
If there is such a thing as a world leader for cities, a spokesman for the 
planet’s exploding urban constituency, then perhaps it’s the likeable, 
silver-haired bundle of Catalan energy sitting across the table from me.

Dr Joan Clos, former mayor of Barcelona 
<http://www.citymayors.com/mayors/barcelona_mayor.html>, is in the middle of a 
three-day conference in Prague <http://www.europeanhabitat.com/?lang=en> which 
– despite feeling bewilderingly large to me – is merely a warm-up act for the
really big United Nations summit scheduled to be held in Ecuador’s 
earthquake-hit capital, Quito, in October.

Habitat III 
<http://citiscope.org/habitatIII/explainer/2015/06/what-habitat-iii> – also 
known as “the third global UN Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban 
Development” – is the urban equivalent of last November’sUN climate change 
conference in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
, where world leaders succeeded in agreeing their landmark “1.5C deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
” in an effort to stave off the very worst effects of climate change.

As executive director of UN-Habitat 
<http://unhabitat.org/principles-of-planned-urbanization-dr-joan-clos-executive-director-un-habitat-2/>
 (the bit of the UN that deals with urbanisation), it is Clos’s job to chivvy 
and coax national and city leaders into coming up with something similarly 
meaningful for the future of the planet in Quito. This is no small task, given 
that these Habitat conferences occur only every 20 years and, as Clos points 
out, “We do not have an easy process of homogenising information like Paris 
did.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb380cc2d990cf0031d6454aa533f592755bbd84e%2F0_131_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20have%20lost%20the%20science%20of%20building%20cities'%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20Joan%20Clos%2C%20the%20unofficial%20world%20leader%20for%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20have%20lost%20the%20science%20of%20building%20cities%27%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20Joan%20Clos%2C%20the%20unofficial%20world%20leader%20for%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb380cc2d990cf0031d6454aa533f592755bbd84e%2F0_131_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Quito’s mayor Mauricio Rodas inspects his earthquake-hit city, which is due to 
host Habitat III in October. Photograph: Fredy Constante/EPA 
He elaborates: “On TV, weather programmes are the most watched in the world, 
and that makes the two- or 1.5-degrees target a language everyone can 
understand. In urbanisation, it’s a more complex social phenomenon: a mixture 
of science, art and a lot of politics … It’s life.”

Clos the scientist – he began his medical career as an anaesthetist before 
moving into healthcare management, then politics – is clear that finding a way 
of quantifying urbanisation would be a significant step forward for 
professionals and the general public alike.

“We need to continue to explore how to vocalise the big complexity of cities. 
One interesting indicator [of a city’s health] could be the proportion of land 
allocated to a city’s street pattern, and its connectivity – the number of 
street crossings per square kilometre. This can be measured by satellite 
photography, and that makes it easy to standardise.”

To Clos, public space is critical to any conversation about “good” or “bad” 
cities. “Everything in a city is related to the availability of public space: 
communication, traffic circulation, space for laying out infrastructure, common 
services … In well-planned cities, the public street pattern takes up between 
30 and 35% of each neighbourhood – but a huge number of cities are very far 
away on this range. Most African cities, for example, are at around 10%, which 
is clearly not an efficient provision of public space.”

Not that Clos is always positive about highly planned cities, either: “If you 
go to Brasilia, for example, with the design of a form of a plane … It is very 
nice when seen from altitude, but the human perspective is awful. OrCanberra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/07/story-cities-17-canberra-capital-australia-walter-griffin-ideal-city>
, the epitome of a garden city – and it’s a nightmare.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F467f23fa06780483f06855fc293b2aa7616efd1d%2F0_147_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20have%20lost%20the%20science%20of%20building%20cities'%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20Joan%20Clos%2C%20the%20unofficial%20world%20leader%20for%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20have%20lost%20the%20science%20of%20building%20cities%27%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20Joan%20Clos%2C%20the%20unofficial%20world%20leader%20for%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F467f23fa06780483f06855fc293b2aa7616efd1d%2F0_147_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 The sprawling Mathare slums in Nairobi: most African cities ‘devote only 10% 
of their land’ to public and street space. Photograph: Antony Njuguna/Reuters 
Five minutes with Clos, let alone an hour, is enough to be persuaded of his 
concern for all our urban futures. As we talk, he periodically bangs his fist 
on the table for emphasis, or out of frustration at the damaging lack of 
understanding of what’s really going in cities. For example:

“The problem with city management in the last 20 or 30 years is the assumption 
that the market will automatically address the question of planning and design. 
As long as there’s money available, it is presumed that some kind of order will 
emerge spontaneously - but this [bang] is not [bang] the case [bang].”

The table gets another hammering when we discuss the issue of corruption – a 
seeming blight on so many cities around the world:

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffeb519afdf55d4c9e8599e445570fb51ae4b191%2F0_75_2019_1212%2F2019.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20have%20lost%20the%20science%20of%20building%20cities'%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20Joan%20Clos%2C%20the%20unofficial%20world%20leader%20for%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20have%20lost%20the%20science%20of%20building%20cities%27%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20Joan%20Clos%2C%20the%20unofficial%20world%20leader%20for%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffeb519afdf55d4c9e8599e445570fb51ae4b191%2F0_75_2019_1212%2F2019.jpg>
 Joan Clos, then mayor of Barcelona, celebrates his city’s many sporting 
triumphs in 1999 with, among others, Louis van Gaal. Photograph: Reuters 
“It’s because not many people understand that urbanisation generates wealth 
[bang, bang, bang]. Just by the fact that you design an urban plan, you are 
creating money – because the value of this land, once the design is approved, 
increases 10-fold. If that is not fully understood, then of course there is 
going to be corruption.”

Clos points out that today, the rate of global urbanisation is actually faster 
than the rate of the planet’s population growth – so that by the time there are 
9.5 billion people on the planet, as many as 7 billion of them may live in 
cities. “This is because people want to be better off; they want to share the 
value of this urbanised land. They instinctively understand this process.”

He is not, however, in favour of Habitat III establishing some kind of 
multilateral anti-corruption taskforce:


“No, no [bangs table again]. Democratic national and city governments should 
deal with this issue openly, every day. There need to be very heavy penalties 
for the ones who break the law; you must put them in jail.”

Furthermore, says Clos, dialogue about the economics and finances of cities 
must be opened up to greater scrutiny – but he doesn’t only blame shady bankers 
and dodgy developers for the current state of affairs:


“There are some anti-capitalist activists who don’t want to talk about money 
[in connection with urbanisation]; they think that to talk about it is to 
mention evil. Butnot [bang] talking about it, and especially how to share the 
value between all of a city’s stakeholders, makes it very easy for the clever 
ones, or the corrupt ones, to take this value. There’s a silence on this; a 
naive ignorance of the economic reality that drives urbanisation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22b053e684a0f8365d9675edc804f38f32fb9d1c%2F0_112_3770_2262%2F3770.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20have%20lost%20the%20science%20of%20building%20cities'%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20Joan%20Clos%2C%20the%20unofficial%20world%20leader%20for%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20have%20lost%20the%20science%20of%20building%20cities%27%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20Joan%20Clos%2C%20the%20unofficial%20world%20leader%20for%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22b053e684a0f8365d9675edc804f38f32fb9d1c%2F0_112_3770_2262%2F3770.jpg>
 The cost of London: anti-gentrification protesters in Brixton, April 2015. 
Photograph: James Evans/Demotix/Corbis 
While it seems unarguable that urban growth always make someone richer, it 
certainly doesn’t ensure that this wealth created is distributed fairly. Does 
Clos ever worry that he is part of a process that is making the world a more 
unequal and divided place?

“Yes,” he says bluntly, “but urbanisation is a human creation like money, or 
banks, and you need a designed system of wealth distribution [to go with it]. 
You need political governance that guarantees wealth distribution – this was 
the origin of the welfare state; this is why there was social housing in 
Britain after theFabians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/aug/13/thinktanks.uk> at the end of 
the 19th century.

“In general, I am depressed because we have a tendency to increase the 
inequalities. But I also wonder, how long can we continue on this path of 
increased inequality? Because one day that is going to create a problem. You 
see some political parties emerging in some places, you see social revolts, you 
see burning districts … But it’s because the systems of wealth distribution are 
diminished – it’s not down to urbanisation directly.”

And what of the spiralling costs of housing in cities all over the world, and 
the impact of gentrification? Isn’t there something to be done at Habitat III 
to slow this trend, which threatens to price people out of their cities 
altogether?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a8c256b64341a060af6e0021b1955aa01c3f3aa%2F0_256_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20have%20lost%20the%20science%20of%20building%20cities'%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20Joan%20Clos%2C%20the%20unofficial%20world%20leader%20for%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20have%20lost%20the%20science%20of%20building%20cities%27%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20Joan%20Clos%2C%20the%20unofficial%20world%20leader%20for%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fapr%2F18%2Flost-science-building-cities-joan-clos-un-habitat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a8c256b64341a060af6e0021b1955aa01c3f3aa%2F0_256_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Former Cuban leader Fidel Castro addresses a plenary session of Habitat II in 
Istanbul, June 1996. Photograph: Enric Marti/Associated Press 
“Unaffordability [of housing] is a real political issue because even the 
middle classes cannot afford a house in the city. But there are models of 
social policies where affordability is better than in others – in Germany, for 
example, it is higher than in France and England, and it’s easy to analyse why. 
Germany has shown that maintaining a healthy rental market, of 50 or even 55% 
of the stock of housing, is good for affordability.


“On the other hand, if we only incentivise ownership, and you spread around 
the idea that if you are wise, you really need to own property … then you are 
going to have problems of affordability.”

This sounds promising. Surely then, Quito represents an ideal opportunity to 
set ambitious targets for the provision of more affordable housing in cities 
around the world?


Clos shakes his head: “No targets; we cannot offer this kind of prescription – 
because it depends on each country’s national model of wealth redistribution.

“Anyway, a house in itself, an apartment in itself, doesn’t make a city. If 
the apartment is in the wrong place, there’s no point in using it. This idea 
that the solution to housing is to build houses … this is too simple. You need 
to build cities, not houses – because if you don’t create ‘the city’ with all 
its complexity, then the mass housing schemes proliferate and they become 
another social pathology. Which is why, in many parts of the world, people are 
now demolishing these mass housing schemes.”

How is public space changing in European cities?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/24/how-is-public-space-changing-in-european-cities>
So it seems we won’t get any kind of “1.5-degrees”-style target for cities at 
Habitat III. I still suspect that many people – even passionate city dwellers – 
will struggle to grasp the point of this once-in-20-years global summit. But I 
am equally certain that in Clos, the urban movement has a figurehead who can 
inspire people to care more about the future of their cities.

At the age of 66, he has somehow maintained the passion and energy of a 
campaigner half his age – which begs the question: if Clos could ditch his 
robes of office and become an urban activist, what’s the one issue he’d spend 
most time campaigning about?

“For me, the biggest problem is the understanding of what urban design is,” he 
says. “In general, the urban community has become lost in strategic planning, 
masterplanning, zoning and landscaping … All these have their own purposes, of 
course – but they don’t address the principal question, which is the 
relationship in a city between public space and buildable space.

“This is the art and science of building cities – and until we recover this 
basic knowledge, we will continue to make huge mistakes …Huge mistakes [bang].”


Guardian Cities is a member of the Habitat III Journalism Project. Read more 
about the project here <http://citiscope.org/journalism-project>
 