
Travellers arriving at New York City’s airports in June 1975 were greeted with 
possibly the strangest object ever handed out at the portal to a great city: 
pamphlets with a hooded death’s head on the cover, warning them, “Until things 
change, stay away fromNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
City if you possibly can.”


 “Welcome to Fear City 
<http://gothamist.com/2013/09/16/the_1970s_pamphlet_aimed_at_keeping.php#photo-1>
” read the stark headline on these pamphlets, which were subtitled “A Survival 
Guide for Visitors to the City of New York”. Inside was a list of nine 
“guidelines” thatmight allow you to get out of the city alive, and with your 
personal property intact.


 The guidelines painted a nightmarish vision of New York; one that made it 
sound barely a cut above Beirut, which then had just been engulfed in Lebanon’s 
civil war. Visitors were advised not to venture outside of midtown Manhattan, 
not to take the subways under any circumstances, and not to walk outsideanywhere
 after six in the evening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431784454933%2F66dd865e-a13e-4b41-9004-02ef1fc58b8b-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431784454933%2F66dd865e-a13e-4b41-9004-02ef1fc58b8b-680x1020.jpeg>
 The 1975 pamphlet. Photograph:islandersa1 flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/58226389@N07/> 


They were also instructed to engrave their possessions with special metallic 
pens, to clutch their bags with both hands, to hide any property they might 
have in their cars, and not even to trust their valuables to hotel vaults. 
“Hotel robberies have become virtually uncontrollable, and there have been some 
spectacular recent cases in which thieves have broken into hotel vaults.” And 
oh, yes: visitors should try “to avoid buildings that are not completely 
fireproof” and “to obtain a room that is close by the fire stairs”.

 Tourists must have been baffled, if not horrified. They might have been even 
more shaken had they known that the men in casual clothes handing them these 
strange, badly set little pamphlets – with their funereal black borders and 
another death’s head leering at them inside next to the smirking wish “Good 
luck” – were members of New York’s police forces.

 “A new low in irresponsibility,” fumed New York’s embattled mayor at the 
time, Abe Beame, who sent the city’s lawyers into court to try to ban 
distribution of the pamphlet. They failed. Justice Frederick E Hammer agreed 
that the members of “New York’s Finest” distributing the pamphlet were 
violating “a public trust” – but ruled that this was a “reasonable 
dissemination of opinion” under the US constitution, even if it struck at the 
heart of public confidence.


 Near panic ensued. The New York Convention and Visitors Bureau immediately 
dispatched emissaries armed with slideshow presentations to London, Paris, 
Frankfurt and Brussels, to “prove” to European travel agents just how 
attractive the Big Apple still was. Tourism was one of the city’s few remaining 
industries, still drawing 10.5 million visitors to the city each year, despite 
reports of massive city budget cuts.


 “Those comments don’t get broadcast outside New York,” worried the bureau’s 
president Charles Gillett, as he announced the dispatch of his goodwill 
ambassadors. “But ‘Fear City’ – that went out to the whole world.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431784849199%2Fec371306-3a31-4220-830f-dfb2c2945f9a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431784849199%2Fec371306-3a31-4220-830f-dfb2c2945f9a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Residents of South Bronx play cards in an abandoned cafe – the Bronx, bastion 
of upper-middle-class living until the mid-60s, burned regularly a decade 
later. Photograph: Alain Le Garsmeur/Getty Images 
 New York’s fiscal crisis of the mid-1970s is surely one of the weirdest 
moments in the history of the city – indeed, of the United States. It was a 
time when the wholesale disintegration of the largest city in the most powerful 
nation on earth seemed entirely possible. A time when the American president, 
Gerald Ford – egged on by his young chief of staff, one Donald Rumsfeld – 
sought not to succour New York but to deliberately shame and humble it, and 
perhaps even replace it as the world’s leading financial centre.


Reportedly one million Fear City pamphlets were printed for distribution, with 
a further million on order if those ran out. The pamphlets were to be followed 
up with a couple of equally alarmist tracts, entitled “If You Haven’t Been 
Mugged Yet” and “When It Happens to You …” aimed at New York residents. They 
were produced and to be distributed by something called the Council for Public 
Safety, an umbrella group of 28 unions of “the uniformed services”, 
representing some 80,000 police andcorrections officers 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prison_officer>, plus the city’s firefighters – 
all infuriated by the city’s plans to lay off thousands of their members.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431784589570%2F2b5f5e5c-9191-4961-904a-dae131873841-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431784589570%2F2b5f5e5c-9191-4961-904a-dae131873841-680x1020.jpeg>
 Page two of the Fear City pamphlet. Photograph:islandersa1 flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/58226389@N07/> 
 I remember the New York of that era well, having arrived to start college 
there in 1976 and never left. The city was compelling in its contradictions: a 
vibrant and very cheap place to live, it attracted talented young people in 
droves. It was also coming apart at the seams.

 Many of the warnings in the Fear City pamphlet were, of course, ludicrous 
exaggerations or outright lies. The streets of midtown Manhattan weren’t 
“nearly deserted” after six in the evening, and they were perfectly safe to 
walk on. The city hadn’t “had to close off the rear half of each [subway] train 
in the evening so that the passengers could huddle together and be better 
protected”. There were still many safe and secure neighbourhoods outside 
Manhattan, and there was neither a spate of “spectacular” robberies nor deadly 
fires in hotels.

 The pamphlet read like one more piece of the dystopia porn then filling 
American cinemas; these were the years of Taxi Driver, The French Connection, 
Marathon Man, Escape from New York, Death Wish and The Warriors, to name a few. 
Jaded New Yorkers quickly turned the cover of Fear City into a tee-shirt, sold 
back to tourists in souvenir shops alongside other classics such as the 
“Welcome to New York” shirt – with its image of a .45 handgun and the charming 
instruction, “Now Hands Up, Motherfucker!”

 Yet a frightening truth lurked beneath much of the pamphlet’s calamity 
howling. Crime, and violent crime, had been increasing rapidly for years. The 
number of murders in the city had more than doubled over the past decade, from 
681 in 1965 to 1,690 in 1975. Car thefts and assaults had also more than 
doubled in the same period, rapes and burglaries had more than tripled, while 
robberies had gone up an astonishing tenfold.

 It’s difficult to convey just how precarious, and paranoid, life in New York 
felt around that time. Signs everywhere warned you to mind your valuables, and 
to keep neck chains or other jewellery tucked away while on the subway. You 
became alert to where anyone else might be in relation to you, augmented by 
quick looks over your shoulder that came to seem entirely natural.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431787596883%2Ffec82ae0-7b7f-4a54-8a05-e9bcefcf8aa5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431787596883%2Ffec82ae0-7b7f-4a54-8a05-e9bcefcf8aa5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An abandoned car in Harlem during the summer of 1975: ‘It’s difficult to 
convey just how precarious life in New York felt around that time.’ Photograph: 
Wiltshire/Rex Shutterstock 
 I knew few people who had been mugged or worse, but everyone I knew had 
suffered the violation of a home break-in. Worst was the idea that anything 
could happen, anywhere, at anytime. Female colleagues working in midtown 
routinely found their handbags had somehow been rifled during lunch hours, 
their credit cards and wallets gone.

While watching a movie once in an uncrowded theatre, my wife-to-be looked over 
to see her handbag moving on the seat beside her. A man had crawled down an 
aisle, crouched behind her chair, and was rummaging through her bag with his 
hand. Discovered, he simply ran out through the fire door. All the manager 
could do was shrug, and offer us two free tickets.

There was a pervasive sense that the social order was breaking down. Most 
subway trains were filthy, covered in graffiti inside and out. Often only one – 
and sometimes no – carriage door would open when they pulled into a station, 
and in summer they were “cooled” only by the methodical sweep of a begrimed 
metal fan that just pushed the sordid air about. The trains ran late, and were 
always crowded; their denizens included chain-snatchers, raggedy buskers and 
countless beggars, including at least two legless individuals, manoeuvring with 
remarkable agility between the cars on their wheeled boards.

 The roads were in no better condition. Public restrooms were almost 
non-existent; dangerous and dirty when they were available at all. Men could 
often be seen pissing in the gutter down side-streets. Times Square’s venerable 
old theatres and spectacular movie palaces were torn down for office buildings 
or allowed to slowly rot away, showing scratchy prints of cheesy second-run 
films or pornography, which any casual visitor might have thought was the 
city’s leading industry.

Countless storefronts advertised live sex acts, X-rated videos, books, 
costumery and assorted knick-knacks. There were porn theatres even in 
respectable neighbourhoods, and corner newsstands routinely featured a vast 
array of pornographic magazines, with stunningly brazen acts depicted on their 
front covers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431785492643%2F773e15f0-1ac6-44c1-a9e8-16088c71c60e-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431785492643%2F773e15f0-1ac6-44c1-a9e8-16088c71c60e-680x1020.jpeg>
 Page three of the Fear City pamphlet. Photograph:islandersa1 flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/58226389@N07/> 
Vandalism was incessant, with the expectation that anything not firmly bolted 
to the ground and covered in some protective coating would be stolen, broken, 
graffitied, spat on, pissed on, set on fire, used as a shelter, or tossed on to 
the subway tracks. Public mirrors (in reality, polished metal) were 
strategically placed by subway staircases so you could glimpse any lurking 
assailants.

 Communities in each of the city’s boroughs were in advanced states of decay. 
Neighbourhoods, such as East New York or Brownsville in Brooklyn, were 
regularly compared to Dresden after the second world war. The Bronx, which had 
been a bastion of desirable upper-middle-class living until the mid-60s, was 
now burning nightly; once-magnificent apartment houses going up in flames lit 
by junkies or landlords looking to dispose of buildings they could no longer 
let or maintain.

 Major pieces of infrastructure, such as the East River bridges, were allowed 
to rust until they were in serious danger of collapse. Grand Central Terminal 
was nearly lost to developers when Judge Irving Saypol – best known as the 
attorney whosent the Rosenbergs to the chair 
<http://www.isreview.org/issues/29/rosenbergs.shtml>, and soon to be indicted 
on corruption charges himself – overturned the city’s landmark preservation 
law. Only Jackie Kennedy Onassis, in a handwritten letter, was able to convince 
Mayor Beame to risk scant city funds on an appeal, asking: “Is it not cruel to 
let our city die by degrees, stripped of all her proud monuments, until there 
will be nothing left of all her history and beauty to inspire our children? If 
they are not inspired by the past of our city, where will they find the 
strength to fight for her future?”

 Beame found the money, and Grand Central was saved on appeal 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2675251/Grand-Central-pays-tribute-former-First-Lady-Jackie-Kennedy-campaigned-1970s-save-one-Americas-iconic-buildings.html>
. But the first widow’s anguished words might have served as an epitaph for the 
era: was it not cruel to let our city die by degrees?

New York, like F Scott Fitzgerald, had gone broke in the usual way: slowly at 
first, then all at once. The city was no worse run, nor more corrupt, than it 
had been through most of its history, but for 10 years it had relied on a 
disastrous policy of funding its operating budget with short-term debt: Rans 
(“Revenue Anticipation Notes”), Tans (“Tax Anticipation Notes”) and even Bans 
(“Bond Anticipation Notes” – that is, notes drawn against future notes). The 
city’s financing had become so slipshod and haphazard that it no longer even 
maintained an official set of books. “In New York State, we haven’t found only 
back-door financing, we’ve got side-door financing,” lamented Governor Hugh 
Carey.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431789669007%2Fa4e2f544-09aa-4e7b-a76d-5037734a2cff-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431789669007%2Fa4e2f544-09aa-4e7b-a76d-5037734a2cff-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Children cool themselves with a fire hydrant on a hot 1975 summer’s day in New 
York’s Lower East Side. Photograph: Wiltshire/Rex Shutterstock 
 By early 1975, New York City owed $5bn to $6bn in short-term debt, out of an 
operating budget of $11.5bn. According to the then-city budget director, Peter 
Goldmark Jr, “Many people believe there is little or no real security or 
receivables behind these obligations.” Wall Street bankers, who had enabled 
much of this reckless behavior, now abruptly refused to take up any more of the 
city’s notes, leaving it teetering on the edge of bankruptcy.

 In fairness, New York was still paying out much more than it received in 
state and federal taxes. It was also expected to pay out a higher share of 
support to its indigent citizens than any other major American city – and no 
city had anything like the number of welfare recipients that New York did: over 
a million by 1975. In the years since the second world war, the poor and the 
aspiring had flocked to the city just as they always had. What they found, 
though, were not jobs and hope, but heroin and firearms. The city had lost a 
million manufacturing jobs since 1945; 500,000 of them since 1969.


 New York could no longer serve as both poorhouse and cash machine for the 
nation. The city turned to Washington for help, asking the federal government 
to back its bonds while it got its fiscal house in order, by making draconian 
budget cuts and reforms. It was then that President Ford decided to advance his 
own political prospects by holding New York up for ridicule to the rest of the 
nation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431786816100%2Fc87a924c-a2a5-4e16-bb6f-a1c68e7b4dd2-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431786816100%2Fc87a924c-a2a5-4e16-bb6f-a1c68e7b4dd2-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Mayor Abe Beame shows off the infamous New York Daily News front page. 
Photograph: New York Daily News Archive/Getty Images 
 Ford, an accidental president about to face a stiff primary challenge from 
Ronald Reagan, went before the National Press Club in Washington on 29 October 
1975 and called New York’s mismanagement “unique among municipalities through 
the United States”. He blamed its situation on “high wages and pensions … its 
tuition-free university system, its city-run hospital system and welfare 
administration”. Ford insisted that the city’s “day of reckoning” had come, and 
promised he would “veto any bill that has as its purpose a bailout of New York 
City to prevent a default”.

The speech provoked the most famous headline in the history of the (usually 
conservative) New York Daily News, a tabloid boasting the highest circulation 
of any paper in America at the time. In 144-point type, its front page 
proclaimed: “Ford to City: drop dead.”

 Reagan or no Reagan, Governor Carey – who had just spent a desperate summer 
fighting to cut New York’s budget to the bone – was baffled by such 
intransigence from the genial, deal-making Ford. Down in Washington to lobby 
for a bailout plan, Carey was told why by Melvin Laird, a former US defence 
secretary under Richard Nixon. “Jerry’s been told by somebody that when New 
York City collapses, Chicago may become the financial centre of the US,” Laird 
informed him.

 But who could be spreading such nonsense? “Well, Rummy comes from Illinois,” 
Laird confided. “Rummy – he’s your problem!”

 Donald Rumsfeld, then Ford’s 43-year-old chief of staff, was apparently 
operating under the delusion that Chicago could shortly become the world’s 
financial centre. Carey would have to look elsewhere for help.

New York’s budget cuts fell heaviest on the city’s public workforce. In May 
1975, Mayor Beame had announced severe reductions in salaries, pensions and 
working conditions, plus the layoff of 51,768 city workers – more than 
one-sixth of its employees – with the proviso that these cuts might be averted 
ifall the city’s workers agreed to work four days a week, for a commensurate 
salary.


 But the municipal unions were not in a giving vein. Their members had borne 
the brunt of the social chaos over the past 10 years: workers in public 
hospitals had dealt with hundreds of thousands of heroin junkies; subway 
workers had got their deteriorating, antique trains back out on the rails every 
day, 24 hours a day. The police had engaged in almost open warfare with the
Black Panthers <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black_Panther_Party> and other 
would-be revolutionaries. Firefighters rushed to thousands of false alarms, and 
were repeatedly bombarded with bricks and garbage, or even shot at, while they 
tried to keep the city from burning.

Cops tend to like to hit back a little. They’re not big on diplomacy. It’s a 
volatile union
Richie Steier  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431786189010%2F3f0d29be-5c0b-4dce-be65-b3aae20cd5d1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431786189010%2F3f0d29be-5c0b-4dce-be65-b3aae20cd5d1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 New York City police officers march at the city’s St Patrick’s Day Parade in 
March 1975. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty Images 
 “The mayor has a right to discuss a four-day week. Let him discuss it as a 
monologue,” responded Victor Gotbaum, the feisty executive director of District 
Council 37 (DC37), an amalgam of some 60 union locals representing 110,000 
workers in different lines of work. Albert Shanker, the even more belligerent 
leader of the city’s largest teachers’ union – already lampooned inWoody 
Allen’s sci-fi comedy Sleeper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/04/the-10-best-woody-allen-films> as 
the man who set off the third world war – demanded a 21% raise for his members, 
saying he would rather see the city go bankrupt than give in.

 The most audacious and ruthless tactics, however, would come from the 
uniformed employee unions of the Council for Public Safety. The vast majority 
were police – especially the roughly 40,000 members of the Patrolmen’s 
Benevolent Association (PBA), the rank-and-file street cops who were scheduled 
to suffer nearly 11,000 layoffs.

 “Cops tend to like to hit back a little,” Richie Steier – editor of The 
Chief, a newspaper for New York’s municipal employees – told me recently. 
Steier expressed some sympathy about the cuts the police were facing, but 
allowed: “They’re not big on diplomacy. It’s a volatile union.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431788373102%2F42e2f7af-75af-4f3a-ad3f-fe656984e620-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431788373102%2F42e2f7af-75af-4f3a-ad3f-fe656984e620-1360x2040.jpeg>
 New York Daily News front page, 23 April 1975. Photograph: New York Daily News 
Archive/Getty Images 
 In 1966, the New York Police Department had defied Mayor Beame’s predecessor, 
John Lindsay, and won a bitter fight against the appointment of an independent 
review board with a racially tinged campaign that included lurid adverts 
depicting a terrified young white woman standing alone by a darkened subway 
station.

The new head of the PBA, Ken McFeeley, decided on a similar tactic: “Fear 
City”. McFeeley, a broad-chested, 36-year-old Navy veteran, had been on the 
force for 13 years before being elected head of the association, most recently 
driving a patrol car around the crime-infested Crown Heights neighbourhood of 
Brooklyn.


The creation of Fear City was “strictly McFeeley and the PBA”, Steier said, 
quoting one former city union commissioner. Certainly it was McFeeley, and 
McFeeley almost alone, who was willing to become the public face associated 
with the pamphlet. Urging business leaders to stop the police cuts, it looked 
for a long moment as if his defiance might carry the day.


On 30 June 1975, the city laid off an initial 15,000 workers, including 
thousands of cops and 1,600 firefighters – 20% of the city’s entire force. Some 
26 fire companies were simply disbanded. By September, 45,000 workers had been 
laid off – and the unions reacted with rage.

Ten thousand municipal workers demonstrated in front of First National City 
Bank, whose arch right-wing president, Walter Wriston, had led the bankers in 
demanding city cutbacks. McFeeley’s cops held a mass demonstration around city 
hall, blocking traffic and letting the air out of motorists’ tyres when they 
complained. Highway workers picketed on major roadways during rush hour, while 
bridge workers cranked up three of the city’s drawbridges and simply walked 
away.

Garbagemen staged a two-day wildcat strike that left 48,000 tons of trash to 
mellow in the June breezes. On the picket lines they yelled, “This isn’t Fear 
City, it’s Stink City!” Shanker’s teachers staged a one-week strike at the 
start of the school year in September, after the city laid off 7,000 teachers. 
They marched with signs that read, “Fear City, Stink City and now, Stupid City.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431791778806%2Fa06cbfc9-9ebb-4d9f-9385-032795d75e4a-2060x1365.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431791778806%2Fa06cbfc9-9ebb-4d9f-9385-032795d75e4a-2060x1365.jpeg>
 Striking New York garbagemen stand by signs reading “Stink City” AND “Abe is 
nuts”. Photograph: New York Daily News Archive/Getty Images 
Yet the tide had already begun to turn. Most of New York’s municipal unions 
condemned or distanced themselves from the Fear City campaign, including the 
unions representing police sergeants, lieutenants and captains. When the PBA 
won the right to distribute its Fear City pamphlets, Sergeant Harold Melnick, 
head of the Sergeants’ Benevolent Association, told the press “it’s time that 
reason took over”, adding that everyone “recognised an obligation to the City 
of New York ... Most police officers who stop me – 99% – are not happy about 
the Fear City tactic,” he claimed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431785872218%2Ff7b2ae01-c77c-45ec-a980-9958dfe15b57-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431785872218%2Ff7b2ae01-c77c-45ec-a980-9958dfe15b57-680x1020.jpeg>
 Final page of the Fear City pamphlet. Photograph:islandersa1 flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/58226389@N07/> 
 Other unions had also begun to reassess their slash-and-burn tactics. “We 
could stop the collection of millions of dollars a day, turn off the water 
supply, pull out the ambulance drivers, leave Coney Island without lifeguards,” 
ruminated Gotbaum, the DC37 union’s executive director, during the crisis, with 
a frankness no American union leader would dare voice today. “We could rape the 
city. [But] to me, this would be disgraceful for any union to do. I never think 
there’s validity in destroying the city. I really believe that a union has a 
responsibility to the public.”

Soon, even McFeeley and the PBA backed off. After a day or two, the 
pamphleteering ceased. Plans to hand out Fear City at train and bus stations 
were never implemented, though the threat remained. Instead of destroying New 
York City, the unions ended up saving it.


Where the banks and federal government baulked, Gotbaum and other union 
leaders persuaded their members to throw $2.5 billion in pension funds – often 
their entire savings for old age – behind the city’s bonds. If the city still 
went bust, there was a chance they would lose it all.


Throughout the morning of 17 October 1975, a car idled dramatically outside 
City Hall, waiting to rush out legal documents officially declaring New York 
bankrupt. Gotbaum and others sought to persuade the teachers’ union boss 
Shanker to stack the nearly half-billion dollars of teachers’ pension funds 
behind the city’s bonds, too (there were rumours that the bearish Gotbaum had 
threatened to throw him out of an eighth-storey window if he didn’t go along). 
In fact, Shanker had already begun to pull in his horns, getting his teachers 
to go back to work even though the city only restored 4,500 of the 7,000 
positions it cut, telling them, “A strike is a weapon you use against a boss 
that has money. This boss has no money.”

 The union leaders and government officials negotiated hurriedly in the 
Manhattan apartment of longtime city powerbroker Richard Ravitch, absently 
devouring slabs of matzoh, the only thing they could find to eat, and 
scattering the crumbs all over the carpet. At one in the afternoon, “the matzoh 
summit” broke up when Shanker declared simply, “Okay, I’ll do it.”

The city was saved – for the time being.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431785307549%2F6d431afd-5ea2-4978-9e96-fe08b7c8b8cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431785307549%2F6d431afd-5ea2-4978-9e96-fe08b7c8b8cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An NYC fire unit tackles a South Bronx fire in 1977 – firefighters rushed to 
thousands of false alarms, and were often bombarded with bricks and garbage. 
Photograph: Alain Le Garsmeur/Getty Images 
Governor Carey, meanwhile, was seeking out other pressure points to use on 
Jerry Ford; some of these would be found abroad. In London, the Times newspaper 
called Ford’s position denying aid to New York City an “act of monumental 
folly”. At the International Monetary Fund’s October 1975 summit in Washington, 
Ford reportedly approached the West German chancellor Helmut Schmidt and asked 
amiably, “How’s the Bundesbank? How’s the mark?” only to be told: “Mr 
President, never mind the Bundesbank or the mark. If you let New York go broke, 
the dollar is worthScheiße!”

 Schmidt went on to announce publicly that a New York default would have “a 
domino effect, striking other global financial centres such as Zurich and 
Frankfurt”. At a later summit in France, the French president Giscard d’Estaing 
joined Schmidt in insisting that the bankruptcy of New York “would be seen as 
the bankruptcy of America”.

 At home, public sentiment seemed to shift. Polls showed nearly 70% of 
Americans supporting some kind of aid for New York, as long as the city 
balanced its budget and taxpayers outside New York didn’t have to foot the 
bill. In late November 1975, Ford urged Congress to pass a bill making $2.3bn a 
year available for three years to New York in direct loans. It quickly passed 
and was signed into law by the president.

I’ll never tell the people of the City of New York to drop dead
Jimmy Carter advert  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431785790235%2F43502198-7288-49a6-bbb3-9b5c0cdd1c6f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431785790235%2F43502198-7288-49a6-bbb3-9b5c0cdd1c6f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 US president Jimmy Carter and New York mayor Abe Beame tour an abandoned block 
in the South Bronx in 1977. Photograph: Everett/Rex Shutterstock 
 The federal credit line was vital to restoring financial confidence in New 
York City. But it mollified no one: not Reagan conservatives, and not New 
Yorkers. The following year, the city handed presidential candidate Jimmy 
Carter – whose local adverts included the line, “I’ll never tell the people of 
the City of New York to drop dead” – a majority of more than 700,000 votes over 
Ford. This was more than twice Carter’s narrow margin of victory in New York 
State, whose 41 electoral votes put him in the White House.

 Twenty-five years later, Ford was still insisting to a former aide to Hugh 
Carey, “I never said ‘New York City, drop dead’.” But New Yorkers knew better.

The city would not go bankrupt, but years of austerity and cutbacks still lay 
ahead, many of them imposed on the same men and women whose sacrifices had just 
rescued the city. Those city workers who kept their jobs generally lost their 
cost-of-living raises, at a time when inflation reached 16% to 18%. The NYPD 
shrank from more than 42,000 police officers to less than 27,000 by 1990 – the 
same year that murders in New York reached a record high at 2,245. The 
bitterness lingered as well. When a blackout set off a riot of looting and 
mayhem in the summer of 1977, some 10,000 cops – 40% of the off-duty force – 
ignored orders to report for duty.

“Municipal workers’ wages and pensions never recovered,” claimed Robert Fitch 
in his 1993 history, The Assassination of New York. At the same time, he noted, 
the fiscal crisis proved to be a great boon to New York’s elite as the city 
“got rid of the stock-exchange tax, halved the personal income tax, and set the 
real-estate tax at a record low”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431786590079%2F896b2065-7f84-45cf-8511-c9f401c455ce-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431786590079%2F896b2065-7f84-45cf-8511-c9f401c455ce-2060x1236.jpeg>
 July 1977: during one of the city’s many power failures, police challenge 
suspected looters in the Bronx. Photograph: New York Daily News Archive/Getty 
Images 
Today, New York City is a vastly different place than it was 40 years ago: 
cleaner, brighter, safer, more orderly – and richer. According to the US 
Census, its population is close to a record 8.5 million people – up by more 
than 300,000 since 2010. Once destitute and crime-ridden neighbourhoods such as 
Crown Heights, or Bedford-Stuyvesant in Brooklyn, are rapidly being gentrified 
– something that would have seemed unimaginable in the days of Fear City.

Other neighbourhoods, such as the High Line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/sep/22/final-stretch-new-york-high-line-complete>
 and the Meat-Packing District, seem to spring up overnight, complete with 
towering glass residences and chic new shops and restaurants. At times 
Manhattan looks, and sounds, like a single, gigantic construction site.


 Crime here has been dropping exponentially for more than 20 years, making New 
York one of the safest cities in America. In 2014, murders fell to 328 – 
according to The New York Times, “The lowest figure since at least 1963, when 
the Police Department began collecting reliable statistics.” This new “Safe 
City” is reflected in a huge increase in tourism: there were more than 56 
million visitors to New York in 2014, over five times the number that came in 
1975.


This February the city set a modern record of 12 straight days without a 
murder, and crime continues to drop
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431793151084%2Fca46d51b-ec26-4367-bf8b-9af8ea7f2f40-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City'%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York's%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Welcome%20to%20Fear%20City%27%20%E2%80%93%20the%20inside%20story%20of%20New%20York%27s%20civil%20war%2C%2040%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F18%2Fwelcome-to-fear-city-the-inside-story-of-new-yorks-civil-war-40-years-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F16%2F1431793151084%2Fca46d51b-ec26-4367-bf8b-9af8ea7f2f40-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A memorial in Times Square forNYPD officer Brian Moore 
<http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2015/may/08/funeral-nypd-officer-brian-moore-in-pictures>
, killed on duty in May 2015. Photograph: Mike Segar/Reuters 
And yet, a fear of returning to “the bad old days” appears to linger in the 
psyche of many New Yorkers of a certain age. The Republican candidate for mayor 
in 2013, one Joseph Lhota, tried to openly evoke that fear in his campaign. He 
was trounced, losing by nearly 50 percentage points to a little-known and 
little-regarded city councilman, Bill de Blasio.

Since then, the local outlet of the Murdoch press and sensationalist TV news 
programmes have trumpeted any uptick in crime or social disorder, especially 
since the city ended its police’s wildly unconstitutional “stop and frisk” 
programme.

This past February, however, the city set a modern record of 12 straight days 
without a murder <http://time.com/3710922/new-york-murder-free-streak-ends/>, 
and crime continues to drop. For better and for worse, New York’s bad old days 
are not coming back. The average cost of a condominium or apartment in 
Manhattan is now $1.5m, for instance; no one is about to walk away from such 
investments the way many people fled their rental apartments in the 1960s and 
1970s.

Rather, New York’s main problems today are those of wealth, and its 
distribution. Thanks to the seemingly endless real-estate boom, some estimate 
there are as many as one million millionaires in the city – as well as some 85 
billionaires. At the same time, more than 21% of the city’s population is 
living in poverty; about the same proportion as in 1980.


Every mechanism of New York’s current economy widens these disparities. Much 
like London, the city has suffered the Invasion of the Foreign Building 
Snatchers: tycoons from around the world scooping up residences as boltholes or 
tax havens they visit for only a few days each year.

Confessions of a location scout: why the New York beloved of the movies 
doesn't exist any more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/12/confessions-of-a-location-scout-why-the-new-york-beloved-of-the-movies-doesnt-exist-any-more>
Meanwhile, those apartment and condo owners who are full-time residents 
routinely join landlords in jacking up commercial rents, driving out beloved 
small businesses and neighbourhood eateries, and reducing the cityscape to a 
monoculture of faceless chain stores, nail salons, bank branches and overpriced 
restaurants.

More and more, the new buildings of the super-rich turn their denizens inward, 
justifying their extortionate prices by offering amenities such as gyms, 
screening rooms, wine bars and even libraries – and thereby further reducing 
the street life that any great city depends upon.

 There arises, for the first time in its history, the possibility that New 
York will no longer be a place where talented young people want, or can afford, 
to go – becoming instead the world’s largest gated community: incalculably 
wealthy, sterile, and dull. This, surely, would be the real Fear City.

Kevin Baker <http://www.kevinbaker.info> is a novelist and historian who lives 
in New York City. His latest book,The Big Crowd 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/15/books/review/the-big-crowd-a-novel-by-kevin-baker.html?_r=0>
, is based on the greatest unsolved murder in mob history.@kbbakerauthor 
<https://twitter.com/kbbakerauthor>

 