
In its preview of one of Christian Thielemann's concerts with the Philharmonia 
late last year, London listings magazine Time Out called the conductor 
"frightening". It was a heavily loaded word, denoting not just musical rigour 
but burning ambition and political danger. Norman Lebrecht evidently agrees 
with that perception: in his turn-of-the-year summing-up in the Daily Telegraph 
of conductors to watch, he called Thielemann "bluntly ambitious" and said that 
"only his penchant for reported rightwing indiscretions can stem his vertical 
progress".

Despite his severe haircut, Thielemann doesn't seem too frightening when we 
meet in a room at the Savoy hotel, but he is quick to anger. It happens twice. 
First when a man in a suit struts round the room shouting into a mobile phone - 
Thielemann glares at him and expounds loudly on "uneducated, uncivilised" 
behaviour. And then when I refer to the remark - "Now the Jewish mess is ended" 
- that he is alleged to have made about suggestions that Daniel Barenboim would 
leave his post as artistic director of the Berlin Staatsoper because of budget 
cuts.

"Can't we leave that out?" he says. "I have never said anything. I have to 
repeat that all the time. I am really getting furious about this. My conscience 
is clear. I never said these things. Whoever accuses you has to produce the 
proof. I don't have to prove my innocence."

He quickly calms down - he is too garrulous and touchy-feely to be truly 
frightening - but it is a tricky moment. He is tired of such accusations, which 
he puts down to a campaign of disinformation being waged against him, and says 
he is consulting lawyers over articles that attributed that anti-semitic remark 
to him.

The wounds are fresh because for the past year he has been at the centre of a 
bitter struggle for power and money within Berlin. Thielemann is the outgoing 
music director of the Deutsche Oper - he resigned last year because he felt 
that he was not properly consulted over the appointment of the new intendant - 
and Barenboim runs the Staatsoper in the former east Berlin. Each house has 
been fighting budget cuts proposed by the city government, and even now the 
situation remains unresolved.

On the one hand, Thielemann says he would be happy to escape from Berlin, 
because he is tired of the infighting and personal abuse. But the way he has 
temporised and left doors open since his resignation suggests a certain 
reluctance to let go. "Berlin is my city, and I'm the first Berlin-born chief 
conductor the Deutsche Oper has ever had. I began in this house and my whole 
youth listening to opera was there. I have a strong connection with this house."

He insists, contrary to some reports, that he has no masterplan to take over 
opera in Berlin by fusing the two houses under his control. "Oh, come on - it 
is completely ridiculous," he says. "For one thing, it would be too much work. 
In any case, I would always call for diversity." Instead, he says, he favours 
the continuation of the two houses, but under a joint financial administration 
and with more liaison over repertoire. He says it is absurd that at present on 
the same night the two houses can both be performing a Wagner opera - 
conceivably even the same work.

If he does leave, the 41-year-old Thielemann will not be short of engagements 
in a musical world eager for new conducting stars. He made a triumphant debut 
with Die Meistersinger at the Bayreuth festival last year and will be a key 
figure there over the next decade (he will do Tristan und Isolde in 2002 and a 
new Ring Cycle in 2006). He guest-con ducts the Vienna Philharmonic and the 
Philharmonia, and is becoming a familiar figure at the Metropolitan Opera in 
New York and at Covent Garden. He had also been tipped to become music director 
of one of the major American orchestras - there are vacancies in New York, 
Boston and Philadelphia - but the remarks attributed to him may have damaged 
him in the US. One executive of a US orchestra told me that what he needs now 
is a guest conductorship with the Israel Philharmonic to counter the smear 
campaign.

Thielemann was born in Berlin - his parents were able but frustrated amateur 
musicians - and he played piano, violin and viola before deciding to become a 
conductor. In his late teens he became assistant to the septuagenarian Herbert 
von Karajan, from whom he learned a great deal. "He would conduct so small and 
get these big results. It seemed so easy when he did it. I suppose he had come 
to the point where he could conduct with his little finger. After 25 years with 
the Berlin Philharmonic, it was a unique relationship."

The "young von Karajan" label has been attached to Thielemann, not least by 
politically inspired opponents of Barenboim, but it is one that he rejects. 
"Conductors should never see themselves in that way. We should see ourselves as 
who we are. People want to label other people, and I have been labelled very 
much. It is true up to a certain point, because you have to know where your 
roots are, but only to a certain point. It is so easy to be labelled, and 
people then get very confused when you break the rules."

When I ask him in what ways he breaks the rules, his answer is instructive. "I 
am breaking the rules all the time, but in a different way from how people 
might think. Rule-breaking is no longer about misbehaving or creating scandals 
or producing hysterical interpretations. We have had everything [orchestrally], 
just as we have had everything on stage. Twenty years ago it was new to have 
naked people on stage; now people say, 'So what?' We've seen everything, so now 
we have to concentrate on other details. I don't think we can be shocked any 
more. You can make grand gestures but they have to be sincere."

Thielemann has steeped himself in the central European romantic repertoire, 
and his interpretations of Wagner, Schumann, Brahms and Richard Strauss have 
won him plaudits. "I am trying to open the repertoire slowly," he says. "I had 
this wonderful position in Berlin and could conduct all these Wagner and 
Strauss pieces that I am fascinated by. I have already done 45 performances of 
Tristan - who has done that at my age? - and 50 Meistersingers.

"I have probably already done Brahms' First Symphony 50 times. It has finished 
in my head, but if I have an important debut - with the Vienna Philharmonic or 
the Berlin Philharmonic, or in New York or London - I will choose pieces in 
which I am 100% secure. A lot of great conductors with long experience have 
done these pieces with these orchestras, and the musicians know after five 
minutes whether you have anything to add."

Working with von Karajan was a key part of his musical education, but hearing 
recordings by Wilhelm Furtwängler appears to have been equally important. 
"Furtwängler exemplifies the combination of freedom and framework, flexibility 
and architecture, hysteria and control," says Thielemann. "It seems to be so 
spontaneous, but it is still in a picture and doesn't go everywhere. His 
feeling for the whole work is unrivalled. His Beethoven Nine in 1942 with the 
Berlin Philharmonic cannot be bettered. Either you have to give up conducting 
or you have to acknowledge that someone has done it in a near-perfect way."

Thielemann is conscious of the legacy of Furtwängler and von Karajan. "I was 
raised in this ambience. I heard these wonderful concerts; people gave 
Furtwängler recordings to me and I felt at home with them, just as every 
Italian growing up with Italian opera feels at home with it. But you have to 
build the tradition anew, not just carry it on."

His critics have used his preoccupation with the German repertoire against 
him, but he considers that ridiculous. "If you had a Russian conductor and he 
conducted Russian works, you wouldn't say a word. Why do people say a word when 
a German conductor conducts German works?"

Whether or not Thielemann is a political conservative, he is certainly a 
cultural conservative. He is anxious to separate art from politics, dislikes 
political correctness, and makes a point of saying that the objectives of les 
evénéments of 1968 have been perverted, that the openness and flexibility of 
the protesters have hardened into dogma. He also refuses to make a blanket 
apology for Germany's history. "I try to value things," he says. "Never has 
everything been wrong. There are some very dark points; there are some very 
good points."

 Above all, he says that politics has no place in music. He has been 
criticised for resurrecting Hans Pfitzner's Palestrina, which he will conduct 
at Covent Garden later this month, by those who argue that Pfitzner's 
nationalist sympathies and anti-semitic statements put him beyond the pale. But 
Thielemann argues that if music is good, the moral character or political 
affiliation of the composer is irrelevant.

"When I first conducted Palestrina in Nuremberg, someone said, 'This is a 
nationalistic piece of shit.' This score, this beautiful, beautiful piece. What 
has C sharp minor to do with fascism? Nothing. Does Meistersinger have anything 
to do with politics? Can a tonality be political?"

I raise the nationalistic peroration at the end of Meistersinger, but 
Thielemann leaps on me. "Ah come on - read the score properly. It has been 
used, I agree, but it doesn't mean that the work is forever out of circulation, 
and it is our duty to see it with fresh eyes."

He is now warming to his argument. "If people say that because you have a 
certain choice of repertoire, this must be connected with your political view, 
this is a sick thing. I choose the scores because I like them, and I conduct 
Hans Werner Henze in the same way as I do Pfitzner and Beethoven. I have done 
many contemporary pieces. I am not interested in what composers have eaten or 
what their political beliefs were. Music doesn't get better because one person 
was better than another person."

 Palestrina is in rep at the Royal Opera House, London WC2 (020-7304 4000), 
from January 29 to February 8.
 