
Dharavi Design Museum in Mumbai is an adventure to find. To get there you must 
cross a busy traffic signal, go past a row of stalls selling fresh meat and 
dried fish, turn right where a barber offers “Bollywood hit hairstyles”, and 
make your way past an oil wholesaler and garbage cart. Finally, in a small 
clearing lit up by string lights, you will find a painted cart that doubles as 
a display case.

The cart is the centrepiece of the “nomadic museum”, billed as the first of 
its kind in an informal settlement. In pride of place at the centre of the cart 
are three brightly painted water pots that resemble children’s stacking toys. 
Shiny handled brooms with bristles of varying shapes are displayed on two 
outstretched orange doors on either side. In front, terracotta cups and saucers 
are arrayed on small white wooden blocks.

The mobile museum is the brainchild of an Amsterdam-based curator-artist 
couple, Amanda Pinatih and Jorge Mañes Rubio, in partnership with URBZ, a 
Mumbai-based urban research collective. “Museums are the cathedrals of the 21st 
century,” says Pinatih. “When you have a museum, you count.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fwhen-you-have-a-museum-you-count-inside-mumbais-first-exhibition-in-a-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f75170284f71047d876c10b2163a5e7ba2ccfde%2F0_80_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='When%20you%20have%20a%20museum%20you%20count'%3A%20Inside%20Mumbai's%20first%20exhibition%20in%20a%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fwhen-you-have-a-museum-you-count-inside-mumbais-first-exhibition-in-a-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27When%20you%20have%20a%20museum%20you%20count%27%3A%20Inside%20Mumbai%27s%20first%20exhibition%20in%20a%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fwhen-you-have-a-museum-you-count-inside-mumbais-first-exhibition-in-a-slum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f75170284f71047d876c10b2163a5e7ba2ccfde%2F0_80_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Pieces are chosen from the museum that illustrate the skill and creativity of 
local artists. Photograph: Dharavi Design Museum 
By giving Dharavi a quirky little cathedral of its own, they hope to help 
Mumbai’s best-known informal settlement gain a more positive identity. Instead 
of the voyeuristic “slum tours 
<http://www.dw.com/en/indias-slum-tours-eye-opener-exploitation-or-both/a-5171492>
” andshit-swimming <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UZ_8fsG8Q1A> cinematic 
spectacles it’s synonymous with, they’d like to draw attention to the thriving 
community of talented artisans who have long made it their home.


Dharavi, a 500-acre settlement in the heart of Mumbai, is sandwiched between 
the city’s two main suburban railway lines. Waves of demolitions and 
relocations since the 1950s have made it one of the world’s most densely 
populated informal settlements. According to unofficial estimates, it is home 
to between 750,000 and a million residents living in houses often without 
running water or toilets, set close together on narrow lanes edged by open 
sewers.

“People [in Mumbai] tend to see them [in Dharavi] as cheap manual labour,” 
says Rubio. “We wanted to show that they’re skilled, creative makers. We wanted 
to really dig into that identity.” To develop the museum, the pair spoke with a 
range of local craftsmen – potters, carpenters, broom-makers, and a cart maker 
– over two weeks.


Their first stop was at one of Dharavi’s oldest communities, a settlement of 
potters called Kumbharwada. They decided to collaborate with Nathalal Chauhan 
and Mitul Chauhan, a father-son duo with a thriving pottery business that went 
back four generations.


Over a few days of sitting together in the Chauhans’ cramped workspace, the 
four of them hashed out design ideas together. Pinatih and Rubio were keen that 
the Chauhans make chai cups and saucers. Mistranslations produced their own 
unique forms. “We told them we’d like the cups to have four ears [handles],” 
says Rubio. “We looked away, and when we looked back, we saw they had actual 
ears. We’d never have come up with that!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fwhen-you-have-a-museum-you-count-inside-mumbais-first-exhibition-in-a-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48542fd6f549c61e5afddaa4ebd1fc26e2e12d4b%2F0_120_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='When%20you%20have%20a%20museum%20you%20count'%3A%20Inside%20Mumbai's%20first%20exhibition%20in%20a%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fwhen-you-have-a-museum-you-count-inside-mumbais-first-exhibition-in-a-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27When%20you%20have%20a%20museum%20you%20count%27%3A%20Inside%20Mumbai%27s%20first%20exhibition%20in%20a%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fwhen-you-have-a-museum-you-count-inside-mumbais-first-exhibition-in-a-slum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48542fd6f549c61e5afddaa4ebd1fc26e2e12d4b%2F0_120_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 The moving museum aims to engage local communities as it moves around Dharavi. 
Photograph: Divyakant Solanki/EPA 
Their next stop was at a broom-maker’s shop, where they learned that the 
profession was looked down upon and relegated to oppressed castes. After 
suggesting that the artisans make brooms with unusual wedge-shaped bristles, 
they decided that the same techniques could be used to make fans and parasols, 
articles associated with ancient kings and noblemen. The parasol was 
transformed in translation; it came to resemble a palm tree. “I was trying to 
draw a parasol, when [the craftsman] grabbed our pencil and started sketching 
out something. He made a completely new object – it was a special moment” says 
Rubio. “I hope these kinds of objects make people see makers not as labourers 
performing a repetitive task, but as skilled people who can solve design 
problems.”

The artisans, too, appreciate this reminder. Sandeep Vishwakarma, a carpenter 
who usually toils over built-in cupboards and sliding windows in newly 
constructed apartment blocks, was asked to make unusually shaped cricket bats 
out of discarded wood. When faced with his first block of weather-beaten wood, 
he was mystified. But within minutes of working with the wood, new ideas for 
shapes started to form. One bat came to resemble an upside-down spruce tree; 
the other looked like a curly-edged popsicle. “It reminded me of my childhood,” 
Vishwakarma says, smiling.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fwhen-you-have-a-museum-you-count-inside-mumbais-first-exhibition-in-a-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F657afc362ecc2fec616aab79afc052561642c27e%2F0_9_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='When%20you%20have%20a%20museum%20you%20count'%3A%20Inside%20Mumbai's%20first%20exhibition%20in%20a%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fwhen-you-have-a-museum-you-count-inside-mumbais-first-exhibition-in-a-slum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27When%20you%20have%20a%20museum%20you%20count%27%3A%20Inside%20Mumbai%27s%20first%20exhibition%20in%20a%20slum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fwhen-you-have-a-museum-you-count-inside-mumbais-first-exhibition-in-a-slum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F657afc362ecc2fec616aab79afc052561642c27e%2F0_9_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘What makes us Indians value beautiful objects, but not the people who make 
them?’ asks Rahul Srivastava, co-founder of URBZ. Photograph: Dharavi Design 
Museum 
Rubio and Pinatih left at the end of February, soon after the museum’s launch, 
but their collaborators at URBZ will continue to ensure the cart rolls on to 
new locations every two weeks until the end of March. At every location, 
they’ll hold an event to engage the local communities. So far, they’ve held a 
pottery workshop and a cricket match.

How art is helping Syrian refugees keep their culture alive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/02/art-helping-syrian-refugees-keep-culture-alive>
The layers of meaning behind the project seem to be lost on some of the 
museum’s most immediate audience, children and young men from the 
neighbourhood. One little boy said that the pots and cups remind him of cracked 
ancient artefacts he’d only seen in history textbooks. Another young man, who 
spends his days selling idlis (savoury steamed cakes made of rice flour) at a 
train station, is more dismissive. “We’re bachelors,” he says. “We sleep four 
to a room with all our materials. We don’t have the space for such small-small 
things.”


Nonetheless, Rahul Srivastava, co-founder of URBZ, hopes the “small-small 
things” might help viewers ask some bigger, provocative questions. “What makes 
us Indians value beautiful objects, but not the people who make them?” he says. 
“Nobody looks at the social context, or the [caste] hierarchy that makes us 
expect to get fantastic work done so cheaply. A museum is a heavy word, but 
we’re using it as a provocation, to shine a spotlight on some heavy questions.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 