
Why do people buy tyres? Well, in my case, it’s usually because an 
unscrupulous garage has tricked me into thinking I need them.

On one occasion, picking up the car after an MOT, I found the garage had 
changedall four tyres due to “wear and tear”.

“Can I look at the tyres you removed?” I asked.

“Too late,” said the garage man, shaking his head sorrowfully. “They’re in the 
bin.”

“Goodness,” I said. “That must be a big bin. Still, we could probably fish 
them out, couldn’t we? Just to make sure.”

“No,” said the garage man. “The bin is on the other side of London. At our 
other branch. They were collected for disposal. And if you went over there, it 
would be impossible to ascertain which tyres were yours. After all this time.”

It had been about 40 minutes.

Anyway, I assume that’s why most people buy tyres. But if I ever got to choose 
new tyres, I might choose Pirelli. I would certainly buy a brand I’d heard of, 
because it’s a trust thing, isn’t it? Important safety accessories, tyres. 
Familiarity breeds confidence. You don’t want some random bit of rubber, 
fashioned into an oval by fly-by-night newbies trying their hand at tyres for 
the first time.

Fully clothed: the 2017 Pirelli calendar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/29/fully-clothed-the-2017-pirelli-calendar>
I’ve only heard of Pirelli because of the calendars. They’ve been publishing 
soft-porn calendars since before I was born.Still, familiarity breeds 
confidence. Their fame is their fortune. At the till, if I didn’t stop to 
analyse it, my brain would instinctively feel that I was likely to get decent 
grip and stopping distance out of a tyre because its makers like to photograph 
the sandy bums of glamour models.

It’s not logical. Perhaps this is why, as newspapers eagerly reported last week
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/29/fully-clothed-the-2017-pirelli-calendar>
, Pirelli is going in a new direction with next year’s calendar: older ladies 
with their clothes on.

The 2017 opus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/01/pirelli-calendar-2017-photographs-nicole-kidman-uma-thurman>
 features Robin Wright, 50, Julianne Moore, 55, Charlotte Rampling, 70, and 
Helen Mirren, 71, in a range of lovely poses.

What a bunch of survivors! Still working, despite all the obstacles! Giving 
and giving, every year, for decades. Only getting better as time goes on. 
That’s what you want in a tyre!

“While tyre shopping,” the makers imply, “have Helen Mirren in your head. 
Longevity. Strength. Tread.”

These images having been lauded as “a revolution” and “a strike against sexist 
imagery”, I’ve been looking back at some old Pirelli calendars to get a sense 
of how much they’ve changed. The answer is: not as much as you’d think.

For its first 10 incarnations, from 1963 to 1972, there was no nudity in the 
Pirelli calendar. There were women in swimsuits and diaphanous kaftans but it 
wasn’t until 1973 that they showed nipples, which they did again in 1974, and 
then the whole thing got axed for 10 years due to financial constraints after 
the Gulf crisis.

In 1984, the Pirelli calendar <http://pauza.de/Pirelli/1984/> roared back into 
life as full soft porn, absolutely laughable unless you have an erection while 
looking at it: two girls clinking their buttocks together like wine glasses; a 
woman dangling one tit over the edge of a hammock; an image (my second 
favourite in Pirelli history) of three gold bums with tyre tracks running over 
them.

It’s much the same for the next two years, then the 1987 calendar 
<http://pauza.de/Pirelli/1987/> is a terribly embarrassing affair as Pirelli 
goes ethnic: topless black women kitted out in turbans, beads, gold armlets and 
necklets like a sort of rude, blackSheena, Queen of the Jungle. It’s so 
toe-curling to see these images of porny ethnicity from as recently as 1987, 
you have to look at them from behind the sofa like when Ed Balls is doing the 
samba.

Cardigans and older models: the 2017 Pirelli calendar is more diverse than ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/01/pirelli-calendar-2017-photographs-nicole-kidman-uma-thurman>
The blue calendar has been much as you’d expect ever since, barring special 
mentions for1991 <http://pauza.de/Pirelli/1991/> (women dressed as sexy 
warriors; they all look like Adam Ant),1992 <http://pauza.de/Pirelli/1992/> 
(the models are topless but otherwise dressed as cats and birds on a weird 
moonscape; it’s like a children’s programme from the 70s) and1989 
<http://pauza.de/Pirelli/1989/>, which contains my very favourite image from 
Pirelli history: a woman reclining on a pillow, completely naked bar the ram’s 
skull pressed against her nether regions. I’d like to think that picture was 
the result of a competition that asked women to write in with the least sexy 
thing they could imagine putting near their vagina. The ram’s skull narrowly 
beat the cactus, the novelty toby jug and the dwarf fromDon’t Look Now.

Of course, those pictures were published before ubiquitous internet 
pornography. One theory for the 2017 Pirelli calendar is that, now, we’re all 
so inundated by nudity, nothing is more erotic than some people looking 
thoughtful in jumpers. Maybe a warmly dressed pillar of the acting 
establishment is as horny as it gets. Maybe pub landlords would do a roaring 
trade with racks of peanut packets that gradually reveal a tired feminist in an 
overcoat.

But I know that’s not it either. The reason Pirelli has put Helen Mirren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mirren> and Charlotte Rampling in 
next year’s calendar is because the newspapers will run excited features about 
“change” and people will buy Pirelli tyres because they’ve seen the name in the 
paper.

It isn’t change at all. It isn’t new, it isn’t different, it isn’t feminist. 
It’s the same old world of onlookers consuming and judging flat images of 
women’s bodies: absurdly beautiful women, who are obliged to spend hours on 
diet and skincare as part of their job, many of whom have been “helped along” 
by surgery.

This calendar isn’t a “strike against sexist imagery”. If they wanted to 
strike against sexist imagery, they could just have pictures of old castles. 
But old castles, like the bodies of the models in 1984, wouldn’t get any 
coverage.

Victoria Coren Mitchell’s new series, Women Talking About Cars 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b084yrjf/episodes/player>, is on Wednesdays at 
6.30pm on Radio 4
 