
It’s been a quarter-century since Japan’s asset bubble burst – and a 
quarter-century of malaise as one “lost decade” has followed another. Some of 
the criticism of its economic policies is unwarranted. Growth is not an 
objective in itself; we should be concerned with standards of living.Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> is ahead of the curve in curbing 
population growth, and productivity has been increasing. Growth in output per 
working-age person, especially since 2008, has been higher than in the United 
States, and much higher than in Europe.

Still, the Japanese believe they can do better. I agree. Japan has problems on 
both the supply and the demand side, and in the real economy and finance. To 
address them, it needs an economic programme that is more likely to work than 
the measures policymakers have recently adopted, which have failed to achieve 
their inflation target, restore confidence, or boost growth to the level 
desired.

For starters, a large carbon tax, if accompanied with “green finance,” would 
stimulate enormous investment to retrofit the economy. Almost surely, this 
stimulus would exceed the contractionary effect of money being taken out of the 
system and the negative wealth effect of the decreased value of “carbon 
assets”. The adverse wealth effect from the decrease in the value of carbon 
assets would be small; and, with the capital stock badly out of sync with the 
new price system, the investment unleashed would be large, unless there were 
bottlenecks in closing the gap.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fa-better-economic-plan-for-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd2107d8920e834485e992e92aabbfbc0787fc9b%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20better%20economic%20plan%20for%20Japan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fa-better-economic-plan-for-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20better%20economic%20plan%20for%20Japan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fa-better-economic-plan-for-japan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd2107d8920e834485e992e92aabbfbc0787fc9b%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Economically speaking, Japan has a mountain to climb. Photograph: Eugene 
Hoshiko/AP 
In that case, the money generated by the tax could be used to reduce 
government debt; otherwise, it could be used to finance investments in 
technology and education – including supply-side measures to improve the 
productivity of Japan’s service sector.These expenditures could simultaneously 
stimulate the economy in ways that would finally pull it out of deflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/26/japans-deflationary-spiral-worsens-as-abenomics-falters>
.

Many outsiders worry about Japan’s debt, which is easy to service at the low 
interest rates prevailing today, but would not be if rates increased to more 
normal levels. While I don’t see that happening anytime soon, Japan could 
undertake two policies to inoculate itself against such concerns.

First, it could exchange some of its debt for perpetuities, bonds that are 
never repaid, but pay a (small) interest rate each year. This would shift the 
risk entirely off the government’s books. Some might worry that this would be 
inflationary; but in Japan’s upside-down economy, inflation is exactly what’s 
needed. I believe worries about a sudden increase in interest rates are greatly 
overblown; but, out of an abundance of caution, the government could exchange 
say 5% of its debt every year, unless and until excessive inflationary 
pressures appeared.

Alternatively, the government could exchange the debt for non-interest bearing 
money – the long-fearedmonetisation of government debt 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/bank-of-japan-negative-rates-mistake-by-adair-turner-2016-02>
. Even if monetary finance was more likely to boost inflation than the exchange 
of debt for interest-bearing perpetuities, this is hardly an argument against 
it: it is only an argument for going more slowly.

The second way Japan could protect itself from an interest-rate spike starts 
from the recognition that a large share of the money that the government owes 
it owes to itself. Many on Wall Street don’t seem to understand that what 
matters is the net debt – what the government owes to the rest of society. If 
the government repaid the money it owes to itself – netting it out, in effect – 
no one would know the difference. But those on Wall Street who look only at the 
headline debt-to-GDP ratio would suddenly feel better about Japan.

The problem with Japan's high-stakes economic mind game | Alex Hern
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/24/japan-economic-mind-game-abenomics>
If after all of this, there is still evidence of a lack of demand, the 
government could reduce its consumer taxes, increase investment tax credits, 
expand programmes to help low- and middle-income households, or invest more in 
technology and education, financing all of this by issuing money. Again, old 
economics would worry about inflation; but Japan wants those “fears” to come 
true.

Japan does have more than a demand-side problem. Data on output per hour 
worked suggest a supply-side problem, most clearly manifested in the service 
sector, where the impressive ingenuity seen in so many manufacturing industries 
typically is nowhere in evidence. A natural niche for Japan would be technology 
developments in the service sector – such as the development of diagnostic 
instruments in the health-care industry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fa-better-economic-plan-for-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e423bb1207bcbf3340168d7cbc266b6cbfcdc0c%2F0_14_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20better%20economic%20plan%20for%20Japan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fa-better-economic-plan-for-japan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20better%20economic%20plan%20for%20Japan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fa-better-economic-plan-for-japan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e423bb1207bcbf3340168d7cbc266b6cbfcdc0c%2F0_14_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Shinzō Abe. Photograph: Issei Kato/Reuters 
Prime minister Shinzō Abe 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/columnist/shinzo-abe>, however, has taken a 
very different approach, supporting the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal 
with the US and 10 other Pacific Rim countries. Abe believes that the TPP would 
force needed reforms in domestic agriculture (though, interestingly, no one in 
the US thinks it would help the US move away from its highly distortionary 
agricultural policies).

In fact, such reforms would have a miniscule effect on GDP, simply because 
agriculture is a very small part of output. Nonetheless, such reforms remain 
desirable and provide another arena in which young Japanese could show their 
ingenuity (though the TPP is not the best way to bring that about).

On the other hand, Abe is right to pursue policies to integrate women more 
fully and equally into the labor force. If successful, such measures should 
provide a boost to both productivity and growth.

Even after a quarter-century of stagnation, Japan remains the world’s 
third-largest single economy. Policies that can help raise standards of living 
there will stimulate demand and growth elsewhere in the global economy. Equally 
important, just as it has shared its innovative goods and technologies with the 
world, Japan could end up exporting successful policies, with the same or 
similar measures increasing standards of living in other advanced countries as 
well.

• Joseph E. Stiglitz is university professor at Columbia University, recipient 
of the 2001 Nobel memorial prize in economics. His most recent book is The 
Price of Inequality.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>
 