
On 15 May 1939, when Isaac Babel 
<http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/RUSbabel.htm> was arrested on false 
charges and taken to Moscow'sLubyanka prison 
<http://www.lonelyplanet.com/russia/moscow/sights/government-building/lubyanka-prison>
, theNKVD <http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/RUSnkvd.htm> also confiscated 
15 manuscript folders, 11 notebooks and seven notepads. "They did not let me 
finish," he told his common-law wife, and it will never be known what their 
contents might have added to his relatively modest corpus of three story 
cycles, two plays, film scripts and assorted fragments: in 1988 the KGB 
officially announced having no record of these papers. That they issued the 
statement at all is testimony to the persisting impact of Babel's violent, 
beautiful, troubling short stories.

Born in 1894 into a bourgeois Odessan Jewish family, Babel grew up in a 
pre-revolutionary Russia where the term "Russian" excluded Jews, and pogroms 
were common. That Odessa was probably the most liberal city in the Empire is 
part of what Grace Paley described as Babel's "lucky composting". He published 
his first story in 1913, and was noticed by Gorky in 1916. According to Babel 
(not the most trustworthy source) Gorky told him to "go among the people" to 
better his writing - so he soldiered on the Romanian front, possibly worked as 
a translator for theCheka <http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/RUScheka.htm>, 
crewed on a food requisitioning barge, and in 1920 joinedGeneral Budyonny's 
Cavalry Army <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1st_Cavalry_Army_%28Soviet_Union%29> 
on the Polish front as a war correspondent. "Only in 1923," he writes, "did I 
learn how to express thoughts clearly and not at too great length. For this 
reason I date the beginning of my literary work from 1924".

The stories Babel wrote then were part of the Red Cavalry cycle 
<http://books.wwnorton.com/books/Red-Cavalry/> (collected in 1926), based on 
his experiences of the Soviet-Polish War. They hum with a sense of the new: 
Babel's writing is a flamboyantly spare, jagged collage of eyewitness report 
and visionary poetry. Impossible at it was for either to have influenced the 
other, Babel and Hemingway are strikingly similar, but Babel possesses an added 
dimension of expressionist oddness. He also takes more obvious pleasure in the 
grotesque; he loved Maupassant, andDonald Rayfield 
<http://www.faber.co.uk/author/donald-rayfield/> notes that both writers 
"frankly relished squalor, corruption and violence."

Red Cavalry, spattered with all three, describes the course of the war 
alongside the narrator Lyutov's ("Ferocious", Babel's risible real-life nom de 
guerre) transition from innocence to experience. It is a complex journey filled 
with tensions: Lyutov is a Jewish intellectual amid antisemitic men of action; 
unable to help a wounded comrade who begs to be shot ("The Death of Dolgushov" 
<http://russiapastandpresent.blogspot.com/2010/12/isaac-babel-death-of-dolgushov.html>
), he later begs fate "for the simplest of abilities - the ability to kill a 
man" ("After the Battle"). While irony is everywhere in Babel's work, here it 
shifts as erratically as Lyutov's squadron, and the terrible end of "After the 
Battle" may be a sincerely Nietzschean appeal. An apparently comic but still 
troubling treatment of this theme is found in the best-known Red Cavalry story, 
"My First Goose".

Uncertainty swarms both within Babel's work and around his life, and as Red 
Cavalry launched him to nationwide fame he worked to deliberately conflate the 
two. His three story cycles - the RunyonesqueOdessa Stories 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Odessa_Tales>, Red Cavalry, and the 
supposedly autobiographical stories of childhood he intended to publish as The 
Story of My Dovecot - can be seen as sharing a single narrator, the eternal 
observer with "autumn in his heart and spectacles on his nose" ("How It Was 
Done in Odessa" (1923)). Babel's childhood stories have the quality of memoir, 
but are largely invented. For example, the writer never witnessed the pogrom 
described in two of his greatest stories, "The Story of My Dovecot" and "First 
Love" (both 1925), despite critics such as Frank O'Connor and Lionel Trilling 
declaring the event central to his art. In 1931 he sent his mother a packet of 
stories with the note, "All the stories are from the childhood years, with lies 
added, of course, and much that is altered."

As the relative artistic freedom and flux of the 1920s calcified into the era 
of Stalinist directives, Babel's production slowed. In 1934, responding to 
attacks on his productivity at theFirst Congress of Soviet Writers 
<http://www.soviethistory.org/index.php?page=subject&SubjectID=1934writers&Year=1934>
, he audaciously described himself as "master of the genre of silence". He 
wrote still, but his greatest work (excepting whatever the NKVD might have 
snatched) was behind him. It is enough, nevertheless, to consider him one of 
the great short story writers, whose influence has been particularly notable in 
America. His semi-autobiographical games continue in the novels of Philip Roth; 
Grace Paley's vivid stories of the Bronx pulse with the same energies as his 
Odessa; his habit of breaking up passages of concrete description with 
rapturous or lurid evocations of nature - the sun "rolling across the sky like 
a severed head" ("Crossing the Zbrucz"), or stars that "crept out of the 
night's cool belly" ("The Ivans") - can be seen at work in Denis Johnson's
Jesus' Son <http://www.nytimes.com/books/98/12/06/specials/johnson-jesus.html>, 
and its many progeny in turn.

The formalist critic Viktor Shklovsky 
<http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/RUSshklovsky.htm> wrote: "Babel's 
principle device is to speak in the same tone of voice about the stars above 
and gonorrhoea." It's a fine description, bettered only by Babel's own. In the 
story "Guy de Maupassant" (completed 1922, published 1932) Babel, or at least a 
narrator we are led to suppose is Babel, pronounces: "A phrase is born into the 
world good and bad at the same time. The secret rests in a barely perceptible 
turn. The lever must lie in one's hand and get warm. It must be turned once, 
and no more." To him words are an army, "an army in which all kinds of weapons 
are on the move. No iron can enter the human heart as chillingly as a full stop 
placed at the right time." This iron, an aggressive partner to Kafka's "axe for 
the frozen sea within us", is something Babel learned to wield with recurring, 
unerring accuracy.

Quotations are taken from David McDuff's translations of the stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/literary-fiction/9780140184624/collected-stories>
.

Next: William Trevor
 