



NOM NOM NOM

Oh, José. You just couldn’t resist, could you? To be fair, we’ve all been 
there. There is, for example, a feeling that most adults in the developed world 
must by now have experienced which occurs when, shortly before their 
anticipated bedtime, they find themselves idly flicking through their available 
TV channels, notice that The Shawshank Redemption has just started on ITV 
Lifestyle Men & Motors 38, decide that they might just watch 10 minutes or so, 
and the next thing they know it’s 2.30am and they’re watching Andy Dufresne 
polish a boat. There are some temptations which we are not culturally or 
genetically capable of resisting, and this is one. You might have others that 
are particular to you, things you don’t so much choose to do as are unable to 
not do: the cracking of one’s knuckles, the casual digital exploration of the 
nasal cavity, the repeated and unnecessary insulting of one’s contemporaries, 
that kind of thing.

José Mourinho is only human, a bundle of cells and synapses that react to 
certain stimuli in predictable ways. In his case, very predicable ways. And the 
thing that really gets him going, without exception triggering massive and 
uncontrollable aggressive chuntering, isimminent encounters with Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/jose-mourinho-arsene-wenger-manchester-united-respect>
.

Prior to tomorrow’s meeting between Mourinho’s Manchester United and Wenger’s 
Arsenal, the Portuguese man o’hate has let rip once again. “The record against 
any other manager being good or bad is not important to me,” he fibbed. “The 
only thing that matters is what you get as a team. And in the Premier League 
tomorrow is a match between the two managers with the best record in the 
Premier League. Between the two managers we are speaking about I think [he 
knows] six or seven [six] Premier League titles, I’m not sure [he is sure]. I 
have three I think [he knows] and Mr Wenger has three [see, he knew]. Does that 
mean we should be respective even in periods when our results are not the best? 
I think Mr Wenger has that respect from all of you. I don’t think I have. My 
last Premier League title was 18 months ago not 18 years ago [Wenger’s is only 
12 and a half years back, to be fair]. I don’t think I get that respect. But to 
be honest, I just follow my way.”

This must all be very upsetting for poor Arsène, who, before Mourinho came 
along, was the undisputed No1 continental-born manager in Premier League 
history. Mourinho took that title from him and replaced it with another, 
describing him in 2014 as“a specialist in failure” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/14/jose-mourinho-arsene-wenger-specialist-failure>
. Then Mourinho proved how able and successful he was by taking that title off 
the hapless Frenchman too, achieving failure on a scale Wenger has never 
approached or even imagined.

And now Mourinho stands alone as the most failure-stained, success-laden 
dugout-occupant in the land, a ball of exaggerated pride and inexplicable fury, 
a man who believes managers who have been successful deserve respect while 
simultaneously refusing to respect managers who have been successful, a man who 
is endlessly irritated by the swagger of a once-successful man whose results no 
longer match his reputation, but can’t for the life of him understand why 
anyone might have any kind of problem with himself.

Still, it all sets up tomorrow’s game rather nicely. Sure, it’s likely to end 
in an irksome and ill-tempered post-match interview with either this manager or 
the other one, but then that’s part of why we love it so. And if it’s a happy 
ending you’re after, the Fiver can always suggest a decent movie.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“It’s not every day you’re walking out on to a football pitch, look up and 
there’s a massive eagle swooping down at you” –Eden Hazard sits down for an 
exclusive chit-chat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/eden-hazard-antonio-conte-chelsea>
 with Dominic Fifield.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjose-mourinho-manchester-united-arsene-wenger-arsenal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb089071a93984551774ab22ad73f0c499e3077dc%2F0_169_5664_3398%2F5664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20A%20bundle%20of%20cells%20and%20synapses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjose-mourinho-manchester-united-arsene-wenger-arsenal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20A%20bundle%20of%20cells%20and%20synapses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjose-mourinho-manchester-united-arsene-wenger-arsenal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb089071a93984551774ab22ad73f0c499e3077dc%2F0_169_5664_3398%2F5664.jpg>
 Lollipop lad. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
FIVER LETTERS

“Re: this business with Wayne ‘Party Boy’ Rooney having a few vinos and 
tinkling the ivories in the wee hours of the morning - if it’s a proper scandal 
we really shouldn’t have to remind anyone that the press always attach the 
obligatory “-gate” suffix [See SWMs - Fiver Ed]. No gate, no problem - can 
everyone calm down now?” – Ciaran Neeson.

“So Rooney is being castigated for his shenanigans at a Hertfordshire hotel. 
In the meantime, Klopp is saying that ‘All the legends drank like devils and 
smoke like crazy’. How could those two statements possibly be related? – Marisa 
Cardoni.

“It’s often said that footballers these days are out of touch with the fans, 
and the latest Wayne Rooney episode only serves to highlight this. I’m the same 
age as Rooney and when I go out I can’t make it beyond half ten without falling 
asleep, being thrown out of the pub & being sick in a taxi” – Gary Mantle.

“It was clever of you Brits to have a vote that effectively devalued the 
pound, ensuring that the Manchester United debt load isslightly higher than it 
otherwise would be 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/17/manchester-united-debt-rises-338m-partly-because-of-brexit>
. But we yanks just had our own vote that will surely result in devaluing the 
dollar to levels barely dreamt of on your side of the pond. So, check and mate” 
– Christopher Smith.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
letter o’the day isMarisa Cardoni, who receives a copy of Football Manager 2017 
<http://www.footballmanager.com/games/football-manager-2017> from those good 
people at Football Manager Towers, and it’s out now! We’ve got plenty more 
copies to give away, so if you want one, keep the letters coming.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

Two former professional footballers have independently told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/17/barry-bennell-two-former-players-reveal>
 about another person within the sport who had links to the serial paedophile 
Barry Bennell and preyed on boys without ever being detected.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fandy-woodward-hope-more-victims-come-forward-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Woodward%3A%20I%20hope%20more%20victims%20of%20abuse%20now%20feel%20they%20can%20come%20forward%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fandy-woodward-hope-more-victims-come-forward-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Woodward%3A%20I%20hope%20more%20victims%20of%20abuse%20now%20feel%20they%20can%20come%20forward%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fandy-woodward-hope-more-victims-come-forward-video&media=>
Andy Woodward: I hope more victims of abuse now feel they can come forward – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/17/andy-woodward-hope-more-victims-come-forward-video>
Pep Guardiola has had his say on Rooney-gate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/pep-guardiola-wayne-rooney-support>
. “I was lucky there were no pictures. I won’t comment on the private lives of 
others because I don’t like it when people comment on my private life, but when 
I was an international I sometimes had a drink,” he commented.

Gareth Southgatge will be asked where he sees himself in five years during 
Monday’s job interview for the permanent England role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/england-gareth-southgate-interview-manager>
. “Gareth is a really strong candidate and clearly, after the last four games, 
his candidacy has become much stronger,” cheered FA suit Martin Glenn.

Purple Tin is not a problem in  Fiver Towers football, according to Arsène 
Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/17/arsene-wenger-drink-not-major-problem-england-arsenal-manchester-united>
.

Lee Cattermole hip gah, right here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/sunderland-lee-cattermole-hip-surgery>
.

The coffers at Premier League HQ have just got £564m bigger  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/english-premier-league-sells-china-tv-rights-for-564m-report-claims>
after the Best League in The World™ signed a record three-year contract with 
Chinese digital broadcaster PPTV.

Sporting Gijon have been ordered to partially close one of their stands after 
alleged racist abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/sporting-gijon-racial-abuse-alleged-stand-closure>
 directed at Athletic Bilbao’s Iñaki Williams in August.

CSKA Moscow midfielder Roman Eremenko has been given a two-year ban for 
testing positive for cocaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/18/cska-moscow-roman-eremenko-banned-cocaine>
 after a Champions League match.

Gianni Infantino has had another bright idea to ease fixture congestion: 
proposing the expansion of the Club World Cupto 32 teams for 2019 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/gianni-infantino-club-world-cup-expansion>
.

Robbie Keane has called time on his LA Galaxy career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/robbie-keane-la-galaxy-mls> 
but is not hanging up his soccer cleats for good just yet. “Winning three MLS 
Cups, scoring over 100 goals for the club and being named as 2014 MVP are all 
achievements that I will look back on with pride,” he trumpeted.

Two supporters have been handed banning orders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/supporters-banned-west-ham-chelsea-efl-cup>
 following crowd trouble at the London Stadium in the Rumbelows Cup tie between 
West Ham and Chelsea.

Liverpool are waiting to discover the results of a scan on Philippe Coutinho’s 
minor hamstring twang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/liverpool-philippe-coutinho-scan-southampton>
 before deciding whether he will play at Southampton on Saturday.

STILL WANT MORE?

Ten (10!) things to look out for in the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/18/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
 this weekend, including a possible sighting of the lesser spotted Saido 
Berahino.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fpremier-league-preview-a-look-ahead-to-the-weekends-action-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Premier%20League%20preview%3A%20a%20look%20ahead%20to%20the%20weekend's%20action%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fpremier-league-preview-a-look-ahead-to-the-weekends-action-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Premier%20League%20preview%3A%20a%20look%20ahead%20to%20the%20weekend%27s%20action%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fpremier-league-preview-a-look-ahead-to-the-weekends-action-video&media=>
Premier League preview: a look ahead to the weekend’s action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/18/premier-league-preview-a-look-ahead-to-the-weekends-action-video>
Fans of liberally-applied facepaint, see here for Barney Ronay’s column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/18/qatar-china-football-world-cup-qualifying>
 on the woes of China and Qatar.


Jonathan Wilson gets all hot under the collar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/18/michael-carrick-manchester-united-jose-mourinho>
 whenever he sees Michael Carrick, and he wants to tell you why.

From Luis Suárez’s dastardly deed against Ghana to Steven Taylor’s ridiculous 
attempt to pretend he had been winded, this week’sJoy of Six puts the spotlight 
on nefarious goal-line handballs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/18/the-joy-of-six-nefarious-goal-line-handballs>
.

Andy Woodward’s harrowing story of abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> by Barry 
Bennell willforce football to assess whether it’s equipped to face its past, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/17/andy-woodward> writes Owen 
Gibson.

Louise Taylor had a chat with Sunderland’s California-raised, surf-mad Lynden 
Gooch about living in England’s north-east andfound out he quite likes it there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/17/sunderland-lynden-gooch-david-moyes>
.

Which is a good job, really, because US soccer is dripping in mediocrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/17/us-mens-soccer-mediocrity-jurgen-klinsmann-sunil-gulati>
, according to Matthew Hall.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


HAVE A NICE WEEKEND, FOLKS <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S0Q4gqBUs7c>
 