
On Monday night A Current Affair launched a guerrilla attack on the refugees 
Australia has resettled onNauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru>.

The ACA team were the first TV crew to make a sanctioned visit to the island 
since it effectivelysealed its borders to journalists in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/09/nauru-visa-to-cost-8000>. 

Given the chance to report from Nauru, where refugees have been brutalised 
under Australia’s stewardship, ACA chose to focus on the more superficial 
problems of life on Nauru – a thrown pencil in a classroom, stolen bikes and 
vaguely described health issues. In doing so, it made the refugees’ universal 
desire to leave the island appear similarly superficial.

“Many average Australians would have watched the story last night and wondered 
what all the complaining was about: on the whole, the refugees on Nauru are 
well-fed, most live in relative comfort and they’re free to move around as they 
please,” wrote ACA’s Caroline Marcusin the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/rendezview/why-are-activists-so-afraid-of-the-truth-about-nauru/news-story/ee5cc5fb94e586e98f6f8d6e9a2daab3>
.

The worst I've seen – trauma expert lifts lid on 'atrocity' of Australia's 
detention regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/20/the-worst-ive-seen-trauma-expert-lifts-lid-on-atrocity-of-australias-detention-regime>
But poor living conditions and restrictions on movement are not what refugees 
fear. Their physical and mental safety is the most significant story embroiling 
Australia’s Nauruan detention regime. Marcus’s report reduced this to a 
parenthetic “there have been reports of sexual assaults”.

Stories of fear and abuse are not difficult to find on Nauru. On Christmas 
night in 2014, after slipping past a sleeping guard into two refugee camps, a 
photographer and I sat with refugees asthey told us their stories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/19/even-god-cant-help-you-here-nauru-refugees-describe-a-life-devoid-of-hope>
. Speaking in hushed voices, a group of Somali women told us that they had 
begged Australian immigration officials to beplaced back into detention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/31/refugees-living-on-nauru-say-they-want-to-return-to-detention-to-flee-violence>
 to remove them from the attentions of men who knocked on their windows at 
night. They said they slept wearing jeans. Several reported being attacked.

The refugee community is small and has become tight-knit against adversity. 
They know when one of their friends has been hurt. Once word spread that a 
journalist was on Nauru, meetings were easy to arrange.

Most interviewees feared retribution from the Nauruan government, locals or 
the Australian immigration department, so they would only speak and be 
photographed anonymously. Thus it is unsurprising that none of these women were 
willing to speak to ACA on camera. It is standard journalistic practice to 
protect the identity of victims of abuse. Whether Marcus offered them the 
opportunity to speak anonymously is unclear.

Three months after my visit, the Moss review would crystallise the rumours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/20/rapes-and-fears-for-safety-on-nauru-uncovered-by-independent-moss-review>
 of rape and abuse in Nauru’s detention centres. This year,a report documented 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/dogs-will-kill-you-if-you-dont-suck-my-private-part-the-torment-of-women-at-nauru-20160606-gpcfeq.html>
 the ongoing abuse of unmarried women like those we met, who live among the 
Nauruan community. On Monday, the Guardianrevealed the mind-numbing frequency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/20/the-worst-ive-seen-trauma-expert-lifts-lid-on-atrocity-of-australias-detention-regime>
 of self-harm recorded in the logs of the private security firm guarding the 
centres.

When given the rare opportunity to interview the Nauruan president, Baron 
Waqa, ACA failed to ask – or failed to air – questions about the safety of the 
refugees.

“Is it dangerous?” Marcus asked the country’s justice minister, David Adeang. 
No, he said, Nauru’s rates of violent crime are lower than Australia’s. There 
was no follow up.

Instead, the camera lingered reproachfully on a flatscreen TV and a new 
undercover playground provided to refugees by the Australian government. There 
were also casual questions about the money refugees paid to traffickers. In 
this context this information was only relevant to fuel the trope that these 
are economic migrants who can’t be that hard up if they can afford thousands 
for a boat trip to Australia.

In PNG and Nauru, Australia’s immigration policy comes at the expense of 
democracy | Jeff Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/15/in-png-and-nauru-australias-immigration-policy-comes-at-the-expense-of-democracy>
ACA’s report sought to set the facts straight on the most facile criticisms of 
Australia’s Nauruan regime. Refugees’ daily protests photographed through the 
wire of the detention centre were revealed to be staged beside an open gate.
Refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> on Nauru are fighting an 
asymmetric media war against the Australian government. Their unalloyed 
condemnation of every aspect of life in Nauru is not subtle.

Neither is the rhetoric of some of their advocates. The program started with 
footage of the Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young calling the island a 
“hellhole”. This type of hyperbole is offensive to the Nauruan people and easy 
for ACA to repudiate. It might be expected that an Australian politician speaks 
with more restraint. Nauru is not Auschwitz.

But the refugees are people devoid of hope and left only with anger. Women and 
children have been raped without consequence. Do we really expect them to 
caveat their complaints with thanks for giving them a TV?
 