
There’s nothing sexy about what Saira Nicole does for a living. “Photo, guys?” 
she asks strangers in a raspy voice. Playful, friendly but never flirty, she 
emphasises each word with a pink ostrich feather in her hand.

She introduces herself and then poses twice for each picture. First full 
frontal, hand on hip, head tilted, no smile. Then a 180-degree turn, looking 
over her shoulder defiantly into the camera. In her underwear, she strides 
across Times Square painted as an American flag as if it were her living room.

 “Here I am: topless in the heart of my city! It’s a very freeing feeling”, 
she explains with a laugh.

 Over the summer, body-painted topless performers – referred to by mass media 
as “desnudas” – have polarized New York City and turned Times Square into an 
unlikely battlefield for gender equality.

All at once, Saira is reclaiming her own body and her city. Not long ago, the 
mecca of American tourism was populated by sex workers, transvestites, drug 
addicts and petty criminals, rather than middle-class tourists. To Saira, her 
performance is a tongue-in-cheek reminder of darker days.

Perhaps no one is less thrilled about it than Mayor Bill de Blasio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bill-de-blasio>, who has embarked on a 
crusade against the “proliferation of topless individuals and costumed 
characters who too often harass people and expose families to inappropriate 
acts”.

Saira, one of his several targets, is petite, though the wedge sandals and 
feather headdress may mislead at first. Across her chest are painted the words 
I <3 NY, which she really does – after all, she says, in which other city in 
the world could her African American and Pakistani parents have met?

 “This is literally how I dress at home and now I can do that here in public 
and celebrate with people,” she says.

A 29-year-old media graduate of Hunter College, she started a year ago after 
seeing an online ad. While public nudity may have inevitable feminist 
undertones, the politics weren’t always as pronounced. But following the media 
storm which followed the group this past month, Saira now sees her job as an 
act of rebellion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsaira-painted-lady-times-square-new-york-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441391784036%2F94a2f29d-a84d-49e7-a1a0-537e888795d5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20day%20with%20Saira%2C%20one%20of%20the%20original%20topless%20painted%20ladies%20of%20New%20York%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsaira-painted-lady-times-square-new-york-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20day%20with%20Saira%2C%20one%20of%20the%20original%20topless%20painted%20ladies%20of%20New%20York%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsaira-painted-lady-times-square-new-york-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441391784036%2F94a2f29d-a84d-49e7-a1a0-537e888795d5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Saira in Times Square. Photograph: Caterina Clerici 
 An older passerby, Lydia Mejia, confronts her. “Why are you degrading 
yourself like that?” she asks aggressively. “What do you gain from it?”

 Now retired, Lydia used to clean offices and apartments in the area. It used 
to be nicer, she says; but now it’s full of ladies looking for “easy money”.

 “It’s disgusting,” she adds. “I don’t think women should express themselves 
like that. Lord gave us a body and we should respect that. You don’t have to do 
that to be free.”

Since the controversy started, Saira’s three-member team has been working 
every day. Out of principle, they won’t be intimidated by the NYPD, who keep an 
eye on them from a distance while directing confused foreigners towards the 
subway.


 “From the day I started I knew it was gonna become a movement,” she says. 
“This is something that should be talked about. It doesn’t mean you have to 
like it. It’s fine you don’t! But talk about it. Think about why you don’t like 
it, think about where you’re coming from.”

‘Women’s bodies don’t belong to themselves’

 This summer, hundreds of New Yorkers have demonstrated in favour of women’s 
equal right to expose their bodies at will under the#freethenipple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/06/free-the-nipple-liberation-photos-breasts>
 banner. Last week, New York Post’s Amber Jamiesonworked “undercover” 
<http://nypost.com/2015/08/30/i-went-undercover-as-a-topless-performer-in-times-square/>
 and topless for a day, concluding in a frontpage story that the controversy 
was “deeply sexist”. She was proudly joining Team Topless.

 “Women’s bodies don’t belong to themselves,” Saira says. “They always belong 
to someone else. They see us and they automatically think we’re gonna be a 
man’s commodity.”

 Why does America have a problem with her exposing her own body to make money, 
she wonders aloud looking up at billboards above her, but not with Pepsi doing 
it systematically?

The idea that a female body needs an owner is also a problem for Chris 
Olivieri, 25, who orchestrates the venture. Because behind every empowered 
“desnuda”, it seems, is a man to hold their handbags, buy tampons and guard 
against inappropriate touches. Tabloids refer to them as handlers, or pimps.

 “Me being labelled a pimp, that’s the worst,” Olivieri says, visibly upset – 
he thinks of himself an artist and part of an arts movement.

 The cops arrested him 
<http://gothamist.com/2015/08/24/nypd_officers_took_painted_womens_c.php> one 
evening shortly after De Blasio’s speech, on old trespass and marijuana 
charges, and quizzed him about his relationship with the performers (“Was he 
their pimp? Did they have threesomes? Did he solicit sex?”) until 3am. They 
kept his ID for four days, Olivieri says, and still have his cellphone.

Olivieri’s Instagram feed is packed with cute pictures of the team together. 
In one shot, Saira and him are in a helicopter ride he treated her to (“She 
means a lot to me. If you got the best, you gotta give the best.”).

A rapper by profession, he has just won a hip-hop competition and will take 
both ladies to an all-expenses-paid yacht party in Miami this weekend.

“This is supposed to be the land of the free, but the government always tries 
to keep you at a certain level,” he says. “I’ve been doing this for four years 
and when media started coming after us, I realized that women have it just as 
hard as minorities do,” he says, adding that somehow they’re more vilified than 
the drug dealers a block away. “I’m all about equality. I respect the women 
more than I respect the men.”

In a small bag slung across his chest, he holds on to their tips: anything 
from a couple of dollars to twenties. In the middle of the walkway, a big red 
signpost informs that tipping street performers is optional.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsaira-painted-lady-times-square-new-york-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441392214427%2F296753cb-c020-4e28-9fb4-34f01968b651-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20day%20with%20Saira%2C%20one%20of%20the%20original%20topless%20painted%20ladies%20of%20New%20York%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsaira-painted-lady-times-square-new-york-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20day%20with%20Saira%2C%20one%20of%20the%20original%20topless%20painted%20ladies%20of%20New%20York%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fsaira-painted-lady-times-square-new-york-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441392214427%2F296753cb-c020-4e28-9fb4-34f01968b651-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Saira at work. Photograph: Caterina Clerici 
 “How much is a photo?” a South Asian lady in shalwar kameez asks, her husband 
shyly observing Saira next to her.

 “Accha tip,” Saira replies in improvised Hindi, avoiding specifics. “I learnt 
to say ‘a nice tip’ in a few different languages now.”

 The team doesn’t talk about how much they make, and although it’s enough for 
Saira to take the chilly winter months off for vacation, she insists money is 
just a bonus.

A body to be looked at and respected

Around 6.30pm cops arrive to break up the scene, a little bit earlier than 
usual according to Saira. It’s dinnertime anyway, and Chris texts them the soup 
menu from a nearby restaurant: Manhattan clam chowder, barley vegetable or 
chicken orzo?

Jennifer Arnold, a middle-aged costume designer for Phantom of the Opera, 
comes up for a picture with Saira and Amanda. She pulls up her green top up to 
flash her own breasts, and people cheer.

 “I totally support these girls. Why can men do this when women can’t?” 
Jennifer says, nodding tothe Naked Cowboy 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/video/archive/2013/12/times-squares-naked-cowboy-and-cowgirl/282514/>
 lurking a stone’s throw away. “It’s so sexist to persecute them and to let 
these guys go around behaving like that.”

 Despite De Blasio’s fear of corrupting minors, 12-year-old Gabriele Rizzelli 
from Italy poses comfortably with Saira and Amanda. As his mum smiles and tips, 
dad Angelo doesn’t see the problem: why wouldn’t nudity be child-friendly? It’s 
the family’s first day on their first visit to New York. In Europe, he says, 
this is no big deal.

 Saira often tries to tell parents exactly that.

 “Why don’t you give your son an opportunity to look at a woman’s body and 
understand that this is just a body?” she argues. “Why are you covering their 
eyes and making it seem like something shocking that they can’t see? What are 
you teaching them? You might as well give them an opportunity to understand the 
female body now, its just a body: it’s to be looked at and respected.”

 And speaking of respect, there are creeps, too. But mostly, people are well 
behaved: a gentle correction of a wandering hand is usually enough to shame its 
owner. Saira emphasises that she actually gets catcalled less here than when 
she’s off work, fully dressed – if anything, men often seem nervous as they 
awkwardly puts their arms around their bare waists.

Breaking the rules gives everyone a bad name

 As the sun sets, Times Square regresses to its sleazier days as more and more 
shirtless women arrive. Carefully covering their nipples with robes until fully 
painted, they get ready in full view under neon lights.

They don’t belong to Saira’s clique: all from Latin America, some with huge 
silicone breasts, they catcall passersby, stroking them with feathers. In 
pictures, they arch their backs, kiss the tourists on the cheek, and shake 
their behinds. One of them recently got in trouble afteroffering oral sex 
<http://nypost.com/2015/09/03/times-square-desnuda-busted-for-offering-oral-sex-to-cop/>
 to an undercover cop. None of them would comment for this article.

 By breaking unwritten rules, these are the girls who give everyone a bad 
name, Saira complains. They’re not feminists; they don’t have an agenda. 
They’re copycats and theirs is not an empowering experience, she insists. On a
Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Times-Square-Body-Art/952845111420898?fref=ts>, 
she tries to set the record straight: theoriginal “Painted Ladies” of Times 
Square are there to exercise their rights and celebrate their freedom by taking 
pictures with people from across the world.

 If De Blasio had only bothered to come out here, he’d get the difference 
between her team and a few bad seeds, she argues. “People want us, believe it 
or not. I take a hundred pictures a day. I’m not forcing them to pull their 
phone out.”

In front of Times Square’s iconic billboards, Eric, a thirtysomething 
Pennsylvanian web developer in beige chinos and striped tucked-in shirt, wraps 
his arms around Amanda and Saira as they near the end of their workday.

The picture is for a friend back home, and while it may be objectifying, he 
doesn’t think it’s degrading. But is it empowering?

 “Without a doubt!” he says. “Otherwise I would never have done it. It’s 
inspiring to see someone with that much confidence.“
 