
Imagine a verdant, landscape filled with rice paddies, tea plantations and 
olive groves. A land where you can hike up mountains in the thick mist of the 
morning and picnic by waterfalls on sun-weathered rocks in the afternoon. A 
land filled with golden apricots that taste like honey, peaches so succulent 
you barely notice the sweet juice that runs down your chin, and small black 
figs, firm and velvety to the touch, that erupt with jammy stickiness as you 
tear them open. I enjoyed all of these delights and more when I travelled 
through Iran in search of the secrets of the Persian kitchen.

On my journey, I cooked and feasted with Iranians of all walks of life who 
welcomed me into their homes to share their favourite recipes. In a country 
most commonly viewed through the narrow prism of its politics, food is a 
wonderful vehicle for discovery. A really good meal is something everyone can 
relate to.

Those unfamiliar with Iranian food often assume that it is fiery or spicy, 
perhaps befitting the country’s climate or politics. But it is, in fact, gentle 
and soothing, a poetic balance of subtle spices such as dried limes, saffron 
and rosewater. Slow-cooked stews, known askhoresh, and elaborate rice dishes 
layered with herbs, vegetables, nuts and dried fruit are the bedrocks of 
Persian cuisine, creating a dazzling mosaic of scents, textures and colours at 
the dining table. Regional and seasonal delicacies are plentiful, making the 
most of Iran’s bountiful produce.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-food-tour-yasmin-khan-stews-kebabs-desserts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21d7f404a03a76ea4d0c024551e1b49362200822%2F0_196_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20foodie%20tour%20of%20Iran%3A%20it's%20poetry%20on%20a%20plate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-food-tour-yasmin-khan-stews-kebabs-desserts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20foodie%20tour%20of%20Iran%3A%20it%27s%20poetry%20on%20a%20plate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-food-tour-yasmin-khan-stews-kebabs-desserts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21d7f404a03a76ea4d0c024551e1b49362200822%2F0_196_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
 Traditional dizi stew is made to an ancient recipe. Photograph: Kaveh 
Kazemi/Getty Images 
My journey started in Tabriz, in north-west Iran, a place of culinary 
connection for centuries, a trading crossroads connecting the Caucasus, the 
Middle East and Europe. Tabriz was one of the capitals of the old Persian 
empire, famed for its bazaar, where spices from India and China were sold 
alongside delicate silks and intricately patterned carpets.

Today, the bazaar is a Unesco world heritage site and nearby is one of the 
best places in town to sample to city’s signature dish,kofte tabrizi. Shariar 
Traditional Restaurant (corner of Tarbiyat Street, +98 41 554 0057) is 
converted from one of the city’s old hammams, and the lamb meatballs are the 
size of your fist, stuffed with hard-boiled eggs, walnuts and dried plums. They 
are served in a tomato and saffron sauce that’s mopped up with warm flatbreads.

Tabriz also has some of Iran’s most comforting street food. I was shown around 
town by psychology student Yasamin Bahmani, who took me on a stroll around El 
Goli park with its famed Persian garden, insisting every few hundred metres 
that we stop at one of the street stalls that line the paths. We feasted on 
mashed potato and hard boiled eggs, smothered in thick slabs of melting butter, 
sprinkled with dried mint and wrapped in a warm flatbread, and tender steamed 
purple and yellow beetroot that we sprinkled generously with sumac.
 A man roasting corn at a street stall in Darband. Photograph: Amos 
Chapple/Getty Images/Lonely Planet Images 
Heading south, I hit the coast of the Caspian Sea and the rolling green hills 
of the Gilan province, famed for its river fish and caviar. The cuisine of 
Gilan is as green as its landscapes, making it the best place in Iran for 
vegetarians. Aubergines and garlic appeared at every meal, alongside the mounds 
of fresh coriander, parsley and dill that are used to create fragrant bases for 
stews and emerald-greenkuku (a type of frittata).

I spent an afternoon with farmer Roya Baighi, who taught me how to cook 
torshi-tareh, an elegant green stew made from herbs we picked from her garden. 
It was bursting with flavour and virtuosity. Gilan is also home to one of 
Iran’s most famous dishes:fesenjoon, chicken poached in an earthy 
sweet-and-sour sauce of ground walnuts and pomegranates. I enjoyed it at Mahtab 
restaurant in Lahijan (Golestan Square, +98 141 422 2963), with white rice and 
crisp, butterytahdig, the golden saffron-infused rice crust that Iranians prize 
so much.

This atmospheric restaurant celebrates Gilaki culture with a menu of regional 
dishes, and live folk music in the evenings. It is adjacent to one of Gilan’s 
most popular tourist attractions, Lahijan lake and promenade, which are a 
perfect spot to walk off any overindulgence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-food-tour-yasmin-khan-stews-kebabs-desserts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2dfa8b359e4a0c2de849b33a81cb363684fe9ed%2F0_41_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20foodie%20tour%20of%20Iran%3A%20it's%20poetry%20on%20a%20plate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-food-tour-yasmin-khan-stews-kebabs-desserts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20foodie%20tour%20of%20Iran%3A%20it%27s%20poetry%20on%20a%20plate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-food-tour-yasmin-khan-stews-kebabs-desserts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2dfa8b359e4a0c2de849b33a81cb363684fe9ed%2F0_41_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 The Koohpayeh restaurant in Darband. 
No trip to the region would be complete without sampling koloocheh, small 
pastries stuffed with ground walnuts, cinnamon and cardamom which are the 
speciality of Fuman, a small town in the south-west of the province. Stalls all 
over town sell these baked treats and they were particularly welcome, washed 
down with dainty glasses of black tea, after a rigorous hike in the surrounding 
hills.

I visited saffron farms, rosewater festivals and pomegranate orchards – 
finding the history behind evocative ingredients

Tehran is filled with upscale restaurants serving dishes ranging from sushi 
and frozen yoghurt todizi, a lamb, chickpea and potato stew made to a 
centuries-old recipe, cooked in a clay pot for several hours until the meat is 
so tender it can be mashed into a paste with a fork. The best local feasting, 
though, is in Darband, a neighbourhood in the north of the city at the foot of 
the Alborz mountains. It’s a district of narrow winding mountain paths lined 
with trees adorned with fairy lights.Koohpayeh <http://www.koohpayeh.com/> 
restaurant is about a 10-minute walk up the Darband hill and provides a scenic 
backdrop for sampling some of the city’s finest juicy lamb kebabs. Finish the 
night by relaxing on faded Persian carpets in one of the many small wooden 
pavilions up and down the road and join the locals in smoking some 
apple-flavoured shishas.

In central Iran, I visited saffron farms, rosewater festivals and pomegranate 
orchards, discovering the history and horticulture behind Iran’s most evocative 
ingredients. The pomegranate is indigenous to Iran and, in ancient Persian 
mythology, the hero warrior Isfandiar is said to have eaten its seeds and 
become invincible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-food-tour-yasmin-khan-stews-kebabs-desserts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e46b3be2999cfaf50d6955b3e080858d263efaf%2F0_134_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20foodie%20tour%20of%20Iran%3A%20it's%20poetry%20on%20a%20plate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-food-tour-yasmin-khan-stews-kebabs-desserts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20foodie%20tour%20of%20Iran%3A%20it%27s%20poetry%20on%20a%20plate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-food-tour-yasmin-khan-stews-kebabs-desserts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e46b3be2999cfaf50d6955b3e080858d263efaf%2F0_134_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 Yasmin Khan choosing pomegranates, the nation’s favourite fruit, at an Iranian 
market. Photograph: Shahrzad Darafsheh 
Today, pomegranates retain their near-mythical status and are revered as the 
nation’s favourite fruit. As well as being enjoyed on their own – their scarlet 
seeds sprinkled with a pinch ofgolpar, an earthy, citrussy spice – they are 
also salted, dried and pounded into fruit leathers or cooked into molasses to 
be added to savoury dishes.

Central Iran is also home to the country’s finest pistachios, which feature in 
both sweet and savoury dishes

The city of Shiraz is synonymous with poetry, and with the roses that flourish 
in the town’s famed garden, Bagh-e Eram. Roses are indigenous to Iran and it 
was here that the petals were first distilled into rosewater, over 2,500 years 
ago. Today, this is mainly used in desserts such as faloodeh, an aromatic and 
refreshing rosewater and lime sorbet with frozen vermicelli. The Hafez garden 
is one of the best places to sample this local speciality and I was taken there 
by Shahin Hojabrafkan, a handsome and charming secondhand car salesman. We sat 
overlooking Hafez’s shrine, squeezing wedges of lime into our fragrant 
rosewater-infused sorbets and watching a steady stream of Iranians pay 
reverence to their most cherished poet.

Central Iran is also home to the country’s finest pistachios, which feature in 
both sweet and savoury dishes. My favourite way to enjoy their creamy texture 
is at one of the many ice-cream parlours in the ancient city of Isfahan at 
night, such as Mahfal ice-cream on Makineh Khajoo. One of the most moreish is
bastani akbar mashti, a saffron and rosewater custard ice-cream flecked with 
toasted pistachios.
 Waiter serving lunch, Iranian style. Photograph: Jason Edwards/National 
Geographic/Getty Images 
The final stop on my travels was the southern port town of Bandar Abbas, on 
the Persian Gulf. Bandar, as it is known, is a town of scorching sunshine, warm 
blue waters and towering palms, and was once an important post on the spice 
route from India to Europe. By contrast with the rest of Iranian cuisine, the 
food of this region is an assault on the senses – a thrilling mix of Persian, 
Indian and Arabian flavours. Tropical fruits, such as mangos, pineapples and 
guavas, are picked green and used for Indian-style pickles, and seafood from 
the warm Persian Gulf is stewed, grilled as kebabs, or fermented, dried and 
ground into powders and pastes.

The best place to sample the day’s catch is at the fish market, where burly 
men shout their deals of the day and women crouch on the floor next to them, 
deftly shelling prawns. Next to the market, a row of fish restaurants serve 
specialities includingghaleyeh maygoo – a prawn, fresh coriander and tamarind 
stew – and small spicy fishcakes calledkuku-ye mahi, .

Travellers in Iran are always met with warmth and hospitality: it is not 
uncommon to be invited to an Iranian home for dinner after just exchanging a 
few pleasantries. For those wishing to expand their culinary knowledge, or 
simply enjoy one of the most sophisticated cuisines in the world, Iran offers a 
wealth of culinary delights. The only challenge for most visitors will be 
squeezing into their jeans at the end of the trip.

• Yasmin Khan is author of The Saffron Tales: Recipes from the Persian Kitchen 
(Bloomsbury <http://bloomsbury.com/uk/the-saffron-tales-9781408868737/> £26). 
To buy a copy for £21.32 including UK p&p call 0330 333 6846 or visit
bookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/saffron-tales.html>
 