
It's one of the funniest moments on celluloid: Julianne Moore, playing 
performance artistMaude Lebowski <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TmDwG9z7EXM>, 
is in her Los Angeles warehouse/studio/residence, strapped into an elaborate 
pulley system. She swoops over the Dude and flings paint at a canvas, on which 
is an image of a splayed and paint-spattered female form. Apart from the 
harness, Maude is naked, leaving Jeff Bridges's Dude more bemused than ever at 
an unexpected display of performance art in action. "My art has been commended 
as being strongly vaginal," Maude says. "The word itself makes some men 
uncomfortable. Vagina."

American composer Meredith Monk <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M59qGoTCc0Q> 
told me that she wasn't annoyed with the Coen brothers for using herWalking Song
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dgxMbPV8VYo>as the musical accompaniment to 
this scene, when I talked to her for Radio 3'sMusic Matters 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006tnvx>. "I was laughing my head off", she 
said. I thought that Monk could have been offended at the gender and culture 
stereotyping that seemed to be going on inCarter Burwell 
<http://www.thebodyinc.com/projects/Big_Lebowski.shtml> (who wrote and 
supervised the music for The Big Lebowski) and Joel and Ethan's imaginations – 
as if Meredith's music was just the sort of stuff that a pseud such as Maude 
would listen to – but Monk, typically, saw and heard only reasons to celebrate, 
and laugh.

And quite right too. Besides, all that was 1998 and this is now, and Monk 
<http://www.meredithmonk.org/> turns 70 on Tuesday. Not that you would know it 
to hear her voice today: that uniquely flexible instrument that is at the 
centre of her work as composer, performer, producer, and all-round 
unclassifiable artist.Listen to this, from her recent Songs of Ascension 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c3mSVR3xtfU>, and hear what I mean.

Monk's roots as a singer and composer are in folk and rock; you can hear her 
singing Greensleeves here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-SJz9cgS-8s> in her 
early 20s. That was just before she began to experiment with the possibilities 
of her voice, as you can hear in Trance on the same album,Beginnings 
<http://www.tzadik.com/index.php?catalog=7721>, out on John Zorn's Tzadik 
label. You'll hear herastonishing range 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f_Xj3ID-ybw>, some extraordinary ululations and 
incantations, vertiginous leaps, drops, cries and other wordless acrobatics. 
They're all things that used to be called "extended vocal techniques" but Monk 
makes them sound completely natural, central, and essential. What Monk 
discovered, and what she went on to create with her own group of singers and 
instrumentalists in New York throughout the 70s and 80s was a kind of 
performance practice that was operatic in the truest sense of involving many 
different kinds of practice: theatre, lighting, film, movement, ritual, myth, 
and avant garde performance art. But descriptions like that can only take you 
so far: listen, watch and be entranced byDolmen Music 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7su7d76LhWg>, Book of Days 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nMFLct2laqw>, or Vessel 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXLHjBFW2j8>.

But what's significant about Monk and her work is what makes her different 
from many of the other composers who have appeared inthis series so far 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/series/a-guide-to-contemporary-classical-music>
: to talk of heronly as a composer would be to diminish what she does and how 
she works. Music is only one of the elements she works in and with, although 
she has composed pieces for orchestras such as theSan Francisco Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zltyK2cVmXU> and chamber ensembles like the 
Kronos Quartet <http://www.boosey.com/cr/music/Meredith-Monk-Stringsongs/46993>
, even if she told me about her frustration that orchestras have so little 
rehearsal time, and that the essential message of her music is something that 
needs time for its performers to understand, appreciate and interpret. But for 
so much ofher output <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gORn6Lh3S5I>, it's 
difficult if not impossible to separate the piece from Monk herself, so 
integral is her voice and her work with her singers to what you hear.

But you can talk about Monk's music, its use of repetition, its drones, modal 
harmonies, its often wordless vocalising. All of that could align her with 
American minimalism, with folk music, or even as a kind of cousin of the 
so-called holy minimalists of Europe. But Monk's music is richer and stranger 
than any of those stylistic labels. It has always sounded to me – listen to 
this fromSongs of Ascension <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hLplX75S2T0> – 
simultaneously ancient and modern. That's to do with the way she uses 
incantations that sound both like plainchant and oriental melodies, and the 
placeless-yet-everyplace vowel-sounds of her singing. But Monk's music isn't 
redolent of a nostalgic past, it is not an escape from today's world. It 
belongs in the present, because, as she says, she wants her pieces to give her 
listeners an alternative vision of concentration and attention amid the 
ever-diminishing and ever-increasing speed of the world around us.

Monk's is a music of connection, a bringing together of many different art 
forms and experiences (a process of fusion that she described as a deep 
"psychic need" for her to accomplish). It's a vision that's radically opposed 
to the fragmentation and deconstruction that so many of her contemporaries were 
up to at the same time, and the result is music that is at once deeply personal 
and unlike anything anyone else is doing, but which speaks simply and directly 
to those collective parts of our subconscious that are the deepest and oldest.
At its best <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WCZ36R-iSSY>, Monk's music sounds 
like a folk music for the whole world.

Five key links

Dolmen Music <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7su7d76LhWg> 

Vessel <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fXLHjBFW2j8>

Songs of Ascension <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c3mSVR3xtfU>

Biography from Education of the Girlchild 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4shD1ObROyA>

Walking Song <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dgxMbPV8VYo>
 