
In the world of contemporary music, epic scale is often viewed as the preserve 
of composers such as Karlheinz Stockhausen or Morton Feldman, whose notoriously 
gigantic theatrical and instrumental essays – Stockhausen's Licht Cycle, 
Feldman's Second String Quartet – seem to be thene plus ultras of new music set 
on a huge, cosmic canvas.

That's partly because so much contemporary music commissioning asks for pieces 
of about 10-20 minutes' duration. Thus it is rare that composers have the 
chance to pitch their imaginations at the largest of scales. But convention 
hasn't stopped the 62-year-old Scottish-born composerJames Dillon 
<http://www.editionpeters.com/modern.php?composer=DILLON&modern=1> from writing 
some of the boldest and most expressively extremeorchestral 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2J9F8OQmivs>, chamber 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pjl7WlTQDyY> and theatre 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/James-Dillon-Philomela-Music-Theatre/dp/B002JIBCOY/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1359969959&sr=1-1>
 works out there.

With a composer as uncompromising as Dillon 
<http://userserve-ak.last.fm/serve/252/154187.jpg>, there is no substitute for 
starting by plunging ears-first into two of his huge musical cycles. First 
comes the utterly unclassifiableNine Rivers 
<http://www.editionpeters.com/london/resources/0001/stock/pdf/9_Rivers_synopsis.pdf>
 project, a collection of nine pieces for forces ranging from six 
percussionists to a large ensemble with live electronics and pretty well 
everything in between.  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eA2iokhI1I0>

Next, the Book of Elements <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eA2iokhI1I0>, a 
five-part essay in continuity versus discontinuity and concentrated substance 
for solo piano that amounts, I think, to the most significant contribution to 
the pianist's repertoire since György Ligeti'sEtudes. 

In both pieces, Dillon's combination of sonic immediacy and multi-layered 
complexity creates some of the richest experiences you can have in new music. 
This is music that seems to animate a mythic power that is both primeval and 
preternaturally sophisticated.

As Dillon says of the whole cycle, which took him 17 years to compose: "Nine 
Rivers is a mythos of imagined waters, of fairies and snake-gods, a melancholy 
of flow, a requiem for poisoned rivers, an odyssey, a theatre of memory …"

That suggests some of the elemental intensity that Nine Rivers contains: its 
soundworld of teeming, ever-changing energy, its fundamental investigation of 
the two types of time and experience that the word "river" suggests. As Dillon 
says, you have the idea of flowing water, of course, but more rarely, a "river" 
can also denote "he who rives – who tears apart, or in pieces, who severs, 
divides or cleaves".

All that means is that when you encounter the piece (whose world premiere as a 
single, day-long event was held in 2010 in Glasgow) you're in for about five 
hours of full-on musical flux, after which you're left existentially battered 
and bruised. From the strange, still centre of the piece to the multimedia 
meditation of La Coupure, (The Cut), it is like being put through a wringer.

The richness of Dillon's music in Nine Rivers lies partly in its surfeit of 
information and influences. He talks about quantum mechanics, the poetry of 
Rimbaud, the aphorisms of Heraclitus, among other things, as being important 
for the cycle. The relationship between acoustic instruments and electronics is 
just one of many questions asked by the piece. As a listener, you grab on to 
any thread you can and hold on tight. The idea of comprehending the whole of 
what's going on at any given moment seems thrillingly impossible. But, as Brian 
Ferneyhough has recently said, that's a basic condition of life. We are always 
filtering out excess information to focus on what we need, whether we are 
commuting to work or listening to a Beethoven symphony.

Next to Nine Rivers, and partly because it is written for solo piano, The Book 
of Elements <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eA2iokhI1I0>, composed between 1997 
and 2002, contains music of relative clarity and distilled energy. But its 
subtlety and the kaleidoscopic experience of listening to the trajectory of all 
five volumes is just as all-encompassing as anything else Dillon has written. 
The cycle moves from the 11 short pieces of Book 1 to the single movement of 
Book 5. What you hear is an idiom that sounds less iconoclastic than some of 
Dillon's earlier music, one that that is unafraid of subconscious references – 
the ghosts of Debussy, Bartók and even Schumann and Chopin haunt some passages 
– and that finds a lyricism and flexibility that is definitively Dillon's own.

Now, those aren't the only cycles in Dillon's output. There is his orchestral 
triptych on the idea of illumination, made up of Helle Nacht,Ignis Noster 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=862QFfiA_oU>, and a flute concerto, 
Blitzschlag. That is not to mention his collection of sixstring quartets 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AS5VqxDAf1I>, his opera Philomela 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/James-Dillon-Philomela-Music-Theatre/dp/B002JIBCOY/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1359969959&sr=1-1>
, and other self-contained orchestral works such as a craggily melodic violin 
concerto and a piano concertoAndromeda 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2J9F8OQmivs>, written, like so much of his 
piano music, for his wife, Noriko Kawai, to play, or the coruscating brilliance 
ofLa Navette <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R48UaObu47A>. 

Dillon's music is fearlessly, relentlessly explorative. To hear it is to 
confront a volcanic imagination that makes listening an act of thrilling, 
vertiginous unpredictability.

Five key links


The Book of Elements <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eA2iokhI1I0>
String Quartet no. 2 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AS5VqxDAf1I>
Ignis Noster <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=862QFfiA_oU>
La navette <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R48UaObu47A>
Andromeda
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2J9F8OQmivs>
 