
George Benjamin <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ed6hEBs8Hbk>: one of the 
doyens of contemporary British composition, whose music makes sounds of 
ravishing, shimmering beauty. Every single one ofBenjamin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/george-benjamin>'s fastidiously achieved works 
has a rare and remarkable quality of not a note seeming out of place, whether 
it's on the smallest and most exposing scale of music for solo violin or solo 
piano, or the grandest canvas of large orchestra or ensemble.

When you hear Benjamin's music, from the contrapuntal exactitude of Shadowlines
 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Shadowlines-Benjamin/dp/B0002T2QA6/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1361787601&sr=1-1>
 for piano to the poetic explosivity ofSudden Time 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Benjamin-Three-Inventions-George/dp/B0000064AX/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1361787631&sr=1-1>
 for huge orchestra, you're encountering one of the most coherent and 
convincing responses to the challenge of making a music that's genuinely new 
but can speak with all the articulacy of earlier musical languages, and which 
dazzles and beguiles with its sensuous colours. He's also at the moment 
arguably the key contributor to BBC4's seriesThe Sound and the Fury 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b01qnp5f/The_Sound_and_the_Fury_A_Century_of_Music_Wrecking_Ball/>
, telling the story of 20th-century music, and his urbane, focused commentary 
distils his decades of experience as one of Britain's most important 
composition teachers, and most eloquent advocates for new music. He takes care 
of every word just as much as he does of every note.

But this most refined and conscientious of musical personalities has just done 
something surprising. In his most recent piece, he has put cannibalism, 
suicide, sex and murder on stage. The visceral human passion and drama of his 
largest work to date, the operaWritten on Skin 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DE_XnB_mcwU>, with a text by Martin Crimp, 
receives its British premiere atCovent Garden 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/written-on-skin-by-katie-mitchell> in March. 
To coincide with the London premiere, Nimbus is releasing a CD of the world 
premiere at Aix-en-Provence last summer; having heard it, what's so striking 
about the opera (as reviews of the Aix performances noted) is how Benjamin 
finds both a rigorous economy and expressive violence in his music, which does 
justice to the opera's stylised storytelling and its unflinching emotional 
struggles. There are also some astonishing orchestral colours – a glass 
harmonica, viola da gamba – that make Written on Skin an essential experience, 
even recorded.

Written on Skin has been a long time coming: there have been premonitions of 
Benjamin's unleashed expressivity for the last decade or so. But before we get 
there, we need to go back to where Benjamin started. Born in 1960, he had an 
early musical life that put him right at the heart of the traditions of 
European modernism; in fact, he was a late participant in arguably the single 
most important compositional crucible of the entire century: Olivier Messiaen's 
class at the Paris Conservatoire, in which Pierre Boulez, Karlheinz 
Stockhausen, Alexander Goehr and hundreds of others had studied in much earlier 
generations. In his teens, Benjamin lived in Paris as Messiaen's youngest and 
favourite pupil; he composed a MessiaenicPiano Sonata 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Benjamin-Piano-Sonata-George/dp/B00000E03Q/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1361787741&sr=1-1>
 and began a lifelong love affair with French musical culture. (Like his 
mentor, one of Benjamin's musical lodestars is Debussy's Prélude à l'Après-Midi 
d'un Faune.)

His breakthrough for British audiences came at the age of 20, when Ringed by 
the Flat Horizon 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Benjamin-Mind-Winter-George/dp/B00004RJIX/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1361787779&sr=1-1>
 was performed at the Proms in 1980. But what seemed like the preternatural 
prodigiousness of Benjamin's achievement in that piece was nothing of the sort: 
at that young age, Benjamin knew more than some composers know in a lifetime 
(he is a brilliant pianist and important conductor as well as composer), and 
Ringed by the Flat Horizon already bore testament to a compositional voice of 
worldly maturity in its handling of structure and colour. Above all, the piece 
creates a symbiosis of technique and poetry that subsequent works would further 
refine. In the Turner-inspiredAt First Light 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bnMtPSIPKlE>, the Yeats setting Upon Silence, 
or A Mind of Winter, which sets Wallace Stevens's poetry, there's no difference 
between what the music expresses and how it does so. Sudden Time crystallises 
this phase of Benjamin's composition, a 15-minute essay in the art of 
orchestral transition, music that flies with gossamer lightness and billows 
into gigantic cloudstorms and thunderbursts.

For me, though, it's not until the first of his two Palimpsests 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uM6lwo8QoEk> for orchestra, written for Boulez 
in 2000, that Benjamin made the crucial creative leap towards the emotional and 
musical immediacy of his operas (his first is a chamber opera calledInto the 
Little Hill 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/George-Benjamin-Little-Figures-Sometime/dp/B001DFITRW/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1361787854&sr=1-1>
, also with Crimp, which updates the Pied Piper story). You hear it in the very 
first moment of shock in the Palimpsests: after a serene but strange song for 
clarinets, there's a brutally loud single chord that cuts across the texture. 
It's a juxtaposition of two kinds of music – a horizontal unfolding of the 
clarinets' music and a vertical sonic blast – that propels the structure of the 
rest of the piece.The Palimpsests 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Benjamin-Palimpsests-George/dp/B0002NYNX0> compress a 
gigantic musical experience into less than 20 minutes, and amount to one of the 
21st century's most compelling orchestral pieces so far. They also introduce a 
new directness and energy into Benjamin's music, so that instead of the music's 
drama coming from a state of ceaseless and sensuous transition as it does in 
Sudden Time, the momentum is driven by the presentation of different but 
distinct musical objects or characters. That was the small but seismic step 
Benjamin took in Palimpsests, and the pieces were the gateway to his finding 
the economy, directness and stark but subtle simplicity he needed to tell 
stories on stage.

However, none of that prepares you for the vice-like drama of Written on Skin. 
It might not just be a watershed for Benjamin's music (and the realisation of 
his lifelong dream of writing for the Royal Opera House), but for British opera 
as a whole. Those performances at Covent Garden, which Benjamin himself will 
conduct, could be an operatic revelation.

Five key links

At First Light <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bnMtPSIPKlE>
A Mind of Winter <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HZWf7ZSDFnQ>
Palimpsest I <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uM6lwo8QoEk>
Dance Figures <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N7ClkNLRmDI>
Written on Skin [excerpt] <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DE_XnB_mcwU>
 