
It's rare that one says this about a contemporary composer, but it's become 
too easy to takeSteve Reich <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JYEwsIW-zsQ> for 
granted. Of course, that's a sign of just how influential his music has been, 
the way it has drawn on everything from African drumming to concept art, and 
how it has influenced generations of pop, jazz and classical musicians over the 
last half-century. In fact, if you were to subtract Steve Reich from the total 
sum of today's musical culture, I think you'd notice more of a difference than 
if you took away any other single figure.

Even if you think you don't know Reich's music directly, you will almost 
certainly be familiar with what it does, thanks to the way his music and his 
example have been refracted by other composers in other fields. Here's a 
whistlestop tour: in the 1960s, with Terry Riley and Philip Glass, Reich gave 
pulse back to experimental music (listen toClapping Music 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FcFyl8amoEE> for the Reichian pulse at its 
purest), he discovered tape-based techniques of looping and phasing using 
recordings of fragments of speech (tryCome Out  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g0WVh1D0N50>and It's Gonna Rain 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_6KAGrqbKqg>), and then molecules of musical 
material (Piano Phase <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EGsmv_irhE8>, Violin Phase
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zeYC-jv5IAY>, or the Fluxus-ish Pendulum 
Music). And phasing itself? Imagine you have a pattern that consists of 12 
quavers. If you keep playing the original but the player next to you starts the 
same sequence, but beginning one quaver later, you start to phase the rhythm 
against itself, and you can move through the whole pattern, quaver by quaver, 
creating a huge diversity of rhythmic possibility from a single cell. In theory 
it might sound simple, but in practice it's pretty mind-bending, especially in 
Reich'sPiano Phase <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EGsmv_irhE8>, where the 
second player must gradually make the minuscule rhythmic shift from one 
semiquaver to the next, before locking into the next note in the pattern.

Later, Reich found a way of using tonal and modal chords but unmooring them 
from any conventional harmonic function (inSix Pianos 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=edKE10Yz_zs> and the final part of Drumming 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RB-woRXwY-Q>). By the mid-70s, he was ready to 
integrate everything he had discovered to encompass genuine harmonic direction 
and expressive potential. He went on to write pieces that have dealt with the 
Holocaust, Middle Eastern history and politics, and contemporary conflict (
Different Trains <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JYEwsIW-zsQ>, The Cave 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KLoc8VTg__Y>, Daniel Variations 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OaevbdI2BXQ>).

In order to best understand what Reich is up to, however, I want to focus on 
one piece. It is the work that, for me, sums up not only what he had written 
before but contains the seeds of the music he would write afterwards: I give you
Music for 18 Musicians <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cO1VVONqL4U>, first 
heard in 1976.

You perceive the significance and the novelty of the piece in terms of Reich's 
music right at the start ofMusic for 18 Musicians 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cO1VVONqL4U> – in the opening Pulse section, 
with which the piece also ends. It's a sequence of 11 chords that the whole 
ensemble breathes through (literally, since what determines how long each 
individual chord is held is the length of time the the bass clarinet player can 
sustain the repetitions of the bass note). What's novel about that? Well, where 
previous pieces had focused on a single harmonic idea (Four Organs, for 
example, is a hallucinogenically hypnotic extension of one chord) or rhythmic 
pattern (the whole of Drumming, which can last up to an hour and a half, is 
based on just one bar-long idea), there is more harmonic motion and difference 
in the opening of Music for 18 Musicians than in all of what he'd written up to 
this point. There's also a greater variety of instrumental timbre; again, 
pieces such as Six Pianos or Violin Phase do what they say on the tin, using 
ensembles of acoustic or recorded versions of a single instrumental colour. But 
the 18 Musicians who play their Music are percussionists, string players, 
clarinettists, singers and pianists, creating an ever-changing, kaleidoscopic 
soundworld.

But it's how Reich uses all of that colour and possibility over the hour of 
the whole work that makes the piece so magnetic. You hear the classic Reich 
technique of gradually building up a rhythm by adding notes in successive 
repetitions, and one of the 12 sections even uses the music of Violin Phase in 
a new context. Reich says the sections of Music for 18 Musicians are based on 
the cycle of chords we hear at the start, so that the whole work creates a 
sequence of short pieces that's like a harmonic expansion and explosion of that 
cyclic pattern. Yet the experience of the piece is much richer than that 
suggests. Music for 18 Musicians creates a labyrinthine experience for the 
listener. You're locked into the mesmerising way in which one pattern morphs 
into another, addicted to the groove and pulse of the music at the smallest 
scale of what's happening from one note to the next.

At the same time, the music describes a bigger journey, as melodies and 
patterns recur over the scale of the whole piece. Reich builds up waves of 
density and complexity that crest at different points (listen out for Section V 
and Section IX especially), creating an experiential arc that does much more 
than repeat a sequence of chords and rhythms. I find Music for 18 Musicians a 
compelling and even moving piece, but given that it eschews, like all of 
Reich's music, any hint of obvious sentimentality, that expressive power comes 
from the notes themselves, from the warp and weft of pattern, melody and pulse.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpZRBfRXJyak%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpZRBfRXJyak%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FpZRBfRXJyak%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to listen to Different Trains 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pZRBfRXJyak>

Reich expanded the range of 18 Musicians even further in Different Trains, for 
string quartet and sampled voices, and the music-theatre and installation 
pieces he has made with his wife, Beryl Korot, such as The Cave andThree Tales 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=caJ-MoESHyI>; there's even a multimedia 
micro-Gesamtkunstwerk calledCity Life 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BYca8EJlz0g>. For me, though, it's when Reich 
focuses on the minutiae of musical material rather than its political or 
cultural message that his work is at its most powerful. That's an alchemy he 
manages in Proverb <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I5lgAUHVFC4>, his setting 
and meditation on Wittgenstein's aphorism "How small a thought it takes to fill 
a whole life", or in the impassioned austerity of hisDaniel Variations 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OaevbdI2BXQ>, a piece based on the words of 
American journalist Daniel Pearl, who was beheaded in Pakistan 2002.

Reich's influence is bigger than any single piece. He has given the 
contemporary musical world a licence to groove, he created a model of a 
self-sustaining ensemble,Steve Reich and Musicians 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jiV9f1_PFHE>, to play, record and remain a 
living laboratory for his music, and he has inspired musicians from Michael 
Gordon to Nico Muhly, from Björk to DJ Spooky. And that means that we all live 
in a Reichian musical world.

Five key links

• Come Out <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g0WVh1D0N50>
• Piano Phase <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EGsmv_irhE8>
• Music for 18 Musicians <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cO1VVONqL4U>
• Tehillim <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fruY31DQvb0>
• Daniel Variations <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OaevbdI2BXQ>
 