
Grand Theft Auto IV, the radio series of The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy 
and the Who have one thing in common; one composer, in fact – the visionary 
musician, improviser and creative-consciousness-expander who isTerry Riley 
<http://terryriley.net/>. In fact, it's one album in particular that creates 
this strange cross-cultural Venn diagram: Riley'sA Rainbow in Curved Air 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hy3W-3HPMWg>, a piece he released in 1969. It's 
music of still-inspirational and frankly feel-good electronic and overdubbed 
radiance, made from Riley playing, improvising and re-recording all the 
instrumental parts you hear in a mind-bending 18 minutes. Riley says that a 
good friend of his was running the lighting for the Who's shows, "and he turned 
Pete Townshend on to A Rainbow in Curved Air. The Who songBaba O'Riley 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x2KRpRMSu4g> was dedicated to both me and 
[Indian guru] Meher Baba. Pete has always said that I had a big influence on 
him." Listen for yourself here: Riley's impact on Townshend could hardly be 
clearer when you hear Baba O'Riley's keyboard riffs and delays.

By the late 60s, Riley was already celebrated in experimental musical circles. 
In fact, since 1964, the Californian-born musician had become a cult figure on 
the west coast scene. That's because in November that year saw the first 
performance took place ofIn C <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OjR4QYsa9nE>, 
still Riley's most famous work, and variously heralded as the first masterpiece 
of minimalism and the work that ushered in a new musical era, after which the 
world was never quite the same. Some of that may have turned out to be true, 
but when Riley came up with In C on a bus ride in San Francisco, it was a piece 
that was important to him for different reasons. The work crystallised his 
musical thinking up to that point (as Keith Potter reveals in his book Four 
Musical Minimalists): his interest in improvisation – already cultivated thanks 
to collaborations with Pauline Oliveros, Morton Subotnick and others – and his 
love of John Coltrane and Miles Davis. In C also reflected and refracted the 
inspiration of the repetitive musical structures he had heard and loved in 
north African music. It was written as a piece that was defined by the 
interactions between the members of a diverse group of musicians and which 
would be different in terms of duration, structure and tempo every time it was 
played. And, like so many of the greatest musical breakthroughs, In C is simple 
to understand, but rich, subtle and diverse when you hear it performed.

In C's score is made from 53 musical modules 
<http://aleatoric.backporchrevolution.com/wp-content/uploads/2009/01/inc_score.gif>
, fragments of musical material and melodies (and not all of them in the key of 
C either. As the piece progresses, different waves of pitch-centres and 
modalities are cycled through.) The players move steadily through the 
fragments, although they can omit them as well, and the modules can be played 
faster or slower than they're written, accompanied by an ever-present chiming 
octave C in a piano or mallet instrument. (The idea for that time-keeping piano 
part could have been Steve Reich's, who, along with Oliveros and Subotnick, was 
part of the ensemble who played the piece for the first time at the San 
Francisco Tape Centre.) How many times each is repeated, and how long a 
performance lasts, will vary each time the piece is played bydifferent forces 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rc2G5b5NvE4>: it's possible to race through it 
in 20 minutes, or to luxuriate in it for an hour and a half.

Part of In C's notoriety is that it also seems to embody the hippy-ish 
sensibility of west coast America at the time, and to evoke a trippy, 
blissed-out state of musical mind. (On his own use of drugs, Riley told William 
Duckworth that LSD was "the element of the consciousness-raising movement … 
[with] marijuana as a sister drug … It had a lot to do with those times, you 
know. There was something emerging then that people were hungry for: almost as 
a public at large, especially young people. I know we weren't interested in 
making money. We were really only interested in having these mystical 
experiences.") But that's to miss the point of In C's musical qualities, and 
its subtly brilliant answer to the conundrum of how you create a piece that 
simultaneously empowers its performers and insists that they listen to each 
other and take responsibility for the performance as much as the composer, but 
which is also always essentially itself, a piece that cannot be mistaken for 
any other. In C does that brilliantly. Along with Cardew's Paragraph 7 from The 
Great Learning, it's as elegant and beautiful a solution as there is.

But In C is also nearly 50 years old, and Riley's life in music is still a 
continual search for the fundamentally spiritual qualities that he believes the 
art form should embody. In 1970, he started to study with Indian vocal master
Prandit Pran Nath <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nlqXyjwJwYM> and his musical 
activity since then has evolved a fluid exchange between improvisation and 
composition, between aspects of jazz, Indian music and classical structure. He 
has even created of a sort of contemporary music of the spheres – you can hear 
the uniqueness of Riley's musical 'interzone' in the keyboard imagination and 
virtuosity ofPersian Surgery Dervishes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hccSK4ng6v0> and Shri Camel 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C7R6iEQUeMA>, with their hypnotic mix of 
unusual tunings, modalities and rhythmic invention. The only connection with 
"minimalism" on these records is Riley's continuing interest in exploring 
different kinds of repetition. Otherwise, his range of sources and his 
musical-mystical ambition are far from the process-based austerity of early 
Steve Reich or Philip Glass.

Riley's association with violinist David Harrington, who went on to found the 
Kronos Quartet, has been the inspiration for a series of works (more than a 
dozen so far) that led Riley back to more conventional kinds of composition; 
conventional at least in the sense of how they are notated and performed – but 
not in how they sound.Salome Dances for Peace 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uXTv7dUAQJ4&playnext=1&list=PLSfPCbzn2jTk88izgGJdAc8vIGd3v3HpM&feature=results_video>
 is a sensuous but epic 100-minute cycle for string quartet;Sun Rings 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xIiUHPWFFOA> is an even bigger set of pieces 
for quartet, choir, visuals and the sounds of space. Literally: the piece uses 
Nasa's captured sounds of the spinning planets to inspire a sonic meditation on 
our place in the cosmos.

With much of Riley's more recent music and performances, you need to be ready 
to be taken into a different way of being when you listen to them, to accept 
the combination of gentleness, naivety and sense of wonder that radiates 
through his work. For Riley, his instrumental virtuosity and his compositional 
imagination are the gateways to the exploration of a global musical 
consciousness. Enjoy your journey into the world of Riley – justbelieve the 
beard <http://www.lifem.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2010/09/terry_riley_07.jpg>.

Five key links

In C <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OjR4QYsa9nE>
Shri Camel <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C7R6iEQUeMA>
Salome Dances for Peace 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uXTv7dUAQJ4&playnext=1&list=PLSfPCbzn2jTk88izgGJdAc8vIGd3v3HpM&feature=results_video>
Persian Surgery Dervishes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hccSK4ng6v0>
A Rainbow in Curved Air <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hy3W-3HPMWg>
 