
Luigi Nono <http://www.luiginono.it/en/>'s music was never going to change the 
world. There's a cliche that the Italian composer's trenchant political 
convictions, and the stream of pieces he wrote with avowedly protesting or 
politically radical titles and messages – the music theatre piecesIntolleranza 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UDma9xr7FNU> (which caused a partisan riot at 
its premiere in 1961 at La Fenice in Venice) andAl gran sole carico d'amore 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Nono-gran-sole-carico-damore/dp/B000050KFM>, his 
anti-fascist orchestral and choral masterpiece from the mid-50sIl canto sospeso 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5q_12QsLgCc>, his experimental anti-capitalist 
cantata for soprano and tapeLa fabbrica illuminata 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yzcAzCEtAbs>, or the violent expressionism of 
the partly improvisedA floresta è jovem e cheja de vida 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=defT2RVNjr0> – are narrow-minded pieces of 
agitprop that beat their audiences over the head with superficial sloganising 
and alternately despairing or utopian imagery.

There is a grain of truth in some of that, in the way, for example, Al gran 
sole <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UrASk7mtkVU> has its revolutionary 
choruses of poster-paint vividness, but what I want to give you in a selection 
of listening to Nono is the sheer musical richness of his achievement, and 
especially the pieces he wrote and conceived in the 15 years or so before his 
death in 1990. Few composers have wanted their music to say, to mean, to be 
about something more than Nono did, and few have understood as keenly that 
every musical decision a composer makes also has social and political 
ramifications. But Nono's real legacy, I think, is in drawing attention to the 
act of listening itself as a space to sound out ourselves and our relationship 
with the world, something that's much more politically profound than any kind 
of rabblerousing from the rooftops.

Here's what I'm talking about: this music of shimmering spaces, disturbed 
silences, sharp-edged fragments and dream-like unpredictability, his very last 
work,"Hay que caminar" Soñando <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kIJ6hmApWKA> for 
two violins, which Irvine Arditti and David Alberman premiered in 1989. It's 
music in which you participate almost as much as the performers, acting out 
your own dream-journey of moving through a landscape that's at once still and 
violent. It's one of a handful of pieces that Nono wrote at the end of his life 
inspired by a motto he discovered on the walls of a monastery in Toledo in 
Spain: "Caminante no hay caminos hay que caminar", one of the great aphorisms 
that's roughly but inelegantly translatable as "traveller, there is no way to 
travel, only travelling". It's a motto that encapsulates the search through 
unmarked musical territories on which Nono's late music embarks – and 
symbolises how far he and his music had come from any sense of artistic or 
cultural certainties. Nono isn't telling you how to listen in Hay que caminar, 
only offering a soundscape for your ears to navigate along with the progress of 
the two violinists.

That sort of contemplative intimacy might have seemed unlikely if you knew 
Nono as a young man, when he was one of the defining personalities and agent 
provocateurs of the Darmstadt-based avant garde, the cauldron of creativity, 
controversy and conflict between composers and musical ideas. Nono and 
Stockhausen fell out over the word-setting of Nono's Il canto sospeso – an 
argument about musical semantics and politics that composers just don't have 
enough any more – and they didn't talk again for decades. Nono took a musical 
and ideological hard line with composers who didn't fit his vision of musical 
progress, whether Henze or Stravinsky. But when you hear his own music of the 
period now, it's the lyricism and delicacy of his breakthrough piece, the
Canonical Variations <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J-N8nRask3Y>on 
Schoenberg's tone-row from his Ode to Napoleon that's so striking, or the 
limpidity of the instrumental music from Il canto sospeso. (That connection 
with Schoenberg wasn't just importantly symbolically to Nono: he fell in love 
with and married Schoenberg's daughter Nuria in 1955.)

But there can be a grandiosity in Nono's music, as in the choral scenes of 
Intolleranza or the despair and, ultimately, hope of Al gran sole carico 
d'amore, written in 1975, not least because of the power and prominence of the 
choral writing in the later piece: the choruses "play a greater role than the 
soloists", Nono said. "That is both a theatrical and a social idea … Musical 
means of expression are utilised in order to encompass the expression of 
individual and collective utterance in one person."

It was the music that Nono wrote from the mid-70s that marked a different 
world of sonic exploration, often involving electronics, and new kinds of very 
slow or even static time, and silence. The effect of these pieces, from the 
clangorous, lamenting… sofferte onde serene … 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vsgq7MNLlHk> for piano and tape in 1976 to 
Prometeo <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kq2FeEeNZgs>, his gigantic sonic 
installation for Venice in 1984/5 is both to focus objectively on the minutiae 
of individual voices, textures and sounds and to explore the inner world of our 
own imaginations and ways of hearing.Prometeo 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TnG2lTW3Hvs&feature=relmfu> is Nono's magnum 
opus, a piece he calls a "tragedy of listening", involving a set up that seems 
theatrical on the face of it, with groups of singers and instrumentalists 
stationed around the hall and the audience, all projected and manipulated with 
live electronics. (Prometeo's original space was awooden "ark" 
<http://educ.jmu.edu//~tatewl/piano/Piano.Prometeo.4.jpeg> designed by Renzo 
Piano.) The experience of the piece is resonantly mythic and resolutely 
contemporary; over more than two hours it becomes less a drama about Promethean 
ideas and more a dramatisation of what it means to listen, to find your place 
in the slowly yet suddenly changing soundscape projected around you, what it 
means to find the work's elusive meaning from the textures of mysterious 
vocalisation you hear throughout the piece. Along with theHay que caminar 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3cWltt_IBX8> pieces, Prometeo is Nono's most 
ambitious, immersive, and, for me, his most important work.

If you want one place to start with, try the Tre Voci 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0OMRdnOxIlQ&list=PL85A8936DC1C6A196&index=19&feature=plpp_video>
 sections, among the most beautiful minutes of music Nono ever wrote, like an 
infinitely subtle and surreal refraction of 17th-century madrigals heard 
through a halo of electronics and amplification. Maybe it's music that does 
have the power to change the world after all, through the subtlest but most 
powerful medium of all – our ears.

Five key links


Prometeo <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kq2FeEeNZgs>

Intolleranza <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UDma9xr7FNU>

… sofferte onde serene … <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vsgq7MNLlHk>

"Hay que caminar" sonañdo <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kIJ6hmApWKA>

Fragmente – Stille, An Diotima <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=escEnvq_GsI>
 