
A wee warning today: this is a little tune 
<http://ubumexico.centro.org.mx/sound/cardew_cornelius/piano-music/Cardew-Cornelius_Piano-Music_08.-revolution.mp3>
 that, once you've heard it, you won't be able to get out of your head for 
days, possibly weeks; but then everyone needs some alternative earworms at this 
time of year to cleanse their brains of Chris Rea and the Pogues and Slade. 
It's Cornelius Cardew'sRevolution Is the Main Trend in the World Today 
<http://www.ubu.com/sound/cardew_piano.html> comes from Cardew's last period, 
in the years before his tragically curtailed life (he was the victim of an 
unsolved hit-and-run in 1981 at the age of just 45, and may have been targeted 
for his leftwing political activism – readJohn Tilbury's 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GqTaikz426o> essential biography 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Cornelius-Cardew-Unfinished-John-Tilbury/dp/0952549247/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1355739934&sr=1-1>
 for more).

Yet in his far too short life, Cardew 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/may/26/howard-skempton-cornelius-cardew> 
made one of the most astonishing musical, social and political journeys in the 
whole 20th-century music. His student days were spent shocking the stuffy 
establishment of the Royal Academy of Music, giving performances such as the 
British premiere of Boulez's Structures 1A with Richard Rodney Bennett, and 
learning the guitar specifically in order to play the instrument in the first 
British performance the same composer's Le marteau san maître – as you do. He 
then became Stockhausen's assistant in the late 1950s in Cologne, where he was 
charged with responsibilities that Karlheinz scarcely gave to any other 
musician, allowing Cardew to work out the compositional systems of his piece 
for four orchestras, Carré.

So what's the link between the tune you heard at the start of this piece, and 
which is no doubt going round your head in endless and joyful circles right 
now, and those musical beginnings? It seems an unconscionably long way from the 
music of avant garde immersion that Cardew was involved in composing, playing 
and improvising in the 60s (he joined the free improv gurus ofAMM 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=enqGmZJf1B4> in 1966) to writing Maoist 
melodies such as The East Is Red andSmash the Social Contract 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wnauDrzdOiQ> more than a decade later. But 
that's because Cardew's avant garde infatuation was really only an upbeat to 
what would become his life's work, attempting new ways of thinking about the 
relationship between musical organisation, whether at the level of individual 
compositions or institutions, and social and political change.

Which all sounds like a lot of fun, doesn't it? But if the idea of music as 
proto-political ideology doesn't float your boat, don't worry: what makes 
Cardew's work so important is how pieces such asTreatise 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6NRoeyVYedA> – with its 193 pages 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=cornelius+cardew+treatise+score&hl=en&client=firefox-a&hs=mLZ&tbo=u&rls=org.mozilla:en-US:official&tbm=isch&source=univ&sa=X&ei=AvXOUIO4A6Wr0AX-xICYBw&ved=0CDoQsAQ&biw=910&bih=616>
 of beautifully rendered graphic score, each one a creative catalyst for the 
compositional and improvisational imaginations of its performers (such as Sonic 
Youth, here <http://uk.myspace.com/music/player?sid=45312951&ac=now>) or the 
seven paragraphs ofThe Great Learning 
<http://ubumexico.centro.org.mx/sound/cardew_cornelius/bbc/Cardew-Cornelius_BBC-Archive_01_Paragraph-2-of-The-Great-Digest.mp3>
 – dissolve the distinction between a musical work and social action. These 
pieces have symbiotic links between the way the music is written on the page, 
the processes the performers have to engage in to play them, the sounds that an 
audience hears and the bigger cultural message Cardew is trying to communicate.

Here's what I mean, in perhaps one of the most succinctly powerful pieces of 
notation ever conceived: the instructions forParagraph 7 
<http://www.newmusicnewcollege.org/Cardew.html> of The Great Learning 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2k1m1ITcljM>, that huge cycle of pieces that 
Cardew wrote based on translations of Confucius by Ezra Pound. The Great 
Learning required a new kind of performance practice and a new ensemble too: 
the hugely influential Scratch Orchestra, a hotbed of musical experimentalism 
and political radicalism that only lasted for four years, until Cardew felt 
that even the Scratchers'anarchic convictions  
<http://ubumexico.centro.org.mx/sound/cardew_cornelius/bbc/Cardew-Cornelius_BBC-Archive_01_Scratch-Orchestra-Interview.mp3>
weren't enough properly to mobilise revolutionary politics in music.

Back to Paragraph 7 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Great-Learning-Paragraph-7/dp/B005L4JSK8/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1355739558&sr=8-1>
. What happens in a performance of the piece is that everyone sings a word of 
Confucius for a prescribed number of times, sustaining each repetition for the 
duration of your individual breath. When you move on to the next line, you take 
your next pitch from another vocalist in the group. That means that having 
started with a completely unpredictable chordal texture, because everyone sings 
a note of their own choosing for the very first word, the pitch content of the 
piece gradually narrows as notes are shared among the ensemble, until there's 
just a single singer and a single note left. (Read the instructions for yourself
here <http://www.newmusicnewcollege.org/Cardew.html>.) Every performance of 
Paragraph 7 is different in terms of its notes, its length, and the particular 
sounds it makes, and yet you can't mistake it for any other piece of music. 
It's also a piece that's a rare triumph of musical democracy, because anyone 
can sing it. Providing you can hold a note, you can be part of Paragraph 7 – 
and if you've never sung it, get a group of friends to do it soon; it's much 
better and more socially and musically fulfilling than any carol service.

But in the 1970s Cardew came to reject Paragraph 7, and indeed everything else 
he had written (including not justTreatise 
<http://ubumexico.centro.org.mx/sound/cardew_cornelius/bbc/Cardew-Cornelius_BBC-Archive_02_A-Composers-Portrait_Treatise.mp3>
 and The Great Learning but his earlier and more conventionally modernist 
pieces suchBun No 1 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BaoxiaUPHmU>) as 
contributing only to the morbid decay of capitalist oppression. Relentlessly 
self-critical, he was also brilliantly uncompromising about everyone else too, 
and his later musical and political philosophy is summed up in his book
Stockhausen Serves Imperialism 
<http://ubu.com/historical/cardew/cardew_stockhausen.pdf>. (You can hear him 
talking on the same subjecthere 
<http://ubumexico.centro.org.mx/sound/cardew_cornelius/bbc/Cardew-Cornelius_BBC-Archive_02_Cardew-on-Stockhausen.mp3>
.) Cardew took the fight to the streets, in his music and in the literal sense 
of being involved in anti-fascist protests and social activism, which sometimes 
landed him in jail.

And that's where Revolution is the Main Trend 
<http://ubumexico.centro.org.mx/sound/cardew_cornelius/piano-music/Cardew-Cornelius_Piano-Music_08.-revolution.mp3>
 comes in. It's easy to patronise these songs that Cardew wrote, performed and 
recorded towards the end of his life as socially naive and musically limited. 
But I think that's to underestimate them. First of all – even if today it looks 
like the height of idealistic fancy to think that a few songs, however Maoist 
and pro-revolutionary in their lyrics, could ever contribute meaningfully to 
the downfall of international capitalism – Cardew's sincerity and his craft are 
never in doubt. And musically these tunes, and his performances of them, are 
much more subtle than they might at first seem. Listen tohis solo piano 
versions of his own songs <http://www.ubu.com/sound/cardew_piano.html> and his 
arrangements of folk tunes to hear what I mean. Cardew's sensitivity and 
brilliance as a musician was something that he never lost, even while 
attempting to rouse the international working classes. Ironically, his songs 
are really too sophisticated to have become popular rallying-cries, and are too 
demotic in tone to have been taken seriously enough by the establishment which 
he anyway reviled. Cardew's life in music is one of the most important of the 
20th century in the questions he asks and the answers he finds – provisional, 
paradoxical and full of still-to-be-realised potential.

Five key links

The Great Learning: Paragraph 1 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2k1m1ITcljM>

Treatise <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6NRoeyVYedA>

Revolution Is the Main Trend in the World Today 
<http://ubumexico.centro.org.mx/sound/cardew_cornelius/piano-music/Cardew-Cornelius_Piano-Music_08.-revolution.mp3>

Bun No 1 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BaoxiaUPHmU>

Cardew with AMM <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=enqGmZJf1B4>
 