
I could do this with any piece of Henri Dutilleux's 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YRPsXuQV-l4>, the French composer whose 97th 
birthday is this week. But seeing as it's one of my favourites, we might as 
well start with his Cello Concerto,Tout un monde lointain 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tga-TAKsvcw>, the visionary five-part piece he 
wrote for Mstislav Rostropovich in 1970. It's music ofsumptuous but rigorous 
splendour <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VpoNOPjcR1A>, music whose sheer 
attractiveness belies the refinement of Dutilleux's harmonic and structural 
imagination, and which seduces you into a faraway world of heightened feeling. 
I defy you not to be won over by this music.

As one of music history's most fastidious perfectionists, Dutilleux's 
published works are few. There are two symphonies and other orchestral works, a 
handful of concertante pieces, a series of pieces for voice and orchestra, and 
a small but significant canon of chamber music, including a dazzling string 
quartet,Ainsi la nuit <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BEYsu6xXWWQ>. Together, 
all of them, from hisFirst Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lpQ6jWGEvhk>
, composed in 1951, to a recent masterpiece,Correspondances  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Dutilleux-Correspondances-Barbara-Hannigan/dp/B00AEMAJ50>
from 2003, which sets the letters of artists and writers from van Gogh to Rilke 
for soprano and orchestra, is proof of a fundamental sometimes 
little-understood truth about French musical life in the postwar period: there 
is another way apart from Pierre's (Boulez's, that is). Dutilleux never 
accepted any of the dogmas of the avant-garde, above all, what Boulez called at 
one stage the necessity of serialism, a systemisation that's anathema to 
Dutilleux's creative sensibilities. AsDutilleux told 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2002/apr/19/shopping.artsfeatures1> 
Stuart Jeffries in these pages a decade or so ago when a mere whippersnapper of 
86, "I don't speak about him, and he doesn't speak about me. I admire his work 
for the Ensemble Intercontemporain. He has made his choices and he has the 
right to make his choices. But there are things I cannot accept, and I don't 
like people who are never in doubt." (Ironically, the richly decorative 
surfaces of some of Boulez's recent orchestral music approach – but do not 
surpass – the refinement and richness of Dutilleux's.A few years later 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2005/apr/28/classicalmusicandopera1>, 
Dutilleux told Jeffries that at the moment, "I have no problems with [Boulez]. 
I even like the fact that he is no longer certain, but is a man riven by doubt, 
as we all should be.")

Dutilleux's anti-ideological approach to music history, his refusal to belong 
to or to establish a school of composition, despite his decades of teaching at 
the Paris Conservatoire, and his unashamed continuation of the concerns of 
earlier and not exclusively French traditions – Debussy, Ravel, Roussel, but 
also Stravinsky, and Bartók – has created some of the most poetically flexible 
music of recent decades.

If you listen to his Second Symphony, Le double 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kXGFWoV12C0>, or his Violin Concerto, L'arbre 
des songes (the tree of dreams), you'll hear a rarefied, epicurean beauty that 
seems to exalt in its fluency and self-contained world of musical coherence. 
(That fluency of Dutilleux's music is an illusion, however; it's rather a 
hard-won prize of sometimes years of hard graft and applied craft – and there's 
another ironic echo of Boulez's mania for revision that Dutilleux is also a 
meticulous reviser of his pieces.) But that's to miss how Dutilleux's music is 
so often inspired by other art forms and experiences.Timbres, espaces, 
mouvements <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7u3PZkISdFY> is a vivid orchestral 
explosion of Dutilleux's way of seeing Van Gogh's hallocinogenic Starry Night 
<http://www.vangoghgallery.com/catalog/Painting/508/Starry-Night.html>; his The 
Shadows of Time 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Symphony-Orch-Capitole-Toulouse-Plasson/dp/B00005A9NP/ref=sr_1_6?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1358770633&sr=1-6>
is an astonishing and paradoxically radiant meditation on loss, partly 
catalysed by Anne Frank's diaries, and written for the 50th anniversary of the 
end of the second world war; the piece is dedicated to Anne Frank "and all the 
children, innocents of the world". At the heart of The Shadows of Time is a 
movement called "memory of shadows" that includes music for three children's 
voices - an inspirational idea that came from Dutilleux's overhearing the 
sounds of children in a playground near his studio.The effect is devastating 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/1999/dec/07/classicalmusicandopera?INTCMP=SRCH>
 because of its directness, but Dutilleux's music is never mawkishly 
sentimental.

The influence of Dutilleux's music on the 20th and 21st centuries isn't to be 
measured in how his work revolutionised the languages of musical possibility, 
or even in the roster of his pupils (who include Gérard Grisey 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kX77MC5oXDY>). Instead, his music is a 
realisation of a complete world, independent of concerns for cutting-edge 
contemporaneity, and one that becomes more essential the more you hear it, 
above all for how he transforms his astonishing compositional refinement into 
real emotional immediacy. That's something that infuses every bar ofAinsi la 
nuit <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BEYsu6xXWWQ>, or The Shadows of Time, or 
Correspondances 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Dutilleux-Correspondances-Barbara-Hannigan/dp/B00AEMAJ50>
, or … well, pretty well everything he has published. Happy birthday, Henri.

Five key links

Cello Concerto: Tout un monde lointain 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tga-TAKsvcw>

Métaboles <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c28Tkw2QxPA>

Timbres, espaces, mouvements <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7u3PZkISdFY>

Symphony no. 2, Le double <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kXGFWoV12C0>

String Quartet: Ainsi la nuit <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BEYsu6xXWWQ>
 