
I can remember the first time I listened to Japanese composer Toru Takemitsu 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-q_zcE9pAR8>. It was his piece Archipelago S 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6I6FZsCfUn0>, written for a large ensemble, and 
it was back in 1993 in Vienna. He was one of the featured composers in that 
year's Wien Modern new music festival. (That was just three years before his 
death in 1996, at 65.)Oliver Knussen conducted the London Sinfonietta 
<http://www.londonsinfonietta.org.uk/artist/oliver-knussen>, and Takemitsu 
himself was there, a benign presence despite his disagreement with Knussen over 
Brahms's orchestration. "You wouldn't want to learn orchestration from Brahms," 
Knussen said, or words to that effect. Takemitsu replied: "I wish I could 
orchestrate like Brahms." Coming from two composers so sensitive to the 
subtleties of instrumental colour, they must have both been right, but it was 
Takemitsu's music that made the stronger impression on me.

Archipelago S <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6I6FZsCfUn0> – just like the 
guitar concertoTo the Edge of Dream <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2W9DCEaYtQk>
, another of the highlights of his residency – was music that had paradoxical 
qualities: it seemed to be in a permanent state of ethereal evanescence, 
shimmering and suggesting rather than stating directly, and yet its impact was 
absolute, definite and unforgettable. It was music that sounded strangely 
similar to Debussy and Olivier Messiaen in its harmonies and textures, yet very 
different in its effect. Instead of Debussy's sensuality, there was something 
crystalline and objective in the way Takemitsu's music unfolded; instead of 
Messiaen's visionary spirituality, there was a sense of space and detachment in 
Takemitsu's pieces, even if some of his musical language sounded similar. The 
question for me was: how did these pieces come to be?

Takemitsu 
<http://www.schott-music.com/shop/persons/featured/toru-takemitsu/index.html>'s 
compositional journey is fascinating because his relationship with western 
music and his native musical traditions shows just how limiting are the 
categories of east and west when it comes to thinking about music's development 
in the 20th century.

Born in 1930, Takemitsu spent his childhood in China, and fell in love with 
western classical music when he heard it on American forces radio in Japan 
after the war. "My first teacher was the radio," he has said. Conscripted into 
military service as a teenager, for many years he thought of Japanese 
traditional music as a symbol of the bitterness battle. "I hated everything 
about Japan at that time because of my experience during the war," he said. He 
described how, in an effort to teach himself more about the western music he 
was hearing but about which he knew so little, he would walk through the city 
listening for the sound of a piano, whereupon he would "ask to touch the piano 
for five minutes. I was never refused!"

Takemitsu's enthusiasm saw him investigate electro-acoustic music in his early 
20s (this was roughly the same time thatPierre Schaeffer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N9pOq8u6-bA> was doing a similar thing in 
Paris), which led him to compose music in an explicitly modernist idiom. He was 
crazy about the Viennese School composers at the time. An encounter with 
Stravinsky, who had heard his 1957Requiem for Strings 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6lgk8MdM_jw> and taken the young composer out 
to lunch because he admired the piece so much, was one catalyst for his musical 
life.

Another of Takemitsu's influences was the music of John Cage in the early 60s. 
Takemitsu began to explore aspects of indeterminacy in his work (the improvised 
sections ofFrom Me Flows What You Call Time 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LpzMI7pqv7E>, for example, are down to this 
approach – even if Takemitsu's controlledaleatoricism 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aleatoricism> has more in common with Witold 
Lutosławski than Cage). But it was also thanks to Cage's Zen-inspired ideas 
about music and the world, Takemitsu explained, that "I came to recognise the 
value of my own tradition".

The other seismic moment for Takemitsu was seeing a performance of Bunraku 
puppet theatre <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bunraku> and, a couple of decades 
after the war, opening his heart at last to the beauty of his homeland's 
musical traditions. "I got a shock … I suddenly recognised I was Japanese."

From the 60s on, Takemitsu's musical project would be to combine elements of 
Japanese music with the western modernism he loved so much. The blend is 
apparent in pieces such asNovember Steps 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UC_T4_HxTb4>, composed for biwa (the Japanese 
lute he studied intensively), shakuhachi and orchestra. The effect is more 
profound than a fuzzy fusion of styles; Takemitsu uses the timbre and texture 
of the two Japanese instruments to make the whole orchestra breathe and glow 
with gossamer lightness, something he continues in a later work for the same 
instruments calledAutumn <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cWPucSiLVuk>.

But the real substance of Takemitsu's Japanese heritage can't be reduced to an 
instrument, a colour or even a harmony. There's something more fundamental 
about his understanding of music; something that informs his work whether he's 
writing forsolo piano <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5LIsjlxDWE>, a film 
score forAkira Kurosawa <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UGG7yC3eB_Y> (he wrote 
music for more than 100 movies), astring quartet 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Egp6TyRl7q4> or a concerto 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G34poeKMjrQ>. It's something expressed by the 
Japanese word "ma" <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ma_(negative_space)>, which 
suggests the concept of a void that isn't empty, an absence that is really a 
presence, a space between things that is full of energy. It's a principle that 
underpinsJapanese gardens 
<http://0317d24.netsolhost.com/WordPress/wp-content/uploads/2010/08/zen-garden-ryoan-ji-500.jpg>
, with which Takemitsu often compared his music. "My music is like a garden, 
and I am the gardener. Listening to my music can be compared with walking 
through a garden and experiencing the changes in light, pattern and texture." 
And yet it's also a way of thinking that is by no means exclusive to Takemitsu 
in contemporary music; it suggests the same circular, non-hierarchical sense of 
structure and time that composers fromAnton Webern 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/musicblog/2007/apr/23/buildingaclassicalmusiclib1>
 to Pierre Boulez, György Ligeti toSteve Reich 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2012/oct/22/steve-reich-contemporary-music-guide>
 have explored.

The idea of a meaningful void is worth keeping in mind when you're listening 
to music Takemitsu wrote in the last two decades of his life. His pieces are 
rarely long (From Me Flows What You Call Time 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LpzMI7pqv7E> is among the longest, at around 
half an hour), they are seldom fast and rarely overtly demonstrative – but they 
do weird things with time. Listen to his piano concerto,Riverrun 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LlP0air0zow> (the title comes from Finnegan's 
Wake), or Quatrain (scored for clarinet, cello, violin, piano and orchestra) or 
his violin concertoFar Calls. Coming, Far! 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dfLm4Qy7wm0> (another Joyce-inspired title), to 
experience what I mean. There's a lot to get to grips with in his output: as 
well as the catalogue of concert pieces, there are those film scores (start with
Kurosawa's Ran <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UGG7yC3eB_Y>), as well as music 
for radio, theatre and television.

Takemitsu was a useful – in fact essential – composer. He was and still is an 
inspiration for the Japanese composers who have come after him, and he has made 
his musical aesthetic part of wider culture, too. I'm listening to hisVisions 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Takemitsu-Orchestral-Works-IMPORT-Toru/dp/B0000034YM/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1360577941&sr=8-1>
 for orchestra right now: in its simultaneous sense of scale and intimacy, its 
heightened but never cloying colours, and its sensuous objectivity, it sounds 
like music that should be at the heart of orchestral programmes and listeners' 
imaginations everywhere.

Five key links


A Flock Descends into the Pentagonal Garden 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X2JoZ3FR32c>
From Me Flows What You Call Time <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LpzMI7pqv7E>
Riverrun <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LlP0air0zow>
November Steps <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UC_T4_HxTb4>
Archipelago S <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6I6FZsCfUn0>
 