
It's become the critical fashion to take a view of Peter Maxwell Davies's music
 <http://www.maxopus.com/> that things were better in the olden days; that it's 
the electrifying, still-shocking imagination of his masterpieces of the 1950s 
and 60s that is where you'll find the real achievement and lasting legacy of 
his work. It's not hard to sympathise with this view – from this period comes 
music such asEight Songs for a Mad King 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v8mod9wAtMM>, a work that simultaneously 
incarnated and perfected a new genre of music-theatre in its crazily virtuosic 
and virtuosically crazy scenes for a bonkers George III and an instrumental 
ensemble who smash their instruments, taunt the poor monarch, and become the 
sounds and substances of his mental dissolution. Or there's the naked 
spirituality ofVesalii Icones <http://www.maxopus.com/work_detail.aspx?key=25> 
– literally naked, that is, since the piece demands that a nude or nearly nude 
dancer takes the role of Christ and Antichrist; there's the instrumental 
ferocity of his earlyFive Piano Pieces 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Maxwell-Davies-Chamber-Kreutzer-Quartet/dp/B000093D02/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1345449660&sr=8-2>
 orTrumpet Sonata <http://www.maxopus.com/work_detail.aspx?key=225>; and the 
pre-postmodern parody ofSt Thomas Wake: Foxtrot for Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/St-Thomas-Wake/dp/B007V2GLGM/ref=sr_1_12?ie=UTF8&qid=1345449933&sr=8-12>
, and the inspired historical fusion of his Second Taverner Fantasia on John 
Taverner's In Nomine.

These pieces belong to the first, revolutionary flowering of Maxwell Davies's 
(he's universally known as "Max") maturity, from the years after he had ripped 
up the compositional rulebook at Manchester University along with his fellow 
young Turks, Alexander Goehr and Harrison Birtwistle in the early 50s. But 
after Max had taken on the establishment and largely, won – at least in terms 
of critical acclaim and public notoriety (the premiere of hisWorldes Blis 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Maxwell-Davies-Worldes-Charles-Pavan/dp/B000025VXY/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1345449990&sr=8-1>
 at the Proms in 1969 caused as near as the Royal Albert Hall has ever come to 
a riot) – he did something that seemed must have seemed counter-intuitive, if 
not actually a kind of madness.

In the mid-70s, Max moved to Orkney, eventually making his home in a cottage 
without water or electricity, perched on a cliff on the most dramatic of all 
Orkney's islands,Hoy 
<http://dovegreyreader.typepad.com/.a/6a00d83451584369e20176155290c8970c-800wi>
. There, above some of the most thrillingly treacherous waters you will find 
anywhere in the world, Max went to work, writing music in and of the land- and 
sea-scape around him. This wasn't an escape from the community of people or a 
sense of musical purpose – just the opposite, in fact: Max composed music in 
and of the people of Orkney too, setting up theSt Magnus festival 
<http://www.stmagnusfestival.com/>, still a touchstone of how new music can 
connect with audiences. Many ofMax's major pieces since the 1970s 
<http://www.maxopus.com/work_detail.aspx?key=289> had their premieres on 
Orkney, includingdozens of pieces 
<http://www.maxopus.com/work_list.aspx?s=%7cFilter%7e%7cCategory%7e22%7c%2fCategory%7e%7c%2fFilter%7e>
 he has composed for the communities of those extraordinary islands.

But it's at roughly this point that the critical tide in thinking about Max's 
music starts to change. It's roundabout the moment in the mid-70s when he 
embarks on what has become, I think, one of themost ambitious and visionary 
cycles of symphonies <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0hT4RQgLUFo> of our time 
that critical opinion starts to curdle a wee bit.

Max was always inviting some pretty risky comparisons, as does any composer 
who dares title a large-scale orchestral work a "symphony". And that's 
especially true of music such as Max's that attempts an un-ironic recreation of 
the essential elementality of the symphony, that tries to find a way to sustain 
a 50-minute symphonic journey in an idiom that is anchored in the tonal and 
modal but which does things that no-one has tried in the form before. All that 
might just sound a tad theoretical: the best place to start is, as ever, at the 
beginning: try the opening of Max'sFirst Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KrHnfhZHznQ>, completed in 1976. One way to 
hear this dazzling foment of ideas – a strident horn-call, a disturbing tread 
of pizzicato strings, a glint of glockenspiel, a percussive explosion, an 
unsettled, passionate violin line – is as a sounding metaphor for the seascape 
that Max looked out on to from that cliff-top eyrie on Hoy, the way the surface 
of the water is ever-changing with cresting waves, the eddies of the tide, the 
pull of the wind, the endlessly unpredictable currents, and yet how all of that 
diversity of movement, shape, and colour, is part of the same single element – 
the sea.

But that kind of onomatopoeia ain't going to sustain a whole symphony, not 
without a bigger tidal motion of musical connections and undercurrents that 
take you from the start of the First Symphony to the end, 55 minutes later. To 
do that, Max has invented his own kind of tonal universe that all of his 
symphonies inhabit (there are now nine; you can hear the 25-minute 9th at the 
Proms on23 August <http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2012/august-23/14282>, 
there are also his cycles of10 Strathclyde Concertos 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OAYZ4zLsmu8> and the 10 Naxos String Quartets 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Maxwell-Davies-Quartets-Maggini-Quartet/dp/B002NFECKY/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1345450757&sr=1-1>
). This is demanding music, and he make no bones about it. It requires a 
concentration of listening, a sensitivity to the underlying ebb and flow of the 
gigantic tensions in theSecond <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZkduAqA_SpQ> or 
theThird <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8EtygiI7-ys> Symphonies, or the only 
slightly smaller-scale structures of theFourth 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1B0w0jXu24I>, Fifth 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0hT4RQgLUFo>, or Seventh 
<http://www.maxopus.com/work_detail.aspx?key=264>, for its power to be really 
heard and understood. It is, frankly, even more sophisticated music than Max's 
earlier works because its ambitions are greater: nothing less than a 
continuation and renewal of the rhetoric, emotion, and expressivity of the 
symphonic principle – something your ears and your brain have got to be ready 
for. You have to be prepared to put yourself out there on the ocean of Max's 
symphonic ocean, to be lost in its currents and tides, to let the music's 
undertow take you to places you hadn't imagined. Not that this music doesn't 
also have immediate, seismic impact. Try the epicfirst movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8EtygiI7-ys> of the Third Symphony for size, 
especially as it careers to an unstoppable churning tsunami just before the 
end, before dissipating in a filigree spray of flute and violin.

Even for Max's admirers, the problems with his output as a whole is its sheer 
scale: there are those gigantic multi-work cycles of instrumental music, a 
whole canon ofoperas and music theatre works 
<http://www.maxopus.com/work_list.aspx?s=%7cFilter%7e%7cCategory%7e13%7c%2fCategory%7e%7c%2fFilter%7e>
, scores of ensemble works, orchestral showstoppers such asAn Orkney Wedding, 
with Sunrise <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bnnkL1t7PXY> (and bagpipes!), 
dozens of shorter occasional pieces (including the hugely popular piano 
miniature,Farewell to Stromness 
<http://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=maxwell+davies+farewell+to+stromness&oq=maxwell+davies+farewell+&gs_l=youtube-reduced.3.0.0j0i5.42881.44446.0.45542.11.11.0.0.0.0.87.708.11.11.0...0.0...1ac.o-D0YlKeldM>
). He seems to write more the older he gets: his surprising but inspired 
appointment asMaster of the Queen's Music  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2004/jun/19/classicalmusicandopera.proms2004> 
has only increased his flow of music since 2004. He now composes and lives in 
the flatter environs of a house onSanday 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2009/9/22/1253617475280/Sir-Peter-Maxwell-Davies--001.jpg>
, a more remote but more hospitable outlier of the Orcadian archipelago. Max's 
music is placed not just figuratively but literally in this landscape: walking 
with him on the beach near his house, a place where he told me he has seen 
orcas take seals from the surf,he described 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00n6t8b> how he maps the pieces he writes 
onto the topography of the daily walks he takes with his dog; each piece is 
inscribed as a new Orcadian songline on to this liminal, ever-restless zone of 
sea, sand, and dune, of marram grass, white horses, flotsam and jetsam.

There is more as you listen too: Max is as engaged as ever in the social 
responsibility of the composer and idea of music as a social force that is 
capable of resisting contemporary discourses and political tensions: a string 
quartet that was a defiant personal statement against the Iraq War, a recent 
opera,Kommilitonen! <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=62T_42vgvRQ> that was both 
a dramatisation of student protest movements in the 20th century and a call to 
arms for today's generation of young people.

Which brings me back to that critical cliche: my hunch is that it will be 
Max's recent music – as opposed to the music he composed in the 50s and 60s – 
that will be his real legacy. For it is this that is a summation of a lifetime 
of listening in and with landscape, of being useful as a composer, a teacher, 
and an inspiration to his colleagues, and it is a visionary renewal of a 
richness of musical discourse that you might have thought impossible at the end 
of the 20th century and the start of the 21st. Well, you read it here first – 
maybe … In any case, get your ears round Max's symphonies and see what you 
think.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fv8mod9wAtMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fv8mod9wAtMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fv8mod9wAtMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch here <http://www.youtube.com/embed/v8mod9wAtMM>

Five key links

 Eight Songs for a Mad King <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v8mod9wAtMM> 
(above)

An Orkney Wedding, with Sunrise  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bnnkL1t7PXY>

Symphony No 1 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KrHnfhZHznQ>

Symphony No 3
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8EtygiI7-ys>

Kommilitonen! <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=62T_42vgvRQ>
 