 Inspirational … Gérard Grisey. Photograph: Salvatore Sciarrino/Casa Ricordi 
The 1999 premiere of French composer Gérard Grisey 
<http://www.remusik.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/Gerard_Grisey.jpg>'s Quatre 
Chants pour Franchir le Seuil <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KdiGNtkh7ng> – 
Four Songs for Crossing the Threshold – was one of those concerts that went 
straight into the history books of contemporary music. The performance, by the 
London Sinfonietta, conducted by Grisey's friend George Benjamin, was never 
supposed to be a memorial for Grisey, but his sudden death at the age of 52 the 
previous November meant that these death-haunted songs would be his last 
completed work, music that imaginatively explores the existential inter-zone 
between life and death. There are apocalyptic visions (listen to the start of
the fourth song <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gvCOHeK9M8w>, The Death of 
Humanity, to hear the world implode in a black hole of percussion writing), 
reflective resignation and spectral stasis in these songs. But more than 
anything, you're left with a sense of benign acceptance. That's true above all 
in the ethereal intertwining of the flute melody and the soprano voice in the 
finalBerceuse <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=laU7ttzLwSM> movement, music 
which realises the post-cataclysmic serenity of a passage from the Epic of 
Gilgamesh, with its open-ended final words, "I looked at the sea's horizon, the 
world …"

Terrible coincidence as it was, the sense of expressive catharsis in that 
performance ofQuatre Chants <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KdiGNtkh7ng> was 
only partly to do with Grisey's own death; much more, it was down to the 
astonishing musical space that this piece conjured in its unflinching 
exploration of existence. For Grisey, every single sound was a living, 
breathing entity; it was only logical that he should want to explore what 
happens at the end of the sonic life-cycle as well as the start. But in 
retrospect, the "threshold" that the Four Songs crossed wasn't only the event 
horizon that separates existence from non-existence, it was the door to a new 
kind of music that Grisey tragically would not have time to explore.

Yet the composer had already given the world visionary, inspirational and 
complete music. His achievement has often been reduced to yet another of new 
music's fetishistic labels, "spectralism" – a category that Grisey had rejected 
by the end of his life. The principles of spectralism are easy to describe, and 
like all good musical cliches, there's more than a grain of truth in the term. 
The essential idea is the creation of a new way of structuring the parameters 
of music by exploring the harmonic series, the overtones that are part of every 
musical note. If you analyse the complexity of the harmonic series of a single 
note played on a particular instrument – say a low E on a trombone – you find a 
teeming world of musical possibility. (That E, by the way, is exactly the note 
that Grisey took as the starting point for his ensemble workPartiels 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kX77MC5oXDY>, the third piece of his epic, 
six-part cycleLes Espaces Acoustiques 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Grisey-Les-Espaces-acoustiques-Gerard/dp/B00004VMCL>.) 
For Grisey, the possibilities of this approach were microscopic yet infinite. 
By atomising sounds in this way, he could structure large pieces of music and 
spans of time, such asPartiels <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kX77MC5oXDY>, 
that were based on an intense process of listening to an individual sound, 
exploding the smallest of sonic phenomena, a single note, on to the largest 
possible scale. The harmonic implications of the overtone series also allowed 
Grisey to create a hierarchy within his micro-tonally enriched musical world, 
which gives his music a monumental dynamism.

So much for a decidedly spectral sketch of the theory, but let's get stuck 
into what Grisey wanted us to get stuck into, which is the stuff of sound, the 
sounds his music makes. Whether you use the "spectral" label or not, Grisey's 
music is about sound as material, as physical element, as living phenomena. As 
he said, "we are musicians and our model is sound not literature, sound not 
mathematics, sound not theatre, visual arts, quantum physics, geology, 
astrology or acupuncture". (He doesn't say "sound not metaphor", incidentally, 
because his music is not some abstract sonic science lesson, but about how 
sound affects our ears, about how we hear, about how it makes our brains and 
bodies vibrate, and what it can make us feel. Listen to the incantatory power 
of the love-obsessed voices and electronics ofLes Chants de l'Amour 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qp7CHBF-V8U> for real sonic proof of what I'm 
on about.)

So here's the opening of Transitoires 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pqjKX9k4HaQ>, the fifth part, for large 
orchestra, of the ever-increasing musical forces required for Les Espaces 
Acoustiques (the cycle starts with a solo viola and ends with a huge orchestra 
and four solo horns in the final part, Epilogue). A glittering, shimmering, 
light-filled chord beginsTransitoires 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pqjKX9k4HaQ>; the music then seems to stop time 
with its pregnant pauses, and with echoes of sounds – a guttural double-bass 
growl, a low gong, a mysterious middle-distance drone – that are sustained, 
seemingly into the infinite. As with so much of Les Espaces Acoustiques, 
Transitoires makes sounds that are simultaneously ancient and modern: there's 
something primeval, even ritualistic about those microtonal chords which chime 
towards the end of the piece, the way the gong's music tolls underneath the 
whole texture, and how the viola emerges with its solo song right at the end. 
That music is a bridge to the Epilogue of the whole cycle, with its whooping 
chords for four solo horns, the sounds of a universe of sound rejoicing in 
itself.

But it's part of the paradox of Grisey's music that just as he can slow down 
time so that you feel you're inside, say, a stretched-out gong stroke for 20 
minutes, he can also speed it up with surreal velocity. (Grisey himself spoke 
of the difference between the sort of super-slow time experienced by whales as 
opposed to the frenetic time-scale of insects.) Listen to the opening ofVortex 
Temporum <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ext5OTiD1WM>, and the way in which 
flourishes of notes in the ensemble spin out of the orbit of the piano music 
(based on a flute solo from Ravel'sDaphnis et Chloé 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daphnis_et_Chloé>). Or, for another kind of 
mobile time, hear how Grisey makes a solo contrabass clarinet swing, slide and 
stride with mythic abandon in his evocation ofAnubis-Nout 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4msFJD-4lzk>, a piece written for the Canadian 
composerClaude Vivier 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2008/feb/22/classicalmusicandopera>, who was 
murdered in 1983. Or, for another surreal manipulation of musical time, listen 
to the funereal bass drums ofStèle <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qxQzSv0APDM>
, a piece for percussion that manages to be almost anti-rhythmic with its 
slides, scrapes and tollings.

Grisey's mastery of a gigantic spectrum of sound, texture and feeling makes 
his music some of the most special of the late 20th century.Le Temps et l'Écume 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVkt26DB_-U>, scored for chamber orchestra, 
percussionists and synthesisers, is a transcendence of the Grisey archetypes of 
scintillating harmony and orchestral colour, and it gives you that 
disturbing-but-seductive sensation of going through a mirror, the way it seems 
to connect the small scale of its details and surfaces – a skirl of woodwind 
sound, a trumpet solo – with an all-encompassing dimension of cosmic, 
coruscating chords and orchestral textures. It's not just thoseQuatre Chants 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KdiGNtkh7ng>: Grisey's music is always crossing 
thresholds of sound and space, of slowness and speed, of time at its grandest 
and most fleeting. To hear Grisey's music is to have adventures in the stuff of 
sound that will change your ears for ever. Enjoy.

Five key links

Quatre Chants pour Franchir le Seuil 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KdiGNtkh7ng>
Partiels <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kX77MC5oXDY>
Transitoires <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pqjKX9k4HaQ>
Le Temps et l'Écume <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CVkt26DB_-U>
Vortex Temporum <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ext5OTiD1WM>
 