
The 20th century's accumulation of musical history was arguably the single 
biggest hurdle for its composers to negotiate. If you think it was hard for 
Brahms to write string quartets and symphonies in the 1860s and 70s, then 
imagine what it was like for composers in the second half of the 20th century, 
with the freight of all of those late Romantic, modernist, and avant garde 
traditions on their shoulders to add to everything else in the historical 
pantheon.

If you're Stravinsky, you escape these historicist pressures by – well, by 
being Stravinsky and viewing the past, the present, and the future through the 
prism of your own creative genius; if you're Pierre Boulez or Karlheinz 
Stockhausen, you have the self-assurance and arrogance of youth to believe what 
you're doing is the only possible option for new music, the ne plus ultra to 
which the trajectory of music history has been leading. Or, like John Cage or 
Steve Reich, you simply acknowledge the past in order to forget it, to start 
again in an ever-present now.

But what do you do if you're a composer of supreme historical awareness, who 
understands only too well the achievements of your predecessors, from 
Monteverdi to Schoenberg, if you're somebody for whom the act of writing a 
single note or chord is already at best a conversation and more often than not 
a confrontation with the musical past – and one, inevitably, that you're not 
going to win every time you compose a new piece?Alexander Goehr 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/alexandergoehr> is, I think, exactly that sort of 
composer 
<http://www.schott-international.com/shop/php/Proxy.php?purl=/essh/persons/featured/7550/index.html>
: a musician for whom there is no such thing as an innocent note, someone for 
whom nearly every work is the hard-won prize ofa historicist battle 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h0MkZCNvt3E>, and in which each gesture, each 
phrase, is loaded with musical and cultural meaning. That's what gives his 
music its craggy, conflicted, and essentially pessimistic character. Goehr's is 
a voice that matters because, on his own terms, his music reveals one of the 
signal sounds of the 20th and 21st centuries in the heightened consciousness of 
its negotiation with history, and also because of the effect that his 
personality and his leadership had onBritish music in the postwar period 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BnHtvz-moD0&NR=1>.

That's because without Goehr, musical modernism would have taken even longer 
to arrive in Britain than it did. Goehr's family moved to Britain from Berlin 
shortly after his birth in 1932, and in the 1950s, Goehr became the eldest and 
most musically experienced member of the so-called Manchester school, along 
with Peter Maxwell Davies and Harrison Birtwistle – it was Goehr who founded 
the New Music Manchester group. Goehr's father Walter had been a pupil of 
Schoenberg's, and a conductor who brought both the extremes of music history – 
the Second Viennese school, the British premiere of Olivier Messiaen's 
Turangalîla Symphony, and Monteverdi's Vespers – to life for British audiences, 
and so Alexander was the conduit between the recent music of continental 
modernism and his fellow students in Manchester. Goehr continued his European 
education in the formative time he spent during 1955 and 1956 in one of the 
solar plexuses of postwar 20th century music: Olivier Messiaen's class at the 
Paris Conservatoire. His account of that time, of Messiaen's teaching, and of 
the reactions and rebellions of his fellow students Karlheinz Stockhausen and 
Pierre Boulez, is one of the mostriveting accounts of postwar music 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Finding-Key-Selected-Writings-Alexander/dp/0571193102>.

Goehr couldn't follow Stockhausen or Boulez into the brave new world of the 
avant garde; his open letter to Boulez (published inFinding the Key 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Finding-Key-Selected-Writings-Alexander/dp/0571193102>
, a collection of his writings) is a powerful creative credo, refuting the 
scorched-earth policy to the past that theyoung turks of Darmstadt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/feb/11/darmstadt-music-school-ferneyhough-finnissy>
 indulged in. As he writes, the music sanctioned by Boulez's ideological 
approach to serialism would mean "a conscious elimination of sensuous, dramatic 
or expressive elements, indeed of everything that in the popular view 
constitutes music".

Reading on mobile? Listen here on Spotify <>

He has not been afraid to put his money where his mouth is, either; in 1961, 
after the fiasco of the premiere of his cantata Sutter's Gold in Leeds, Goehr's 
feeling was that his choral parts may simply have been too difficult: how can 
you imagine the possibility of the autonomous work of modernist music, he 
writes, "when people who sing for pleasure [like the amateur choir who 
performed Sutter's Gold] are deprived of true satisfaction in the performance 
of new work?" Goehr's alternative path, as composer, teacher and proselytiser, 
was a commitment to contemporary music's power to communicate the social and 
cultural conflicts of the 20th century by remaining true to a Schoenberg-like 
belief in the continuity of musical traditions.

Which all rather raises the question: what does Goehr's music sound like? Even 
as he articulates the necessity for modern music to be sensuous or pleasurable, 
his music only rarely gives you that simple satisfaction. Which is precisely 
its strength. Instead, Goehr's works – like the dark drama of the misleadingly 
titledLittle Symphony 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Alexander-Little-Symphony-String-Quartet/dp/B001AQW86W/ref=sr_1_6?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1364740996&sr=1-6>
, the bleaker-still strains of theSymphony in One Movement 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Alexander-Goehr-Concerto-Symphony-Movement/dp/B0000260DX/ref=sr_1_4?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1364743684&sr=1-4>
, the heightened emotional drama of thePiano Concerto 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Alexander-Goehr-Concerto-Symphony-Movement/dp/B0000260DX/ref=sr_1_4?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1364743684&sr=1-4>
, or the concentrated drama ofBehold the Sun 
<http://www.fcqv.org/Goehr/Behold%20the%20Sun/Behold%20the%20Sun.html> for 
soprano and ensemble – are invitations to get stuck into the labyrinths of 
contemporary music's tussle with the musical past, to feel the mud on music's 
historical shoulders (to paraphrase Edoardo Sanguineti, one of Luciano Berio's 
favourite writers, another composer who refused to reject the past). Or listen 
to his involvingly knottyThird String Quartet 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GJ6N3NzK7Ls>: music like that quartet, or 
Goehr's other chamber works, makes me think of him as a kind of 21st century 
Brahms, as a composer as released as he is trapped by tradition. The intensity 
of the quartet's drama is catalysed by that essential dichotomy. But there are 
simpler pleasures to be had from Goehr's music: hisreconstructions around 
Monteverdi's mostly lost opera Arianna 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Goehr-Arianna-Alexander/dp/B00002693K>, or the joyful 
neo-classicism ofMarching to Carcassonne 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Goehr-Pastorals-Symphony-Orchestra-Sinfonietta/dp/B00ARL9PNA/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1364742981&sr=1-1>
 for piano and ensemble, one of his most unbuttoned and sheerly joyful and 
tuneful pieces.

Two other works show the depth of Goehr's engagement with musical traditions 
and how he attempts to transcend them. He has composed a series of piano pieces 
designed as a contribution to piano-playing pedagogy, studies in contemporary 
counterpoint calledSymmetry Disorders Reach 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Goehr-Symmetry-Disorders-Reach-Alexander/dp/B000RPBCMI/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1364743744&sr=1-1>
. In its conscious debt to Bach, this results in some of Goehr's most direct 
music. As does, for me, his operaPromised End 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wFmSd-g3HVI>, that fragmentary retelling of 
King Lear, that story of "old men who get it wrong when they have power and 
influence – and then get into a mess",as he described it to me 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/sep/23/alexander-goehr-opera-king-lear>. 
Goehr's music is defiantly uneasy listening. But its expressive unease sounds 
out a relationship with the musical past that is one of fundamental legacies of 
20th and 21st century music.

Five key links

String Quartet No 3 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GJ6N3NzK7Ls>
Little Symphony 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Alexander-Little-Symphony-String-Quartet/dp/B001AQW86W/ref=sr_1_6?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1364740996&sr=1-6>
Arianna <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h0MkZCNvt3E>
Marching to Carcassonne 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Goehr-Pastorals-Symphony-Orchestra-Sinfonietta/dp/B00ARL9PNA/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1364742981&sr=1-1>
Promised End <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uhnYrLPtf8c>
 