
It’s a long way from here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aHB-sWx-0eQ> to here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bzPI5z1cYvc>. The first is from Magnus 
Lindberg’s 1985 piece Kraft <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1TBuBcYX19g> 
(Power), a work that one commentator called Lindberg’s Rite of Spring, scored 
for huge orchestra, a group of perambulatory soloists, an assemblage of 
junkyard percussion, and live electronics; music that’s one of the great sonic 
brouhahas of the late 20th century. Kraft is the aural result of what happens 
when German metal-merchantsEinstürzende Neubauten 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VZsCvABTX90> meets Xenakis (two of Lindberg’s 
most important inspirations at the time) filtered through an iconoclastic 
twentysomething Finnish composer’s imagination. The second is from Lindberg’s 
Clarinet Concerto, a piece composed 17 years later, and which sounds – well, 
completely, utterly, totally different. The concerto sounds more like what 
happens when Gershwin meets Sibelius and Stravinsky, perhaps on some convenient 
Icelandic ice-floe in the mid-Atlantic, in a voluptuously melodic crossing of 
cultures. The question is how Lindberg got from one to the other – and how and 
why this music has come to be one of the definitive sounds of the 21st century 
orchestra, as ensembles from the New York Philharmonic to the Finnish Radio 
Symphony and the BBC Symphony champion Lindberg, making him one of the 
most-performed composers of new orchestral music.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1TBuBcYX19g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1TBuBcYX19g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1TBuBcYX19g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
One of the reasons is simple to understand: Lindberg, who was born in 1958 in 
Finland and trained at the Sibelius Academy in Helsinki, is now a 
not-especially-gris eminence of that astonishing generation of Finnish 
musicians who have the musical world as their collective plaything: composers 
Esa-Pekka Salonen and Kaija Saariaho, clarinettist Kari Kriikku, cellist Anssi 
Karttunen, conductors Sakari Oramo and Jukka-Pekka Saraste, and many others 
besides. A prodigiously gifted teenager who was writing gigantic orchestral 
scores before he turned 20, Lindberg was also the founder of the Toimii 
Ensemble, along with Salonen, Kriikku, and Karttunen, and he was and remains a 
virtuoso pianist to boot. Kraft’s power comes from the way it juxtaposes – 
smashes together is a better of putting it – the soloists of Toimii (who 
perform the piece in all-white sportsgear when I’ve seen them play it) with the 
orchestra. The energy released by these explosions of personnel and of musical 
material define the piece’s chaotic but unstoppable momentum, and it’s one of 
the jaw-dropping feats of contemporary orchestral gigantism if you’re lucky 
enough to hear it live.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbzPI5z1cYvc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbzPI5z1cYvc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbzPI5z1cYvc&media=>
But that’s only part of what makes Kraft work. Its dynamism really comes from 
the way all this surface sound and fury is underpinned by Lindberg’s harmonic 
thinking. In Kraft, that dimension of the music is based in this piece on the 
principle of the chaconne, repetitions of small-scale harmonic cycles. And for 
all its in-your-face energy, Kraft’s language was developed, in part, by 
Lindberg’s use of computer software to create sophisticated matrices of pitch 
material.

Which all sounds like a science experiment (an atmosphere that’s weirdly 
conjured up by those white clothes, too; outfits that have a disturbing 
retrospective cinematic referent in the all-white murderers ofMichael Haneke’s 
Funny Games <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JAXzkEqnHIQ>), but Lindberg’s music 
fuses the ultra-rational with the restlessly dynamic.

Even if the Clarinet Concerto sounds as if it could have come from a different 
musical universe to Kraft, there is a creative connection across the whole of 
Lindberg’s output. His music – so much of it written for his favourite 
instrument, the orchestra – is always searching for the greatest possible 
structural energy, propelling his listeners through the whole of his pieces. 
Sounds simple? It’s anything but in practice (try this in-depth essay 
<http://www.mtosmt.org/issues/mto.10.16.1/mto.10.16.1.martin.html> on the 
harmonic practice of his short solo piano piece Twine to see what I mean). Yet 
the effect that Lindberg wants to have on his listeners is immediate, direct, 
and accessible in the best sense. He wants the music to grab your ears and your 
body and not let go until you’ve been variously pulverised, pummelled, or 
pleasured into submission. For the pummelling, tryEngine 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yKJgTqRWsKg>; for Lindberg at his most sensual, 
here’s the orchestralArena <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eo9Njks49xI>. 

There’s an irony, though, about Lindberg’s developing harmonic sophistication. 
Lindberg’s goal is the creation of a self-sustaining harmonic world that’s 
capable of similar kinds of large-scale structure and patterns of tension and 
release to what old-school tonal music could do, but which breathes new life 
into those ideas and forms. (Listen to his voluptuous, iridescentViolin Concerto
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vGLJ_YZbiYc> to see what I’m on about. But 
increasingly, his music has found a way with melody and orchestral colour that 
is not just reminiscent but positively redolent of references to the music of 
the past, and late-Romantic repertoires especially. Lindberg has described 
himself as a Romantic, since he’s an unashamed expresser of emotion and of 
doing things on a large-orchestral scale. But if you listen toGraffiti 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KRyJNiLmqaw>, for choir and orchestra – one of 
his rare pieces for voices – orSeht die Sonne 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_2-0b4D11a0>, composed for the Berlin 
Philharmonic, you’ll hear sounds of Wagnerian opulence, Stravinskian rhythmic 
drive, and Sibelian textural richness. To my ears at least, Lindberg’smost 
recent works <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lTjtrKlWNic> open up a Pandora’s 
box in which so many styles and references are available to him that it’s 
difficult to know where his own voice lies, unless it’s in a grand 
hyper-Romantic fusion of the totality of orchestral techniques. (And that’s the 
reason he’s so popular with orchestras around the world: his most recent pieces 
are well-written, sumptuously colourful and approachable showpieces that work, 
efficiently and effectively, for players and listeners.)

But for me, Lindberg’s most successful works come from the period before he 
had fully opened up that compositional box of tricks. If I had to choose one 
piece, it would be 1994’sAura <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sceOg1a8g5o>, a 
four-movement symphony-in-all-but-name. Aura has all the variety and richness 
of his later music, but it’s combined with an unfailing sense of momentum that 
compels, surprises, and above all sustains you over its almost 40 minutes. Aura 
is a genuine realisation of Simon Rattle’s assessment of Lindberg: that he is a 
“one-man living proof that the orchestra is not dead”.

Five key links

Ur <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XfMfZSZYrw0>
Engine <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yKJgTqRWsKg>
Aura <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sceOg1a8g5o>
Clarinet Concerto <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bzPI5z1cYvc>
Graffiti <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KRyJNiLmqaw>
 