
What are the limits of a musical instrument? And what are the boundaries of a 
piece of music? Is an instrument bounded by the reality of the individual piece 
someone happens to be playing on it, so that all exists when you hear a 
violinist play, say, a solo Bach partita is that single piece, that single 
player, and that single instrument? And is a musical work like an island, cut 
off from the rest of music history by a sea of difference so that the perimeter 
of one piece never impinges on the coast of another?

I may have already got lost in my musical-maritime metaphors, but my point is 
this: both of those propositions are of course philosophical bunk, and one of 
the composers who proved that most clearly, who tackled the immanent 
historicism of every note played on every instrument he wrote for, and for whom 
each new piece wasn't so much a sallying forth into oceans of new musical 
possibility so much as a writing on, over, and with the music of the past, 
whether his own or of other composers, is our subject for discussion this week. 
I'm talking about the Italian composerLuciano Berio <http://lucianoberio.org/>, 
who was born in 1926 and died in 2003.

A place to start with Berio? Try Laborintus II  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oKP0UvdPyZU>for voices, instruments and tape, a 
piece in which not just a musical past but a whole labyrinth of meanings, 
memories, and histories are conjured by the voices, in the interplay between 
Edoardo Sanguineti's richly resonant text and Berio's vertiginously surreal 
collage of references and allusions, to musical pasts of madrigals and 
polyphony. As Berio puts it, Laborintus II is "a laboratory 'reduced' to the 
dimensions of performance, where we test theories and practices which can be 
used as experimental models of real life."

And then explore the Sequenzas for solo instruments that Berio started writing 
in the mid-1950s, which run through the rest of his life in music, from the
Sequenza I <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mE-iWQsJhjQ> for Severino 
Gazzelloni's flute in 1958 to numberXIV for cello 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wGZH70MUqcY>, composed in 2002. Each sequenza 
(sequence) is a compositional love-letter from Berio to the repertoires and 
possibilities of each instrument. But while a piece like theeighth  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tqDZJ69iEHk>in the, er, sequence of Sequenzas 
for violin refracts the virtuoso traditions of the instrument through a 
colourful modernist prism, it also opens up a new kind of soundworld in its 
volatile extremes of density and dynamic, the way sudden chordal explosions 
lacerate the music's surface. There are moments in the piece where – as in 
Bach's D minor Chaconne, but achieved in a completely different way – you feel 
you're hearing an ensemble of violinists rather than a single soloist. But each 
of the Sequenzas is essential listening and essential Berio. Others of my 
favourites arenumber III <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DGovCafPQAE> for 
voice, composed in 1965 for his ex-wife Cathy Berberian, the voluptuously 
violentSequenza VI <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y1yu8hRMd3w> for viola, 
number XI <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l-GUZza1AoU>for guitar, which distils 
and transcends the traditions of classical and folk guitar into 15 minutes, and
number XII 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SY0tuAcgaDY&playnext=1&list=PL34E78C0B7B4B1FCB&feature=results_video>
 for bassoon, which bassoonist Pascal Gallois plays in an apparently 
never-ending cycle of circular breathing, creating a continuous sound from the 
his instrument for an almost unbelievable 18 minutes – just one of the examples 
where Berio pushes an instrument and a performer, to their limits, and beyond.

The Sequenzas were themselves starting points for another series of works 
called Chemins, pathways through the material of the Sequenzas but exploded and 
amplified into new contexts, scored for larger instrumental groups or even for 
different solo instruments. Listen to what Berio does inChemins II 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OerFd44RjxE>, based on the viola sequenza. It's 
a typical Berio strategy of writing upon writing, building up layer upon layer 
of meanings, and refusing the idea that a single piece can exhaust the 
possibilities of its musical material.

And if that's true for individual instruments, it's also true for Berio's 
attitude to whole genres. Written in 1968/9, Sinfonia ("symphony", but never, 
oddly, given referred to in translation) is the ultimate pre-postmodernist 
musical palimpsest – which alliterative concatenation points to what happens in 
the work's centralthird movement <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oQKJ0ACJuCY>. 
Composed for large orchestra and eight amplified vocalists, Sinfonia's middle 
movement is one of the essential experiences of post-war music. The connective 
tissue of the piece is provided by the scherzo third movement from Mahler's 
Second Symphony, but that's the just the base material of the musical resources 
Berio uses. That's because every bar is crammed full of quotations of 
repertoire from Debussy to Stockhausen, from Stravinsky to Ravel – and dozens 
of others - so that the Mahler, which is always running in the background, 
appears through the cracks of this kaleidoscopic tumult. The vocalists 
simultaneously provide a commentary on what is happening in the performance 
("where now?", "well, so there is an audience", "it's a fantastic public 
performance") and provide their ownmash-up 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MRTv7BMay8Y> of literary material, from Beckett 
to Claude Lévi-Strauss. (Even if you've heard it only once, I guarantee that 
the vocalists's gnomic words will stick in your brain; for some reason, the 
phrase I can never get out of my head is "the name of Mayakovsky hangs in the 
clean air", as well as the Beckettian "keep going, going on …") It's 
vertiginous, witty, moving, and profound.

What this teeming complexity is all about is, in a sense, simple to describe: 
it's proof of the etymology of the word symphony, which means "sounding 
together": Berio simply makes all of these musics sound together. But it's also 
a piece about listening. The third movement of Sinfonia writes out how Berio 
listens to the equivalent movement from Mahler's symphony, and the piece 
reveals how every time we listen to music, we're plugging into an 
always-changing network of memory, allusion, and cross-reference. Within the 
framework of the whole five-movement piece, Sinfonia listens to itself, so that 
its final movement does to the piece what the third movement does to Mahler. 
The effect of Berio's labyrinths of listening is nearly always immediate, 
pleasurable, and sensual. His music admits as much of the world as he can cram 
into it, an openness embodied by one of Berio's most popular and approachable 
pieces,Folk Songs <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OxAqyfewoss>.

Sinfonia  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LZpU7ZR3PXA>has a dark parallel in 
what might just be Berio's masterpiece,Coro  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ksFm2h6c7E>(Chorus), composed in 1976/7, an 
hour-long coming together of a 40-piece choir and orchestra (each singer has an 
instrumental partner, so that the singers and players are intermingled with 
each other on stage). Coro makes a kind of meta-world music by turning a poem 
by Pablo Neruda into a gigantic, dissonant lament, but it also uses folk texts 
from all over the world, from Polynesia to Peru, to create what Berio himself 
described as "the plan for an imaginary city which is realised on different 
levels, which produces, assembles and unifies different things and persons, 
revealing their collective and individual characters, their distance, their 
relationships and conflicts within real and ideal borders". (Andrew Clements 
writes passionately about Corohere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2005/jul/29/classicalmusicandopera.proms20051>
.)

Berio's operas do to the stage and to storytelling what the rest of his music 
does to other kinds of repertoire; among them are the genre-expanding Opera, 
then there'sLa vera storia <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=COanDfDQn0g>, a 
collaboration with Italo Calvino, the Tempest-hauntedUn re in ascolto 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X1zYl89vA6o>, and his final stage work or 
"azione musicale", as Berio described it, Cronaca del luogo. Berio's last work,
Stanze <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s_QwnVVzawc>, is a luminous song-cycle 
on themes of God and death, for baritone, male voices, and orchestra, music as 
moving as any he wrote. Wherever you start with Berio, you won't want to end, 
only keep listening, listening on …

Five key links


Folk Songs <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OxAqyfewoss>

Sequenza VI <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y1yu8hRMd3w>


Sinfonia <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LZpU7ZR3PXA>

Coro <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ksFm2h6c7E>

Sequenza XII 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SY0tuAcgaDY&playnext=1&list=PL34E78C0B7B4B1FCB&feature=results_video>
 