
It's not every composer whose music is guaranteed to uplift and revivify you, 
which makes you feel a sense of essential positivity about the world and our 
place within it. British composerJonathan Harvey 
<http://www.fabermusic.com/Composers-Details.aspx?composerid=297> belongs in 
that special category, and he does it not through creating a trivial sense of 
comforting musical escapism but by confronting, describing, and transcending 
the world and its pains, joys and sufferings. Stick this piece on right now if 
you've never encountered his music before, one of the genuine masterpieces of 
electronic music,Mortuos Plango, Vivos Voco 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TxEGPIEraFA> ("I lament the dead, I call the 
living"). It's music that electronically etherealises the recorded sounds of 
the largest bell of Winchester Cathedral, in which is inscribed that wonderful 
Latin epithet, and the voice of Harvey's son, who was then a chorister in 
Winchester's Choir.

Mortuos Plango was composed at Pierre Boulez's IRCAM in Paris in 1980. It 
crystallises some of the fundamental achievements of the music Harvey has been 
writing for a half century now: a searching use of technology, a fusion of 
acoustic and electronic sounds, a desire to make music at the borders of 
consciousness and existential knowledge, to use the power of music to explore 
the spiritual. Mortuos Plango's composition also says something for the 
internationalism of Harvey's music, and the fact that we still need to hear 
more of it in programmes in this country.

At the core of so much of Harvey's music is a seeking out of a 
Buddhist-inspired spirituality <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9oUSgXGbuHU>. 
The dangers with that idea are obvious: a lesser composer could easily aspire 
to the condition of meditative transcendence yet only create music of 
one-dimensional banality. But Harvey's music does not succumb to that 
temptation. Have a think about his most recent full-length opera,Wagner Dream 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sBY3qJ9UU6U>, performed at the Barbican earlier 
this year <http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=11830>. It's a 
piece that puts together two of Harvey's most abiding influences and passions, 
the teachings of the Buddha and the worldly, sensual, death-haunted 
late-romanticism of Wagner. On the face of it, you'd be hard-pressed to think 
of two more essentially opposed phenomena: on one hand, the lesson of mindful 
egolessness, on the other, maybe the most self-obsessed amplification of an 
individual ego in Western creativity. But Wagner was in fact thinking about an 
opera on the life of the Buddha at the time of his death in 1883; Harvey's 
piece is both an imagined vision of what that piece could have been and a 
dramatised encounter between Wagner's egomania and the Buddhist myth of the 
love of Prakriti for Buddhist monk Ananda.

For Harvey, both Wagner and Buddhism are routes to the beyond. What he heard 
in Wagner's music that so inspired him as a young musician was precisely its 
evocation of a sense of heightened reality, a realm of pure feeling that has 
its Buddhist analogy in states of heightened awareness. And that's what you 
hear in Harvey's score, a heady mix of East and West in music and drama that 
sounds out the borderland between consciousness and unconsciousness.

There's another apparently paradoxical fusion that Harvey's music embodies. 
For some composers, technology and electronics are means to explore new worlds 
of sound for their own sake, to find new materials to make part of their 
technical arsenal. For Harvey, it's just the opposite: technology is a way of 
extending the reach of acoustic instruments into other realms of space and 
time, to literally and metaphorically go beyond physical boundaries. That's 
what you hear happening as early asBhakti 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NWzJooDGa6c>, Harvey's 50-minute 1982 piece for 
ensemble and tape; as technology has developed, so too has Harvey's 
imagination, so that he can manipulate the live sounds of the string quartet in 
hisFourth Quartet <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tF1LtKC2Jbg>, creating a 
sonic halo around the players and the audience, or turning a solo piano and 
ensemble into a colloquy of birds in hisBird Concerto with Pianosong 
<http://www.nmcrec.co.uk/recording/bird-concerto-pianosong>.

Harvey is unafraid to go where other composers fear to tread in order to 
illustrate what he sees as the essential unity of the world around us.Weltethos 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jun/22/weltethos-review> is a gargantuan, 
80-minute piece for choir and orchestra, originally written for the Berlin 
Philharmonic and first heard in this country in Birmingham last June, which 
sets texts that attempt to reveal the oneness behind all of the world's major 
religions.Andrew Clements found that 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jun/22/weltethos-review> the naivety of 
the work's subject-matter couldn't sustain the imagination of Harvey's music; 
but the attempt to find a music for the whole world reveals what Harvey wants 
his work to do, how he wants it to be useful and the messages he wants it to 
convey. (In fact, there's another recent piece calledMessages 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yEaEVUHBM3U>, a choral and orchestral setting 
of meditative splendour consisting entirely of the incantation and evocation of 
the names of Persian and Judaic angels.)

There are no such problems, however, in his smaller scale but no less 
ambitious recent orchestral works, especially the pieces he composed for the 
BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra when he was composer in residence there between 
2005 and 2008.Body Mandala <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Fwvzoi-njY> is a 
coruscating, violent transliteration of the ritualistic power of Tibetan brass 
instruments for the Western orchestra, whereas â€¦Towards A Pure Land 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Harvey-Mandala-Timepieces-Tranquil-Towards/dp/B00163JH6S>
 is yet another irresistible essay in how the orchestra can take you on a 
journey to a different consciousness. Another work,Speakings 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6UJ2RXIEXa4>, is even more far-reaching. Thanks 
again to help from IRCAM, the music turns the orchestra into would-be 
vocalists, exploring a region where the sounds of the orchestra cross a border 
from dumb instrumental scratchings and blowings into linguistic phonemes.

Exploring Harvey's music is one of the most rewarding journeys you can take as 
a listener to contemporary music. All of it - from his chamber works 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DEJQTINEplI> to his orchestral pieces 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6fne0ICEsJA>, his song cycles to his operas, 
tape pieces to pieces forsolo instrument 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9oUSgXGbuHU> - is a corrective to the cynicism 
of so much of today's musical world, an essential lesson in how it's possible 
to be at once vividly contemporary and timeless, to speak simultaneously of the 
outer world and inner spiritual experience. We need his music now more than 
ever.

Five key links
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnYdRzDx1_J4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnYdRzDx1_J4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FnYdRzDx1_J4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>


Mortuos Plango, Vivos Voco <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TxEGPIEraFA>


Bhakti <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NWzJooDGa6c>

Madonna of Winter and Spring <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6fne0ICEsJA>

Speakings <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6UJ2RXIEXa4>

Body Mandala <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Fwvzoi-njY>

Jonathan Harvey day is at the Southbank Centre on 7 October 
<http://ticketing.southbankcentre.co.uk/find/festivals-series/jonathan-harvey-day>
.

Next week: Wolfgang Rihm
 