
Now, we're perilously close to the boundaries of our self-imposed criteria for 
this whole series with the Polish composerWitold Lutosławski 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MduKsNELAbE>, since his centenary is celebrated 
next week (on the 25th, to be precise), but unlike that other prospective 
centennial this year, one Britten, B (who won't be in this series for reasons 
of sufficient exposure here and elsewhere).Lutosławski's output 
<http://www.chesternovello.com/default.aspx?TabId=2431&State_2905=2&composerId_2905=966>
 is, I think, neither well-known nor well understood enough. It will be, of 
course, by the end of this 'ere exposition! Or at least, you will have found, I 
hope, some ear-opening avenues into the work of a composer whose output is 
among the most complete and coherent of the 20th century.

So let's start, obviously, at the end. Listen to this: Lutosławski's Fourth 
Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9QO9nmP61-Q>, his last major work 
before his death in 1994, and a piece that symbolises and cements the 
achievement of his musical language. This is astonishingly eloquent music: a 
piece that creates a genuinely symphonic discourse through a revivification of 
some classical principles of achieving unity through diversity, but which is 
also open and adventurous enough to admit the existence of doubt, conflict, and 
melancholy – listen to thefinal few minutes  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ztX9Em66qno> to hear what I mean. It's all a 
long way from this music, the sophisticated Stravinskyisms and Bartokerie of his
First Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cww6NDuVx4Y>, composed nearly 50 
years earlier, just after the second world war.

Lutosławski's compositional journey involved him finding unique answers to the 
big existential and musical questions that the 20th century opened up, and his 
solution, eventually, was to rethink those hoarily old-fashioned ideas of
harmony, melody <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=laFCR96RPO4> and how you create 
large-scale musical structures, and he did so in a way that created new kinds 
of texture, sound, and feeling. (Don't believe me? Try this for size: the 
opening of Lutosławski'sThird Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NK8gvqWEFpk>, premiered by the Chicago Symphony 
and George Solti in 1983; a visceral contrast between vertical violence and 
sensual but chaotic melody, a juxtaposition that propels the whole half-hour 
piece.)

But this wasn't a serene progress to musical maturity carried out in an 
artistic vacuum. Far from it. Lutosławski's life was as enmeshed as any 20th 
century composer's in the terrifying warp and weft of history and politics. One 
of his first memories was his father being taken away for execution in Moscow 
in 1918; his brother didn't survive the second world war, and he spent his war 
away from his military duties playing in a piano duet with his fellow composer
Andrzej Panufnik <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sHteyAYQZwI>. Every time they 
played could have been their last, as they risked performing music banned by 
the Nazis – like Chopin! – but in their improvisations together, Lutosławski 
also laid the foundations for some of his later music, like theVariations on a 
Theme by Paganini <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iFsvmq-C9Kk>.

After the war, Lutosławski had to play a delicate game of creative 
cat-and-mouse with the communist regime in Poland. As part of the Composers' 
Union, he paid lip service to the socialist-realist demands of the government, 
working for Polish Radio and composing jingles, patriotic mass songs, and radio 
dramas. Even music like his First Symphony did not escape censure, but by the 
mid 1950s and Poland's political thaw, and the establishment of the Warsaw 
autumn festival of contemporary music in 1956, Lutosławski was able to begin to 
compose the music he wanted to. (HisConcerto for Orchestra 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YADvkF62nFo>, completed in 1954, is still his 
most popular piece with orchestras, but Lutosławski said that that brilliant, 
vital piece did not represent his unadulterated compositional voice; something 
he only recognised with the music he composed after hisMusique Funèbre 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O_n5cyYd6ag>, from 1958.) But Lutosławski's 
search for musical truth isn't quite as simple as it seems: under a pseudonym, 
he wrote pop tunes that were hits in Poland in the late 1950s and early 1960s, 
something only discovered a decade later; it's still controversial whether his 
motives were musical or financial in writing these tunes.

From the 1960s, Lutosławski was able to explore the musical terrain that he 
would make his own. It's a paradoxical combination of compositional freedom 
with structural rigour that finds a sometimes subtle, sometimes sensual, and 
occasionally visceral poetry in pieces likeJeux Venitiens 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J2pDnK6wgEA>, his Livre pour Orchestre 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ghtpM_OA0Gg>, or the Second Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nJPJHbkg5A0>. If you listen to what Lutosławski 
said ininterviews 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Conversations-Witold-Lutoslawski-Tadeusz-Kaczynski/dp/0906594014/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1358235492&sr=1-1>
 and public statements, you'll understand these pieces, just like all those 
that came after, as purely abstract investigations of the things that music can 
say that nothing else can: ie that there's no connection between the social, 
political, or personal dimensions of Lutosławski's life and the music he wrote.

Mstislav Rostropovich didn't agree, though. He regarded the Cello Concerto  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qbxU3uFWdWI> that Lutosławski wrote for him in 
1970 as an epic confrontation between an individual and an oppressive mass, in 
which the cello's voice is symbolically squashed by outbursts in the brass and 
orchestral explosions, a staging of the essential tensions of living in a 
communist system. Not so, said Lutosławski. Then there's Lutosławski's 
distinctive but misunderstood technique of "controlled aleatoricism", a 
magnificently obfuscatory term for something incredibly simple: basically, 
giving orchestral players material to play without precise rhythmic 
co-ordination, so you can create textures in which you know what pitches you're 
going to hear, but not exactly in what combination or at what speed. It's an 
easy way of conjuring a controlled chaos and a complex but relatively static 
texture, and you hear it in the Ad Libitum sections of hisChain II 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tmpV1jswXjI> for violin and orchestra, or 
passages in nearly every work he composed since the 1960s, starting withJeux 
Venitiens <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=78Bdb3oxsz0>. It's misunderstood 
because it's not at all a way of giving musicians license to improvise, and 
it's far too simplistic to equate this delicate musical freedom with any social 
or political agenda. Nonetheless, it was one of the ways that Lutosławski found 
to open up his music to a more unpredictable soundworld, while retaining an 
essential compositional control.

It's a technique that's also used throughout the Third Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NK8gvqWEFpk>, a piece composed during Poland's 
period of martial law in the early 1980s, and work that creates an irresistible 
lyricism in some of the most powerfully melodic string writing of the late 20th 
century, a song that sings with a completely convincing but utterly novel 
expressivity. And Lutosławski at last admitted that although it wasn't his 
intention that this piece should reflect Poland's and Solidarity's contemporary 
struggle for greater freedoms, if people chose to interpret it that way, he 
wouldn't tell them not to. Sounds a pretty small aesthetic change? It's 
important, I think. I've been in Poland recording interviews for Radio 3'sMusic 
Matters <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006tnvx>, which is dedicated to 
Lutosławski on Saturday 19 January, and I met Grzegorz Michalski, president of 
theLutosławski Society <http://www.lutoslawski.org.pl/en>, who told me 
something that contradicted everything I've read about Lutosławski's supposed 
lack of direct political engagement. He was affiliated, albeit in secret, to 
one of Solidarity's committees, and was the only musician to hold such a 
position. And he refused to play ball with the government in the early 1980s, 
withdrawing from his public activities. (Lutosławski had a telling metaphor for 
all this: he said that working with the regime had been like wearing shoes that 
were too small, and that once they had come off, once he stopped trying to play 
games with his public persona and the government, he couldn't put them on 
again.) It was also around this time that he started giving grants to young 
composers so that they could study abroad, and paying for essential medical 
operations; work he often did unacknowledged and without any public fanfare.

There's always a debate to be had around the relationship between a composer's 
life and their music, and if the composer says there's no connection, we need 
to listen to them. But it's more complicated that Lutosławski suggests. You 
don't have to look for clues in the communist regime to find the foundations of 
Lutosławski's harmonic language, but the concentration, ravishment, and 
refinement of his music could not have been written by anyone else at any other 
time. Lutosławski the man was as immaculate, fastidious, and restrained as his 
music. And just as his works don't contain any extra notes, Lutosławski was 
someone who only spoke when he had something to say, according to Marcin 
Bogusławski, his stepson.

And there's something else too. Lutosławski's attitude to life – his 
unswerving fealty to a daily regimen of work, work, and more work, his sharing 
of his talents and the material wealth he earned, and his insistence on 
absolute silence in his home and the study where he worked – has an almost 
monastic quality. And according to Michalski, Lutosławski was a religious man, 
even if he didn't write any explicitly religious or liturgical works. Because 
his wife Danuta (to whom he was devoted, and who died of a broken heart just 
weeks after his death) had divorced before marrying him, Witold could not take 
communion in the Polish church. That mattered to him, Michalski said, and to 
compensate, every year he would stay for a week with his cousin at his 
monastery to "clean his soul". That spiritual dimension, I think, is what's 
behind the transcendent refinement you hear in his music: it's there throughout 
theFourth Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9QO9nmP61-Q>, it's present 
in the radiant, deceptive simplicity of his late song-cycleChantefleurs et 
Chantefables <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g-WPqcWaNks>, and in the limpid 
drama of the Piano Concerto, composed for Krystian Zimerman. Lutosławski said 
that to write music was to go "fishing for souls", searching for listeners like 
him, for whom his music would resonate somewhere deep inside them. It's a 
strikingly spiritual way of describing his supposedly abstract art – see if he 
has caught yours …

Five Key Links


Third Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NK8gvqWEFpk>


Concerto for Orchestra <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YADvkF62nFo>

Cello Concerto
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qbxU3uFWdWI> 

Chantefleurs et Chantefables
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g-WPqcWaNks>

Fourth Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9QO9nmP61-Q>
 