
Whatever you think about works such as the tragically popular (in the sense of 
its baleful use at the most famous royal funeral of recent memory)Song for 
Athene <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rMrxJfvSnn8>, or his cello concerto The 
Protecting Veil <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=022lNxhAEec>, which Steven 
Isserlis <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tavener-The-Protecting-Veil/dp/B001IRXVC8> 
made one of the most beloved contemporary pieces of the late 20th century,John 
Tavener <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iK7Qkxt8FNs>'s music is not reducible 
to one-dimensional labels such as "holy minimalism".

That kind of categorisation suggests that Tavener's work is only ever an 
escape from the modern world and a retreat from and rejection of the 
achievements and sounds of musical modernism. If you've only heardSong for 
Athene <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rMrxJfvSnn8>, you might not think that 
its composer would be much of a fan of Anton Webern or Elliott Carter. But 
after Carter's death Tavener wrotein these pages 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/nov/06/elliott-carter-remembered>: "He 
did something no other modernist has ever achieved. He, in the last 10 years of 
his life, seemed to rid modernism of all its angst, creating sparkling edifices 
of joy and beauty, like the Flute Concerto and Dialogues for Piano and Chamber 
Orchestra. From a composer's point of view, he was an absolute master - and he 
did it better than any of us." In Webern, Tavener hears acrystalline meditation 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Music-Silence-Composers-Testament/dp/0571200885/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1361120117&sr=1-1>
 on musical material that transcends the composer's ego; qualities he has found 
also in the lucid music of Stravinsky's late, serial period, as well as the 
radiant musical spirit of Olivier Messiaen.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F43v-1tzXseI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F43v-1tzXseI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F43v-1tzXseI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=43v-1tzXseI>

What all of these enthusiasms have in common, from Tavener's point of view, is 
an attempt to find a musical objectivity, a sense of letting the material 
achieve a life that has its own internal energy, something outside the 
composer's subjectivity or "angst". That's Tavener's main critique of some 20th 
century music (indeed, music in general): he identifies a morbid, decadent 
subjectivity as the driving force behind much of the avant-garde and the 
expressionism that preceded it. There's a parallel with Tavener's spiritual 
life in this essential view: for much of his life an Orthodox Christian 
(although he has recently spoken of every religion being as "senile as one 
another"), his ideal relationship with his spirituality as it's expressed in 
his music is that he should be a channel through which the music flows, with as 
little impediment from the predilections of his own personality as possible. "I 
wanted to produce music that was the sound of God. That's what I have always 
tried to do." That's language that's liable to alienate non-religious 
listeners, but what it's really about is a striving to release his music from 
the mundanities of his own consciousness. You hear the results of that attempt 
on the grandest and gentlest scale inThe Veil of The Temple 
<http://www.chesternovello.com/default.aspx?TabId=2432&State_3041=2&workId_3041=14207>
 from 2003, a seven-hour-long cycle for choir that's a combination of 
liturgical vigil and spiritual epic, as well as a test of stamina for the 
singers, the players, and the posteriors of the audience.

Compare that piece to the music that shot Tavener to fame in the late 1960s, 
and you might think they're by different composers. In his mid-20s, Tavener 
symbolised what must have seemed like a visionary coming-together of thepop and 
classical <http://www.oocities.org/es/melgarbeatles9/cdsapcor15a.jpg> musical 
avant-gardes. In 1968, his gleefully postmodernist cantataThe Whale 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=43v-1tzXseI> was the first piece played by 
the-then young turks of new-music performance, the London Sinfonietta, and it 
was then released in 1970 on The Beatles'Apple record label 
<http://www.applerecords.com/#!/artists/John_Taverner>. ("I was less surprised 
at John Lennon's enthusiasm, but I was surprised at Ringo's".) The piece is a 
riotous recreation of the story of Jonah and the Whale. There's a narrator, 
there are electronic sounds, there's bestial - or rather cetacean - 
improvisation from the choir, there are football rattles and a whip, there's 
serialism, crunching dissonance, and loud-hailers. "The Whale is a piece 
written by an angry young man", Tavener said in 2004. "I was angry because the 
world didn't see the cosmos in metaphysical terms. I was also angry because 
what I saw of so-called classical music in those days was very po-faced. I 
wrote The Whale as a reaction in a way. The piece is very fantastical." 
Tavener's musical maximalism continued throughout the 1960s and into the 1970s, 
in pieces such as Celtic Requiem, with its Irish folk tunes, electric guitars, 
and children's songs, and his opera for the Covent Garden, Thérèse.

What's surprising when you hear pieces like The Whale or Ultimos Ritos 
<http://www.chesternovello.com/default.aspx?TabId=2432&State_3041=2&workId_3041=8536>
, a sprawling fresco of the "last rites" is not just the sounds they make, it's 
their aesthetic of open-eared inclusion that's so striking. It's all markedly 
different from a choral piece such asThe Lamb 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T8-cFRjcdU0>, which like so many of Tavener's 
dozens of choral pieces, seems to embody an aesthetic of excluding any 
superfluous sound and fury in its simplicity, its slowness and stillness, and 
above all, its harmonic attractiveness and consonance. For some, that turn to 
the musical terra cognita of diatonic harmony (one without the novel structural 
underpinning of a technique such as Arvo Pärt's tintinnabulation) makes Tavener 
a pseudo-spiritual sell-out, writing music whose "transcendence" is nothing of 
the sort, but rather a cheaply achieved audience manipulation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7s6JY6jgJfo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7s6JY6jgJfo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7s6JY6jgJfo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch here
 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7s6JY6jgJfo&playnext=1&list=PLD29108EA10406C03&feature=results_video>
But it's not that straightforward, and certainly not in the music that Tavever 
has written in recent years. At its most affecting, Tavener's work isn't about 
trying to fill your ears and your body with a cynically achieved ethereality, 
it's about giving the listener the space to create his or her own sense of 
private contemplation. That's still not going to work for some listeners, who 
still hear Tavener only as a badge of that which makes us most wretched; that's 
to say, humanity's belief in its own wretchedness, as if the human condition 
were something we had to escape rather than celebrate.

Yet Tavener's recent music has accommodated both a greater range of thinking 
than his Orthodox-inspired works of the 1980s and 1990s (The Beautiful Names 
<http://www.chesternovello.com/default.aspx?TabId=2432&State_3041=2&workId_3041=35236>
, for example, is a setting of the 99 names for Allah that are found in the 
Koran), and a renewed interest in a more modernist style of dissonance and 
conflict. And as you'll find inThe Protecting Veil 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=022lNxhAEec> there's more in this music than 
merely a rapt penitential radiance. In fact, there's a numinous wildness in 
Tavener's stratospheric writing for the solo cello, and the blazing intensity 
of the textures he finds from the string orchestra. As a composer who genuinely 
became a major cultural figure in the country's consciousness, Tavener is 
unique in the story of post-war British music; his music deserves and repays 
hearing and re-hearing with ears and minds as open as his have always been.

Five key links

The Whale <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=43v-1tzXseI>

The Protecting Veil <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=022lNxhAEec>

The Lamb <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T8-cFRjcdU0>

Funeral Canticle 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7s6JY6jgJfo&playnext=1&list=PLD29108EA10406C03&feature=results_video>

Eternity's Sunrise <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a9PAlIjl_pM>
 