
It sounds like something out of a film script. A Greek man in his early 20s 
fights for his homeland as part of the Communist resistance at the end of the 
second world war. Shrapnel from a blast from a British tank causes a horrendous 
facial injury that means the permanentloss of sight in one eye 
<http://www.bruceduffie.com/xen4.jpg>. He is sentenced to death after his exile 
to Paris (a sentence that was later commuted to a prison term, with his 
conviction finally quashed with the end of the junta in 1974). By the time he 
returns, he has become one of the leading creative figures of the century: an 
architect who trained, worked, and often transcended the inspiration of his 
mentor and boss, Le Corbusier; an intellectual whose physical and mathematical 
understanding of the way individual particles interact with each other and 
create a larger mass - atoms, birds, people, and musical notes - would produce 
one of the most fertile and prophetic aesthetic explorations in musical 
history; and above all a composer, whose craggily, joyously elemental music 
turned collections of pitches and rhythms and instruments into a force of 
nature, releasing a power that previous composers had only suggested 
metaphorically but which he would realise with arguably greater clarity, 
ferocity, intensity than any musician, before or since. This is the music of
Iannis Xenakis <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oQ8kcRi4upA>.

When you hear Xenakis's music – any piece of what we recognise as his mature 
work, starting with1954's Metastasis 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n2O8bMlEijg>, onwards – you're confronted with 
an aesthetic that seems unprecedented according to any of the frames of 
reference that musical works usually relate to. You won't hear vestiges of 
things like familiar forms, or shapes, or languages. Even the furthest-out 
reaches of early 1950s serialism sound resolutely conventional next to 
Xenakis's works of the same period. It's music whose sheer, scintillating 
physicality creates its own territory in every piece, whether it's forsolo cello
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=37ajOyhcl_c> or huge orchestra 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=37ajOyhcl_c>. As Ben Watson has put it, 
Xenakis's work is "an alien shard, glimmering in the heart of the West 
<http://thewire.co.uk/in-writing/interviews/iannis-xenakis_primal-architect>". 
When Xenakis approached Olivier Messiaen in Paris for composition lessons, 
Messiaen turned him down, because, "I think one should study harmony and 
counterpoint. But this was a man so much out of the ordinary that I said… 'No, 
you are almost 30, you have the good fortune of being Greek, of being an 
architect and having studied special mathematics. Take advantage of these 
things. Do them in your music'."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHXLuY9vvhpo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHXLuY9vvhpo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHXLuY9vvhpo%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
And that's exactly what Xenakis would do, and was already doing - which is 
both one explanation of his music's shocking otherness (it was heard as "alien" 
even by the hipsters of the early 1950s; the 1955 premiere ofMetastasis 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n2O8bMlEijg> at the Donaueschingen Festival was 
one of the scandals of postwar music) and a revelation of this music's deep, 
primal rootedness in richer and older phenomena even than musical history: the 
physics and patterning of the natural world, of the stars, of gas molecules, 
and the proliferating possibilities of mathematical principles. Xenakis 
resisted the label of being a mere mathematician in music just as surely as he 
refused the idea of his music's political or social message, and it was of 
course how he used those scientific principles (outlined in his book,Formalized 
Music 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Formalized-Music-Mathematics-Composition-Harmonologia/dp/1576470792>
) to create pieces of shattering visceral power.

His architectural output offers ways into his music's imaginative world. Take 
thePhilips Pavilion that Xenakis designed 
<http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-FQpIjaphyuk/UQ10mzeKi_I/AAAAAAAAB4A/hBbMmjKQncY/s1600/expo_58_philips.jpg>
 for the Brussels World's Fair in 1958 and for which he and Edgard Varèse wrote 
electronic music to animate its still gorgeously futuristic-looking parabolas, 
swoops, curves. The maths underlying its construction, and the shapes it makes, 
have a direct correlation in the way Xenakis uses the instruments of the 
orchestra in Metastasis, organising the entries of the instruments, and the 
pitches they play, according to the working-out of mathematical and statistical 
formulae, translating the space of architectural planes into musical time. 
(Take a look at his near-contemporary design for a "Cosmic City 
<http://legacy.drawingcenter.org/images/artwork/large/IX%2022_main.jpg>", a 
gloriously sci-fi vision of the metropolis of the future - and what happens 
when Dan Dare meets curvy brutalism.) Xenakis also designed what he called 
"polytopes", high-artson-et-lumière installations 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ObuWjkUUrF0> that involved his lighting 
designs, his sets, his music, and his sound projection to create vivid 
multi-media experiences, in places from Canada to Iran to Greece. And he 
designed a system for the conversion of graphic stimuli into sound, a programme 
he called UPIC and which has now morphed into more sophisticated computer 
software like IanniX. (More than a decade before Boulez founded IRCAM, Xenakis 
had set up his own institute for music-technological research in Paris called 
EMAMu, which now exists asCCMIX <http://www.centre-iannis-xenakis.org/>.)

Those are some clues to the elemental concerns of his music. But what happens 
when you hear his music goes beyond even the sensation of teeming natural 
phenomena or landscapes transmuted into music. Listen to this piece - Synaphaï 
- forpiano and orchestra <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HXLuY9vvhpo>. You'll 
hear a piano part of mind-bending complexity, which has the unique distinction, 
as far as I'm aware, of having a separate stave for each finger. You did read 
that right: Xenakis uses 10 staves in this piece. You'll hear clouds of 
minutely detailed orchestral sonority wrap around the solo part, like flocks of 
small birds mobbing an avaricious raptor; and you'll hear a near-continuous 
rhythmic intensity and textural violence that takes your breath away. Hearing 
this piece is as awesome an experience as watching some life-changing natural 
spectacle. Synaphaï has all the teeming unpredictable power of a glacier, the 
thrilling complexity of shape and movement of a mass animal migration.

But there's something else as well. This music is expressive: not in a 
conventionally emotional way, perhaps, but it has an ecstatic, cathartic power. 
Xenakis's music – and its preternaturally brilliant performers - allows its 
listeners to witness seismic events close at hand, to be at the middle of a 
musical happening of cosmic intensity. (That's literally true in Terratektorh, 
in which the orchestra perform from within the audience – it would have been 
fun to be part ofthis performance <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=37ajOyhcl_c> 
conducted by Matthias Pintscher…) Xenakis has said that his war-time experience 
informed his desire to create his new kind of sound-experience. (He described 
the play of sirens, gunfire, and spotlights in Athens in the 1940s as like a "
large-scale spectacle 
<http://thewire.co.uk/in-writing/interviews/iannis-xenakis_primal-architect>") 
Yet his music sounds, to me at least, to be purged – or perhaps to be a purging 
- of the sort of existential darkness that György Ligeti's music, say, never 
escapes. (Among the closest Xenakis comes to a direct emotional utterance is in 
hisNuits  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tXjilKOyzow>for chorus; music that 
sounds like a primordial cry, an impassioned scream.)

There's a huge amount to discover in Xenakis's music, and much of his vast 
output is out there on YouTube. Some highlights: the non-stop dynamism of
Keqrops for piano and ensemble <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cc3ZV9cSZC0>, 
the epic scale of the75-minute long Kraanerg 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1HNGIMtJGuU> for ensemble and tape; the 
dagger-like pointillism of Khoai <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6rTCRPSh6Gc> 
for solo harpsichord; or the devastating virtuosity ofTetras 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_OAAJvaKx5c> for string quartet. The piece that 
converted me, though, wasJonchaies <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oQ8kcRi4upA> 
for orchestra, composed in 1977, and quite simply one of the most exciting 
experiences you can have in music. Listen to it as loud as you can and convert 
all your neighbours to Xenakis too.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FoQ8kcRi4upA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FoQ8kcRi4upA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FoQ8kcRi4upA%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Jonchaies <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oQ8kcRi4upA> embodies the elemental 
truth about all of Xenakis's music. Beethoven described nature in the Pastoral 
Symphony, Sibelius was terrified by it in Tapiola, but it took Xenakis for 
music to become nature. On holiday in Corsica, Xenakis would pilot his canoe 
into the teeth of the biggest storm he and his paddle could manage. When you're 
listening to his music, you also go out there into the eye of a musical storm 
that will invigorate, inspire, and awe. See you out there…

Five key links

Synaphaï  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HXLuY9vvhpo>
Jonchaies <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oQ8kcRi4upA>
Keqrops <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cc3ZV9cSZC0>
Tetras <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_OAAJvaKx5c>
Terratektorh <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=37ajOyhcl_c>
 