
Tradition, Mahler once famously said, is "Schlamperei" - which means something 
akin to sloppiness. Mahler meant it in terms of performance practice, but it's 
an axiom many contemporary composers have followed to the letter, throwing out 
any "sloppy" vestiges of previous traditions, the tainted sentimentality of 
romanticism, the overblown rhetoric of expressionism, or any of the too easily 
imitated "isms" that have been part of the story of 20th and 21st-century 
music. If that's a rough axiom for many of the greats of contemporary music, if 
you're a German composer, it pretty well became an ideology after the second 
world war.

All of which makes this week's composer one of the most radical figures 
writing today, precisely because of his superficial conservatism. To those who 
know his music, he's someone whose unstoppable musical creativity, whose tumult 
of pieces for orchestras, opera houses, string quartets, for the familiar forms 
of musical institutions, and for famous soloists such as Anne-Sophie Mutter, 
makes him one of the most approachable, engaging and profound composers writing 
music today. I give youWolfgang Rihm 
<http://www.universaledition.com/Wolfgang-Rihm/composers-and-works/composer/599/biography>
, arguably contemporary music's most prolific composer, with more than 400 
works – and counting – to his name.

Born in Karlsruhe in 1952, when the generation of Stockhausen, Boulez and Nono 
were in their first, iconoclastic phase of maturity, Rihm had already written a 
symphony as a teenager (it's astonishingly good, too,a compelling essay in a 
wildly expressive atonal language that teems with ideas, energy, and meaning 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/jan/16/rihm-symphonies-nos-1-2>). As a 
young composer, he challenged the masters of ideological purity with a language 
that wasn't afraid to reference, to transmute and to deal with the music of the 
past, composing pieces that had the temerity to take on the legacy of 
Austro-German music rather than rejecting the achievements or the aesthetic of 
Berg and Schoenberg, or Schumann, Schubert or Beethoven.

This was a crazy way of doing things for any self-respecting avant garde 
composer in the 1970s, and Rihm unwittingly found himself part of a movement 
misleadingly called (aren't they all?) the "New Simplicity 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Simplicity>". But before this becomes too 
much of a German-new-music version of theJudean People's Front v the People's 
Front of Judea <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gb_qHP7VaZE>, the point is that 
Rihm's gigantic musical output – one of the greatest and grandest in terms of 
sheer quantity of hours of music composed, of consistent quality, of massive 
emotional range, of variety of forces and scales – resists any attempt to 
reduce its reach to a few handy labels.

If you listen to his Lichtes Spiel <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qu-lado4QRg>
 for violin soloist and strings, you might think that Rihm specialises in 
modern-sounding nostalgia; if you hear one of his Fetzen for string quartet and 
accordion, you'll have him down as a splintery modernist, all sharp elbows and 
crystalline energy; if you go for one of his operas such as the recentDionysos 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HFMz2Flahgk>, you might hear him as the heir to 
Berg's operatic canon; or if you hear his cello concerto,the Konzert in Einem 
Satz 
<http://www.universaledition.com/Wolfgang-Rihm/composers-and-works/composer/599/work/12663>
, you could describe him as a lyrical atonalist, picking up where Schoenberg 
and Karl Amadeus Hartmann left off. Listen to one of hisKlavierstücke 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LfCh9-qPtcA>, though, and you're hearing music 
of blistering, unpredictable intensity.

When I met Rihm a few years ago 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/mar/04/wolfgang-rihm-interview>, he 
shamed me by giving me 30 CDs of his music, none of which I had heard, and yet 
I had thought I had got to grips with at least some of his music before I saw 
him.

The first thing you need to do with Rihm is give up on any idea of coming to 
terms with the whole, generously proportioned effulgence of his life's work, 
and remember that the longest journey starts with a single step, or in this 
case, a single work. Begin with this one, and promise me you'll stay with it 
until the end:Jagden und Formen <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KML7ZFLAtVI>, a 
50-minute, single-movement musical thrill-ride for large ensemble that embodies 
some of the signature qualities of Rihm's music: its addictive energy, its 
torrent of ideas, its massively ambitious scale, as well as its uncanny sense 
of drama and pacing. The title means "hunts and forms"; I prefer thinking of it 
as "hunting and forming", because the music is in a constant state of 
volatility, of change. A spirit of restless dynamism animates every bar of this 
music. And that's why it's important you stay with it until the end (although 
YouTube hasn't got an upload of the complete piece; you need Spotify for that) 
because when you get there, you'll experience one of the most life-enhancing 
jolts of musical energy in post-war music. Whatever else post-tonal music was 
supposed to do, it was supposed to sound like this.
 Andrew Shore as Jakob Lenz in English National Opera's recent production of 
Rihm's opera. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
You'll find a similar sense of momentum, even mania, in the movements that 
make up hisChiffre-Zyklus <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RQ_XOyM3ZFU>, but for 
a concentrated shot of Rihm at his best, go for any of his by turns monumental 
and delicate Piano Pieces (Klavierstücke) or any of theFetzen 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O6JXfjPKRVs>, and for a elementally powerful 
hit of Rihm the dramatist, have a listen to the psycho-philosophical narrative 
ofJakob Lenz <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=anB4EaXKeiU>, his first and most 
successful opera, or try his larger-scale music-theatre pieces such asDie 
Erorberung von Mexico ("The Conquest of Mexico" 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Wolfgang-Rihm-Die-Eroberung-Mexico/dp/B000001RVZ/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1348396455&sr=1-1>
) or the experimental soundscapes of Die Hamletmaschine.

Rihm's influence as a teacher at the Hochschule in his hometown of Karlsruhe, 
and as a writer, thinker and proselytiser, and the infectious big-heartedness 
of his personality, makes him one of the most positive presences in the 
landscape of new music. Keeping up with his ceaseless flow of creativity is a 
life's work in itself. So get out there and go hunting and forming in Rihm-land.

Five key links

Lichtes Spiel <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qu-lado4QRg>
Chiffre-Zyklus <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RQ_XOyM3ZFU>
String Quartet 5 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F_wf_q8ZdcU>
Klavierstuck II <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3-FzEXtZyUQ>
Jagden und Formen <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KML7ZFLAtVI>

Next week: Thomas Adès
 