
There is a story that Hans Werner Henze 
<http://www.schott-music.com/shop/persons/featured/8708/index.html> reports in 
his fascinating and brave autobiographyBohemian Fifths 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bohemian-Fifths-Hans-Werner-Henze/dp/0571178154> that 
symbolises his central place in the cultural and political conflicts of postwar 
music. It's about Henze's opera,Der Prinz von Homburg 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uHRfhG_-AzY>, a piece that had premiered in 
Hamburg in 1960. Henze relates that at a dinner party (at which he wasn't 
present), the Italian composer Luigi Nono threw some Meissen porcelain to the 
floor in disgust at the mere mention of Henze's opera. The reason for the 
offence? Well, as the philosopher Theodor Adorno also said to Henze about the 
piece, "your music is not chaotic enough." As Henze put it, when I met him in 
2009 at his home near Rome: "What a thing to say! There you are every day, 
trying to put something reasonable and clear on paper, and somebody comes and 
says it is not sufficiently chaotic."

Now whether Nono really did throw the pottery, Henze was (it's shocking to 
have to write that past participle followingnews of his death 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/oct/27/hans-werner-henze-dies-age-86>, 
evenin his last years 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/dec/14/hans-werner-henze-interview>, the 
twinkle of his blue eyes and his Puckish energy seemed inextinguishable) 
certainly an outsider in the terms and frames of the postwar avant garde – 
especially to one of the most single-minded modernists of them all like Nono. 
That's what Adorno meant by the lack of chaos: Henze's music simply wasn't 
deemed abrasive or critical enough in the 50s and 60s by his ultra-critical 
colleagues. He wrote operas, and avowedly lyrical, large-scale operas at that 
(the sequence starts withBoulevard Solitude 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hkdVzltjfqY>, the by turns limpid and dramatic 
retelling of the Manon Lescaut story in 1952, and ends with the luminous myth of
Phaedra <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dvaV9szNTFQ> in 2007, with another work 
for an entire community of musical and theatrical performers calledGisela! 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0YlCGbyyFtY> that he completed in 2010: be 
entranced by Henze's shimmering music theatrehere 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kexfwzr5btY>). By 1970 he had even written six 
symphonies <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=648OWVmbEtU>, a genre that no 
self-respecting avant gardiste would consider using without a shrug of ironic 
distance.

Yet Henze's creative exile from the ideologies propagated by the generation of 
young musical Turks such as Nono or Stockhausen meant that he connected with 
more listeners, with more institutions, and that his music achieved its 
arguably more radical aims more completely than many of his contemporaries.

From the start, Henze really was an outsider. Born in 1926 in Westphalia, he 
had no choice from his surroundings or his Nazi-sympathising father but to 
enlist in the Hitler Jugend and serve in the war. Those experiences marked his 
entire life; even his last pieces are concerned with confronting and coming to 
terms with the darkest periods of Germany's history, and his own. He moved to 
the remote Italian island of Ischia in the early 1950s, and based himself in 
Italy for the rest of his life. His home in the hills outside Rome was as 
lavish, abundant, and sensual as his music, yet his political sympathies were 
those of a lifelong communist. And Henze did more than most to make his music 
part of the enlightening of international social consciousness, premiering his
Sixth Symphony 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Hans-Werner-Henze-Symphonies-Nos-1/dp/B0009I7IT4> in 
Cuba and living there in 1969 and 70. But Henze was never an ideologue, and he 
supported artists who spoke out against the Cuban regime. Just as in his music, 
it was human and the individual that mattered more to him than the aesthetic 
position or orthodoxy.

And unlike so many of his contemporaries, writing music for Henze was an 
unavoidable, irresistible compulsion. It flowed from him in a nearly continuous 
stream. Even after the mysterious illness that struck him in 2005, when he 
returned to the world from weeks of near unconsciousness, the same unquenchable 
thirst to compose was there, as he completed thesecond act of Phaedra 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kexfwzr5btY> – music that dramatises 
Hippolytus's return to life – and composed large orchestral and vocal pieces.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fas4iu7o_8ro%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fas4iu7o_8ro%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fas4iu7o_8ro%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to watch video
 <http://www.youtube.com/embed/as4iu7o_8ro>

You can hear that fluency at its best in Ondine 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BIPEXzzTUrE>, the masterful ballet he wrote for 
Frederick Ashton and the Royal Ballet in 1958. The idiom is quintessential 
Henze, a fusion of Stravinskian neo-classicism and rhythmic drive with a 
voluptuous expressive language, bringing the tragic water-nymph of the story 
vividly to life – Oliver Knussen's recording with the London Sinfonietta is one 
of the classics of the gramophone, as they used to say, and one of the pieces 
to hear to convince anyone who thinks that postwar music cannot be sumptuously 
beautiful.

For Henze, his music was the sound of his inner life. There was only a 
gossamer-thin separation between the man and his music, and his fundamental 
artistic credo was that music ought to have something to say about human 
emotion and ought to contribute to contemporary society. That way of thinking 
also meant that he was out of step with the formalist side of postwar music. 
Music, for Henze, was the living, breathing sound of resistance to any kind of 
system, a means of creating political and cultural freedom.

And Henze was unafraid to give an explicitly political message to his music. 
His pieceVoices <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V0jxKGcIAxQ> is a collection 
songs for the oppressed, a piece that gives voices to those who otherwise would 
not be heard;El Cimarron 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Hans-Werner-Henze-El-Cimarron/dp/B005V1T9SW> tells the 
story of the Cuban slave Esteban Montejo; We Come to the River was an overtly 
anti-war music-theatre experience, a set of "Actions for Music" devised by 
Henze and Edward Bond for Covent Garden in 1976.

As well as those pieces of Henze's that make their politics obvious, his 
renewal of the idea of symphony, concerto, and opera in the late 20th century 
is a much more radical project than it might seem at first. Henze's operatic 
subjects take in the tragic, the comic, the mythic and the exotic. Among the 
best, I think, areThe Bassarids <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uavtwpyBQmU> 
(and there's a fantastic suite of orchestral music from this 1966 work, with 
its libretto by WH Auden and Chester Kallman), and from the other end of his 
career,L'Upupa <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HY4IJahZz4Q>, is a magical 
Middle-Eastern fairytale from 2003.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHY4IJahZz4Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHY4IJahZz4Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FHY4IJahZz4Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to watch video 
<http://www.youtube.com/embed/as4iu7o_8ro>

Henze's symphonies are just as diverse; listen to the magnificently angry 
expressionism of his Sixth Symphony and compare it to the frankly gorgeous 
pleasures of theEighth 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Henze-Symphony-No-Hans-Werner/dp/B001AMM3C0>, inspired 
by A Midsummer Night's Dream (including the most opulently orchestrated Bottom, 
if you see what I mean, in its second movement; a fantastical orchestral 
scherzo that's a great place to start if you're a Henze newcomer), or the choral
Ninth 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Henze-Symphonies-Barcarola-Grande-Orchestra/dp/B001LTPOSW/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1351496360&sr=1-1>
. Henze knew exactly what he was doing composing a choral symphony as his ninth 
essay in the genre: unlike the Beethoven, the choir are present throughout, and 
Henze's piece is a personal and public attempt to reflect and reconcile the 
nightmare of Germany's early 20th-century history, setting a version of Anna 
Seghers's 1942 novel about prisoners attempting to escape from a concentration 
camp, dedicated "to the heroes and martyrs of German anti-fascism" – and it's a 
gigantic, fearlessly coruscating work to experience.

You'll sometimes hear a mealy-mouthed criticism of Henze's work that he wrote 
too much, that he couldn't stop himself overloading his orchestral textures 
with too much detail, with too great a density of line and activity. But 
listening now to works that I thought in the past were over-written or 
overwrought, I hear now instead a riot of colour and imagination. There is 
always a line to follow in Henze's music, a golden thread of lyricism and 
narrative that leads you through all of his pieces no matter how densely packed 
they might seem on the surface. Listen to theSeventh Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QmRpoA74BME> to hear what I mean – music of 
abundant effulgence, no doubt, but also real clarity, with its finale that 
starts as a gentle song and ends with an emotionally charged peroration.

For all its public grandeur, the reason that Henze's music matters and will 
continue to matter is that it's a distillation of his essential, generous 
humanity. The piece he wrote after the death of his partner of more than 40 
years, Fausto Moroni,Elogium Musicum 
<http://www.chesternovello.com/default.aspx?TabId=2432&State_3041=2&workId_3041=36329>
, is one of the most moving pieces he ever wrote, and that second act of 
Phaedra has a visionary luminescence, music that realises a character's return 
from the dead just as its composition symbolised the composer's recovery.

By the end of his life, Henze was disillusioned with the loss of his health, 
his bereavement, and his sense of his own death. But he knew that he had 
outlived an era of ideologies, whether political or musical, and he must have 
known too, that his music voiced an expressive freedom that inspired 
generations of German composers from Wolfgang Rihm to Jörg Widmann and Detlev 
Glanert. That essential freedom of the spirit is something that Henze's music 
yearns for and realises as completely as the work any other 20th or 21st 
century composer. Henze's life may be over, but we're only just beginning to 
understand the real importance of his music.

Five key links
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-Gf7EzrWHGg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-Gf7EzrWHGg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-Gf7EzrWHGg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to watch video 
<http://www.youtube.com/embed/-Gf7EzrWHGg>

Reqiuem <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Gf7EzrWHGg>

Ondine <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BIPEXzzTUrE>

Seventh Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QmRpoA74BME>

Phaedra <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dvaV9szNTFQ>

Voices <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V0jxKGcIAxQ>
 