
He's the British composer who has among the closest links to the European 
avant garde in its postwar pomp, who gave the first British performance of 
Pierre Boulez's epoch-defining Structures 1a for two pianos while still a 
student (along with his fellow compositional traveller at the Royal Academy of 
Music, Cornelius Cardew). He is one of the very few to have studied personally 
with Boulez in the 1950s. He has written concert works, operas, and choral 
music, as well as becoming a brilliant and celebrated film composer. Oh, and he 
is also one of the most gifted jazz pianists and singers of his – or any – 
generation.

I could only be talking about the astonishing polymath 76-year-old Richard 
Rodney Bennett 
<http://www.chesternovello.com/default.aspx?TabId=2431&State_2905=2&composerId_2905=100>
. On the face of it, Bennett's compositional career looks like a turning away 
from the strictures and structures of the avant garde in his earlier music 
towards an embracing of a more conventional kind of tonality, lyricism and 
melody in his recent work. That change was inspired partly by his experiences 
in the film studio, where he has written scores for movies fromMurder on the 
Orient Express <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Ik3C9aIp7o&feature=related> – 
including a vibrant, vital, Rachmaninov- and Ravel-infused waltz that's still 
one of his most memorable melodies – toFour Weddings and a Funeral 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TCgcCA7V1s8>. But have a listen to the opening 
of his 1968Piano Concerto 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Richard-Rodney-Bennett-Piano-Concerto/dp/B003TZSGV8/ref=dm_cd_album_lnk>
, composed for Stephen Kovacevich, or hisGuitar Concerto 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CQ_xDaY1tEc> from a couple of years later, 
written for Julian Bream, and compare those to the sheer unbridled tunefulness 
of his 1995 Partita 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bennett-Orchestral-Works-Vol-1/dp/B003H196YU/ref=dm_cd_album_lnk>
 for orchestra, and you might think you're listening to music by completely 
different composers.

But Bennett's music is much more interconnected than it first seems. Let's 
just remember what he did in the 1950s and 60s to promote the furthest reaches 
of the avant garde in what was still the conservative confines of the postwar 
scene in the UK. A talented pianist – he had grown up playing tunes by memory 
from the films he saw as a child – he became fascinated by the force of 
imagination and the hard-edged glamour of contemporary music from Europe, and 
he immersed himself in everything he could get his hands and his ears around. 
He travelled to theDarmstadt <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Darmstadt_School> 
summer courses, the fountainhead of the musical far reaches in the 1950s, and 
also spent those extraordinary years with Boulez in Paris. It was an experience 
that simultaneously showed Bennett the expressive possibilities of the language 
Boulez was developing, above all in Le marteau Sans Maître, and its 
limitations. Bennett remembers talking to Boulez excitedly about a performance 
he'd heard of Ravel's Daphnis and Chloe: Boulez's response was that Ravel's 
masterpiece was an unconscionable piece of empty pederastic sensuality (an 
opinion he has now completely reversed). Bennett could not agree, and while he 
admired Boulez's musical and personal asceticism, he couldn't completely go 
along with either.

Yet for Bennett, this wasn't a rejection of everything that Boulez's 
revolution represented. (Far from it: with his friend and co-Boulezian Susan 
Bradshaw, Bennett translatedBoulez on Music Today 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/On-Music-Today-Pierre-Boulez/dp/0571105874/ref=sr_1_cc_1?s=aps&ie=UTF8&qid=1341224679&sr=1-1-catcorr>
 into English in 1971.) It was just that he needed to find a way to include the 
rest of his musical loves in his own work. You can hear his expressive 
accommodation with serialism and an emerging lyricism in his 1965 opera,The 
Mines of Sulphur 
<http://www.universaledition.com/The-Mines-Sulphur-Opera-in-3-acts-Sir-Richard-Rodney-Bennett/composers-and-works/composer/47/work/1274>
, and in the set of pieces he called Commedia; the same is true of the grand 
opera he wrote for Covent Garden,Victory 
<http://www.universaledition.com/Victory-Sir-Richard-Rodney-Bennett/composers-and-works/composer/47/work/5656>
, performed in 1970.

In 1990, Bennett found a way of fusing jazz idioms in a classical context in a 
concerto he wrote for saxophonist Stan Getz 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=me0cJIm4p7I> (who died, sadly, before he could 
perform it). The piece isn't about a Third-Stream kind of blend of 
improvisation and classical conventions; instead, as Susan Bradshaw wrote about 
the piece, it's about putting "jazz harmonies in conjunction with the 
composer's own free-flowing serial technique". It's a work whose tensile rigour 
and utterly compelling musical momentum couldn't have happened without 
Bennett's structural thinking, but that also sings and stomps with expressive 
and stylistic freedom.

The flowering of Bennett's melodic and harmonic language in his recent songs 
and choral music, and in the Partita, I find pretty well irresistible:see what 
you think 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Richard-Rodney-Bennett-Songs-Before/dp/B003YCM0KY/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1341225007&sr=1-1>
! Bennett is living proof that the 20th and 21st century's stylistic extremes 
are not mutually exclusive, that serialism and lyricism can not only co-exist 
but are dependent on each other; that it's possible simultaneously to compose 
film scores and post-12-tone symphonies, and that there need be no division 
between singing cabaret songs and writing concertos. Bennett's prodigious 
musicality has meant, I think, that his work has been undervalued. It shouldn't 
be. In his reflection of so many of the streams, trends and styles of postwar 
music, and in the unmistakable, personal voice he has found across all of the 
genres in which he has worked, composed and performed, Bennett is one of the 
most significant compositional voices we have.

Five key links
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fme0cJIm4p7I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fme0cJIm4p7I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fme0cJIm4p7I%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Concerto for Stan Getz <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=me0cJIm4p7I>

Guitar Concerto
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CQ_xDaY1tEc>

Murder on the Orient Express
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Ik3C9aIp7o&feature=related>

Five Studies for piano, performed by Shura Cherkassky 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6H5I5w8pLHE>

A Garland for Marjory Fleming <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bXSkDmp1aRQ>

Next week: Kaija Saariaho
 