
I'm trying, I really am. But I can't hear anything in Philip Glass's 
symphonies – and there are now a mighty 10 of them at the time of writing – 
apart from windily grandiose bombast, mind-numbing note-spinning, and 
time-filling composing-by-numbers. Many of you will no doubt violently disagree 
with me, since there are thousands of listeners out there for whom Glass's 
symphonies mean something important. But all I can find in Glass's Ninth (the 
whole piece ishere <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=koaXXjHG9v0>) is a vapid 
combination of vamp-till-ready underscore inflated through the means of 
pseudo-symphonic rhetoric and souped-up orchestration until it blows up into 
something actually unpleasant, an artificially pumped-up symphony that sounds 
like it has overdosed on synthetic musical implants. The more the music shouts, 
the bigger and louder it gets (try the 20-minutesecond movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DTyPp6tTd2E> to hear an example of what I'm 
talking about), and the more its simple harmonic material is repeated, the more 
cringingly, emptily redundant the whole thing becomes.

Now, it matters not a jot how much it makes my toes curl, of course, since 
Glass's symphonies have important champions, such as conductorsDennis Russell 
Davies <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xUS-u5LoSX0> and Marin Alsop 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jE8YOU2pnIY>, as well as John Adams, who 
conducted the Ninth earlier this year. But what does matter is how Glass and 
his music got here because, in his 76th year, Glass is arguably the most 
influential composer across the whole range of the musical world, from film 
scores to music theatre, from rock and pop to new music, of any of the 
composers in this series so far – even more so than Steve Reich. And that's 
because the music that Glass made in New York in the 60s and 70s had a 
combination of experimentalism, listener-friendliness, and potential for 
commercial exploitation that none of his contemporaries have ever quite matched.

So to flush the memory of that Ninth out of your system (at least, if you're 
anything like me), here's a cleansing dose of something authentically 
important, from a time when Glass and his ensemble were making the lofts of 
Manhattan one of the centres of the musical world: the opening of hisMusic in 
12 Parts <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2euBS6YzrK4>. Like Steve Reich's Music 
for 18 Musicians, this is one of the most significant game-changers in American 
postwar music. First performed in a now-legendary four-hour stint at New York's 
Town Hall in 1974 (and therefore pre-dating 18 Musicians by a couple of years),
Music in 12 Parts <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9i_7Z96tkLc> is an 
encyclopedia of the techniques of additive rhythms and "music with repetitive 
structures" (Glass's preferred term for his music as opposed to "minimalism", 
and in the richness of experience it offers, as well as its sheer length, there 
ain't nothing "minimal" about Music in 12 Parts) and it cements the soundworld 
of the Philip Glass Ensemble, a still fresh-sounding combo of voices, electric 
keyboards, and wind instruments. It's also, like Reich's 18 Musicians, the 
piece in which Glass opens his musical world to a richer harmonic palette than 
his previous works had attempted, above all inParts 11 and 12 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zsOpRKkz5Ms>. Earlier pieces such as Music in 
Changing Parts <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=75L4srwdDMk> or especially Music 
in Fifths and Music in Contrary Motion are the definitive trailblazers for 
Glass's musical language, in its purest state of plain harmony, rhythmic 
subtlety, and textural austerity.

There are other dots to join, though, between Music in 12 Parts and Glass's 
symphonies; most importantly, his series of operas, beginning with Einstein on 
the Beach, a piece he made with Robert Wilson in 1976 that was in London 
earlier this year, performances that revealed Einstein as a riveting and 
hypnotic music-theatrical experience. Einstein'sopening number 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h8ElIlpF2u4> and its Knee Plays for an ensemble 
of voices counting numbers over and over again above an addictively sonorous 
electronic ground bass is one of the most imitated of any of the sounds of 
postwar music. It's also had the ultimate tribute of being parodied as much as 
any other piece, too (Chris Morris's "war composer" Michael 
Philip-Philip-Philip-Philip Annoyment inOn the Hour 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Itv6nB6cPrI> is the funniest, but South Park's  
"happy, non-offensive, non-denominational Christmas play" 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I9TeVdW8sYA> scored by an angry-looking Glass 
is up there as well). Then there's his film music: Glass's dozens of scores now 
include three Oscar nominations, for Kundun, The Hours, and Notes on a Scandal, 
but his most important music for film is surely the trilogy of non-narrative 
music-and-image spectaculars he collaborated on with director Godfrey Reggio, 
starting withKoyaanisqatsi <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CGG6aM0cMew> in 1982.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPirH8PADDgQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPirH8PADDgQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FPirH8PADDgQ%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch here <http://www.youtube.com/embed/PirH8PADDgQ>

Whatever you think of what Glass did next with his musical language – and even 
if you're as allergic to some of it as I am – you can't doubt his influence on 
musicians fromBrian Eno <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oxhIkc5gthI> to Nico 
Muhly <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P2ZWsRMJkEc>, from David Bowie  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fu--3OCi7YU>to Hans Zimmer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TbJmpKcNrLQ>. Yes, I do have a problem with the 
way the same innocent little progressions that work so effectively on the scale 
of the song-like numbers ofGlassworks 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eDN8NzIGz-Y> or even the comparatively 
restrained rhetoric of his first orchestral commission, theViolin Concerto 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7ZPWiUXYPg>, are pushed to ridiculous extremes 
in his symphonies and recent music-theatre pieces. But can any of us imagine a 
musical world without Philip Glass?

Five key links

Music in 12 Parts <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2euBS6YzrK4>

Symphony No 9 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=koaXXjHG9v0>

Koyaanisqatsi <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CGG6aM0cMew>

Einstein on the Beach <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h8ElIlpF2u4>

Glassworks <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eDN8NzIGz-Y>
 