
Listen to this 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A3qqA5MaceQ&playnext=1&list=PL89C61511248E454E&feature=results_video>
. Sound familiar? It both should – and shouldn't.Jörg Widmann's 
<http://www.joergwidmann.com/> Third String Quartet, the "Jagdquartett 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A3qqA5MaceQ&playnext=1&list=PL89C61511248E454E&feature=results_video>
" (Hunt Quartet) is based, as you'll have heard even from just the first few 
bars, on the obsessive repeated rhythms from the first movement of Beethoven's 
Seventh Symphony. But the German composer Widmann, who is not yet 40, dares 
what Beethoven could not, making that infectious, foot-tapping dotted rhythm 
the basis for an exploration of musical violence, extremity and dissonance; a 
musical hunt that goes further than the figurative hunt-motives of the 
classical and romantic periods (Mozart, after all, also wrote a so-called "Hunt 
Quartet"). Widmann writes out the potential for sadism and humour latent in 
these archetypes; the piece ends with the rest of the quartet symbolically 
hunting down and killing the cellist. (As some string quartets may want to 
actually do in real life … )

That piece is the middle panel of Widmann's gigantically expressive and 
ambitious cycle of five string quartets. But now try this, his orchestral piece,
Armonica <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2psVd3Kj0V8&feature=related>, composed 
in 2007. Sound different? It sure does: music scored for large orchestra and
glass harmonica <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_XPfoFZYso8&feature=fvwrel> 
(another relic of the 18th century, in fact, and an instrumentMozart 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lGoTLeGG7Aw> wrote for at the end of his life, 
but which has scarcely been used in the 20th and 21st centuries). The piece 
casts an ethereal web of sound that seems to radiate from the harmonica's 
ghostly, almost electronic textures with slow-moving, overlapping chords and 
sensuous orchestral glitter, and an accordion acting as a kind of sonic 
intermediary between the glass harmonica and the rest of the orchestra.

That kind of expressive diversity and sensitivity to the instruments, forms 
and traditions for which he is writing is rooted in Widmann's unique musical 
life as a composer and world-class clarinettist. He's also a useful conductor 
and an almost equally accomplished pianist, who has pretty well the entire 
tradition of classical music at his fingertips: he busked through almost the 
whole of Schumann's piano workswhen I met him at his home in Freiburg a few 
years ago 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/mar/13/jorg-widmann-clarinettist-wigmore-hall>
. Like his teacherWolfgang Rihm 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2012/sep/24/tom-service-guide-wolfgang-rihm>
, Widmann doesn't reject any aspect of musical tradition. His music is a 
dialogue, homage and continuation of the essential concerns of the music he 
loves most: Beethoven, Schumann, Schubert, Mozart, Mahler, Berg – as well as 
Rihm andLachenmann 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2012/jun/12/helmut-lachenmann-contemporary-composers-guide>
.

But it's much more than that. Born in 1973, Widmann is young enough to be 
freer than previous generations of German composers of the style-police of 
modernist ideology – freer, in other words, to be the musician and composer he 
wants to be rather than having to obey the diktats of any creative orthodoxy. 
But the range of Widmann's music anyway makes pigeonholing him or his work an 
impossible task. Another pair of contrasts: the magnificently opulent orchestral
Lied 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Widmann-J-Erscheinung-Schnebel-Schubert-Phantasie/dp/B0026DOEZQ/ref=sr_1_cc_1?s=aps&ie=UTF8&qid=1349685646&sr=1-1-catcorr>
, a dream of late romanticism that manages to be nostalgic and contemporary at 
the same time, and the splintery energy of theFünf Bruchstücke 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NnHVulua-2c> for clarinet and piano.
 Unique musical life as a composer and world-class clarinettist … Jörg 
Widmann. Photograph: Felix Broede 
The reason I think Widmann's music is so invigorating and important is that it 
not only charts a new musical and imaginative terrain – one that is joyously 
free to plunder the entirety of music history from Mozart to Lachenmann for its 
own ends – but also has so much to say about the way we hear the music of the 
past. When he played Mozart and late Schumann at the piano for me, Widmann 
rejoiced in finding the moments of acidulous dissonance, unresolved tensions 
and modernist style-clashes in music I might have thought I knew. In a sense, 
those works of his that are obviously based on previous music (like this one,
Con Brio <http://www.schott-music.com/shop/9/show,235622.html>, composed as a 
tribute to Beethoven for the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra) explode their 
models to create a soundscape of instability and unpredictability. But really, 
as in the Jagdquartett, what Widmann is doing is revealing the fissures and 
cracks in the original pieces, asking us to hear Beethoven with the same sense 
of thrill and novelty with which we listen to new music. For Widmann, honouring 
that music of the past is the opposite of putting it on a pedestal. His 
essential project is to reveal the continuing contemporary vitality of Mozart 
or Schubert. That's the fundamental connection between his performing career 
and his work as a composer, because any Widmann performance brings whatever he 
plays kicking and screaming into the present day, whether it'shis own pieces 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BTY5tEwm-54> or the Brahms clarinet quintet. 

But don't think Widmann's voice is anything but essentially of his own time. A 
new opera,Babylon 
<http://www.bayerische.staatsoper.de/889-ZmxhZz0xJmlkPTI4NTMmbD1lbg-~spielplan~oper~veranstaltungen~vorstellung.html>
, with a libretto by one of Germany's greatest living thinkers,Peter Sloterdijk 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Sloterdijk>, premieres at the Bayerisches 
Staatsoper in Widmann's hometown of Munich at the end of the month. Having 
already worked on stage pieces withAnselm Kiefer 
<http://www.schott-music.com/shop/9/show,265480.html> and an earlier opera 
about human cloning for Munich,The Face in the Mirror 
<http://www.schott-music.com/shop/persons/featured/joerg-widmann/works/katr-1-stage/>
, Widmann's vision of Babylon could be one of the most important new operas of 
the decade. Watch this space.

Five key links
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBTY5tEwm-54%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBTY5tEwm-54%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FBTY5tEwm-54%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

• Fantasie: Widmann plays his own solo for clarinet 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BTY5tEwm-54>

• Implosion <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FOg6XB5oh70>

• Armonica <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2psVd3Kj0V8&feature=related>

• Jagdquartett 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A3qqA5MaceQ&playnext=1&list=PL89C61511248E454E&feature=results_video>

• Fünf Bruchstücke
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NnHVulua-2c>
 