
How do you turn the evanescent shimmer of sound into something tangible and 
solid, something that can glow with intense, fiery colour or dazzle with a 
weirdly luminous darkness? You need the technique of an alchemist and the 
imagination of a poet to pull off this feat, to turn sound into a kind of 
sculpture. But that's exactly what British-born and Berlin-based composer
Rebecca Saunders <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IIkvcW8UsHA> has been doing in 
her music the last couple of decades.

We often talk of the "material" that composers use, which is usually a 
metaphorical sleight of hand that tries to turn a bunch of notes into so much 
clay. But in Saunders' case, you really are dealing with sound – and the way 
sounds are made by voices, by instruments, or by music-boxes and record players 
– as mouldable, physical stuff. Few composers make you more aware of the 
intricacy, delicacy, and elementality of the musical process, of what happens 
when a musician's body and fingers catalyse their instruments, than Saunders 
does. As she says in her programme note forminiata 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uH03-WtNOI0>, an astonishing and sometimes 
terrifying piece for accordion, piano, orchestra, and choir: "Surface, weight 
and feel are part of the reality of musical performance: the weight of the bow 
on the string; the differentiation of touch of the finger on the piano key; the 
expansion of the muscles between the shoulder blades drawing sound out of the 
accordion; the in-breath preceding the 'heard' tone … " The result is music of 
extremes, of violence and stillness – and of violent stillness. Listen to the 
opening of Saunders'choler <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cmjUEEDz0Ts> for two 
pianos, and you'll understand what I mean by that poetic paradox, as volleys of 
granite-like chordal pile-ups erupt out of, and sink back into, pools of 
resonant silence: music as explosive meditation.

Born in 1967, Saunders has made her creative life in Germany. She studied with 
Wolfgang Rihm, she has taught at the Darmstadt Summer Schools, and has been 
commissioned by ensembles, orchestras, and festivals in her adopted homeland. 
It's a cliche with any contemporary composer, but we really don't hear enough 
of her music in Britain, even if she has been a regular fixture of the
Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival's <http://hcmf.co.uk/> programmes over 
the last decade or so (she has a world premiere with Ensemble Resonanz of a new 
cello concerto on 17 November, and she was in residence at the festival in 
2010), and theProms 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/aug/28/prom-56-staatskapelle-dresden-review>
 andBBC Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/feb/13/classicalmusicandopera> have 
played her music in the last couple of years.

What we're missing out on is music that charts a unique aesthetic. There are 
twin influences in Saunders' work of postwar German fastidiousness and 
expressionism on one hand, and experimental, Cageian concentration on the 
other. She has builtentire pieces <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wc8jZ8gC2eM> 
on something as seemingly small as the shift from one pitch to another, 
focusing the ear on minute gradations of timbre and intonation, and turning her 
performers into Zen masters of attention and focus. Her orchestral piece,G and 
E on A 
<http://www.edition-peters.com/product/modern/g-and-e-on-a/ep7507?TRE00000/>, 
investigates the different shades and shimmers that are possible to find in the 
musical base matter of tuning and texture. More recently, her music has taken a 
sculptor's approach to space as well as sound: inChroma 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=25XyDzpaOlc>, the players are positioned around 
the hall, and in other pieces such asStirrings Still 
<http://www.wergo.de/shop/en_UK/3/show,231199.html> the musicians conjure 
musical moments that are suspended in time like a series ofAlexander Calder 
mobiles 
<http://artobserved.com/2009/11/go-see-%E2%80%93-rome-alexander-calders-monumental-sculpture-at-the-gagosian-gallery-through-january-30th-2010/>
.

What makes Saunders' music so fascinating is the way in which this forensic 
examination of how sounds are made becomes a vivid and sometimes disturbing 
world of feeling. James Joyce and Samuel Beckett are important inspirations for 
her (CRIMSON: Molly's Song 1 
<http://www.sheetmusicplus.com/title/CRIMSON-Molly-s-Song-1/19111483> is just 
one of the handful of works she has written that meditate on images fromMolly 
Bloom's monologue <http://www.claddaghireland.com/library/molly.htm> at the end 
of Ulysses), but so too is colour. The titles of some ofSaunders' works 
<http://www.edition-peters.com/composer/Saunders-Rebecca> amount to a 
miscellany of colours, especially arcane and redolent reds: cinnabar, crimson, 
vermilion, rubricare (latin for marking with red), miniata (coloured with 
cinnabar). That obsession with the furthest reaches of redness suggests the 
rarefied sensuality of Saunders' music. Far from abstraction, she is looking to 
create moments of such intensity that music ceases simply to be sound, but 
becomes an all-consuming, synaesthetic experience. It's demanding to perform 
and to listen to – you need to concentrate just as hard as the musicians to get 
there. But it's worth it: stay withdichroic seventeen 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ezbnhHUiJv0> to discover the mysterious world 
of memory, melody, and the scratching of a record player in its last couple of 
minutes; experience the continuous clusters of hercrimson 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eTowuNR8T-c> for solo piano, sounds that 
coruscate and blaze in your imagination. And above all, enter the heightened 
world ofminiata <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uH03-WtNOI0>, that 
extraordinary work for instrumentalists, singers, solo piano and accordion, 
composed in 2004. It's music in which each breath and whistle of the accordion, 
every abyssal utterance from the wordless choir, each hammered-out note in the 
piano, and every moment of stillness and silence, is transmuted into primeval 
poetry. It's Saunders' musical alchemy at its best.

Five key links


miniata <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uH03-WtNOI0>


dichroic seventeen <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ezbnhHUiJv0>


choler <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cmjUEEDz0Ts>


crimson <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eTowuNR8T-c>

Blaauw <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wc8jZ8gC2eM>
 