
I believe new music should take you to new places, via soundscapes and 
landscapes of feeling you hadn't thought could exist. For me, that's something
Thomas Adès <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dw_o0s1eubw> does in different ways 
in pretty well every piece. No composer of his generation (he is now 41) has 
written music that makes me want to return to it again and again to explore the 
fundamental questions about the job music does and the mechanics therein.

That's because Adès performs one of the greatest sleights of hand a composer 
is capable of. His music – for instance, the first piece I heard of his,
Darknesse Visible 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B004SBCAQO/ref=pd_lpo_k2_dp_sr_3?pf_rd_p=103612307&pf_rd_s=lpo-top-stripe&pf_rd_t=201&pf_rd_i=B0074XY8VS&pf_rd_m=A3P5ROKL5A1OLE&pf_rd_r=0XVD31J6TC74GS0SH7ZW>
 for solo piano – makes you hear things you thought you were familiar with as 
if they were completely new.Darknesse Visible 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JrZ5mUJBdHM> transforms the piano into an 
instrument that's alchemically capable of sustaining a continuous line of 
melody; the technique of ceaseless tremolo that Adès demands of the player 
(often, ason this recording 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B004SBCAQO/ref=pd_lpo_k2_dp_sr_3?pf_rd_p=103612307&pf_rd_s=lpo-top-stripe&pf_rd_t=201&pf_rd_i=B0074XY8VS&pf_rd_m=A3P5ROKL5A1OLE&pf_rd_r=0XVD31J6TC74GS0SH7ZW>
, himself) conjures a ghostly shimmer from the instrument. You feel you're 
experiencing the piano as apparition as much as reality – a heightened sonic 
surrealism that Adès's music often achieves with different media and in 
different contexts.

This piece is simultaneously an "explosion", as Adès says, of a John Dowland 
lute song <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ym1kWj1TwkU>, and an expressive 
distancing from it, as if you're seeing and hearing Dowland's tune with a 
shuttering or a doubleness in the image. It's not just about the instruments 
Adès uses and how he uses them, either – although that kind of imagination is 
as vivid when he's writing for the largest orchestra. Listen to the opening of 
his 1997 orchestral pieceAsyla <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nvchR9258Jg>, 
with its cowbells and quarter-tone-flat upright piano, to hear what I mean.

Adès also makes you hear and assess the fundamentals of music all over again: 
the bare intervals that remain the building blocks of the vast majority of 
contemporary classical music; the humble third or fourth or fifth, or the 
supposedly simple major and minor chords, or the forms that are still the 
touchstones for teachers, historians and music-makers the world over, those 
hoary old classics like "binary form <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_form>
" or "sonata form <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sonata_form>". Have a listen to 
how Adès takes a pattern of familiar intervals in the slow second movement of 
Asyla (a typically punning Adèsian title, meaning places of refuge as well as 
enclaves of madness), starting with that breathtaking melody for the epicurean 
timbre of the bass oboe, and makes them sound rich and strange. To hear the way 
he makes chords resonate in new ways, try his 2007 orchestral pieceTevot 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S_vVN7ONPnc> (written, like Asyla, for Simon 
Rattle, but this time for the Berlin Philharmonic instead of the City of 
Birmingham Symphony Orchestra). Above all, listen to its ending, which finds an 
A-major chord that shimmers like no other I've heard. For the way he does the 
same to entire forms, listen to the Piano Quintet, a fully fledged sonata form 
movement that makes its recapitulation a musical black hole of time and 
tonality, sucking up the material you've been listening to for the last quarter 
of an hour into a couple of frantic but inevitable-sounding minutes.
 Simon Keenlyside and Cyndia Sieden in Adès's The Tempest, which premiered at 
the Royal Opera House in 2004. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
But all this is really a tangent to what I think Adès's real achievement has 
become in recent years – and what it could mean for the music he will write in 
the future (not least the new opera he is working on, his third, to be based on
Luis Buñuel's film The Exterminating Angel 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?NR=1&feature=endscreen&v=RYqH2eTcm4c>). To hear 
it, the best place to start is the opera he wrote for Covent Garden in 2004 and 
is conducting at the Metropolitan Opera in New York this autumn:The Tempest 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hnMbYHm-WkU>, which uses a brilliantly 
effective rhyming distillation of Shakespeare's play in the libretto by 
Meredith Oakes. Adès casts his singers adrift on an island of music of his own 
conjuring, as any composer writing music for The Tempest must. But more than 
that, in writing this piece, Adès has found a way of hearing, a way of 
navigating the relationships between one note and another, that marks The 
Tempest as the place where a truly Adèsian world is magicked into being.

In the course of a series of interviews that form the basis of a new book 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2012/sep/28/composer-thomas-ades>, Full of 
Noises, Adès has explained to me how the opera's harmony works, and how each 
character is associated with a distinct but interrelated series of intervals 
and harmonic moves. In those sets of chords and shifts from one kind of harmony 
to another, Adès was describing a totally distinctive (in my experience, at 
least) way of inhabiting the tonal universe. On one hand, there's something 
objective and even systematic about Adès's harmonies: there are some 
quasi-serial aspects to the way his chords work that could generate a virtually 
infinite ocean of musical possibilities. But it's the instinctive manner in 
which he handles his material in the score that gives the piece its visceral, 
expressive power. (Some moments to listen toin the opera 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Ad%C3%A8s-The-Tempest-Thomas/dp/B0026FIR3E>: the 
prelude; Prospero and Miranda's first duet; Ariel's ethereally, 
stratosphericallyhigh-register music 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=83_q-gmPkfk>; Ferdinand and Miranda's love 
duet; Caliban's aria This Island's Full of Noises. There are plenty more!) I 
say "tonal universe" because when you're listening to the piece, you'll hear 
how it sounds – as so often with Adès – both familiar and strange, as if the 
world of conventional tonal progressions and processes were shifted by a 
knight's move. (Adès, incidentally, identifies historical precursors for his 
musical thinking, what he calls the "irrationally functional harmony" that goes 
at least as far back as Berlioz, he says, but was not properly followed up by 
today's composers.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FgVIBu-UMa4U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FgVIBu-UMa4U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FgVIBu-UMa4U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Above all, the sounds in The Tempest are, I find, some of the most 
unforgettable and most moving of any recent music (video) 
<http://www.youtube.com/embed/gVIBu-UMa4U>. The same is true for the other big 
pieces Adès has composed in the last few years: Tevot, the Violin Concerto, and 
his latest orchestral piece, Polaris. Adès talks about hearing the "magnetism" 
in each note of Polaris, every one of which becomes, under his composer's 
microscope, a seething mass of musical possibilities. For Adès, this way of 
hearing is an absolute, a golden thread he follows in each piece he writes. The 
results, though, are the opposite of predictable or pre-planned.

To hear what I'm talking about, listen to Violin Concerto: Concentric Paths 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NqUduiFVGDk>, which he composed in 2005. In 
just 20 minutes, this three-movement piece does something magical. The way it 
swirls ethereally in the first movement, exerts a tragic and vice-like grip in 
the chaconne-like second part and finally propels you into the uninhibited 
flight of thefinale <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yPUbs9ngYpA> is like being 
spun into an infinite space.

Yet you never lose your footing, never lose a sense of where you are, even as 
you glimpse an unbounded region out there behind the notes. Technically, that's 
because of Adès's seemingly infinitely subtle and infinitely expandable tonal 
universe. As with all really good music, however, it's a piece whose detail is 
endlessly absorbing but whose emotional impact is immediate and impossible to 
resist. In my opinion, at least. See what you think as you delve into theAsyla 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HRQr33PdyiQ> and Arcadiana  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nP5__SSf3dk>of Adès's music.

Five key links

Powder Her Face (Adès's first opera) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j8OCuAfIO2g> 

Asyla <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nvchR9258Jg>

Piano Quintet 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TLOdqOhnf4Q&playnext=1&list=PL2F7A0177A5B50482&feature=results_video>

The Tempest
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=83_q-gmPkfk> 

Violin Concerto: Concentric Paths <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NqUduiFVGDk>
 