
What constitutes musical truth? Is there really such a thing as musical 
authenticity (by which I don't mean using period instruments, or playing 
without vibrato) in the sense of giving voice to an absolute sincerity of 
emotional or expressive utterance? Or is music a combination of stylistic 
convention and structural formula that means composers conceal their true 
identity – whatever that might be – so that the search for the single true 
voice of a composer is always a confusing game of shadows?

The huge output of Russian composer Alfred Schnittke 
<http://www.starscolor.com/imgs/4751-alfred-schnittke-2.html> raises these 
sorts of questions – and some even more profound ones about musical meaning and 
historical signification. Take this monstrous music for example, hisFirst 
Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fGRWyyDw9Cc>, during whose composition 
Schnittke coined the phrase "polystylism" to cope with a musical aesthetic in 
which the kitchen sink is just the start of what he chucks into his "symphonic" 
structure. On the surface, you're listening to a large-scale, four-movement 
symphony that lasts a Mahlerian 75 minutes or more, and which ought to be the 
heir to a symphonic tradition whose immediate predecessor, in Russian music, is
Shostakovich <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/dmitri-shostakovich>. It's also a 
piece that should signal the start of the mature composer's style, written when 
Schnittke was in his mid-30s. But what you actually hear is an 
hour-and-a-quarter-long pile-up of musical quotations and strange symphonic 
theatre. There are references – more like unabashed thievings – to melodies and 
whole musical chunks fromTchaikovsky 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/pyotr-tchaikovsky>, from Strauss and from 
Chopin; there's even a full-on jazz improvisation in the middle of the second 
movement, a set for violin and piano; and the whole thing is framed by an 
apocalyptic version of Haydn's Farewell Symphony. The players come on to the 
stage during the opening few minutes of the symphony and they troop off during 
the final movement leaving a solo violinist playing Haydn's symphony, only to 
reassemble to play a gigantic unison C as the symphony's conclusion. But this 
is more than a music-historical joke. Had it lasted a mere 10 minutes or so, 
you could hear Schnittke's mashup of the whole of western music as a 
sophisticated symphonic gag, a parody of the end of history. But the sheer size 
of Schnittke's symphony demands that you take it seriously. And just as he does 
not limit himself to any single genre, style or period for his outrageous 
symphonic pilferings, you have a range of options as to how you take this piece.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfGRWyyDw9Cc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfGRWyyDw9Cc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfGRWyyDw9Cc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
You could hear it as one of the great embodiments of musical post-modernism, a 
defiant and even joyous two fingers to the denizens of stylistic purity who had 
held sway, in the West at least, during the immediate post-war years. At the 
other extreme, you might feel that this symphony is among the most nihilistic 
ever written: instead of even attempting an originality of voice, instead of a 
belief in the possibility of musical renewal, all that remains is to 
regurgitate the past as a grotesque cavalcade, an enterprise for which the 
moniker "symphony" is nothing more than a cynical sticking-plaster, since any 
pretence of "symphonic" coherence belongs to another musical universe than the 
surreal space that this piece creates.

I'm not sure. I think Schnittke's First Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fGRWyyDw9Cc> (he wrote eight, left a ninth 
unfinished at his death, and there's a Bruckner-style symphony number zero that 
he didn't acknowledge as part of his canon) is probably both, neither, and more 
than either of those extreme interpretations. Above all, it's a thrilling and 
disturbing musical riot if you ever have the chance to hear it live. But it's 
also a fragment – albeit a massive, hulking planetoid of a fragment – of the 
whole of Schnittke's catalogue of orchestral, vocal, chamber, theatre and film 
music, all written in his 63 short years, the last of them scarred by the 
series of strokes that would end his life in 1998.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzfsQX6BF5J0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzfsQX6BF5J0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FzfsQX6BF5J0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to watch video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zfsQX6BF5J0&feature=player_embedded>

There's much to explore, and much of it is available on YouTube, but to give 
you a sense of the range of Schnittke's voices – or masks, or truths – listen 
next to hisPiano Quintet <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zfsQX6BF5J0>, written 
shortly after the First Symphony in the wake of his mother's death. Where the 
symphony is a cataclysmic colloquy, the Quintet sounds like a single-minded 
expression of lament and loss. That's because of the directness and the 
bleakness of its emotional expression above all in its third and fourth 
movements, music that Schnittke said "are real experiences of grief which I 
would prefer not to comment on because they are of a very personal nature". The 
final fifth movement is a surreal lullaby in which a short melody in the piano 
part is encircled by sinister string lines; the music resolves into an image of 
limbo, as the piano repeats its tune into the infinite.

So is the quintet the "real" Schnittke, the harbinger of his 
echt-compositional voice? Probably not, if you listen now tothis piece 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M3Xehs1rHfM>, one of his most famous: the 
Concerto Grosso no. 1, which returns to the hyper-real world of the First 
Symphony, but in a more compressed and in a sense still more stylistically 
extreme form. In the Concerto Grosso,Schnittke said 
<http://alfredschnittke.wordpress.com> he wanted to realise "one of my life's 
goals … to overcome the gap between 'E' (Ernstmusik, serious music) and 'U' 
(Unterhaltung, music for entertainment), even if I break my neck in doing so!". 
That means that beneath and within its frame of pseudo-baroque figuration, 
you'll hear, asSchnittke's biographer Alexander Ivashkin says 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Schnittke-20th-Century-Composers-Alexander-Ivashkin/dp/0714831697>
, "the transformation of a cheerful song chorale of Soviet schoolchildren, a 
nostalgic atonal serenade, quasi-Corellian allusions" – as well as Schnittke's 
grandmother's favourite tango, and quotations from his film scores. The 
recitativo central movement, the work's "atonal serenade", though, rhymes with 
the Quintet's grief-stricken passages; as if this movement were the skull 
beneath the work's polystylistic skin.

So if it's not in the Concerto Grosso, perhaps Schnittke's real voice is music 
like this <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rb-hf-UnbKE>, his Concerto for Mixed 
Chorus, composed in the mid-1980s, music that strips back any playing in the 
mud of music history to make an avowedly spiritual statement, a piece that 
confirms Schnittke as a composer of some of the most important religious music 
of the late 20th century (born to an atheist Russian Jewish father in 1934, he 
converted to Roman Catholicism in 1982). You can hear the same essentially 
devout spirit animating theFourth Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GlZrJqPrdNQ>, especially its final few minutes, 
a setting of the Ave Maria that Schnittke wanted to bring together Jewish, 
Orthodox, Catholic and Lutheran ideas and musics.

In his last years, Schnittke composed some of his most austere music, which 
seems, on the surface, to be the distillation of his life in music, and a 
radical simplification of its means and methods: listen, for example, to the 
last movement of theEighth Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tgDwmIGTrhk>
, or any ofthe Ninth 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LmrymDVTr_c&playnext=1&list=PL137B9F113FBDCAE2&feature=results_main>
, deciphered from Schnittke's handwriting: because of the strokes he suffered, 
he was forced to write with his left hand. Is this, asGerard McBurney 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gerard_McBurney> thinks, the Schnittke whose 
music will prove the test of time, or will it be his more notorious 
polystylistic pieces that will continue to be heard as the heart of his 
achievement? Your idea of the real Schnittke will differ from mine, or from 
anyone else's for that matter; the real legacy of Schnittke's music lies 
precisely in its multidimensional exploration of what musical truth in the 20th 
century might be, from chaotic polystylism to heartfelt spirituality – and 
everything in between.

Five key links

Symphony no 1 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fGRWyyDw9Cc>
Concerto Grosso no 1 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M3Xehs1rHfM>
Concerto for Mixed Chorus <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rb-hf-UnbKE>
Piano Quintet <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zfsQX6BF5J0>
Symphony no 8 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tgDwmIGTrhk>
 