Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCViBJCos42M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCViBJCos42M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCViBJCos42M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to view video 
<http://www.youtube.com/embed/CViBJCos42M?enablejsapi=1&version=3>

La Monte Young's  <http://www.melafoundation.org/>magnum opus will have you 
entranced, bewitched and will change your sensory perceptions of the phenomenon 
we call music. It is a work for solo piano as you've never heard it before, and 
is simultaneously universal in its scope and intimate and enchanting in its 
effect, even as it opens the doors to new kinds of musical and psycho-acoustic 
experience.

Young, one of the fathers of American minimalism along with Riley, Glass and 
Reich, may have worked with and inspired everyone from Brian Eno to John Cale, 
once beaten Eric Dolphy to the second-alto saxophone position at the Los 
Angeles City College Dance Band, written pieces that require you to release 
butterflies into the auditorium and feed bales of hay to the piano (yes really; 
they're just some of the pieces that are part of his "Composition 1960 
<http://24.media.tumblr.com/tumblr_lnxl5yrOM01qie441o1_500.jpg>" series), been 
among the first to realise and capitalise on the static time-flow latent within 
serialism – especially the crystalline pitch-structures of Webern – in a piece 
such as his hour-long Trio for Strings and founded theDream House 
<http://www.melafoundation.org/dream02.htm> with his wife Marian Zazeela – a 
project/place/way of being in New York where time is based on a 27-hour clock – 
but even the ironically maximally long sentence required to sum all that up is 
only an upbeat to the perception-changing piece that will mean Young's music 
stretches into the cosmic infinite of music history: The Well-Tuned Piano.

Given that this piece has been one of the central pre-occupations of Young's 
life and work since the mid-60s, and given that you have the chance,here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=44HxMPKC8RM>, to immerse yourself in it for 
more than six-and-a-half hours (or you can choose a shorter, five-hour 
performance,starting here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CViBJCos42M>), The 
Well-Tuned Piano is going to dominate this discussion. So the first thing is: 
don't panic. The length of this piece is deceiving, dynamic and ever-changing. 
What I mean by that is that The Well-Tuned Piano exists as a template for 
Young's continual improvisation and expansion (although the filmed performance 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=44HxMPKC8RM>, with lighting by Zazeela, from 
1987 is the last time he played the piece in public), and that listening to the 
recording or watching the video collapses your sense of scale and time so six 
hours pass differently from how you might expect. In fact, time seems both to 
expand as well as contract.

The piece so takes over your brain that it seems as if it has always been 
playing, that no other music apart from this has ever existed; and yet, because 
of the way themes and ideas return throughout the performance, you're aware of 
a structure, you become conscious of musical anchors in the ocean of pianistic 
time that the piece creates.

Kyle Gann, The Well-Tuned Piano's most extraordinarily perceptive critic 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/121234288/the-well-tuned-piano-la-monte-young> and 
advocate, sums up the delirious temporal mind-funk the piece creates: "In an 
'eastern', timeless way [Young, like Terry Riley, was a student of Pandit Pran 
Nath], the work can be listened to as a static articulation of a set tuning, a 
continuous present in which concepts of before and after are irrelevant. In a 
'western' way, it can also be heard as a unidirectional time-pattern of 
thematic development in which earlier melodies return altered and at different 
pitch levels. Perhaps it is more accurate to say, avoiding quotation marks and 
over-worked stereotypes, that the WTP [Gann's abbreviation] manifests with 
equal emphasis both poles of the psychic qualities immanent in all musical 
listening. Few works so satisfy the desires of both structuralist and ambient 
listeners."

All of that, though, is still in store for you – unless you've already started 
listening. Because the first and most significant thing that will strike your 
ears from the first second of The Well-Tuned Piano is the acidulous yet 
soft-focused beauty of the tuning system Young uses in the piece. The product 
of decades of research and of dissatisfaction with the artificial exigencies of 
equal temperament – that gigantic musical fudge that has arguably robbed 
classical music of much of its expressive power but to which our ears have 
unfortunately become almost completely accustomed – Young's tuning system is 
based on a fundamental E flat and a sequence of rational, ratio-based 
relationships for the other notes of the scale.Read Gann's distillation of what 
Young does <http://www.kylegann.com/wtp.html> and be as flabbergasted as I was 
to learn that Gann worked out much of this unbelievable Pythagorean subtlety 
using nothing more than his ears, a calculator and a synthesizer, blowing open 
once and for all the veil of secrecy about how Young created these ethereal yet 
earthy sounds: it's a musical hall of mirrors where, to obey the strictures of 
Young's tuning, the G sharp on the keyboard actually produces a note lower than 
the G; the C sharp and C similarly.)

The piece, in its 1987 incarnation, cycles through sections that Keith Potter, 
in his bookFour Musical Minimalists 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Four-Musical-Minimalists-Twentieth-Century/dp/0521015014>
, charts from The Opening Chord through The Romantic Chord, Orpheus and 
Eurydice in The Elysian Fields, and The Ending. But that's just the tip of the 
iceberg of the work's poetic titles: themes, motives and subsections of the 
piece rejoice in monikers such as The Theme of the Dawn of Eternal Time, Young 
Böse's Brontosaurus Boogie ("Böse" because Young plays a Bösendorfer piano, 
with its extension down a major sixth from the compass of a normal piano; 
instead of the bottom note being an A, the Böse goes down to C) or The Homage 
to Brahms Variation of the Theme of the Dawn of Eternal Time.

With Gann as your guide 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/121234288/the-well-tuned-piano-la-monte-young>, 
you'll be able to follow the progress of the Well-Tuned Piano through its 
"clouds", themes and sequences. But what you'll also hear, if you pay enough 
psycho-acoustic attention, is a weird chorus of notes and timbres that don't 
seem to come from the piano, and which open an acoustic space far below the 
bottom reaches of the instrument. Gann heard a resonance of a truly fundamental 
E flat, the one that cycles just18 times a minute 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=6Tk8AUmr6vIC&pg=PA212&lpg=PA212&dq=gann+18-cycles-per-minute&source=bl&ots=WuHxlKCo8v&sig=Wi8uveMTVjWwS46talsGwdsuR10&hl=en&sa=X&ei=1X5PUaTqMueU0QW4z4CICw&ved=0CEEQ6AEwAw#v=onepage&q=gann%2018-cycles-per-minute&f=false>
, off the scale of what even Young's Böse can do, but the pitch from which all 
of the other notes in the piece derive as overtones; Keith Potter recalls 
hearing phantom French horns, saxophones and voices conjured from Young's 
keyboard. Even via YouTube, you'll encounter strange sonic phenomena as the 
clouds of resonance from Young's piano shimmer and hover in the air, taking on 
an almost physical reality in the course of the performance.

Young is now devoted to working with another of his groups, The Just Alap Raga 
Ensemble <http://www.melafoundation.org/calendar.htm>; whether The Well-Tuned 
Piano will be performed live again by him remains to be seen (his 
pupil/disciple Michael Harrison is the only other person ever to have done so). 
It is one of the great achievements of 20th-century music and to hear a 
performance must be one of the most remarkable and life-changing things you 
could ever hope to do as a listener. Meanwhile: enjoy your six hours and 40 
minutes inside the world of The Well-Tuned Piano …

Five key links

The Well-Tuned Piano (1987) <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=44HxMPKC8RM>
The Well-Tuned Piano (1981) <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CViBJCos42M>
Just Charles & Cello in the Romantic Chord 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P7-hQ6TZTGk>
Pre-Tortoise Dream Music <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wJAdBW675v4>
B Flat Dorian Blues (The Theatre of Eternal Music) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KAPIUIy8SCk>
 