
Karlheinz Stockhausen <http://stockhausen.org> has arguably done more to 
transform 20th- and 21st-century music than any other single composer: from
serialism <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BLK7byb_l-k> to electronic music, 
from consciousness-expandingmusical happenings 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hhbqUr8PCZ0> to cycles of pieces for every day 
of the week <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qt-3aQJPbIM> and every hour 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gtYAw12dzKY> of the day, from a musical mantra 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vQ4jQyTHU-4> to some hallucinogenic Cosmic 
Pulses <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7rGbHiJnk4I>.

But with Stockhausen – as Wagner or possibly Beethoven – you're dealing 
immediately as much with myth as with reality. Firstly, there's the caricature 
of his music, from those who either haven't heard it or who are ideologically 
opposed to it (Thomas Beecham 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/friday_review/story/0,3605,468909,00.html> is 
alleged to have quipped when asked if he had heard any Stockhausen: "No, but I 
believe I may have trodden in some."). Then there's the apparent eccentricity 
of the man: thoseorange jumpers 
<http://media.economist.com/sites/default/files/cf_images/20071215/5007OB.jpg>; 
his life with his two muses/life partners; his apparently obsessive control of 
his publishing, performing and recording rights; and not forgetting the small 
matter of his claims to come not from Earth but from the star Sirius – a 
statement that made many see him as a kind of musical-mystical crank.
 Sound thinking … Stockhausen giving a lecture. Photograph: Garp/Redferns 
In 1971, Stockhausen admitted he was a myth, but for different reasons. "You 
are always referring to my music. What does it mean, my music? It's just 
something that has come into my mind and I am working all the time and that's 
it. So: I am a myth, I am a name, and if I go away then they just attach on 
something that vibrates within yourself, where you are confronted with this 
so-called music. It has a name in order to identify it. That's all. Like 
'Beethoven': who was he? He was a very miserable person, I must say, as a human 
being. And he is a myth for something that we are, that is within ourselves. We 
are echoing: Beethoven is part of us or he doesn't exist. And in that sense I 
think it [music] is only a means, it's like spiritual food … When I like 
something, then I discover something that I have been before, that is 
profoundly already within me. It resonates, like a piano that you hit."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3hPkJW95jsw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3hPkJW95jsw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F3hPkJW95jsw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
"Spiritual food" – that's the simultaneously ancient and modern conception of 
music as vision that Stockhausen's life as a composer was really about. There's 
more gnarly theory to get stuck into with Karlheinz than with almost anyone 
else in music history, thanks tohis own writings 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Die_Reihe> and the mini-industry of Stockhausen 
arcana and analysis out there. (Also, thanks to the generosity ofthis YouTube 
channel 
<http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLCqtKpAgznS7uIRaCVGpbO0ToEAJBI8EJ>, you 
can watch all of the lectures that Stockhausen gave in English in 1972, and 
experience his infectious combination of charisma, blazing intellect and force 
of will at first-hand.) But much more than the theory or the admittedly teeming 
intellectual ideas, Stockhausen's music is about experience and intuition. It's 
about the way it feels in parts of your brain and body, parts that you may not 
realise you had – until you've swum in the ritualised pool of sound that is
Stimmung <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3hPkJW95jsw>, or crashed headlong into 
the chaotic cosmos ofMomente <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aZdtGa7PosM>, or 
been frazzled and transformed by any of the operas from theLicht cycle 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ANA-wYfHLQk>, which is the grandest statement 
of Stockhausen's cosmology.

So when you're listening to Gruppen 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6IZMWEtksII> for three orchestras – one of the 
masterpieces of Stockhausen's early career, completed in 1957 when he had 
recently turned 30 – you shouldn't (or shouldn't have to) attempt to hear the 
way the piece uses different "scales" of speeds and timbres and dynamics as 
well as more conventional collections of pitches; instead, immerse yourself in 
the thrilling and disturbing sonic spectacle that the piece creates as it hurls 
sound around you for 23 minutes (especially if you're lucky enough to listen to 
it live, or in surround sound).Brian Ferneyhough 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/tomserviceblog/2012/sep/10/contemporary-music-guide-brian-ferneyhough>
 was simply knocked off his feet by the tumultuous power of the music when he 
first heard it and sought to recreate its essence in his own music.

What gives Stockhausen's music its vitality is precisely the tension between a 
desire for structural experimentation, and the irresistible energies of its 
surfaces. You hear this in his electronic music, indelible contemporary 
classics such asGesang der Jünglinge 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3XfeWp2y1Lk> or Kontakte 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZZyFXbb8izM>. 

It's something that didn't appeal to all of Stockhausen's contemporaries: 
Ligeti, for example, accused him of a stultifying surfeit of pre-compositional
"plannification" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2003/oct/17/classicalmusicandopera>. But that 
"plannification" is what makes Stockhausen's apparent randomness – in the 
pointillism of the earlyKlavierstücke 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MVPlE6yHcoE>, or the wildness of Momente 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aZdtGa7PosM> – so essential. For Stockhausen, 
there was no distinction between pushing musical technique and avant-garde 
thinking to its limits and the concoction of new kinds of "spiritual food". 
That's what he heard when he was in his early 20s in the out-there (at the 
time) experiments of Olivier Messiaen's work of thelate 40s 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o9Pkk7SfATA> to rationalise rhythm, dynamic and 
articulation as well as pitch. For Stockhausen, this was a way of making music 
approach the fecundity, poetry and organic complexity of the stars, of the 
universe – not simply a labyrinth of musical head-scratching to get lost in. 
It's the same withMoment Form <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-vjofqA2SNY>, one 
of Stockhausen's compositional discoveries of the late 50s: OK, it was partly 
about releasing new kinds of temporal structuring at micro- and 
macro-musical-architectonic levels, but it was much more about finding a music 
that could voice the revelation of one of his favourite lines from William 
Blake: "He who kisses the joy as it flies/ Lives in eternity's sunrise."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FqGnkZnm9MPw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FqGnkZnm9MPw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FqGnkZnm9MPw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

When you're listening to Stockhausen – try Mantra for Two Pianos 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vQ4jQyTHU-4> now – you confront and transcend 
the limits of the musically possible. What I mean is this: the precise 
comprehensibility of what you're hearing – in how it was made, what's happening 
in the textures and lines and form of the music – often lies outside the bounds 
of what you can properly digest, but the actual experience of the music is 
indelible, irrefutable and real. Your instinct knows things before your brain 
does; or your subconscious is more intelligent than your conscious brain. Which 
might be the orange jumper talking, or possibly it's a message from Sirius – 
for which apologies – but the essence is another of Stockhausen's aphorisms: 
"Whenever we hear sounds, we are no longer the same, and this is the more the 
case when we hear organised sounds – music." (You can hear Stockhausen himself 
say those words at the start ofTuning In 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qGnkZnm9MPw>, an Omnibus documentary from 1981 
by Stockhausen student Robin Maconie (who has written a dazzling book onhis 
master's music 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Other-Planets-Music-Karlheinz-Stockhausen/dp/0810853566/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1367834458&sr=8-1&keywords=maconie+other+planets>
) and Barrie Gavin, and the kind of film about music that they just don't make 
any more but really should.)

For some, Stockhausen's later Licht-based obsessions with mysticism and myth 
prove an insurmountable barrier to hearing the quality of his music. The loss 
is theirs: as Graham Vick's world-premiere production ofMittwoch aus Licht 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/aug/23/karlheinz-stockhausen-mittwoch-aus-licht-birmingham>
 in Birmingham proved last year, and as an unforgettable performance ofCosmic 
Pulses <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7rGbHiJnk4I> at the Proms a few years 
ago also demonstrated, Stockhausen's last three decades were just as full of 
visionary exploration and musical experimentation as his earlier life in music. 
As with possibly no other composer in musical history, there's a literal and 
metaphorical universe of sound to explore in Stockhausen's work. So: begin! 
And, as one YouTube commenter puts it, "see you on Sirius".

Five key links

Momente <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aZdtGa7PosM>
Mantra <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vQ4jQyTHU-4>
Cosmic Pulses <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7rGbHiJnk4I>
Kontakte <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZZyFXbb8izM>
Gruppen <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6IZMWEtksII>


This is the last in this series. Next week I'll be looking back at a year of 
intensive listening-to and writing-about contemporary composers. How has it 
been for you? Who have we missed? Who shouldn't have been there? Has it changed 
your own listening habits? Tell us in the comments below.
 