
Here's what I love most about John Adams: the gilded celebration of sheer, 
unadulterated major-key glamour at the end ofOn The Dominant Divide 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GuyXEJAG-3g>, the finale of his Grand Pianola 
Music. Scored for two pianos, vocalists and ensemble, the piece was composed in 
1982, a time when the idea of writing tonal music – let alone the spangly, 
hummable tune of On the Dominant Divide – was, according to many central 
European and academic diktats, beyond the stylistic and even political pale.

As Adams himself remembers, "the audience response [at the premiere] included 
a substantial and (to me) shocking number of 'boos'. True, it was a very shaky 
performance, and the piece came at the end of a long concert of new works 
principally by serialist composers from the Columbia-Princeton school. In the 
context of this otherwise rather sober repertoire, Grand Pianola Music must 
doubtless have seemed like a smirking truant with a dirty face, in need of a 
severe spanking."

The three movements of Grand Pianola Music are a brilliant ne plus ultra of 
one side of Adams's creativity. The piece came to him as a flash of inspiration 
in a dream "in which, while driving down Interstate Route 5, I was approached 
from behind by two long, gleaming, black stretch limousines. As the vehicles 
drew up beside me they transformed into the world's longest Steinway pianos … 
20-, maybe even 30-feet long. Screaming down the highway at 90mph, they gave 
off volleys of B flat and E flat major arpeggios." The effect in the piece he 
wrote after he woke up is a sort of pile-up between Steve Reich, Rachmaninov, 
Liszt, Liberace – and the rest of music history.

But let's rewind a bit. Adams was never a composer to play by the rules his 
predecessors had mapped out for him – even if those rules were all about 
opening up musical freedoms. Born in 1947, Adams is half a generation younger 
than the progenitors of minimalism –Steve Reich 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AnQdP03iYIo>, La Monte Young 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CViBJCos42M>, Philip Glass 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z7ZPWiUXYPg>, and Terry Riley 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C7R6iEQUeMA>. He was also growing up when those 
twin antipodes of American music,John Cage 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U7O0VXzbV2Y> and Elliott Carter 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EwbPwq3-PAs>, were in the full flowering of 
their creativity. As he studied at Harvard and worked as an orchestral 
clarinettist on the east coast, he was able to absorb influences from a huge 
variety of sources.

Adams's breakthrough as a composer came when he moved to the west coast – his 
home ever since. And the piece that crystallised his creative world was his 
string septetShaker Loops <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B8VwjfCGAqE>. Here's 
what Adams (incidentally, one of today's most virtuosically literate composers: 
check out hiscollected writings, Hallelujah Junction 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Hallelujah-Junction-Composing-American-Life/dp/0571231152/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1346654813&sr=8-1>
) says about this piece, written in 1978: "Rather than set up small engines of 
motivic materials and let them run free in a kind of random play of 
counterpoint, I used the fabric of continually repeating cells to forge large 
architectonic shapes, creating a web of activity that, even within the course 
of a single movement, was more detailed, more varied, and knew both light and 
dark, serenity and turbulence."

You could paraphrase: it's minimalism, but not as you know it. Attracted to 
the surfaces of the minimalism, but frustrated by its lack of harmonic interest 
and large-scale momentum, Adams's solution in Shaker Loops was at once more 
radical and more conservative. Radical, because he was prepared to fuse the 
purity of minimalist processes with a richer range of references, and 
conservative because he wanted to find a way to restore old ideas of harmonic 
ebb and flow to this new style, to create his "large architectonic shapes". But 
just as with Grand Pianola Music, it's the sound and shimmer of Shaker Loops 
that will make you fall for this music (or at least, it is why I fell for it!)
Have a listen here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B8VwjfCGAqE>.
 English National Opera and Metropolitan Opera's production of Adams's Death 
of Klinghoffer at the London Coliseum in 2012. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for 
the Guardian 
That first phase of Adams's development climaxes with two masterpieces of the 
mid-1980s. There's his first opera, Nixon in China 
<http://youtu.be/DXXmjR0aCug?t=4m30s> (which the composer conducts at the Proms 
on Wednesday with the BBC Symphony Orchestra), which dares to put recent events 
on the opera stage – dares, and wins, thanks to the poetry of Alice Goodman's 
libretto and the irresistible imagination of Adams's music. The score for Nixon 
is by turns souped-up tonal surrealism (listen to the opening to see what I 
mean) and a delicate, reflective meditation (in the final act especially).

Adams also wrote the huge three-movement orchestral piece Harmonielehre 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nFj9NSh6x90> that recast the expressive power 
of late romanticism (it virtually quotes Mahler's 10th Symphony in its slow 
movement) in the garb of a post-minimalist workout. Again, those labels are far 
less helpful than simply hearing the music: try the unstoppable energy of the 
start of Harmonielehre, or the first 20 minutes or so of Nixon, one of the most 
compelling openings to any opera, ever.

Adams's music of the later 90s and the noughties has brought another two 
full-scale operas,The Death of Klinghoffer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-jw33u9qAsE> and Doctor Atomic 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7fJRoKlCroU>, both on contemporary themes (the 
murder of Leon Klinghoffer on board the Achille Lauro in 1985, and the birth of 
the atomic bomb), and he hasn't shirked from big statements on everything from 
religion to pop culture to natural disasters in his other theatre and vocal 
works, some of them in collaboration with Peter Sellars.

But something else has happened in Adams's recent music. He has continued to 
develop his palette of references and harmonic richness, even encompassing the 
European modernism that he seemed at first to resist. There's an ongoing 
dialogue with Schoenberg (the title of Harmonielehre pays tribute to one of the 
Austrian composer's masterly didactic tomes) in music such as theChamber 
Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZV99L4m8uWs> and the Violin Concerto 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3RxNVzV39Bc>; on the other hand, there are 
obvious and affectionate reworkings of pop tunes and musicals inI Was Looking 
at the Ceiling and Then I Saw the Sky 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2f09UYdA-N8>, and there's a welter of 
historical and contemporary reference in his recent orchestral piece,City Noir 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O-pp6WD89JU>. 

I'm still undecided over whether this side of Adams's music packs the same 
punch as his earlier work. It's not because his more recent work is less 
ambitious – in a way, it's more far-reaching in its subject matter and what 
it's trying to do musically, but the risks are greater, too. To my ears, the 
saturation of the Chamber Symphony or a piece such as his orchestral Guide to 
Strange Places does not pay off, because there's both too much detail in the 
chromatic density of some of the harmony and not enough real complexity, and 
because Adams has a way of subsuming the diversity of his musical sources 
beneath the sheen and dazzle of his own language, so that everything sounds 
weirdly homogeneous. But if I'm struggling a bit with his recent work – and I 
found Doctor Atomic similarly disappointing compared with Klinghoffer or Nixon 
– there are many that would disagree. But what is beyond doubt is that Adams is 
one of those contemporary voices we all need to hear and keep hearing.

Five key links
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDXXmjR0aCug%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDXXmjR0aCug%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDXXmjR0aCug%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Nixon in China <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DXXmjR0aCug>


Shaker Loops <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B8VwjfCGAqE>

Grand Pianola Music <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ym9Q5vV44Hw>

Harmonielehre <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AUiv0jJl9zU>

Violin Concerto <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tx1ktwTcPz0>
 