
Here's a question. What is complexity in music? Is there any music more 
complex than, say, thesix-part Ricercar 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N2c6AFlb4x4>, with its six independent but 
symbiotically related strata of ever-changing musical information, from Bach's 
Musical Offering? Has anyone in the 20th or 21st century come close to 
demanding as much from his or her listeners and performers than JS Bach did in 
that piece, or any of his innumerable fugues? Or what aboutBeethoven's late 
quartets <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kW8wdpfkpM0>? Aren't they the acme of 
musical complexity, in the sense of a rich stream of musical meanings and 
unpredictabilities, for the players just as much as the audience? Or is the bar 
set still higher by Schoenberg'sFirst Chamber Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GgFTLquN8eI>, that jam-packed single movement 
that compresses pretty well the entire classical and romantic tradition of 
forms, structures and expressivity into 20 minutes? Or what about the 
compressed atonality of Webern'searly works 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yXE8gPrkRkQ>, or the quasi-neural network of 
multiple musical connections of hislater music 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YZq3r0-bLRM>? The impossible canons of Conlon 
Nancarrow <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UPdX85cv_D8>, taking his player 
pianos to other dimensions in the Mexican desert? Or the vertiginous sound and 
fury of the postwar avant-garde composers Ligeti, Stockhausen, Boulez, Xenakis 
… ?

The reason I ask is 69-year-old Coventry-born composer Brian Ferneyhough 
<http://toddtarantino.com/hum/ferneyhough.jpg>. His works, it is often said, 
are thene plus ultra of musical complexity, in the sense of notational 
overload, performing difficulty and even philosophical questioning. He is even, 
supposedly, one of the godfathers of "New Complexity", although he rejects the 
term (just like his fellow so-called complexists, James Dillon and Michael 
Finnissy). Here's a good example of what I'm on about, including, thanks to
flammesombres <http://www.youtube.com/user/flammesombres?feature=CAQQwRs%3D>'s 
YouTube channel, a score of Ferneyhough's piano pieceLemma-Icon-Epigram 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gJwxKxJVps4&feature=related> as well as its 
sounds. (And this is one of Ferneyhough's "simpler" scores, by the way.) The 
comments below include some pretty polarised opinions on this piece, falling 
into a typical new-music polemic, of "It sounds like a monkey throwing itself 
on the keyboard" versus "If you don't get this, you're a philistine". If you're 
new to this music, though, you may need some help in decoding the score. So 
let's have a wee think about how you might approach the very first bar.

Firstly, the pianist has to play a group of 11 hemi-demi-semiquavers in the 
time of seven in the basic tempo of quaver = around 50, followed by a single 
hemi-demi-semiquaver rest and then a semiquaver rest. That volley of notes is 
followed by a group of 11 hemi-demis in the time of eight, enclosing a triplet 
and dotted notes; then comes a group where you need to count 10 hemi-demis in 
your head in the time of eight, but you also have to subdivide them into one 
group of five against four in your new virtual tempo, and then six against 
four, before a final hemi-demi rest in that overall scheme of 10 against eight. 
Got that? And that's just the rhythm. There's then, of course, the small matter 
of the notes you have to play in this rhythm, the dynamics, and the huge 
variety of expressive markings and pedal indications. And that's just to be 
able to get close to playing the first five seconds of this 14-minute piece. It 
is, well, pretty complex!

So what does this kind of notational complexity mean? What does it produce in 
performance, and what does it sound like? Virtually every single bar of 
Ferneyhough's music poses these questions (his mature music, at least – he grew 
up playing in brass bands in the Midlands, but left what he saw as the UK's 
musical provincialism for the more experimental climes of Europe and the US, 
where he now lives and teaches). It's in performance that the open-ended and 
endlessly fascinating answers are disclosed: philosophical solutions that pile 
musical riddle on to musical riddle to push at the existential limits of what a 
musical work might be.

Ferneyhough holds no compositorial guillotine of musical perfection over the 
heads of his performers. Asking any of the musicians who regularly commission 
and play his pieces – theArditti Quartet 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GJVj60z-TVc>, say, or pianist Nicolas Hodges 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0V9ZElkKGak>, or violinist Mieko Kanno, or 
cellist Neil Hyde – to perform them perfectly, according to the precise letter, 
dot, and micro-indication of his scores, is not Ferneyhough's abiding aim. You 
see, the desire to put all that information on the page is really the start of 
a dialogue, with the possibilities of what the performer is going to do with 
the piece and with what the listeners will hear. Even more fundamentally, the 
notation is a sort of scratching at the surface of what the actual musical work 
of Lemma-Icon-Epigram might be.

The point is, if Ferneyhough wanted his scores (and check out the orchestral 
works, such asLa Terre Est un Homme <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qxbpF_aW4vU>
 orTransit <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1mRJipHsiHE> if you really want your 
head to spin) to be a sort of straitjacket for the performer, to determine 
precisely what they should be doing at every micro-second of the piece, he 
would have become an electronic or electro-acoustic composer. In that case, a 
single recording could and would represent the definitive realisation of each 
of his pieces. In fact, as hundreds of composers have discovered in the past, 
the more information you give for your performers to interpret, the more 
open-ended rather than fixed the work becomes, as every expressive mark becomes 
something that's played and interpreted differently by each different performer.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fxy8Ozl2AF7o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fxy8Ozl2AF7o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fxy8Ozl2AF7o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading this on mobile? Click here to listen 
<http://www.youtube.com/embed/xy8Ozl2AF7o>

Ferneyhough has said 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Brian-Ferneyhough-Collected-Writings-Contemporary/dp/3718655772/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1347262469&sr=8-1>
 as much himself in the trademark poetical convolutions of his prose. "What can 
a specific notation, under favourable conditions, hope to achieve? Perhaps 
simply this: a dialogue with the composition of which it is a token such that 
realm of non-equivalence separating the two (where, perhaps, the 'work' might 
be said to be ultimately located?) be sounded out, articulating the inchoate, 
outlining the way from the conceptual to the experiential and back." I like 
that, because what Ferneyhough's really saying is that the "work" is not to be 
found only on the printed page (his "non-equivalence" phrase), but somewhere 
between and beyond the sum of the score's indications and the sum of all of the 
possible performances that may result from it – as well as being a record of 
Ferneyhough's own gigantically complex compositional processes.

OK – now bear with this, because these general points will give you a 
framework at least to begin to understand the rest of Ferneyhough's music, and 
have something to say about the whole culture of classical music, too. What 
happens, then, when you hear a piece of Ferneyhough's, in the process of 
communication from performer to audience? While it's true to say that 
Ferneyhough does not expect perfection on the part of his performers, he does 
expect them to try to get there, and part of the thrill of what you hear in any 
performance of Ferneyhough's music is an experiential extreme of the world's 
most virtuosic musicians pushing themselves to the boundaries of what they can 
do – and sometimes beyond. (At least one of Ferneyhough's pieces,Time and 
Motion Study II <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xy8Ozl2AF7o> for solo cello and 
electronics, makes expressive play with that idea, virtually strapping the 
cellist into a sort of musical electric chair in which one of the strictures 
that binds the musician to the attempt to realise the work is the labyrinthine 
density of the notation, sometimes written on five staves instead of the single 
stave that a cellist usually needs.) There is no chance – not even if you're 
Pierre Boulez or Oliver Knussen – of notating down what you hear when you hear 
a Ferneyhough piece. And similarly, there's no chance that the mind-bending 
rhythmic density of that first bar of Lemma-Icon-Epigram is heard as it is 
written. Here's what I mean: the effect of that first bar, without the score, 
is of a coruscating burst of piano sound that propels the start of the musical 
labyrinth of the piece; it isn't of 10 hemi-demis in the time of eight, or 
whatever else the score says. So what's the point of all that "complexity"?

If you talk to the players who most often play Ferneyhough, they all say that 
his notation has to be the way it is to achieve the results he wants in 
performance, even if there's a vanishingly tiny possibility of all that 
information being communicated to the listener. What we're getting as listeners 
is a trace of the score the performer is playing from, which is in turn only a 
trace of the musical work that Ferneyhough has imagined. And yet, because of 
the ferocity of concentration on the part of the musician, and because of the 
range and imagination of what you hear, what you actually get when you hear a 
performance of his music is something definitive, direct and undeniable – a 
sheer thrill of musical extremity.

If you heard the BBC Symphony Orchestra's revelatory performance <> of La 
Terre Est un Homme <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qxbpF_aW4vU> last February 
at the Barbican in London, you can't have escaped the elemental power of this 
music, one of the most significant achievements in late 20th-century orchestral 
writing, yet hardly known until that concert. (And it must be issued on CD 
soon, if there's a record company reading this!)

All of that is a sort of gigantic upbeat to your own exploration of 
Ferneyhough's music. Get stuck into his works for solo instruments or chamber 
ensemble. There's also an unclassifiable music-theatre piece on Walter Benjamin 
calledShadowtime <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0tDheuaUz78>; there are those 
gigantically ambitious orchestral pieces, including the most recent,
Plötzlichkeit <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JGUvn_OkSfw>; and there are some 
brilliant large ensemble pieces that grab you by the scruff of the neck and 
don't let go. Try theCarceri d'Invenzione pieces 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wCaOfEax8MM>, or one of my favourites, Terrain 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ChUcGzjlnjY>, a kind of uber-violin concerto. 
Oh, and Ferneyhough has also written one of the most important canons ofstring 
quartets in the entire literature <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=775kiGAh5Yg>, 
six of them so far.

One last thing: just what is it that Ferneyhough's music has to tell us about 
the entire literature of western classical music? Well: that it's all 
essentially unknowable – it is as difficult to answer the question of what 
Beethoven's Fifth Symphony really is as what Lemma-Icon-Epigram might be, if 
you think about it for a second – and essentially experiential, revealed in all 
of its elusive but definitive power through the evanescent illumination of 
performance. In that fundamental sense, Ferneyhough's music is no more and no 
less complex than any other classical music. Got there. I've only scratched the 
surface of Ferneyhough's work here, of course: the rest is up to you!

Five key links

Terrain <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ChUcGzjlnjY>

String Quartet No 5 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GG4g2BTB8Nk>

Carceri d'Invenzione III <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wCaOfEax8MM>

Lemma-Icon-Epigram <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gJwxKxJVps4&feature=related>

Bone Alphabet – in performance <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BF44UdjH-ys> and
Ferneyhough teaching the piece <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wTvzfP23zwk>

Next week: Jonathan Harvey
 