
You're writing an opera on Oscar Wilde's The Importance of Being Earnest. Or 
maybe you're not right at this minute, but bear with me: now, aside from what 
you do with the words, and how you make Wilde's crystalline, lethally precise 
words into music, you've got to decide how to cast the roles of the opera. The 
young lovers might take care of themselves in an assortment of tenors and 
sopranos, and you'd almost certainly cast the redoubtable Lady Bracknell as a 
throaty, booming alto of the old school. Well I would, at least. But Irish 
composerGerald Barry turns Lady Bracknell 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/apr/29/importance-earnest-concertgebouw-nancarrow-soldier>
 into the lowest of bassi profundi – to surreal, hilarious, and brilliantly 
insightful effect.

That's just one wee example of how Barry's  
<http://www.cmc.ie/composers/composer.cfm?composerID=4>compositional thinking 
displaces the familiar to find something unexpected – yet something that is 
unexpectedly, searingly right when you hear it. Barry's music for abassy Lady 
Bracknell <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gINiIybn6SM> enhances the cruelty and 
ludicrousness of her part, but it also makes her words deadly serious at the 
same time, from her advice on smoking to her rampant Germanophilia and her 
"handbag". The whole opera is poised between the same poles of the ridiculous 
and the uncompromisingly serious: the piece starts with an atonal pianistic 
mash-up of Auld Lang Syne, the music the characters hear right at the start, 
the score goes on to pulverise the rhythmic scheme of the finale of Beethoven's 
Ninth Symphony, and the whole piece has an energy that careers wildly and 
breathlessly from the first bar to the last, amplifying the lacerating comedy 
of Wilde's words. That's most obvious in the scene between Gwendolen and 
Cecily, in which the percussionists smash, in perfectly sychronised time, 
dozens of china plates: these are the absurdist sounds of the skull beneath the 
skin of enforced Victorian etiquette that the two sopranos are playing.

But this isn't absurdism for the sake of wacky effect but part of Barry's 
search for a coruscating directness of musical expression. In the 70s, Barry 
was a pupil of Stockhausen and Kagel; he returned to Ireland, where he now 
lives between Dublin and a cottage perched on the brutally beautiful Atlantic 
coast of Galway opposite the Aran islands – a place where he sang me his 
version of Lady Bracknell to my open-jawed astonishment.

That's a common feeling when you're listening to Barry's music, whether his 
Handel-inspired opera The Triumph of Beauty and Deceit, his brilliant operatic 
realisation of Fassbinder's filmThe Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant 
<http://www.cmc.ie/shop/cd_detail.cfm?itemID=1836>, or any of his orchestral 
and chamber pieces, from the delirious scales of_______ 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Gerald-Barry-Chamber-Nua-Nos/dp/B0000260DV/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1357547416&sr=1-1>
 (yes, that really is a title), to the outright hysteria ofBob 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Gerald-Barry-Chamber-Nua-Nos/dp/B0000260DV/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1357547416&sr=1-1>
, or the full-on orchestral onslaught ofChevaux-de-frise 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Barry-Orchestral-Works-Gerald/dp/B0000069K5/ref=sr_1_4?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1357547416&sr=1-4>
. Unlike so many other contemporary composers whose music is concerned with 
creating an artful craft of transition, a sound world of diaphanous meltings 
and meldings from one idea to another, Barry's is a world of sharp edges, of 
precisely defined yet utterly unpredictable musical objects. His music sounds 
like no one else's in its diamond-like hardness, its humour, and sometimes, its 
violence.

Let's take a case in point, his orchestral masterpiece Chevaux-de-frise. The 
title comes from (you mean you didn't know?) wooden spikes that were used to 
impale the onrushing horses of opposing armies, and it also connotes thornily 
difficult passages in literature. That suggests something of the ferocity of 
the music, but it can't fully prepare you for the 17 minutes of nearly 
continuous orchestral wall-of-sound that you'll experience. But the surface of 
the music conceals the precision and severe, calculated construction of Barry's 
composition. The opening of Chevaux-de-frise is made up of closely packed 
canons, self-similar repetitions of musical material that are worked out with 
systematic orderliness, but which you only hear as a chaotically gigantic slab 
of orchestral sound. Barry generates his material from weird and wonderful 
pre-existing sources – Handel arias, scale passages in Tchaikovsky's 
symphonies, folk melodies – but what he does to these bits of pre-existing 
musical material unmoors them utterly from their original context. There's a 
kind of willfully cubist violence in that kind of transformation, and it's a 
process that means that Barry's music burns with a unique combination of manic 
objectivity and incandescent individualism: listen to this excerpt from The 
Intelligence Park to hear what I mean.

But that doesn't prepare you for the expressive intensity of Barry's music 
<http://www.schott-music.com/shop/persons/featured/gerald-barry/>. His approach 
goes much further than even Stravinsky's did in what he does to his source 
material, but the poetic effect is similar. All that that radical distancing 
has real emotional power. The Importance of Being Earnest is that rarest of 
things in contemporary music, a genuinely comic opera; The Bitter Tears of 
Petra von Kant, as well as being one of the most frenziedly intense of recent 
operas, was also one of the most affecting, as the heightened drama of Barry's 
music revealed the essential isolation and loneliness of the characters. The 
power of Barry's pieceBeethoven 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Barry-Orchestral-Works-Gerald/dp/B0000069K5/ref=sr_1_4?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1357547416&sr=1-4>
 is similar: a desperate, frenetic setting of Ludwig van's letter to his 
"immortal beloved" for bass soloist and orchestra that sounds nothing at all 
like Beethoven but that realises the workings of the Beethovenian brain more 
powerfully than any biography. It's the same in Barry's instrumental music. The 
strange repetitions and explosions of a piece like Lisbon for piano and chamber 
ensemble are on one hand quirkily funny, but Barry is really asking existential 
questions about how music works, about how we experience a piece of music in 
time, and he's asking them in a way that no other composer is doing today.

One final example of Barry's irreverent revelation 
<http://ukcatalogue.oup.com/category/music/composers/barry.do>: his setting of 
God Save the Queen <http://www.cmc.ie/composers/digi_works.cfm?composerID=4>, 
composed for the Royal Festival Hall's 50th birthday in 2001: writing for 
orchestra and choir of adults and children, Barry set the words of the verses 
of the poem that we never get to hear, the ones that talk about "scattering her 
enemies" and "confounding their politics". His music was both a cubist 
deconstruction of the tune we all know and love/hate, but it was also showed 
the blood, gore, and rapacious violence that lies behind the power and the 
glory of Empire. It was just another irresistibly surreal inspiration from this 
composer. We all need some Gerald Barry in our lives: if you haven't got any 
yet, you must do soon.

Five key links

Piano Quartet No 1 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0eUBCBjunrc>

Chevaux-de-frise 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Barry-Orchestral-Works-Gerald/dp/B0000069K5/ref=sr_1_4?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1357547003&sr=1-4>

The Triumph of Beauty and Deceit 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Triumph-Beauty-Deceit-IMPORT-Barry/dp/B00000JIQC/ref=tag_dpp_lp_edpp_ttl_in>

Gerald Barry's music on NMC <http://www.nmcrec.co.uk/recording/gerald-barry>

The Importance of Being Earnest: Gerald Barry, Thomas Adès, Stephen Fry, and 
Fiona Shaw in discussion <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gINiIybn6SM>
 