
A conundrum for every conscientious 20th- and 21st-century composer has been 
how music relates to politics: what's the possible relationship between the 
music you write and what you think about the world? How does one connect with, 
and even change, the other? And if you're a composer who's dissatisfied with 
the way the world works – or even the way the musical world works – what can 
your music do to comment on it, criticise it, protest against it and possibly 
transform it?

One answer can be found by listening to this, an excerpt from 73-year-old 
Dutch composer Louis Andriessen'sDe Staat 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OLcHpLH_TJU>. (For the whole piece, you'll need 
Spotify, and De Staat is a better reason than most to sign up for it if you 
haven't already!) The title means The Republic, and this 1976 piece is an 
imagination of whatPlato's Republic <http://www.philosophypages.com/hy/2g.htm> 
means and meant for music; a musical discourse on how his ideas about music 
might relate to contemporary society. Or don't.In Andriessen's own words: 
<http://www.boosey.com/pages/cr/catalogue/cat_detail.asp?musicid=1425> 

"Many composers view the act of composing as, somehow, above social 
conditioning. I contest that. How you arrange your musical material, the 
techniques you use and the instruments you score for, are largely determined by 
your own social circumstances and listening experience, and the availability of 
financial support. I do agree, though, that abstract musical material – pitch, 
duration and rhythm – are beyond social conditioning: it is found in nature. 
However, the moment the musical material is ordered it becomes culture and 
hence a social entity."

Andriessen's piece includes settings – "declaimings" would really be a better 
word – for four female voices, which illustrate these ideas. "Everyone can see 
the absurdity of Plato's statement that the mixolydian mode should be banned as 
it would have a damaging influence on the development of character," Andriessen 
says. But he goes on: "My second reason for writing De Staat is a direct 
contradiction of the first: I deplore the fact thatPlato 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/plato> was wrong. If only it were true that 
musical innovation could change the laws of the state!" Aye, there's the rub. 
The thing is, Andriessen's music really has changed themusic of a state – no 
Dutch composer has been as influential on musical culture, especially in his 
home country, as Andriessen, and his importance internationally has only 
expanded as his career has gone on. In an inevitably reductive nutshell, 
Andriessen's music is the sound of the most fruitful of collisions between 
political radicalism, minimalist pulsation and European modernism; at its most 
profound, it's much more than that.

For me, De Staat is the solar plexus – or at least one of the solar plexi 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9qJtKiZLUhE> – of Andriessen's output because 
it brings together the spectrum of his musical and political thinking, but also 
because of the sounds that it makes. How can you resist the aggressive lyricism 
of this music, its moments of gigantic tension and explosive release – such as, 
for example, the moment when that austere energy created by the four oboes and 
then the four trombones you hear at the start is suddenly but inevitably 
shattered by the thrilling wall of sound of the full ensemble? Ditto the fiery
moto perpetuo <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perpetuum_mobile> the whole 
ensemble creates in unison in the middle of the piece, or the waves of strange 
repeated chords that pass through the music near the end – a weirdly disturbing 
noise that's both static yet full of energy?

The elements of De Staat's ensemble demonstrate what Andriessen is on about 
when he says that even the lineup you choose as a composer reflects a complex 
cultural politics. Although it was written for a pre-existing group,the 
Netherlands Wind Ensemble 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nederlands_Blazers_Ensemble>, De Staat's 
instrumentation (which includes harps, pianos, three electric guitars and just 
four string-instruments – a group of violas) reflects Andriessen's years 
working with his own band,De Volharding  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2g2_60jMHY>(Perseverance, named after another 
Andriessen piece). That group was founded as a reproach to the existing 
behemoths of Dutch classical musical life, which Andriessen and his friends and 
fellow provocateurs, including conductorReinbert de Leeuw 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7KXaylNMJMs> and pianist Misha Mengelberg 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vxHNItG_Ico>, fought against in the 1960s and 
70s. They disrupted concerts given by and at the Concertgebouw, demanding 
greater representation of new music on Concertgebouw programmes and saying that 
the orchestra had a duty to represent the whole of Dutch society and not just a 
small social fraction of it. They were scarcely listened to, so set up their 
own groups that would be more flexible and radical and genuinely reflect new 
musical thinking. For Andriessen, that meant what amounted to a decades-long 
aversion to the sustaining line of string instruments, and an almost genetic 
attraction to the rhythmic power and potential of brass, winds, percussion and 
electric instruments – a sort of souped-up version of the kind of ensemble
Stravinsky <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/igor-stravinsky> loved the best. 
(Andriessen's profound affinity with Stravinsky has produced, as well as 
refractions of Igor's techniques in his own idiom, one of the best books ever 
written about the Russian composer,The Apollonian Clockwork 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/music/9789053568569/the-apollonian-clockwork-on-stravinsky>
). It's worth saying, however, that – at least until the cuts that are now 
blighting Dutch musical culture – Andriessen, De Leeuw and the others have now 
become the de facto music establishment in Holland, thanks to the success of 
the institutions they set up and the miraculous energy and diversity of the new 
scene they created with their radical ripostes to the system decades ago.

De Staat's politics and unnerving power is only one side of Andriessen's 
output. His music is not always concerned with those fissile social questions, 
and many of his pieces explore the fundamentals of a listening experience, 
getting to grips with the raw materials of music. Try his De Tijd (Time),De 
Snelheid <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68GxdpbSUJA> (Speed) or Zilver 
(Silver) to see what I mean. And having inspired a generation of Dutch 
composers with the violence, anger and sheer energy of pieces such asDe 
Volharding <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2g2_60jMHY> and Workers Union 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jrQkIxccJnE>, Andriessen's music has seemed to 
take a surprising turn towards a more conventional expression and lyricism. 
That includes string instruments: work such as the song cycleLa Passione 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=24jvqp1K8NY>, written for solo soprano and solo 
violin, or the gentler meditation of his opera with Peter Greenaway,Writing to 
Vermeer <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7vufklWk2r0>.

But if there's one piece of Andriessen's I want the world to hear, it's his 
epic four-part cycleDe Materie 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Andriessen-Materie-Louis/dp/B000005J3J/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1350278660&sr=1-1>
 (Material) – again, you'll need Spotify to hear the whole thing. The first, 
inspired in part by shipbuilding in Holland, is a piece that transmutes its 
base elements of rhythm and percussion just as the base materials of wood, 
fabric and metal were crafted into the carriers of Dutch colonial power, and 
starts with a hammered-out sequence of the same chord, repeated 144 times. The 
second, a nun's vision of her union with Jesus, is a magnificently sensual 
scena for solo female singer and ensemble calledHadewijch 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_IZfCpSV1-Y>. The third, De Stijl 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9qJtKiZLUhE> (Style), is a boogie-woogie 
tone-poem inspired by Piet Mondrian's work, and the final panel is a 
mesmerising meditation on death, relating musically to a work by Andriessen's 
father, the composer Henrik. On one hand, De Materie is an unclassifiable 
hybrid of theatre, narration, singing, instrumental music and philosophical 
reflection. But it's also quintessentially itself, and quintessential 
Andriessen, because every bar of it has an absolutely compelling materiality 
(see what I've done there), both on the level of the four parts and the cycle 
as a whole. It's best heard together, but Andriessen – and I! – allow you to 
hear each section separately. You'll be as blown away by the energy ofDe Stijl 
<http:> as I was if you haven't heard it before. Music to change the world? 
Don't bet against it, Louis; maybe Plato was right after all …

Five key links

De Stijl <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9qJtKiZLUhE>
Hadewijch <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_IZfCpSV1-Y>
Workers Union <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jrQkIxccJnE>
De Snelheid <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=68GxdpbSUJA>
De Volharding <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I2g2_60jMHY>
 