
Watch this <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g319gW5_O0o>. A couple in their 
mid-80s, married for 65 years, play the piano. Their hands – the skin of which 
is smooth, shiny and unwrinkled, as if washed clean rather than marked by the 
decades – don't so much play the keyboard as conjure sounds from it. Their 
playing dissolves the difference between them and the instrument, and between 
each other. Their arms criss-cross, as if their four hands make a single 
composite player; their gestures, their open-mouthed wonder at and commitment 
to the music (a sequence of pieces by the husband, and transcriptions of Bach), 
and their smiles to each other, are touchingly similar. They even look alike, 
with their glasses and short grey hair, their posture at the piano. What you're 
seeing is private, intimate music-making raised to the level of a joyous 
miracle. It's one of the treasures of 20th- and 21st-century music.

Hungarian composer, pianist, and teacher György Kurtág and his wife Marta have 
been playing Kurtág'sJatekok 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Kurt%C3%A1g-J%C3%A1t%C3%A9kok-Bach-Transcriptions-Gy%C3%B6rgy/dp/B0000266O8/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1362996354&sr=1-1>
 (Games) for the past 40 years, and that ever-expanding set of pieces is just 
one of the laboratories in which Kurtág has conducted his experiments in the 
search for musical truth. It's a compositional journey that has often involved 
reducing music to the level of the fragment, the moment, with individual pieces 
or movements lasting mere seconds, or a minute, perhaps two. In fact, Kurtág 
builds whole cycles of pieces from these small shards, like his blistering
Kafka-Fragments 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Gyorgy-Gy%C3%83%C2%B6rgy-Kurt%C3%83%C2%A1g-Juliane-Andr%C3%83%C2%A1s/dp/B000E0W3FG>
 for violin and soprano, a 40-movement song-cycle of unflinching emotional and 
existential rawness, or the12 Microludes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ekTnQdFnXeo> for String Quartet, each a shred 
of pure musical extremity: violence or stasis, complexity or simplicity. 
Kurtág's apparent obsession with this smallness of time-scale isn't some kind 
of post-Webernian quest to split the musical atom or to find the structural 
essence of music. Far from a "reduction", Kurtág's fragments are about musical 
and, above all, expressive intensification: maximising the effect and impact of 
every note, every gesture. Listen to any of the Kafka-Fragments to hear what I 
mean.

Despite their brevity, these tiny pieces are not incomplete as experiences. 
Take, for example, the seven notes of Flowers We Are, Mere Flowers … ( … 
embracing sounds) – whose title takes almost as long to read as the piece does 
to hear – part of the 8th book of Jatekok. (You hear it from 4'10'' into the 
Kurtágs' performance.) Kurtág precedes the piece with a prelude of nine tolling 
B flats; the seven notes of Flowers We Are … follow. What you hear are the 
notes of the C major scale turned into a meditation for four hands. There is 
nothing more familiar than these elements, but nothing stranger than what 
happens to them throughout this performance. Paradoxically, precisely because 
of its conciseness, the piece becomes static and timeless; and those notes, far 
from meaning anything like "C major" or "tonality" are unmoored from 
conventional function and allowed to resound and shimmer in a much larger 
musical space. Hearing Flowers We Are … is like opening a trapdoor in your 
floor and dropping for a moment into the infinity of the cosmos.

That kind of intensity is something that Kurtág is always looking to create. 
Often, that's about an expressive or expressionistic violence (hear The Saying 
of Peter Bornemisza for soprano and piano, or theMessages of the Late Miss RV 
Troussova 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wUfeJes8uP4&playnext=1&list=PLBE844C02532B387B&feature=results_video>
 for soprano and ensemble to experience some of Kurtág's most emotionally 
shattering music), but it's just as often about wresting images of beauty and 
solace from a world of darkness. Some of Kurtág's most beautiful pieces are the 
ones he has composed as memorials for friends or musicians. They are often 
pieces that use that paradoxical power of the fragment to suggest a 
timelessness or spaciousness, for example In Memoriam Andras Mihaly, another of 
the Jatekok.

The detail of Kurtág's compositional imagination is matched by the 
inspirational and sometimes forbidding fastidiousness of his teaching of the 
whole repertoire of classical chamber music and his coaching of his own music. 
His near-perennial state of dissatisfaction with performers is the stuff of 
legend among musicians, but so too is the brilliance of his insight and wisdom. 
And any frustration with his interpreters is matched by a much deeper and more 
lacerating strain of self-criticism: "I never hear my ideas properly ... No one 
can hear it … There's nothing to be done … I felt I couldn't go on, I mustn't 
go on …" – just some of the Beckettian aphorisms that stud hisinterviews with 
Balint Andras Varga 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Gy%C3%B6rgy-Kurt%C3%A1g-Interviews-Homages-Eastman/dp/1580463282/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1362996314&sr=1-1>
. (A mirror image can be found in his unconditional admiration for the music of 
his friend György Ligeti, whom he first met in 1945: "I … love this music from 
the bottom of my heart, which resounds in Atmosphères as if it welled up inside 
me, which shakes me so in the Dies Irae [of Ligeti's Requiem], which lifts me 
on high in the violin concerto.")

Kurtág's music for orchestra has embraced a larger scale in pieces such as 
Stele 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GXDyfW-l0Go&playnext=1&list=PLB992A28D44E9D800&feature=results_video>
, composed for the Berlin Philharmonic and Claudio Abbado, and… concertante … 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Tksayf09-c> for violin, viola, and orchestra. 
The three-movement Stele is memorial music that is nonetheless filled with a 
strange luminescence: the reverberating chordal repetitions in the final 
movement sound like the tolling of funeral bells (or perhaps the breathing of 
alien life forms). The first movement is an adagio, an implacable lament that 
ends with a homage to Bruckner in a passage for four Wagner tubas. But the 
second movement has the most scintillating moment of all. In the middle of the 
music's desperate violence, there is a sudden image of strange stillness, a 
sound made by six flutes, a tuba, and a piano. Kurtág said he wanted the effect 
to be like "the scene in Tolstoy's War and Peace where Prince Andrei is wounded 
at Austerlitz for the first time: all of a sudden, he no longer hears the 
battle but discovers the blue sky above him. That is what the music conjures 
up." He continues, lamenting that, "I keep telling this story and no one 
responds." But they do, György! If you are open to it, the devastating poetry 
of Stele can sear itself on your soul.

This can only give you a small slice of Kurtág's world. Ever since the piece 
he thinks of as his opus 1, a string quartet written in 1959 after a year of 
psychoanalytic soul-searching in Paris, Kurtág has composed a huge catalogue 
that resonates with the music of the past he loves most – Bach, Schubert, 
Schumann, Beethoven, Bartók, Webern. It also speaks with a fearless directness 
that bypasses musical tradition and becomes its own idiom. When you hear it in 
a performance such as the Kurtágs' own, his work creates a world of apparently 
unmediated feeling. It is full of the joys and despairs of life, which you can 
see, etched in the faces ofGyörgy and Marta 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g319gW5_O0o> as they play. 

Five key links

Jatekok in performance by the Kurtágs 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g319gW5_O0o>

Stele 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GXDyfW-l0Go&playnext=1&list=PLB992A28D44E9D800&feature=results_video>

12 Microludes
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ekTnQdFnXeo>

Messages of the Late Miss RV Troussova
 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wUfeJes8uP4&playnext=1&list=PLBE844C02532B387B&feature=results_video>

… concertante …
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4Tksayf09-c>
 