
Newspapers employ several devices to persuade you to read a story, headlines 
and photographs being the most obvious. In recent years, an increasing number 
of boxes have appeared within stories, attracting your attention by presenting 
the main points of an article or offering fresh themes on the same subject. 
They require tight editing to get their points across, and therein can lie the 
quicksands of error and misunderstanding.

One appeared in our news pages last month. A detailed piece on a drug 
rehabilitation programme run by the controversial Church of Scientology was 
accompanied by a panel headed 'Other Ways to Beat Addiction', which devoted 
single paragraphs to describing four schemes. One, on acupuncture, was the 
subject of a correction in For the Record two weeks ago, but it was the summing 
up of the 12 Steps programme devised by Alcoholics Anonymous that drew the 
strongest criticism.

Here's the offending paragraph: 'Chiefly used by recovering alcoholics, 12 
Steps encourages addicts to admit they are powerless without alcohol and that 
their lives have become unmanageable. Through a mixture of prayer and 
meditation, addicts improve their contact with God to gain the strength to 
break free of their addiction.'

A reader who had passed successfully through 12 Steps wrote to take issue with 
us. 'I was perturbed that this incorrect summary of the programme made such 
heavy play on God that it could discourage some practising alcoholics who may 
have a well-grounded aversion to God. Also, AA is open to all, not just 
believers. AA is a spiritual programme based on the values of love, tolerance 
and fellowship. It is not a religious organisation, nor is it a cult. The steps 
themselves could be summarised as "Get honest. Trust God [or a higher power]. 
Clean house. Help others".'

That 'higher power' can be whatever the alcoholic chooses. What matters is 
that it is a power outside the individual alcoholic, because addiction is a 
disease of the self, and the ego must be deflated.

The second error was a more subtle one. Alcoholics do not improve their 
contact with a higher power 'to gain the strength to break free of their 
addiction'.

'This is a gross misreading and betrays a reprehensible lack of knowledge 
about the subject of alcoholism,' wrote the reader. 'This seems to imply that 
our addiction is a weakness of will. Addiction is a disease and is accepted as 
such by the medical fraternity. We are not addicts because of our fecklessness, 
nor is it because we have not taken a grip of ourselves. If strength of will 
could have conquered my addiction, I would have been clean and sober a long 
time ago. What we have to do, paradoxically, is "surrender to win". We admit 
and accept our alcoholism and become willing to practise the steps.'

Far from being 'powerless without alcohol', alcoholics are 'powerless over 
alcohol', and Step 1 requires them to admit their powerlessness.

When practising the programme, alcoholics have to be honest, open-minded and 
willing. The other steps involve taking a 'fearless, searching moral inventory' 
of themselves - their resentments, fears and conduct towards others. Then they 
must draw up a list of people they have hurt and make amends and, finally, pass 
on what they have learnt to other alcoholics.

'The change that is wrought by attending AA meetings and practising the steps 
is an internal change, an inside job,' wrote our reader. 'It is not a question 
of merely putting down the bottle. The alcohol is in the bottle; the alcoholism 
is inside me.'

Â· Write to Stephen Pritchard, Readers' Editor, The Observer, 3-7 Herbal Hill, 
London EC1R 3EJ, tel 020 7713 4656 or emailreader@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:reader@observer.co.uk>
 