
Prague is heaven for the classical music lover. This great musical city has a 
fine array of concert halls, many churches that stage concerts (though beware 
the expensive and mediocre offerings put on for the benefit of gullible 
tourists) and numerous festivals. Music-making has always been as natural as 
breathing for the Czechs.

Of course, we have to start with Mozart, who was venerated by the musical 
public in Prague. In 1787, he made two month-long visits to the city, enjoyed a 
number of other shorter stays and warmed to the adoration he received. His 
first visit, in January of that year, saw the premiere of the “Prague” symphony 
– Symphony No 38 in D major, to give it its proper title – a glorious work 
occasionally overlooked because of the focus on Mozart’s final three symphonies.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkBr6xPXotRs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkBr6xPXotRs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkBr6xPXotRs&media=>
That first triumphant visit produced a commission for an opera, and what an 
opera it turned out to be –Don Giovanni 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gp11bweiOA8> premiered on 29 October 1787 at 
the Teatro di Praga (now called theEstates theatre 
<http://www.estatestheatre.cz/>). The ink was barely dry on the score: Mozart 
completed it the day before the first performance. Despite the chaos of the 
preparation, which necessitated a two-week postponement,the production was a 
great success <http://www.opera.co.uk/view-review.php?reviewID=46>. 
“Connoisseurs and musicians alike agree that Prague has never heard anything to 
equal it,” reported Prague’s Die Oberpostamtzeitung. “Herr Mozart conducted in 
person. When he entered the orchestra pit he was greeted with a triple ovation 
and this was repeated when he left.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM2z2V_oJgdU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM2z2V_oJgdU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM2z2V_oJgdU&media=>
Mozart’s final visit to the city was in September 1791, just months before his 
death. He had come to conduct the premiere of La Clemenza di Tito, commissioned 
to mark the accession of Leopold II, the Holy Roman emperor, as King of 
Bohemia. The Estates theatre was again the venue. Mozart is reckoned to have 
bashed the opera out in 18 days, possibly with help from Franz Xaver Süssmayr 
(remembered today, above all, for his skilful completion of Mozart’s Requiem). 
The haste contributed to a general disregard for the work, but it has been 
reclaimed in the last 30 years, and is now firmly part of the repertoire.


After Mozart, everything else can seem like an anticlimax, but perhaps Jan 
Dismas Zelenka 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2013/07/why-has-nobody-heard-of-the-miraculous-czech-composer-zelenka/>
– championed by heroic commenters @thesecretorganist 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15303784> and @abkquan 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567>, among others – will save 
us. Zelenka was born in Bohemia in 1679, studied in Prague and wrote his early 
works there, and in 1710 joined the court orchestra in Dresden.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7OFZ2y4cEHk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7OFZ2y4cEHk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7OFZ2y4cEHk&media=>
Zelenka, who has a small but loyal following, is unquestionably one of the 
giants of the baroque – his aficionados see him as a Catholic Bach. A good 
entry point to his substantial oeuvre is theTrio Sonata No 6 in C minor 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F_X_KuHWAiM>, though the other sonatas are 
well worth taking in, too. HisRequiem in C minor 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7OFZ2y4cEHk> is a work of astounding beauty, 
and his dramaticMissa Votiva <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RCL2CWQaH4A> 
demonstrates the scale of his achievement. Zelenka is one of the greats; we 
just haven’t acknowledged it yet. Give it a few more centuries.

An early advocate of Zelenka, instrumental in putting him back on the musical 
map, was the 19th-century composer Bedřich Smetana, who lived and studied in 
Prague and came to personify Czech nationalism in an age in which the old 
empires were creaking and their ethnic populations starting to seek independent 
statehood.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsn2tlfH5hqU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsn2tlfH5hqU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dsn2tlfH5hqU&media=>
 Smetana: Má Vlast 
Smetana’s comic opera The Bartered Bride 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nv1uDEg92-4> was premiered in Prague in 1866, 
but of course the work we must have is Má Vlast (My Homeland), a suite of six 
symphonic poems written in the 1870s. The first depicts thecastle of Vyšehrad 
<http://www.prague-guide.co.uk/vysehrad/> in Prague; Vltava, the second and 
most famous, follows the course of theriver Vltava 
<http://storage.1pragueguide.com/contentcontext/Vltava-River-130.jpg> from its 
source to Prague and beyond. Few cities have been celebrated so lovingly.

Antonín Dvořák, who was born in a village on the banks of the Vltava close to 
Prague and took up the baton from Smetana as the exemplar of Czech music, also 
studied in Prague and played in a theatre orchestra in the city. There are any 
number of masterpieces by him one could include, but theSlavonic Dances 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fN4z8HjSCI8> are apposite – they are glorious 
miniatures and were crucial in giving the Prague-based composer, who was 
already in his late 30s, international status.

Now I must defer to the faithful @abkquan 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567>, who offers “Mozart’s and 
Beethoven’s contemporaries Myslivecik, Stamitz [Johann or Carl?], Vanhal, 
Wranitzky, Reicha, Tomasek, Vorisek etc”. He declares a particular fondness for
Pascha’s Christmas Mass <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0INwh1cE0S4> and 
Voříšek’s Symphony in D major <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dg4kGTiDoC4>, a 
pioneering work that paved the way for the flowering of Czech music in the 
second half of the 19th century.

For good measure, @abkquan <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567> 
addsJosef Suk’s Symphonic Poem “Prague” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BZCemq0ZDb8>, the Hungarian György Kurtág’s 
Kafka Fragments <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LIDNEzl6iKA> (on the grounds 
that “Prague and Kafka are inseparable”), and the symphonies of Bohuslav 
Martinů, who studied at the Prague conservatory and was a violinist in the 
Czech Philharmonic before moving to Paris in the 1920s and the US in 1941 in 
flight from the Nazis. The symphonies belong to his American period, but are a 
good introduction to Martinů’s work, with No 6 a suitably coruscating starting 
point.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZQXqpkCDIBI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZQXqpkCDIBI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZQXqpkCDIBI&media=>
 Martinů: Symphony No 6 
@abkquan <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567> is ambivalent 
about whether to include Leoš Janáček, whose musical world, as he puts it, “was 
centred in Brno rather than Prague”, but @PositivistDinosaur 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4376557> has a neat solution, pointing 
out that Janáček’s operaThe Excursions of Mr Brouček  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fx2XWE7wNqM>was premiered in Prague in 1920 
and thatThe Makropulos Affair <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tEVrBm3FP0A> is 
set in the city.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtEVrBm3FP0A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtEVrBm3FP0A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtEVrBm3FP0A&media=>
 Janáček: The Makropulos Affair 
Next week, the north German city of Hamburg will be our focus – and yes, we 
will try to make room for the Beatles.


 * Previous cities in this series: London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/01/musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-london-stephen-moss>
 |Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/14/musical-tour-europe-great-cities-paris>
 |Venice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/29/a-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-venice>
 |Helsinki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/24/a-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-helsinki>
 