
The tragic decision for the UK to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> has prompted us to 
undertake, with your help, a new series in which we celebrate the great cities 
of Europe through the music they have inspired.

We are looking for pieces that capture the essence of cities such as Vienna, 
Paris, Rome and Leipzig, pieces that were written by people who had the spirit 
of those places in their soul. Or perhaps their connections are more literal – 
the works were commissioned for, or premiered in, that city, or perhaps their 
composer found love, or sanctuary, or inspiration within its confines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fmusical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-london-stephen-moss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c241361fd3bf8e47910e3b02d6a8f7ab0a676b8%2F0_280_2050_2561%2F2050.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20musical%20tour%20of%20Europe's%20great%20cities%3A%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fmusical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-london-stephen-moss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20musical%20tour%20of%20Europe%27s%20great%20cities%3A%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fmusical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-london-stephen-moss%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c241361fd3bf8e47910e3b02d6a8f7ab0a676b8%2F0_280_2050_2561%2F2050.jpg>
 The Proms, at the Royal Albert Hall, one of London - and Europe’s - greatest 
music festivals. Photograph: Chris Christodoulou 
Musicians, especially classical musicians, do not recognise borders. Music – 
their language – is universal. Whether they perform in London, Paris, Berlin, 
Milan or Madrid, they express the same emotions and thoughts of love, war, 
death and suffering to their audiences, who respond with no thought for 
nationhood. People are people; Europeans are Europeans; music lovers are music 
lovers.

I interviewed a conductor in Berlin the day before the referendum vote. He 
said he hoped desperately that the UK would stay in: Remain was a vote for 
cosmopolitanism and togetherness and a future based on hope. He was Jewish. His 
grandparents had died in the concentration camps; his parents were in hiding in 
Budapest throughout the second world war. He remembered and understood why the 
EU had been set up. An hour with him was worth more than three months of 
useless campaigning by Remain. This was full-blooded emotional commitment, 
rather than wheedling, half-hearted economic calculation. Such a campaign 
would, I believe, have won the day. But back to the music.

Today we start with London, soon (or soonish anyway) to leave the EU, very 
much against most of its citizens’ wishes 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36612916>. We will cover 
other great cities in coming weeks in a languorous grand tour of our gorgeous 
European cultural landscape.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTCw9_avTlYs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTCw9_avTlYs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTCw9_avTlYs&media=>
It is tempting to start with The Clash’s London’s Burning 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TCw9_avTlYs>, which certainly encapsulates the 
way many of us feel right now, or the nostalgicWaterloo Sunset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/18/how-we-made-waterloo-sunset-the-kinks-ray-davies-mick-avory>
, an etiolated hymn to a wonderful city. There’s alsoA Nightingale Sang in 
Berkeley Square <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dj3S1maX6A0>, which for me 
sums up the unquenchable spirit of London during the Blitz.


If you want something a little more “classical”, well, there’s Eric Coates’s 
London Suite <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Mis4jetKY5s>, which I’ve always 
adored. (Damn, demonstrating my 1930s sensibility and liking for light music 
for all to see.) I love the perkiness and dash of this as Coates takes a 
musical walk through Covent Garden, Westminster and Knightsbridge. This is a 
city that loves itself and fears nothing.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPGEZ-kxQ0Z0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPGEZ-kxQ0Z0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPGEZ-kxQ0Z0&media=>
Elgar <https://www.theguardian.com/music/edward-elgar> caught that spirit, 
too, in his Cockaigne overture, also known as In London Town. Cockaigne was a 
mythical medieval land of luxury and excess. That’s how its critics, not unlike 
Leave voters in the north of England and south Wales, saw the capital. London 
adopted the term and took it as a compliment, as Elgar does in his glorious 
overture.

I’ve always, however, given Vaughan Williams’ London Symphony 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_London_Symphony> a wide berth. I’m a 
Symphonies 3 and 5 man, andNo 2 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Uv4lJsu0Jw> 
never made the same impact. But listening to it againthis week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/jul/01/battle-of-somme-centenary-commemorations-live>
 I find it mesmerising: written just before the outbreak of the first world war 
and a poignant meditation on a world that was soon to be lost.


Vaughan Williams spent 25 years revising it and distanced himself from the 
specificity of some of the original scene-setting: Westminster at night, 
Hampstead Heath on a bank holiday Monday, Bloomsbury Square on a November 
afternoon (you can almost smell the mist). Instead of A London Symphony, he 
said he preferred “Symphony by a Londoner”. Either way, it works beautifully, 
especially as we wonder what the new world we are stepping into will look like.


Any of Haydn’s London symphonies, composed between 1791 and 1795, could make 
the cut – I’ll plump forNo 104, his final symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zFx5kvZEvgo>. I also want some of the music of 
Purcell, a great son of London who spent his entire life in the city. His song
Now That the Sun Hath Veiled His Light 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R5f6a8jjpaE> always calms the spirit, and 
those feeling that the referendum result may be a valediction of sorts will 
want his extraordinaryMusic for the Funeral of Queen Mary 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8aPhVoxFqxA>.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR5f6a8jjpaE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR5f6a8jjpaE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR5f6a8jjpaE&media=>
The German-born George Frideric Handel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/george-frideric-handel> moved to London in 
his mid-20s (a welcome economic migrant), became a British citizen and lived 
there for the rest of his life, dying at the age of 74 at his Mayfair home (now 
a museum dedicated to him <https://handelhendrix.org/>). It is claimed that the 
last of his pieces he heard performed was Messiah 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AZTZRtRFkvk>, that quintessentially English 
piece written by a German.

And did you know London can (sort of) also claim Beethoven’s 9th Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QG2G4X6IMY4>? The Philharmonic Society of 
London commissioned a symphony from him in 1817, but it wasn’t completed for 
seven years, so Vienna got the premiere while London had to make do with the 
score, on the front page of whichBeethoven inscribed  
<http://royalphilharmonicsociety.org.uk/index.php/rps_since_1813/composers/the_society_and_beethoven/>
“written for the Philharmonic Society in London”. It is delicious to think that 
Beethoven’s Choral Symphony, the rousing last movement of which, with its “Ode 
to Joy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anthem_of_Europe>”, has become the anthem 
of the European Union, began life in London. One in the eye for the Brexiters!

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm0aRxYYGLUo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm0aRxYYGLUo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm0aRxYYGLUo&media=>
That’s enough from me. Feel free to offer your own suggestions for music that 
evokes London below, and please also make some suggestions for Paris, which I 
will tackle next week. The more the merrier. These are testing times and we 
need to stick together.

 