
OK, my friends, I accept I may have made an error of judgment by making a 
musical stopover in Amsterdam. @abkquan 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567> puts it very nicely: “Here 
the problem is the opposite toVienna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/oct/21/stephen-moss-musical-tour-europe-great-cities-vienna>
: what to include instead of what to exclude.”

The Netherlands is a nation of performers – and painters of course – but 
composers are thin on the ground. It doesn’t have its equivalent of Sibelius, 
Nielsen or Grieg, a composer who came to symbolise 19th-century nationhood. I 
feel there is probably a good PhD thesis to be written explaining why.

But we have made our bed and now must lie in it. The great thing about @abkquan
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567> is that he does not give 
up. “I’ll tentatively put forward Louis Andriessen, whose pungentDe Staat 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oaATmagbYsw> is widely considered a minimalist 
masterpiece.” De Staat is a setting of and commentary on Plato’s Republic, and 
has been brilliantly deconstructed by Guardian writerTom Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/oct/15/louis-andriessen-classical-music-guide>
. Immerse yourself in it, and you will find yourself perplexed, inspired, 
seduced.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9qJtKiZLUhE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9qJtKiZLUhE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9qJtKiZLUhE&media=>
 De Stijl, from Louis Andriessen’s De Matirie 
I was also fascinated by Andriessen’s De Stijl 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9qJtKiZLUhE>, which Service describes as “a 
boogie-woogie tone-poem inspired by Piet Mondrian’s work”. De Stijl is the 
third element in De Materie (Matter), Andriessen’s four-part exploration of 
life, the universe and everything, which was composed in the 1980s. Service 
considers it his masterpiece.

Andriessen’s radicalism stems from his democratic philosophy of music-making. 
In that sense, he is a typical child of the 1960s in Holland, which was at the 
forefront of the cultural revolution that swept the world at that time. He does 
not favour one musical form over another. He reveresStravinsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/29/stravinsky-rite-of-spring>, but 
also adoresCount Basie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/may/07/count-basie-jazz>: you 
can hear both in his syncopated, jazz-inflected scores.

The fact that the Netherlands does not have a great musical tradition freed up 
Andriessen and his fellow Dutch modernists. They had to construct their own 
musical landscape. They faced what they saw as the conservatism of Dutch 
orchestras, especially the greatRoyal Concertgebouw orchestra in Amsterdam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/audioslideshow/2014/apr/01/a-day-in-the-life-of-the-concertgebouw-audio-slideshow>
. In the late 60s – the era of sit-ins and assorted happenings – Andriessen and 
Co were happy to disrupt performances by the Concertgebouw to further their 
demands for more adventurous programming, apparently letting loose toy frogs in 
the middle of concerts.Those were the days! 
<http://radiom.org/detail.php?omid=MC.1984.01.13.A> I rather like the idea of 
Mahler’s Third Symphony, say, played to an accompaniment of the croaking of an 
army of toy frogs.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxxjecPnc3T8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxxjecPnc3T8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxxjecPnc3T8&media=>
 Reinbert de Leeuw’s Der nächtlige Wanderer 
Another Dutch modernist of Andriessen’s vintage (and 60s enfant terrible 
status) is Reinbert de Leeuw, who broke a 40-year (!) compositional silence in 
2014 withDer nächtlige Wanderer <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xxjecPnc3T8>, 
a wonderfully haunting piece (complete with barking dog) that was givenits UK 
premiere at the Proms last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/07/bbcso-knussen-proms-2016-review-nachtliche-wanderer-de-leeuw-brahms>
. De Leeuw – teacher, pianist, composer, musicologist – is, like Andriessen, a 
gloriously unclassifiable figure, but he is certainly very Dutch in his 
intellectualised view of music and the inspiration he draws from other art 
forms – Der nächtlige Wanderer is inspired by a Friedrich Hölderlin poem.

Now we start struggling. @thesecretorganist 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15303784> offers Jan Pieterszoon 
Sweelinck’s organ music, though he doesn’t sound entirely convinced. “The first 
piece by Sweelinck I ever heard was a wonderful little jewel called Hodie 
Christus Natus Est,” he says. “It’s still my favourite of his pieces, although 
I wouldn’t say it sounds particularly evocative of Amsterdam.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB2rAkZE5UU0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB2rAkZE5UU0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DB2rAkZE5UU0&media=>
 Hodie Christus Natus Est, by Jan Pieterszoon Sweelinck 
Sweelinck is an important figure in Europe’s musical evolution, but a somewhat 
recherché one – a late 16th-century organist and teacher who was probably the 
finest keyboard player in Europe before Bach and helped open the way for the 
emergence of baroque styles of playing. He also composed manykeyboard 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aa6GFvMoCqU> and vocal works 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ul91q549_kI>. In Holland’s flat musical 
landscape he stands out as a giant.

@abkquan <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567> offers Alphons 
Diepenbrock, a composer and conductor who swam successfully in the 
cross-currents of late 19th-century musical life, effecting a sort of marriage 
of Wagner, Mahler and Debussy. He was particularly noted for his song settings. 
Hölderlin clearly appeals to the Dutch spirit, because his poemDie Nacht 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8AypRUaXuRs> is one of Diepenbrock’s most 
notable compositions. @abkquan 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567> is also keen for us to 
listen toIm Grossen Schweigen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DVkpQR9njX8>, a 
tone poem for baritone and orchestra drawing on the composer’s interest in 
Nietzsche.

One other Dutch composer worth mentioning, though the Amsterdam connection is 
weak, is Unico Wilhelm van Wassenaer, an 18th-century noble and diplomat whose 
amateur compositions are extremely enjoyable, especially hisConcerti Armonici 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D38YGgGAFd8>, which until 1980 were thought to 
be the work of Pergolesi.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD38YGgGAFd8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD38YGgGAFd8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DD38YGgGAFd8&media=>
 Six Concerti Armonici, by Unico Wilhelm Graf Van Wassenaer 
Van Wassenaer was his own severest critic and did not want the concerti 
published – one reason for a succession of misattributions over the next two 
centuries. “Some of them are tolerable, some middling, others wretched,” he 
wrote. “Had they not been published, I would perhaps have corrected the 
mistakes in them, but other business has left me no leisure to amuse myself 
with them, and I would have caused their editor offence.”

Despite these intriguing individual composers, the real strength of Dutch 
music lies not in composition but in performance. The Concertgebouw has been 
one of the great musical forces in Europe since its foundation in 1888, and has 
formed long relationships with some of the world’s finest conductors:Willem 
Mengelberg <http://www.morethanthenotes.com/read-the-book/willem-mengelberg> 
for the little matter of 50 years;Bernard Haitink  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/22/passion-and-pain-bernard-haitink>
for almost 30;Riccardo Chailly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/09/riccardo-chailly-leipzig-gewandhaus-conducting-interview>
 andMariss Jansons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/22/mariss-jansons-conductor-concertgebouw-step-down>
 for more than a decade each. In its hall, theConcertgebouw 
<https://www.concertgebouw.nl/en/>, it also has one of the most evocative 
venues in the world, once experienced never forgotten.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvQatlvFvGdM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvQatlvFvGdM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvQatlvFvGdM&media=>
 Frans Brüggen play Telemann on the recorder 
As @fleetfootkid <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16378982> notes, 
Holland’s contribution to period performance has also been considerable over 
the past 50 years, thanks in particular to recorder player and conductorFrans 
Brüggen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vQatlvFvGdM> and organist, 
harpsichordist and conductorTon Koopman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PhRa3REdozw>, both wonderful players who 
combined a quest for authentic performance with a raw energy that communicated 
itself to a wide public.


All then is not lost for Amsterdam and for the Netherlands generally. It may 
not be Vienna, but it has done its bit and I will (almost) defend myself from 
the accusation by @Repons <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11486064> 
that this was an odd choice.

If all else fails in the case for my defence, there is always – as 
@fleetfootkid points out – the theme music toVan der Valk 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zvesdlGe-EI>, the 1970s ITV detective show set 
in Amsterdam. The Van der Valk theme was written by Dutch composer Jan 
Stoeckart (masquerading under the pseudonym of Jack Trombey), and got to number 
one in the UK charts in 1973, which is more than Beethoven ever managed.

Next time we’ll look at Berlin, the last stop in our post-referendum series on 
European cities. All musical associations gratefully received. I’m assuming 
this is going to be a little less challenging than our tour of Amsterdam, 
though in the end I found the quirks of this week’s journey rather engaging. 
Thanks to those who offered signposts.

Previous cities in this series: London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/01/musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-london-stephen-moss>
 |Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/14/musical-tour-europe-great-cities-paris>
 |Venice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/29/a-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-venice>
 |Helsinki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/24/a-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-helsinki>
 |Prague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/sep/08/a-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-prague>
 |Hamburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/sep/23/stephen-moss-musical-tour-europe-great-cities-hamburg-brahms-beatles>
 |Rome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/oct/06/stephen-moss-musical-tour-europe-great-cities-rome-respighi>
 |Vienna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/oct/21/stephen-moss-musical-tour-europe-great-cities-vienna>
 