
Once again thanks for your suggestions for our post-Brexit referendum grand 
musical tour of Europe’s great cities, which this week reaches Venice.

@PositivistDinosaur <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4376557> is 
surely right that we must begin with Claudio Monteverdi, who lived in the city 
for the second half of his life and was responsible for the music at St Mark’s 
Basilica. Monteverdi’s reputation was established before he arrived in Venice 
in around 1613, thanks mainly to his groundbreaking operaOrfeo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0mD16EVxNOM> and the Vespers 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jKzKrRfMOUc>, but his two late operatic 
masterpiecesThe Return of Ulysses <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CJeFcOqzdXc> 
andThe Coronation of Poppea <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=li7vDj2vcX0> were 
produced during the three decades he spent in the city. He died in 1643 and is 
buried in the Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari, one of the city’s most imposing 
churches.

The history of opera, as @PositivistDinosaur 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4376557> notes, is virtually 
inseparable from the history of Venice, which was still a powerful city state 
when Monteverdi was setting out the possibilities of the art form. Venice’s 
opera house, La Fenice, gave the premieres of several operas which are now part 
of the bedrock of the repertoire –La Traviata 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4oJwdMG-eeA>, Rigoletto 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nlr9jygEgwM>, Simon Boccanegra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YS1VzIkN4wI>, The Rake’s Progress 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DdJw86l22JA>, The Turn of the Screw 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mEA5ByEhX6g>. 

La Fenice was burned down in 1996 in an arson attack, but was rebuilt in its 
original form and reopened eight years later (Fenice means phoenix in Italian, 
and the theatre was so named because it replaced another that had burned down 
in 1774). Inevitably, when La Fenice reopened in 2004, the first production 
staged in the restored house was Traviata.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT215xfnvAck&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT215xfnvAck>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT215xfnvAck&media=>
Watch an excerpt from La Traviata at La Fenice, Venice 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T215xfnvAck>. 
@abkquan <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567>, who from his 
suggestions so far should, I suspect, be writing these musical city guides, 
makes the point that there are actually two Venices. There is “the opulent 
Venice celebrated in the music of Monteverdi, Gabrieli and Vivaldi. And then 
there is the decaying Venice we know from novels and films, for example Thomas 
Mann’s Death in Venice, Visconti’s film and inevitably the adagietto from
Mahler’s 5th symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BJT5BUZr_9Y>; Ian 
McEwan’s The Comfort of Strangers, also made into a film directed by Paul 
Schrader; Nicolas Roeg’s Don’t Look Now, etc.”

There are two Venices because the city is the decaying relic of a once-great 
empire. When Monteverdi was composing, even though that empire was already in 
decline, the grandeur, the independence and the city’s position as a centre of 
trade remained. After the conquest by Napoleon in 1797 and absorption into the 
new Italian state in 1866, it became a museum, the most beautiful and 
captivating in the world.

No one who visits the city will ever forget it; and many who have fallen in 
love with it will want to die there, as Aschenbach does in Death in Venice.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D36QBU474nqM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D36QBU474nqM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D36QBU474nqM&media=>
Watch the death scene from Death in Venice 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=36QBU474nqM>. 
The city is a metaphor for life: a brief glory, doomed to ruin. Aschenbach 
symbolises that ruin, but dies contemplating the possibility of beauty and 
transcendence.

@abkquan <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567> makes some great 
suggestions for what he (sorry, I am making an assumption here) calls the 
“unheimlich” Venice – he means strange, but is there also a suggestion of seedy 
and threatening? He offersLiszt’s La Lugubre Gondola 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U0sRuLKgnuM>, written in 1882 and seen as 
prefiguring his son-in-law Richard Wagner’s death in a palazzo on the Grand 
Canal the following year.

Liszt was overwhelmed by the sight of the funerary gondolas he saw in the city 
– one was to take the body of Wagner on the beginning of his final journey back 
to Bayreuth – and sought to capture them in music. Later, as he associated the 
work more and more with the death of Wagner, he produced a revised versionfor 
piano <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=INcmX27TVfo> and composed an arrangement 
for cello and piano.

Benjamin Britten first visited Venice in 1949 and loved the city. Two of his 
final works were written under its spell – his opera based onMann’s Death in 
Venice <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TY7CVdJJnUk> and his third string 
quartet,which uses motifs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AElJ08gIOOM> from 
the opera. In the opera, the libretto (by Myfanwy Piper) refers to “Ambiguous 
Venice, Where water is married to stone, And passion confuses the senses”. 
Ambiguous Venice – not a bad summing up of the way it mixes majesty with 
melancholy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLsCn8lbRG3I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLsCn8lbRG3I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLsCn8lbRG3I&media=>
Watch Franz Liszt’s La Lugubre Gondola played on historical instruments. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsCn8lbRG3I> 
In a similar vein, @thesecretorganist suggests Thomas Adès’s quartet 
Arcadiana, the first movement of which, Venezia notturna, also plays on the 
idea of the decaying city – one of the vanished idylls portrayed in the
seven-movement piece <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LeKa8Wk37RY>. @abkquan 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567> says Adès “likens the first 
movement to ‘the ballad of some lugubrious gondolier’”, and wonders whether he 
had Liszt’s work in mind while writing it.

Lest we allow the post-decline view of Venice to dominate, @Oldiebutgoodie 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12675798> suggests Tomaso Albinoni’s 
gloriousoboe concertos <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LjgndGuy77o>. Though he 
travelled widely in Italy, Albinoni was born and died in the city, and always 
considered Venice his home. We may also want Albinoni’s Adagio  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MfkzNNaXFyo>(back to melancholy), if only to 
wonder whether he really wrote this haunting melody, or whether it was the work 
of Italian musicologist and Albinoni scholar Remo Giazotto, who claimed to have 
rescued it from the bombed-out Albinoni archive in the state library in Dresden 
after the second world war.

And, yes, of course we have to have Antonio Vivaldi, who was born in Venice in 
1678 and spent many years as music teacher at the Ospedale della Pietà, which 
was then an orphanage. Vivaldi’s output was vast – so vast that he quickly fell 
from favour after his death in 1741, and even today we struggle to comprehend 
the scale of his achievement.

Part of the problem, of course, is the Four Seasons, the ubiquity of which 
crowds out the rest of his huge catalogue (500 concertos, 40-plus operas, 
numerous choral and chamber works). We will ignore the Four Seasons, which in 
any case was written while Vivaldi was working as capellmeister at the court of 
Philip of Hesse-Darmstadt in Mantua, and choose insteadhis Gloria 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RMHguvZPcqQ>. Glorious.

Next time, in honour of the great Finnish composer Einojuhani Rautavaara whose 
death has just been announced 
<https://www.yahoo.com/music/finnish-composer-einojuhani-rautavaara-dead-age-87-094020347.html>
, we will visit Helsinki (metaphorically speaking, that is – I hate it when 
Radio 3 announcers say: “And now maestro X takes us to place Y.” No he doesn’t 
– we listen to a piece of music). All suggestions gratefully received. Left to 
my own devices it will be all Sibelius, so please help leaven the mix.
 