
I chose Helsinki <http://www.visithelsinki.fi/en> as our next port of call on 
a whim. I was just putting the finishing touches toVenice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/29/a-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-venice>
, the third in this series of post-Brexit love letters to Europe’s musical 
centres, when news came through that the Finnish composerEinojuhani Rautavaara 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Einojuhani_Rautavaara> had died. 


Some recognition of the fact seemed to be in order, though @Napoleon Bonaparte 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16555951> – one of the commenters on 
the Venice article, in which I invited suggestions for Helsinki – immediately 
saw the flaw in my choice. “The trouble … is that not a lot of Finnish music 
has an urban feel to it. Of course one can go with the premieres of famous 
works, but there’s little in, say, Sibelius’s output that says ‘Helsinki’.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6zpXPq-lHSM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6zpXPq-lHSM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6zpXPq-lHSM&media=>
Listen to Kullervo by Sibelius. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6zpXPq-lHSM> 
It’s true, of course. The musical Finland we love is all forests and lakes and 
sleigh rides through frozen landscapes. My number one piece of Finnish music is 
Sibelius’sKullervo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6zpXPq-lHSM>, an everyday 
tale (based on the national epic) of incest, murder and suicide. I can’t say 
I’ve ever got too preoccupied by the dismal story – the music’s epic sweep is 
what grips me. If ever I need a shot of musical adrenaline, I play the first 
movement, and there I am bounding through the snow.

Sibelius’s work may not say “Helsinki”, but the city was central to his life. 
He studied there, premiered many of his works there, and wined and dined to 
excess there before building a retreat, which he named Ainola, after his wife, 
30 miles north of the city. He is synonymous with Finland and Finnish music, 
and deservedly in any pantheon of great composers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV8qiAMOiygs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV8qiAMOiygs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV8qiAMOiygs&media=>
Listen to Sibelius’s 5th Symphony in Karajan’s recording with the Berlin 
Philharmonic. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8qiAMOiygs> 
All seven of his symphonies are masterpieces, and richly varied ones at that – 
from theTchaikovskyan First <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eBBWvzHuC1k> 
through themajestic Second <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IPd9znWgGLk> (which 
may or may not be an expression of Finnish nationalist fervour), to the 
unremitting darkness of theFourth <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4EyAQw42cW4> 
and the affirmatory power of theFifth 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8qiAMOiygs> and Seventh 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h3ZvVXMpH14>.

The Third <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4kNtcbu6Veo> and Sixth 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uKhCHvaAc3o> are played less often, but they 
are as essential as the rest. Sibelius’s symphonic cycle loses nothing in a 
comparison with those of Beethoven, Mahler and Shostakovich: each feels 
inevitable, like bricks in a great wall that would collapse if you removed any 
of them. They chart Sibelius’s struggle against illness and disillusion, and it 
is fitting – if sad – that he burned sketches (perhaps even a full score) ofa 
projected eighth symphony because it failed to meet his exacting standards 
<http://www.sibelius.fi/english/elamankaari/sib_kahdeksas_sinfonia.htm>, and 
published virtually no new music during the final 30 years of his long life.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM-P183jzdfw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM-P183jzdfw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM-P183jzdfw&media=>
Listen to Sibelius’s Violin Concerto. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M-P183jzdfw> 
Sibelius’s Violin Concerto <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M-P183jzdfw> and 
the tone poemEn Saga <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VyDRWw_g2xU> are also 
works that it would be impossible to be without. Beyond these obvious mountain 
peaks, @thesecretorganist <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15303784> 
(one of a small band of devoted commenters to whom these columns owe a great 
deal) says he wants to “fly the flag” for Sibelius’s lesser-known music, in 
particular “the massively underrated piano music”: “I especially love the 
wonderfulRomance in D flat, Op 24 No 9 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GzntslRN4Yc>, which I once made a rather 
misguided attempt to learn.” It’s a piece that packs a lot into its four 
minutes, and I can see (or perhaps hear) why it proved hard to master.

Since Rautavaara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/28/einojuhani-rautavaara-obituary> 
was the inspiration for heading north (I really am now sounding horribly like a 
Radio 3 announcer doing one of their imaginary musical journeys), it is time to 
engage with his work. The composer sums up much of the difficulty of modern 
music. He is much played and much recorded, but very few people beyond 
contemporary music specialists will even have begun to come to terms with his 
large repertoire – more than 150 works, including eight symphonies, 12 
concertos and nine operas.

As with the late Peter Maxwell Davies, the vast output becomes almost 
self-defeating. What will really stick in the repertoire? Rautavaara’s dreamy
Seventh Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dpzt3DNqF1M&list=PL36B43813F3E97A8E> from 
1994, subtitled the Angel of Light, has certainly established itself, tapping 
into the urge for spiritual fulfilment that also fuelled the success of 
Górecki’s near-contemporaneous Third Symphony and Tavener’s The Protecting Veil.

Less easily classifiable is Rautavaara’s Piano Concerto No 1 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JFIGoB7rK70>, which finds him moving from the 
serial techniques he embraced in the 1960s towards the romanticism of his later 
compositions. A wonderful work, as are the monumental (some say Brucknerian) 
Third Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c_tMZyc2sCo> and the lyrical 
Eighth 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E59-6iXpnFc&list=PLRRe_urOjL_-CB3oKzoZrOorz_EQ-48v5&index=15>
, “The Journey”, a cliched subtitle that in fact perfectly sums up Rautavaara’s 
stylistically restless but never faddish career.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fa-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-helsinki%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c59672fe989ede0885bbd35dffd298cee4f9980%2F0_173_3744_2246%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20musical%20tour%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20great%20cities%3A%20Helsinki&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fa-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-helsinki%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20musical%20tour%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20great%20cities%3A%20Helsinki&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fa-musical-tour-of-europes-great-cities-helsinki%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c59672fe989ede0885bbd35dffd298cee4f9980%2F0_173_3744_2246%2F3744.jpg>
 Einojuhani Rautavaara photographed in 2014. Photograph: Martti 
Kainulainen/AFP/Getty Images 
This, though, is merely to scratch the surface, and we will be coming to terms 
with Rautavaara’s oeuvre for decades to come. As long, that is, as orchestras 
and promoters have the confidence to programme his music. There needs to be a 
sea change in the way in which we approach “classical” (wretched word) music, 
to get across the fact that the canon didn’t end with the death of Shostakovich.

@Napoleon Bonaparte <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16555951> 
recommended Uuno Klami’s Suomenlinna Overture (1940) as a more 
Helsinki-specific composition. I haven’t so far been able to find that, but did 
listen to the evocative (and oddly un-Finnish)Sea Pictures 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SzZlOyyOyI8> and Klami’s First 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eJIdnFuwD4I> and Second Symphonies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gamxlLZ8KtU>. The influence of Sibelius is 
unmistakable, but Klami is a definite find.

It’s also worth reading @Napoleon Bonaparte 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16555951>’s immensely detailed and 
discerning commentary (under the Venice article) on other lesser-known Finnish 
composers. He makes a particular plea for the piano music of Selim Palmgren, 
who studied and lived in Helsinki, and it is indeed a delight. Try the 
Satie-esqueNocturne in Three Scenes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G3FePgcyhLI> and Palmgren’s arresting Piano 
Sonata No 1 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tnjdAqj7_to>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtnjdAqj7_to&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtnjdAqj7_to>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtnjdAqj7_to&media=>
Listen to Selim Palmgren’s Piano Sonata No 1. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tnjdAqj7_to> 
All of which goes to prove, once again, that the best part of this series are 
your suggestions, so do keep them coming. I plan to look at Prague next time, 
so please give me your thoughts on music linked to that city, but also feel 
free to moot your own favourite musical locations. Vienna, Madrid and Hamburg 
are already on the stocks for the future.

A final thought about musical productivity. I said that one difficulty for us 
in getting out heads around Rautavaara was the sheer number of large-scale 
works to absorb. Where, then, does that leaveLeif Segerstam and his 300 
symphonies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2v7Ht2W8Z6E>? Probably nowhere, as 
the works are really frameworks for performers to go their own aleatory way. An 
interesting idea, but where on Earth do we begin? Those crazy Finns!
 