
Our post-referendum celebration of the richness of European life – yes, you 
guessed it, I am not a fan ofBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/theresa-may-brexit-talks-eu-after-summer-martin-schulz>
 – moves on this week to Paris, and I’m happy to say that, as I’d hoped, you 
have done all the work for me with a set of excellent suggestions. 
Crowdsourcing is definitely the future. In fact, the present.

This is primarily a classical music blog (whatever “classical” music is – I 
detest the term), but it would be impossible to do a piece about music in Paris 
without mentioning Edith Piaf, a fixture at Olympia – the great concert hall in 
the French capital – for almost 30 years. @Oldiebutgoodie 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12675798> suggests her signature tune, 
La Vie en Rose, which is fine by me.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrzeLynj1GYM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrzeLynj1GYM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrzeLynj1GYM&media=>
Watch Edif Piaf perform La Vie en Rose 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rzeLynj1GYM> 
If anything, I love Charles Trenet – another Olympia regular – even more than 
the great Piaf. His songMénilmontant 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KECtE-1S9HE>, about the much-loved district in 
the city’s 20th arrondissement, is a delight. “Ménilmontant, yes indeed, madam 
/ That’s where I left my heart,” sings Trenet, whose dodgy wartime record – he 
performed for the occupying Germans, but was cleared of collaboration – I hope 
we to some extent forgive, for all the pleasure he gave in his long career.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmusical-tour-europe-great-cities-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7392ab53d784b14a4271f0cb7ab88cad90ffe90%2F0_0_1416_1769%2F1416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20musical%20tour%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20great%20cities%3A%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmusical-tour-europe-great-cities-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20musical%20tour%20of%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20great%20cities%3A%20Paris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fmusical-tour-europe-great-cities-paris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7392ab53d784b14a4271f0cb7ab88cad90ffe90%2F0_0_1416_1769%2F1416.jpg>
 French singer and songwriter Charles Trenet, seen jumping in front of the 
Eiffel Tower in 1987. Photograph: Herve Merliac/AP 
Oldiebutgoodie <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12675798> also offers 
Cole Porter’s I Love Paris <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3ahbE6bcVf8>, 
definitively sung by Ella Fitzgerald, whilecorre11 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13378485> suggests Charles Aznavour’s 
J’aime Paris au Mois de Mai <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i6zFWNeGCfQ>. Has 
any city inspired so many love songs to itself?

Cole Porter was not the only American who loved Paris. George Gershwin, who 
spent time studying there in the mid-1920s, captured his feeling for the city 
in the symphonic suiteAn American in Paris 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KU1X3Wut-k0>, written in 1928. “My purpose,” 
he explained, “is to portray the impression of an American visitor in Paris as 
he strolls about the city and listens to various street noises and absorbs the 
French atmosphere.” Energetic, exciting, cacophonous – the young American, 
beset by occasional twinges of homesickness, catches the vibrant mood of the 
city perfectly. AsAlberichthenibelung 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12707297> says: “Gershwin’s An 
American in Paris always sounds to me like the sequel to Elgar’s Cockaigne.”

Gershwin’s jazz-inflected score also hints at the relationship between that 
musical form and the city – generations of American jazz musicians found a 
devoted audience there. Miles Davis adored Paris – not least because black 
musicians felt more respected there than in theracially segregated US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/dec/10/miles-davis-paris-us-segregation>
 – and made many visits. It was fitting that he gave his final performance in 
the city he loved.

On the classical front, MichaelBulley 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1353727> suggests Jacques Ibert’s 
Suite Symphonique <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qFz5IZWTHK0>(1930), another 
atmospheric journey round the city taking in the Metro, the suburbs, the Mosque 
of Paris, a restaurant in the Bois de Boulogne, a steamship and a fairground 
parade. By turns energetic and elegant, it expresses the essence of the city in 
a musical language not so far removed from that of Gershwin.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Y43wVqrckA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Y43wVqrckA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6Y43wVqrckA&media=>
Watch Miles Davis: The Last Performance <https://youtu.be/6Y43wVqrckA> 
Mr Bulley also recommends Haydn’s Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> symphonies, a set of six written in 
the mid-1780s for the Comte d’Ogny. Marie Antoinette was reputedly keen on 
Symphony No 85 in B flat major – hence its nickname “The Queen”. Since she was 
to lose her head in the revolution a few years later, it might be appropriate 
for this to be our choice.

Mozart, too, wrote a work which came to be known as the Paris symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NNQuYPGdqiI>, written in the French capital in 
1778 when he was just 22.It is one of his greatest symphonies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/feb/04/symphony-guide-mozart-31st-paris-tom-service>
, scored for the largest orchestra he had written for at that point. He seems 
to have had scant regard for French audiences and remarked: “I hope that even 
these idiots will find something in it to like.” He need not have worried: the 
reception on its premiere in June 1778 was ecstatic.
Following that, abkquan <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13885567> 
makes a strong case for including Puccini’s tearjerkerLa Bohème 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I-gbu7-JqmY>, which was based on Henri 
Murger’s 1851 novel Scènes de la Vie de Bohème, about a group of young 
bohemians living in the Latin quarter of Paris in the 1840s. Puccini captures 
the pleasures, the squalor and the ultimate tragedy with great poignancy, and 
defies us not to be moved by the first ecstatic meeting between Mimi and 
Rodolfo.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvDw8Ykxep40&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvDw8Ykxep40>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvDw8Ykxep40&media=>
Listen to Haydn’s Symphony No 85, ‘La Reine’ <https://youtu.be/vDw8Ykxep40> 
Another work mentioned by abkquan is Frederick Delius’s Paris: The Song of a 
Great City <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gmvu66c7-oE>. He is not greatly 
taken by it, complaining that it “doesn’t sound remotely Parisian”, but it does 
have a languid charm – though it may be more an exploration of Delius’s head 
than of the city he loved and lived in for a decade at the end of the 19th 
century. But if you imagine night falling over the city and the turbid waters 
of the Seine, it has a certain Whistlerian mystery and power.

It would be impossible in a survey of Parisian music not to include something 
by that consummate ParisianErik Satie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/01/erik-satie-a-life-less-ordinary>
, who lived in the city in its Belle Époque heyday at the turn of the 20th 
century. His enigmaticGymnopédies and Gnossiennes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oaAZwFFjqpA>, composed for solo piano, are a 
private reverie on a world that would be blown away by the first world war.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNNQuYPGdqiI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNNQuYPGdqiI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNNQuYPGdqiI&media=>
Nikolaus Harnoncourt conducts Mozart’s Paris symphony, No 31 
<https://youtu.be/NNQuYPGdqiI> 
They were written at a time when Paris was the centre of the world’s musical 
life – Ravel, Debussy, Fauré and Saint-Saens were all active at the same time – 
and indeed of artistic life generally. It was in Paris, at the Théâtre des 
Champs-Élysées on 29 May 1913, thatStravinsky’s ballet The Rite of Spring  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/29/stravinsky-rite-of-spring>was 
premiered, producing a near-riot in the audience, at a stroke revolutionising 
20th-century music and seeming to prefigure the violence of the war that broke 
out the following year. Music would never quite recover its equilibrium, and in 
some ways neither would Paris.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNOTjyCM3Ou4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNOTjyCM3Ou4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNOTjyCM3Ou4&media=>
An excerpt from The Rite of Spring <https://youtu.be/NOTjyCM3Ou4> 
Next time, we will consider Venice and the music associated with it, so please 
offer your suggestions below. Any further reflections on Paris also welcome. 
While everyone else is talking Brexit, we will continue to delight in our 
European-ness. We at least have a plan.
 