
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> had 
barely slept in 24 hours when she arrived at her polling station in Westchester 
County, New York to cast her ballot, on the crisp autumn day that would 
eventually determine that she would not, after all, break “that highest, 
hardest glass ceiling”.


The final day of her 18-month campaign to be the US’s first female president 
had seen her blitz through four cities in three battleground states, and 
culminated in a bespectacled Clinton bounding off her plane to her campaign 
anthem, Fight Song by Rachel Platten, before a couple of hundred supporters who 
braved the 3.30am wind chill at the Westchester County airport.

Hillary Clinton concedes presidential election to Donald Trump: 'We must 
accept this result'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-concedes-election-donald-trump-speech>
About four hours later, at least 100 well-wishers assembled at the Douglas G 
Griffin elementary school in Clinton’s adopted hometown of Chappaqua to watch 
her cast her vote.

“It is the most humbling feeling,” she told CNN when asked how it felt to vote 
for herself, “because I know how much responsibility goes with this and so many 
people are counting on the outcome of this election, what it means for our 
country, and I will do the very best I can if I’m fortunate enough to win 
today.”

To have a woman on the ballot as the nominee of a major party was a first in 
America’s 240-year history – and Clinton said she had thought about her mother 
when she cast her ballot.

Her language at the polling station echoed the cautiously optimistic tone that 
had dominated the final two weeks of her campaign. Shifting from her routine 
stump speech, the Democratic nominee had begun to look beyond the 8 November 
election, the first time many reporters had witnessed her allowing herself to 
do that in 18 months of covering her campaign.

She spoke of a certainty that voters would choose “an open, inclusive, 
big-hearted America”, and told voters in Manchester, New Hampshire: “We will 
have some work to do to bring about healing and reconciliation after this 
election.”

The country would need to come together, Clinton said repeatedly, whether 
standing before several dozen parishioners at a black church in Philadelphia in 
the crucial swing state of Pennsylvania or before thousands of students 
gathered under the fall foliage at an outdoor park in that state’s other major 
city, Pittsburgh.

“There is fear and anger in our country,” Clinton said in Pittsburgh. “But 
anger is not a plan. We have got to start talking to each other again.”

Beneath the veneer of her carefully chosen words, Clinton had already begun to 
frame the aftermath of the election as though victory was well within sight. 
Neither she nor her campaign seemed to foresee that American voters would 
reject a plea to hold on to unity in favour of division, and choose fear over 
hope.


But they did precisely that on Tuesday, propelling Donald Trump to the 
nation’s highest office in a stunning affirmation of a wholly different 
definition of America and its identity.

As Clinton hopscotched across a small set of critical swing states in those 
final days, top aides sauntered to the back cabin of her campaign plane daily 
to brief the traveling press on the state of the race. An at-capacity group of 
42 reporters huddled in the aisle or climbed on to their seats to record vital 
details on how the campaign was executing its turnout strategy, rooted in a 
massive ground game they claimed was slowly cultivating a lead too 
insurmountable for Trump to overcome.

How Donald Trump swept to an unreal, surreal presidential election win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/how-trump-won-us-election> 
Standing near a barricade separating the press from the crowd at one of 
Clinton’s final rallies on Monday, a senior campaign official predicted wins in 
Nevada, Michigan, Florida, New Hampshire and Pennsylvania, deeming only North 
Carolina a tossup. Only New Hampshire and Nevada would eventually be won.

The official even quietly entertained what a President-elect Clinton’s 
itinerary might look like after Tuesday, telling reporters she would need some 
downtime before probably flying to Washington on Thursday to meet with Barack 
Obama.

Timing of announcements for a potential transition team was unclear, but the 
aide was willing to indulge an exhausted press corps and speculate on when they 
might finally be safe taking a break from a grueling schedule that for some had 
spanned more than two years trailing Clinton.

Somewhat lost at that moment was the fact that the conversation was taking 
place in Michigan, where Clinton held a rally for 4,600 supporters at a 
basketball gymnasium in Grand Rapids.

The Clinton campaign remained bullish about its chances in Michigan, insisting 
that its decision to make a last-minute trip to the state, and dispatch 
President Obama there too, was merely the product of taking no votes for 
granted. But in retrospect, it presaged the Trump insurgency, both there – 
Trump looks likely to have won the state for the Republicans for the first time 
since 1988 – and across the US, and the attendant cracks in the so-called 
Democratic firewall.

How do I tell my daughter that America elected a racist, sexist bully?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-president-jessica-valenti-daughter>
But if the Clinton campaign’s major weakness was in Michigan, the odds pointed 
to a similar trend in Wisconsin and Pennsylvania (Democratic since 1992) and 
the rest of the midwest too, where the campaign – and most of the pollsters and 
pundits – underestimated thelarge number of white voters 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/10/upshot/there-are-more-white-voters-than-people-think-thats-good-news-for-trump.html>
 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/10/upshot/there-are-more-white-voters-than-people-think-thats-good-news-for-trump.html>
who would flock to the Republican nominee. In its pursuit of more diverse 
states, Clinton’s team failed to shore up the Democrats’ long-held base in the 
so-called rust belt, despite recurring signs that Trump was appealing to 
working-class, less-educated white voters.

If there was any concern within the Clinton campaign in its final stretch, it 
was instead over the untold damage caused by the announcement by the FBI 
director, James Comey, at the end of October that his agency was reviewing a 
new batch of emails that might be pertinent to the previous investigation into 
her use of a private server while heading the Department of State.

The jolt was delivered 11 days before the election, as Clinton was flying 
between campaign events, placing another cloud of suspicion over a candidate 
polling persistently low in trustworthiness. Aides downplayed its significance 
on the polls, conceding only that the renewed focus on emails distracted 
Clinton from her message with precious time remaining to seal the deal with 
undecided voters.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
“It frustrated us because it was a diversion from the things Hillary wanted to 
talk about,” Clinton’s campaign manager, Robby Mook, said. “But we haven’t seen 
it impact her support.”

But on Sunday, as Clinton’s plane was again airborne between rallies, the 
matter was resolved just as abruptly. In a new letter to Congress, Comey 
reaffirmed the FBI’s earlier assessment clearing Clinton of any criminal 
activity.

Moments after the news broke, campaign spokeswoman Jennifer Palmieri could be 
seen entering Clinton’s private front cabin. She soon emerged before a frantic 
press corps and offered a short statement – a testament to the campaign’s 
desire to put the issue to rest. “I have seen Director Comey’s latest letter to 
the Hill. We’re glad to see that he has found, as we were confident that he 
would, that he has confirmed the conclusions that he reached in July, and we’re 
glad this matter is resolved,” Palmieritold reporters 
<https://www.msn.com/en-us/news/factcheckingthecandidates/clinton-campaign-responds-to-comey-were-glad-this-matter-is-resolved/vp-AAjYCGp>
 traveling with the campaign to Ohio.

It was clearly a welcome development for the campaign, and top aides could be 
seen smiling in their section of the plane while scouring the news reports.


When Clinton’s flight touched down for a rally in Cleveland, the candidate 
left the plane with Cheryl Mills, her former chief of staff at the state 
department, who had kept a distance from the trail for much of the campaign 
amid the email controversy. They descended the stairs outside Clinton’s 737 
with the sun setting behind them.

What now for progressives after Hillary Clinton's loss?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-loss-progressives-liberals>
Bolstering Clinton’s confidence going into the polls was a tour de force final 
act that brought together some of the country’s most prominent artists. Music 
icons Jay Z and Beyoncé ignited a stadium of 10,000 in Cleveland on Friday, an 
endorsement Clinton eagerly touted in the subsequent days.

“I got to say, I was with Jay Z and Beyoncé,” she gushed at nearly each one of 
her remaining nine rallies. “My personal favorite part was Beyoncé had her 
backup singers and dancers in pantsuits.”

Each celebrity who joined Clinton for her last push seemed to top the previous 
night, giving her closing appearances an aura of celebration.

There was Katy Perry, wearing a stars and stripes dress, belting out her most 
famous pop numbers; singer-songwriter James Taylor soothed an anxious New 
Hampshire crowd with the lyrics “Shower the people you love with love”; Bruce 
Springsteen captivated 32,000, Clinton’s largest crowd yet, on the eve of the 
election in Philadelphia; and at Clinton’s final rally, Lady Gaga dueted with 
Jon Bon Jovi, who even hopped aboard the plane for its last two legs.

The mood was so jubilant that during her final voyage, Clinton, her family and 
all of the staff aboard her plane taped a tongue-in-cheek video based on a 
viral challenge that required participants to pose as mannequins. A camera 
panned their frames, frozen toward the front cabin, before finally fixing its 
shot on Clinton. The group swiftly burst into laughter as the words “Don’t 
stand still: Vote today” flashed before the screen.

It was almost an afterthought, promoted primarily on social media as voters 
had already headed toward the polls. An aide implied the video was filmed 
almost just for fun, as a light-hearted way to cap off a night with a historic 
feel.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhillary-and-bill-clinton-do-mannequin-challenge-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20and%20Bill%20Clinton%20do%20mannequin%20challenge%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhillary-and-bill-clinton-do-mannequin-challenge-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20and%20Bill%20Clinton%20do%20mannequin%20challenge%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhillary-and-bill-clinton-do-mannequin-challenge-video&media=>
Hillary and Bill Clinton do mannequin challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/08/hillary-and-bill-clinton-do-mannequin-challenge-video>
Clinton had just held her biggest rally of the campaign, outside 
Philadelphia’s Independence Hall, where she was joined in making her closing 
argument by Bill and Chelsea Clinton and the Obamas. As tens of thousands 
descended upon the site where the founding fathers signed the Declaration of 
Independence and debated the US constitution, there was a remarkable poignancy 
about the prospect of the nation’s first black president passing the baton to 
its first female president.

“I am betting that tomorrow you will reject fear and you’ll choose hope,” 
Barack Obama said. “I’m betting that the wisdom and decency and generosity of 
the American people will once again win the day. And that is a bet that I have 
never, ever lost.”

Clinton’s campaign had bet all its odds on the same unshakable belief in what 
was in the minds and hearts of most Americans. At a rally on the penultimate 
day of her campaign, she took the stage in New Hampshire with Khizr Khan, the 
father of the fallen Iraq war hero whose rebuke of Trump at the Democratic 
national convention in July ranked among the most stirring moments of the 
campaign cycle, and led to a characteristically intemperate and racially 
inflected response from Trump.

Khan, while introducing Clinton, made yet another impassioned appeal against 
the Republican nominee, asking if Muslims, Latinos or African Americans would 
have a place in Trump’s America.

“Would anyone who isn’t like you have a place in your America, Donald Trump?” 
Khan asked. “Well, thankfully Mr Trump, this isn’t your America.”

US voters in their own words: ‘A country split in two and at rock bottom’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/us-voters-respond-donald-trump-win-president>
But Clinton and her supporters would soon learn otherwise. Her platform of 
social justice, progressive ideas and a vow to restore what she called “love 
and kindness” proved woefully insufficient. A grassroots uprising, intent on 
upending the political establishment and rejecting the changing demographics of 
America, slowly and painfully plucked away the electoral votes that held 
Clinton’s path to victory, although with 98% of precincts reporting on 
Wednesday it seemed she had beaten Trump in the popular vote, 47.7% to 47.5%.

Clinton had arrived at the Peninsula hotel in New York on Tuesday expecting 
towatch voting returns that would cement her place in history. Within an hour 
of her arrival, a team of aides went into her suite to begin work on Clinton’s 
remarks – to be delivered at the Jacob Javits convention center, a building 
encased by the largest glass ceiling in Manhattan.

Charlotte, Clinton’s two-year-old granddaughter, had donned a dress bearing 
her campaign logo: an H with a forward-facing arrow. It was symbolic of one of 
Clinton’s thematic lines on the stump, dedicated to the Charlottes of the 
country, in which she expressed her desire to build a “an America where a 
father can tell his daughter, ‘Yes, you can be anything you want to be. Even 
president of the United States.’”

But as the returns trickled in, the Clinton campaign soon went dark. The 
tension was apparent as reporters repeatedly sought updates via phone, email 
and text but were met with radio silence.

In the end, Clinton never made it to the stage with her granddaughter. 
Thousands streamed out of the Javits center in tears, many of them women and 
girls.

America had chosen to build a different future. 

On Wednesday, Clinton appeared instead at the New Yorker hotel and addressed 
female supporters directly in a concession speech in which she called on 
Americans to acceptthe US election result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-us-election-2016-live-reactio>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-concession-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%20concession%20speech%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20know%20it%E2%80%99s%20painful%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-concession-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%20concession%20speech%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20know%20it%E2%80%99s%20painful%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhillary-clinton-concession-speech-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton concession speech: ‘I know it’s painful’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-concession-speech-video>
“To all the women, and especially the young women, who put their faith in this 
campaign and in me,” she said, “I want you to know that nothing has made me 
prouder than to be your champion.

“I know we have still not shattered that highest and hardest glass ceiling, 
but I know someday someone will and hopefully sooner than we might think right 
now,” she added.

“And to all of the little girls who are watching this, never doubt that you 
are valuable and powerful and deserving of every chance and opportunity in the 
world to pursue and achieve your own dreams.”

The glass was left unshattered. 
 