
What do you think of when you think of city life? Working hard and playing 
hard? Being on the move 24 hours a day among the brightly coloured lights, 
manoeuvring through crowds while avoiding eye contact? Traffic jams and hooting 
horns, stimulation and frustration?


And out of the city? Peacefulness, starlight, space, tedium? An advertisement 
<https://thecornwall.com/importance-slowing-escaping-city-life/> for a holiday 
break in Cornwall talks of “the importance of slowing down – escaping city 
life”.

It doesn’t have to be like this, but only if employers start to move towards 
the gains that are there for the taking.

City life is indeed fast. This has been studied using walking speed as a 
proxy: between the early 1990s and 2006, average city walking speedincreased by 
10% <http://www.richardwiseman.com/quirkology/pace_home.htm>, with the biggest 
changes in Guangzhou (China) and Singapore.

And while working hours are not necessarily longer overall in cities than in 
rural areas (whereproportionately 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1057/rt.2011.2> more people are 
self-employed or work from home), certainly high-pressure industries such as 
finance and insurance, whereall-night and weekend work 
<http://www.jobsite.co.uk/worklife/city-people-longest-hours-16035/> is 
expected, are concentrated in cities.


Overworking is bad for our health and wellbeing. The Mental Health Foundation 
<https://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/a-to-z/w/work-life-balance> says that “the 
pressure of an increasingly demanding work culture in the UK is perhaps the 
biggest and most pressing challenge to the mental health of the general 
population”.

The fetishisation of work is making us miserable. Let’s learn to live again | 
Anna Coote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/fetishisation-work-miserable-long-hours-poor-pay>
Common sense tells us that life is better when it is balanced, with time to 
look after ourselves and our loved ones, and to experience life in the round, 
as well as to strive and achieve. As the New Economics Foundation haspointed out
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/fetishisation-work-miserable-long-hours-poor-pay>
, the fetishisation of work is making us miserable.


A healthier, slower city life is possible if employers allow more flexible 
working.

A third of workers say their boss thinks the ideal employee should be 
available 24 hours a day, according to a recent poll run byRelate 
<https://www.relate.org.uk/about-us/media-centre/press-releases/2016/10/24/pressure-work-damages-our-relationships-says-new-report>
, and that work should come before home life. Over a quarter work longer hours 
than they would choose.

More flexible working and shorter hours would be better for employers as well 
as for employees. As theTimewise Foundation 
<http://timewise.co.uk/knowledge/what-weve-learned/> says, employers attract 
extra candidates and a more diverse pool if they hire flexibly, because many 
talented workers cannot consider a full-time role.


Also, both efficient work and the best ideas come from workers with energy – 
whoever did their best work when they were exhausted?


And less time commuting to and from work would, theoretically, reduce 
transport chaos and pollution in our cities and allow us to spend more time in 
our local communities.

A few companies are starting to get the picture. Californian advertising 
companySteelhouse 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/steelhouse-ceo-monthly-three-day-weekends-2016-12?utm_content=buffer00de6&utm_medium=social&utm_source=facebook.com&utm_campaign=buffer-ti&r=US&IR=T>
 announced in 2016 a long weekend every month for all its employees. Japanese 
clothing companyUniqlo 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-08-20/uniqlo-to-try-out-four-day-workweek>
, the year before, offered the option of four longer working days.

UK charity Working Families benchmarks 
<http://www.topemployersforworkingfamilies.org.uk/index.php/special-awards/winners>
 the flexible working practices of its employer members; in 2016 its top 
employers included a number of big names from the finance sector, such as Citi, 
Deloitte and EY.


But crazy fast-must-be-better city culture still dominates. Will 2017 be the 
year the balance tips and enlightened businesses start to support our cities to 
become more human and humane places that are better for all?

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 