
“What do Charlton Heston, Marlon Brando and John Wayne have in common?” asks 
Lee. “They all owned Vespas. Some people laugh at them for not being as macho 
as other motorbikes, but this is seriously one of the coolest ways to travel. 
They’re so much fun … you’ll see.”

It is the first evening of our long-weekend adventure, in a charming inn in 
the pretty town of Tamajón. Over a bottle of local ribera del duero wine, we 
are discussing our 200km trip through the hills and fortified medieval cities 
of Spain’s Castilian heartland in the Ayllón mountains – a crescent-shaped 
route around the north of Madrid, starting here in Tamajón and finishing in 
picturesque Navafría.
Spain Vespa our map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/travel_spain_map/giv-300809pHyQ9szRj6m/>
Our hosts are The Flash Pack, a group-travel company that says it will do for 
touring holidays what glamping did for tents: remove the dirty work and inject 
some style – with the bonus of professionally taken photographs to download and 
take home afterwards.

Founded by the aforementioned Lee (Thompson, a photojournalist), and his 
partner Radha Vyas, the company aims to identify the best boutique hotels, 
wines and cuisine in a certain region, then weave them together into an 
innovative journey. I’ve signed up for their most popular trip: the four-day 
Vespa tour. Other trips range from crossing Iceland in Jeeps to sea-kayaking 
around the Turkish coast.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441362569540%2F83c7509b-f732-4a4f-963f-3c2ebba3a754-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Spanish%20road%20trip%20-%20by%20Vespa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Spanish%20road%20trip%20-%20by%20Vespa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441362569540%2F83c7509b-f732-4a4f-963f-3c2ebba3a754-2060x1236.jpeg>
But first – as the vast majority of us are complete novices – we learn how to 
handle a Vespa. From Madrid airport, our 10-strong group of Brits are shuttled 
90 minutes north to tiny Tamajón, where we meet our two Spanish guides for the 
weekend – Big Javier and Little Javier.

In the sleepy town square, we get to grips with our shiny new rides, bouncing 
and bunny-hopping across the sun-splashed cobbles. Once we’ve overcome the 
natural impulse to put your feet down whenever your balance is challenged, it’s 
a breeze. The bikes are automatic, with a twist-and-go throttle on the right 
handlebar and bicycle-style brakes on both sides. Once you’ve mastered the John 
Travolta-style hip thrust to get the bike off its stands from a seated 
position, you’re away. Pretty soon we’re zooming about Tamajón’s square like 
children who’ve just had their stabilisers removed and refuse to come in for 
tea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441363014079%2F87e89ce5-8950-4d15-a12d-15ba834e5e2c-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Spanish%20road%20trip%20-%20by%20Vespa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Spanish%20road%20trip%20-%20by%20Vespa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441363014079%2F87e89ce5-8950-4d15-a12d-15ba834e5e2c-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The writer in Pedraza 
But come in we eventually do, and dinner at our rustic posada in Tamajón is a 
feast of local produce, including plenty of the moreishmorcilla, a black 
pudding-style sausage. Next morning we saddle up like a posse of off-duty John 
Waynes. The 10 Vespas are all either bumblebee yellow or Campari red (“The 
colours of the Spanish flag,” says Big Javier). Our goal for the day is 
Sepúlveda, an ancient hill town 90km away.

We set off into the open countryside like a colourful motorised centipede, the 
Javiers bookending our colourful procession, with Little in the support van 
containing our luggage at the rear. The first thing I notice is that these 
125cc scooters can seriously fly. It’s hard not to whoop as we soar down empty 
roads, our only concern the pitifully low speed limit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441363460205%2Fbf6f3178-87fa-4612-8361-1d3a1219d35a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Spanish%20road%20trip%20-%20by%20Vespa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Spanish%20road%20trip%20-%20by%20Vespa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441363460205%2Fbf6f3178-87fa-4612-8361-1d3a1219d35a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 One of the group’s frequent pit stops 
The riding isn’t hard: we stop for coffee or something to eat every hour or 
so, and there’s a handy compartment for water at the base of the steering 
column. By mid-afternoon we’re devouring a steep switchback like mountain 
goats, little bleats from our horns marking our progress. The group dynamic is 
perfect. I’m not sure what I was expecting (a Mod-life crisis?) but the seven 
women and three men in our poor excuse for a biker gang get along famously. 
Most are single thirty- and fortysomethings up for a quirky weekend away, and 
the vibe – fuelled by Lee – is one of energy and excitement.

As soon as the helmets go on, though, you’re in your own little world, and 
these periods are supremely peaceful. There’s something Zen-like in racing 
along seemingly forgotten back roads, intermittent gusts of fresh lavender and 
pine the only punctuation to our private meditation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441362823356%2Fe7f16cd5-dcf1-4538-b1d4-cdbdf377ad7c-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Spanish%20road%20trip%20-%20by%20Vespa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Spanish%20road%20trip%20-%20by%20Vespa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F06%2Fvespa-group-road-trip-tour-madrid-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441362823356%2Fe7f16cd5-dcf1-4538-b1d4-cdbdf377ad7c-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The medieval town of Sepúlveda 
In Sepúlveda, we dine in a superb restaurant hugging the city’s ancient 
battlements, Casa Paulino. Once again the meat – this time suckling pig and 
oxtail – is the star of the show, while our hotel for the night,La Posada de 
San Millán <http://www.posadasanmillan.es/>, is a medieval Moorish fortress 
with heavy wooden doors, ancient stone walls, antique furniture and four-poster 
beds.

By the time we scoot out for our third day, we’re all comfortably in the swing 
of things, leaning fully into corners and, wherever possible, pushing the bikes 
to their limits on the straights. Feeling the wind rush by seems a far better 
way of engaging with the environment than being boxed inside a hire car. Bugs 
ping off our helmets as we race along.

Our final night is spent in Pedraza, the best town of the lot. It’s a smaller, 
Spanish version of Carcassonne, and many of its ancient cobbled streets are too 
narrow to drive a car down – but not a Vespa. We snake back and forth through 
its dusty stone arteries looking for our hotel,Hosteria del Arco 
<http://www.hosteriadelarco.com/>, before parking up and catching the last rays 
of sunshine in the pretty town square. Sipping a cold beer by our gleaming 
bikes seems like the perfect end to the trip. As Little Javier bustles back 
from the bar with another tray of drinks, some of the group are already on 
eBay, looking for Vespas to buy when they get home. I admit I’m one of them. As 
the sun sets over Pedraza, the colour of the future is clear for me: it’s a 
deep Campari red.

How to do it

 The four-day Vespa trip was provided by The Flash Pack (020-3733 0830, 
theflashpack.co.uk <https://www.theflashpack.co.uk/spain>); from £800pp 
self-guided or £989 on a group tour, including Vespa hire, insurance, three 
nights’ half-board with wine and airport transfers but excluding flights. The 
next departures are on 17 September, 1 October and in spring-summer 2016.EasyJet
 <http://www.easyjet.com/en/> flies to Madrid from Bristol, Edinburgh Gatwick, 
Liverpool and Luton. For further information seespain.info 
<http://www.spain.info/>
 