
All critics cherish their independence. But what happens if newspapers cannot 
afford to pay their salary?An unusual solution has been found in a major US city
 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/01/arts/music/nonprofits-to-help-boston-globe-pay-classical-music-critic.html?smid=tw-share&_r=0>
 that has implications for all of us. TheBoston Globe 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/>’s classical music critic is on leave to take up 
an academic post. In his absence a freelance, Zoë Madonna, will fill his shoes. 
The catch is that part of her salary will be paid by a consortium of nonprofit 
groups comprising theSan Francisco Conservatory of Music 
<https://sfcm.edu/press-releases/-/blogs/sfcm-pilot-program-with-boston-globe>, 
the Rubin Institute for Music Criticism and the Ann andGordon Getty 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gordon_Getty> Foundation.

Coverage of classical music is especially vulnerable & so it may be better to 
have a subsidised critic than none at all

Does this open the door to the idea of the sponsored critic? It is, in every 
sense, a classic dilemma. You can understand the reasoning behind the decision. 
Serious arts criticism is under threat in just about every US city. Coverage of 
classical music is especially vulnerable and so it may be better to have a 
subsidised critic than no critic at all. Philanthropic donations from 
institutions or individuals are also an essential part of the arts in the US. A 
few years back, I met a charming chap who had funded an auditorium in 
Minneapolis’s Guthrie theatre and after whom this particular space had been 
named. He confessed he wasn’t a profound lover of theatre, but he felt that the 
gift was part of his civic duty.

But the dangers of extending the idea of altruistic giving to critics are 
obvious. In the specific case of Boston, the San Francisco Conservatory has a 
roster of distinguished alumni and the Getty Foundation supports many musical 
institutions. It is perfectly possible that Ms Madonna may find herself 
reviewing work by the products of both organisations. I know nothing of Ms 
Madonna but I am perfectly sure she will jealously guard her integrity. The 
danger, in such a situation, is not that the critic will give a soft ride to 
her fellow beneficiaries, it is more likely that she will be unduly rigorous in 
order to display her independence.

It takes courage to withstand the tsunami of puffery that precedes every major 
film, play, opera or art exhibition

One has only to transpose the situation to the UK to see the potential 
pitfalls. Serious criticism everywhere faces a struggle to survive. Before it 
folded completely, theIndependent on Sunday dispensed with all its arts critics 
<http://www.mhpbooks.com/the-independent-on-sunday-axes-all-of-its-arts-critics/>
. The Sunday Telegraph has abandoned reviews for arts comment and chat. Young 
critics writing for websites and blogs frequently get nothing more than free 
tickets as a reward. In a tough world, it is vital that the art of criticism be 
kept alive. But, if I was told – heaven forbid – that the Guardian could no 
longer afford to pay my salary and that my post would be partly subsidised by, 
say, the Cameron Mackintosh <http://www.cameronmackintosh.com/> and Jerwood 
Foundation <http://www.jerwoodcharitablefoundation.org/>s, I would feel that 
the job was untenable.

Criticism on both sides of the Atlantic is under threat from stringent budget 
cuts. But not only that, the pressures on the critic are constantly growing. 
One is that of ever more insistent media hype. To some extent, it has always 
been there: the great film critic,Dilys Powell, 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p0093ym6> once told me she was banned by MGM 
for three months because she was disobliging about Gone With the Wind (she also 
added it was the happiest three months of her life). But today it takes more 
courage than ever to withstand the tsunami of puffery that precedes every major 
film, play, opera or art exhibition. The blogosphere also creates an extra 
pressure in that any rejection of the prevailing consensual view subjects the 
critic to insult and abuse. But we learn to live with that and, in the end, 
every critic does the job because he or she has an obsessive passion for their 
subject. I’m sure that is true of Ms Madonna. I just think the idea of a 
subsidised critic is the thin end of a dangerous wedge. The Boston dilemma also 
raises an unanswered question: is the Globe so precariously placed that it 
really can’t afford to pay an extra salary?

 