
Atop party canapés, or as a starter this season before turkey and trimmings, 
caviar is a luxury that never goes out of fashion. And while the finest stuff 
originally came from the Caspian and Black Seas, it’s now produced in the US 
and western Europe.

Siberian sturgeon were introduced into Aquitaine, in south-west France, in the 
1970s, and the region soon became the capital of French caviar production. A 
newcomer,Domaine Huso <http://www.caviar-huso.com/fr/>, produces 
environmentally friendly caviar in a pretty Dordogne village, and offers guided 
tours of its 19-hectare fish farm – with the chance to cuddle a sturgeon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcaviar-farm-aquitaine-guided-tours-south-west-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F340b32d937cdc63eee6ee1d36c007649e3ea95ff%2F0_4_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20taste%20of%20caviar%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20sturgeon%20will%20see%20you%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcaviar-farm-aquitaine-guided-tours-south-west-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20taste%20of%20caviar%20%E2%80%A6%20the%20sturgeon%20will%20see%20you%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fcaviar-farm-aquitaine-guided-tours-south-west-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F340b32d937cdc63eee6ee1d36c007649e3ea95ff%2F0_4_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Tipping the scales … an employee holds a female sturgeon at a caviar fish 
farm. Photograph: Alamy 
10 of the best foodie retreats in rural France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/sep/01/10-best-rural-retreats-france-foodies>
Domaine Huso is a 200-year-old farm at a pretty spot under chalk cliffs, at 
the confluence of the Isle and Vern rivers, north of Bergerac. Its high-quality 
caviar is named after nearby Neuvic, known for its 16th-century island château 
and botanical garden. Tours – pack wellies and waterproofs in winter – are 
conducted by manager Jean Salkazanov, who leads visitors around the four 
breeding ponds, explaining how water is extracted from the river and later 
returned to it in a sustainable process.

Then comes the fun part: visitors are invited to pull on a pair of waders and 
climb into a pond inhabited by a number of sturgeon, lift one out and inspect 
it. They are wriggly and quite oily to the touch. This is followed by a 
caviar-eating lesson – the best way is to let it melt on the tongue, apparently.

Tours, from €15pp, run on Fridays and the first Saturday in July and August, 
but are available all year round if booked in advance. Tours in English are 
available on request.

• caviar-de-neuvic.com <http://www.caviar-de-neuvic.com/>
 