
When chef Isaac Toups was a boy, he would go fishing with his dad in the 
bayous of Louisiana. What they caught, they ate; father conjuring up a ceviche 
of the fresh catch by the waterside.

Toups is from Cajun country, where people have always eaten simple, hearty 
food such as rice, pork and chicken, shrimps, oysters and crawfish, so it was 
only natural that he brought those ingredients to his newly opened restaurant 
in New Orleans,Toups South <http://toupssouth.com/>. But, as one of a new wave 
of chefs in the city, he is taking tradition and experimenting, using 
unexpected combinations and unusual seasoning in a way that is consolidating 
the city’s position as one of the most original culinary centres in America. In 
2015 the city was ranked fourth in theWashington Post’s 10 best food cities list
 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/sf/style/2015/12/21/the-10-best-food-cities-in-america-ranked/>
 – ahead of New York, Chicago and Philadelphia.

Figures published in August 2015 by Tom Fitzmorris, editor of the New Orleans 
Menu, showed that in the 10 years after Hurricane Katrina the number of eating 
increased from 800 to 1,400, despite the fact the population is still 100,000 
less than in 2005.
 Tops for taste … Toups South 
Increasingly, many young professionals are moving there from more expensive 
cities, such as New York and San Francisco, attracted by the cheaper property 
and work opportunities in tech industries, a booming medical sector and 
tourism, which saw more than 9.5 million visitors in 2014, a figure likely to 
increase in 2017 when British Airways beginsdirect flights from London 
<http://www.louisianaweekly.com/new-orleans-attracts-first-non-stop-european-flights-in-decades/>
 in March and Germany’s Condor Airlines from Frankfurt in May. Many of the 
incomers have gentrified parts of the city that were previously considered 
no-go areas, defying a crime rate which has seen 156 killings this year and 
encouraging the growth of shops, bars and restaurants.

Toups South shares a space with the delightful Southern Food and Beverage 
Museum <https://natfab.org/southern-food-and-beverage/>(adult $10.50, 
concessions $5.25, children under 12 free), which opened in 2008 in Riverside 
Marketplace but moved to its current home in 2014. As diners crowd in, often 
making a detour into the museum, drinks in hand, to examine the culinary 
history of the South, it is hard to imagine that this area used to be known as 
the Seven Mile Killer Zone.

Toups’s speciality is meat: smoked goat wrapped in tamales with green tomato 
relish and a padrón pepper cream ($12) and his pièce de resistance of a stack 
of fried pork chops skewered with a steak knife and, unexpectedly, a dab of 
coffee aioli ($36 for two).

Cochon <http://www.cochonrestaurant.com/>, on Tchoupitoulas Street, is run by 
another Cajun chef, Donald Link, and was among the first to brave the Warehouse 
District 10 years ago, when it was still distinctly edgy. Now the area is alive 
with restaurants and art galleries. Cochon is a hectic place that attracts long 
queues but it’s worth it for the crab starter with coriander and hints of 
chilli ($14), or the pork with cabbage, given a surprise fillip by pickled 
turnips ($24). If it’s out of your price range or fully booked, the adjoining
Cochon Buthcer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/18/top-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-diners-new-orleans>
 deli/sandwich bar is a good place to try Cajun cuisine on a budget.

Take a tram to the evocative sounding, but rather run down, Elysian Fields, 
the setting for the Tennessee Williams play A Streetcar Named Desire, a few 
blocks fromSt Roch Market <http://www.strochmarket.com/> food hall on St Claude 
Avenue. The recently converted pristine white market is now a destination for 
laptop-wielding millennials taking their pick from barbecue shrimp ($7), 
Vietnamese-style pork belly roti ($13.50 for two) and rotisserie chickens 
($11). There’s also a well-stocked bar and coffee vendor.
 St Roch Market food hall in the St Roch neighbourhood. Photograph: The 
Washington Post/Getty Images 
For all their tinkering with the traditional, most restaurateurs acknowledge 
the influences that make New Orleans food so distinctive. Liz Williams, founder 
of the Southern Food and Beverage Museum, explains how rice came with the slave 
trade, spices from the Caribbean and, above all, the skills with the French, 
who ruled Louisiana from 1682 to 1762. They took the shellfish and meat eaten 
by the indigenous tribes and elevated them into luxurious dishes that are still 
popular today, such as veal chop with a duck foie gras mousse and red-wine 
sauce. The Cajuns, who settled in the swamps of Louisiana after they were 
expelled by the British from their homeland in Nova Scotia in 1755, brought 
trapping skills. Stir in the Sicilians who came at the turn of the last 
century, the Vietnamese shrimpers of in the mid-1970s, and the Latinos who came 
to work after Katrina and that’s a real diversity of flavours.

One of the city’s signature dishes is gumbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/24/new-orleans-best-gumbo-louisiana>
, a simmering broth of anything from oysters to alligator meat that is served 
by pretty much every restaurant, smart or homely. Another is po’boy, a crusty 
loaf stuffed with beef and gravy or shellfish. Celebrated New Orleans chef 
Susan Spicer, owner of elegant French Quarter restaurantBayona 
<http://www.bayona.com/>, has just opened the more casual Rosedale 
<http://www.rosedalerestaurant.com/> (no reservations) in a disused police 
station where she has gone for a retro menu of local classics, includingcochon 
de lait po’boy – roasted suckling pig immersed in a rich gravy ($12).
 Compère Lapin 
Compère Lapin <http://comperelapin.com/>, which opened last year in the cooly 
renovated Old No 77 Hotel and Chandlery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/28/whats-new-in-new-orleans-the-citys-post-katrina-highlights>
, owes more to the traditions of the West Indies than the bayou. Chef Nina 
Compton is from St Lucia and cooks distinctive, Caribbean-influenced dishes 
such as curried goat with sweet potato gnocchi and cashew nuts ($27) and 
southern fried “hot-fire” chicken with a spicy red sauce, a melée of paprika, 
ginger and cayenne ($17).

Most of the restaurants highlighted here are away from the popular French 
Quarter, home to some of the oldest, and most expensive, restaurants in the 
city, such as Galatoire’s, Brennan’s and Antoine’s.

One traditional French Quarter restaurant worth a mention, however, is So Bou 
<http://www.sobounola.com/>, which combines the old and the new with affordable 
panache. Is it possible to surpass the joy of the mini cones of yellow-fin tuna 
with pineapple ceviche, a hint of basil and avocado ice-cream for $8? Yes it 
is. The tuna tacos in a sticky orange sauce, cracklin’ (aka pork crackling), 
pickled radish and garlic tempered by sweet cucumber is a triumph of delicate 
contrasts ($13). So Bou. So new New Orleans.


FIVE OF THE BEST NEW ORLEANS RESTAURANTS

Best for brunch: Arnaud’s

Beside the brash bars and clip joints of Bourbon Street is Arnaud’s, an oasis 
of elegance. The Gumbo Trio serenade the tables with jazz favourites, while 
diners tackle belgian waffles in pools of strawberry and blueberry compotes. 
Steady the jangling effect with a cocktail before embarking on eggs hussarde – 
eggs, bacon, french bread with a dash of Hollandaise sauce, followed by bread 
pudding topped with rum-soaked raisins, custard and a warm Bourbon sauce. 
Four-course brunch from $32.50, cocktails from $7.25.
• 813 Bienville Street, +1 504 523 5433, arnaudsrestaurant.com 
<https://www.arnaudsrestaurant.com/>

Best for oysters: Casamento’s
 New Orleans writer and television personality Ronnie Virgets is served the 
house speciality, ice-cold oysters on the half shell, by Alma Griffin at 
Casamento’s. Photograph: Getty Images 
Take the tram along St Charles Avenue as far as Napoleon, walk a few blocks 
south and on the corner of Magazine Street is a scruffy outfit that is part of 
the city’s food folklore. There’s no booking: join the queue and think yourself 
lucky if you get to one of the somewhat unvarnished tables before closing time. 
Half a dozen fat, raw oysters cost $7.50. Start with a cup of oyster stew 
($5.50), follow with half a loaf stuffed with fried oyster, catfish or shrimps 
(from $6.95). This is not good for the cholesterol levels. Walk it off by 
strolling down Magazine Street – several miles of independent shops and easy 
charm.
• 4330 Magazine Street, +1 504 895 9761, casamentosrestaurant.com 
<http://www.casamentosrestaurant.com/main/main.html>

Best for cocktails: Old No 77 Hotel and Chandlery

The mixologist is Abigail Gullo, a performance artist with swirling shakers 
and rattling ice cubes for props, whose creations include Paris Between the 
Wars – scotch, pear cider and bitters with a dash of lemon – and the Andromeda, 
which mixes pisco and green chilli vodka with lime and grapefruit. While I 
waited, she created the Cajun Coquito, a creamy, perilously sweet concoction of 
cane syrup and two types of rum with a hint of nutmeg. No wonder New Orleans is 
known as the city that care forgot. Cocktails from $9.
• 535 Tchoupitoulas Street, +1 504 527 5271, old77hotel.com 
<http://old77hotel.com/>

Best for dinner with music: Three Muses Maple

The other reason for visiting New Orleans is the music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/15/new-orleans-music-scene-10-years-after-hurricane-katrina>
. In clubs, bars and on street corners, there’s always someone playing. The 
adventurous could head for Bullet’s Sports Bar at 2441 AP Tureaud Avenue, where 
trumpeter Kermit Ruffins and the Barbecue Swingers appear on Thursdays. He 
brings his own mobile barbecue so that fans can eat burgers, stand at the bar 
and listen to him play. More sophisticated is the Three Muses Maple, which 
opened in September. There has long been a Three Muses on Frenchmen Street, 
home to many music clubs, but this new branch on the other side of town is 
quieter – more piano and guitar than blazing sax – and it offers a more 
substantial menu, such as a hanger steak with crab cake and a béarnaise sauce 
($16).
• 7537 Maple Street, +1 504 510 2749, threemusesmaple.com 
<http://www.threemusesmaple.com/>

The odd one out: Mosca’s
 Photograph: Bower Productions 
It’s can be annoying when people say, “You must go to …” but I’m afraid you 
must go to Mosca’s. It’s a 30-minute-plus drive over the Mississippi river, 
along highway 90, to a nondescript clapboard shack with a tin roof. Follow the 
fearsome aroma of garlic into a dining room as unremarkable as the exterior – 
brown and beige – with plastic chairs and random tables. Start with the baked 
oysters with the restaurant’s own Italian seasoning, covered in breadcrumbs and 
shrimp, drenched in white wine (the small option is enough for two: $29). It is 
obligatory to have the chicken à la grande, a whole chicken smothered in salt 
and pepper, rosemary, oregano, white wine and heaps of garlic ($28.50). When 
asked to name the top 10 restaurants in the world, influential US food writer 
Mimi Sheraton is reputed to have said: “I’ll put Mosca’s at the top and work 
down from there.”
• 4137 US-90, Westwego, +1 504 436 9942, on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/Moscas-Restaurant-116433201714940/>

Richard Holledge <http://www.richardholledge.com/> is author of The Scattered, 
the story of the British expulsion of the Cajuns from Nova Scotia in 1755
 