
The glug-glug of bubbles on the surface is a sign of divers in the depths. I 
watch their dark shapes rippling slowly in the emerald water for a while, 
before taking a slippery slate staircase winding up through the still autumnal 
oak woodland surrounding theflooded Vivian quarry 
<http://www.viviandivingcentre.co.uk/>.

In a clearing lit briefly by November sun, a brown-coated, blacked-headed 
beast with horns as magnificent as any fairytale faun, is munching grass next 
to an old red-painted winding house. It is a scene of storybook strangeness. 
The horned head turns slowly, fixing me briefly with a pair of yellow eyes, 
then returns indifferently to its business.

A landscape worked down to its bones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/02/a-landscape-worked-down-to-its-bones>
To me the feral goats of Wales 
<http://www.snowdoniamammals.co.uk/mammals/feralgoat.html> seem quite wondrous, 
a remnant of theNeolithic 
<http://www.nhsn.ncl.ac.uk/interests/mammals/mammals-north-east/feral-goat/>, 
but they suffer from the “nuisance” stigma, and in the past have beensubject to 
culls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2006/nov/13/conservationandendangeredspecies.uknews>
 orkilled for sport 
<http://www.realtree.com/global-hunting/galleries/welsh-mountain-feral-goats>. 
I have some sympathy for conservationists guarding rare arctic alpines in Cwm 
Idwal, less for horrified home owners in Nant Gwynant protecting their petunias.

On a broader level, however, if grazing by a few hundred of these shaggy 
creatures is so damaging, what does that say about the policy of publicly 
subsidising countless thousands of sheep to chomp thehills of Eryri 
<http://www.mudandroutes.com/the-eryri-way-long-distance-footpath/> bare? 

I carry on upwards, into the epic surroundings of the main Dinorwic quarry 
<http://www.penmorfa.com/Slate/dinorwic.html>. Two centuries of slate 
extraction came to an end in 1969, leaving behind a hole half the size of a 
mountain and some astonishing industrial archaeology.

The vast dry stone constructions supporting the funiculars used to transport 
the slate have the aura of ancient monuments; under a sky of scudding clouds, 
these could almost be the echoing remains of some abandoned Andean city.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwelsh-wonderland-slate-feral-goats-wales-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b4898714eeb6c269536e4e13935b9fec9692e4%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20Welsh%20wonderland%20of%20slate%20and%20feral%20goats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwelsh-wonderland-slate-feral-goats-wales-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20Welsh%20wonderland%20of%20slate%20and%20feral%20goats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwelsh-wonderland-slate-feral-goats-wales-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15b4898714eeb6c269536e4e13935b9fec9692e4%2F0_0_4032_3024%2Fmaster%2F4032.jpg>
 A huge transporter incline in Dinorwic quarry. Photograph: Carey Davies 
These quarries now host hundreds of climbing routes, on rock that can be as 
sleek and frictionless as a blackboard. At first glance,Llanberis slate 
<https://www.llanberis.com/slate.html> is a gloomy grey, but closer inspection 
reveals rippling, pulsing, iridescent veins of purple and green.

With sun showers drifting through, drenching and lighting the sidings, spoil 
heaps, slabs, derelict buildings and crumbling terraces, it is a kaleidoscopic 
display of black magic, and a reminder that forms of brilliance can be found 
even in the heart of winter’s darkness.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 