
With over 1,500 acts playing across more than 70 venues, the "Live Music 
Capital of the World" will certainly live up to its title during next month's
SXSW <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw> (South by Southwest) festival, 
but getting to grips with the schedule and deciding what to do can be 
overwhelming. Make sure you pick out who you're most keen to catch (Juiceboxxx 
or Ice Cube?), accepting the fact that you won't be able to see all and do all 
that you'd like to. Annoying friends will gloat that they've witnessed the 
"best gig ever" while you were stuck on the other side of town, but whatever 
you choose, it's unlikely you'll be disappointed given the quality of the acts 
playing. This year's highlights include - deep breath - the return of REM, 
everyone's current favourite band Vampire Weekend, the Domino showcase with 
Simian Mobile Disco, Lightspeed Champion and the Kills, up-and-coming acts Dead 
Confederate, Brooke Waggoner and AA Bondy, a whole slew of "black" bands 
including the Black Keys, Black Mountain, Black Diamond Heavies and Austin's 
own Black Angels, plus Fucked Up, Holy Fuck and Fuck Bottons.

Party-crashing

Outside of the official schedule are numerous parties hosted by American music 
and style magazines like Fader, Filter and Nylon, as well as record label 
showcases. Many of these are free to get in to, and even offer free booze and 
food. The trick is finding out where and when they are, and getting yourself in 
- often by an email RSVP. If you're not yet on a social network site like 
MySpace or Facebook, now may be the time to join and buddy up with some 
industry insiders - or sign up to SXSW Insider's Guide 08 (sxsw.ning.com 
<http://www.sxsw.ning.com>).

Fringe of the festival

While most of these gigs will have you hitting the popular music venues in 
town such as Emo's, Stubb's and the cool Continental Club, try to venture out 
to the hipster east side's Scoot Inn (1308 E 4th Street,eastinns.com 
<http://www.eastinns.com>), a one-time railroad saloon dating back to 1871, to 
enjoy a tall cool one in the bier garten. Meanwhile, those missing Guinness or 
not wanting to forget St Patrick's Day may want to hit Mother Egan's Irish Pub 
(715 W 6th Street,motheregansirishpub.com <http://www.motheregansirishpub.com>).

Where to eat

Don't forget that you need some form of nourishment to keep up with all the 
activity, and a few places make it easy to get some without feeling you've left 
the scene. Casino el Camino (517 E 6th Street,casinoelcamino.net 
<http://www.casinoelcamino.net>) serves up some of the best burgers in town, 
and the potential half-hour wait for your food might not seem so bad when 
you're standing next to your favourite rock star. More star-spotting can be 
done at the historic Driskill Hotel bar (604 Brazos Street,driskillhotel.com 
<http://www.driskillhotel.com>), while good street food can be had from the 
counter at Home Slice Pizza (1415 S Congress St,homeslicepizza.com 
<http://www.homeslicepizza.com>) as well as taco stands like Torchy's Tacos 
(1207 S First Street,torchystacos.com <http://www.torchystacos.com>) that are 
dotted through the city.

Where to sleep

Many festival-goers easily burn out by the time the fourth day begins, so it's 
worth reminding yourself that you do need to get some sleep. The best hotels 
get booked fast, although you could still score downtown digs oncraigslist.org 
<http://www.craigslist.org>. By arranging to rent someone's house or apartment 
you'll feel like a local, can find a better location, and provide a place for 
friends to stay together and even a chance to throw your own barbecue.

Â· This article was amended on Monday February 25 2008. The article above 
originally gave the line-up for last year's festival. This has been changed.
 