
Scenery

Trek America (0844 576 1405, trekamerica.com <http://www.trekamerica.com/>) 
offers a range of tours and mini trips using bus and local transport for 
travellers aged 18-38. Its new 10-dayAlaskan Budget Lodging Tour 
<http://www.trekamerica.co.uk/tours/ab.html> costs £1,329pp and takes in 
ice-blue glaciers, mountain ranges, dog-sledding and wildlife. It also has a 
range of mini adventures a few days long.

See the US and its national parks by rail on a trip with Holidays By Rail 
(0800 033 7960,holidaysbyrail.com <http://holidaysbyrail.com/>), many of which 
go coast to coast. ItsSeattle, Glacier national park and New York 
<http://www.holidaysbyrail.com/destinations/america/seattle-ny-city/index.html#page=page-0>
 Amtrak journey starting from Puget Sound takes in cities and scenery, and 
costs from £1,254pp for 14 days. Or there's theFall Colours & Scenic Trains 
<http://www.holidaysbyrail.com/destinations/america/fall-colours-scenic-trains/index.html#page=page-0>
 tour of New England, from £1,379pp for nine nights.

Water

Western River Expeditions (westernriver.com <http://www.westernriver.com/>) 
runs short rafting tours in Utah, Idaho and Oregon, and the Grand Canyon. 
Options include a five-dayfamily trip in Idaho 
<http://www.westernriver.com/trips/salmon-river-canyons/> down the Salmon river 
from Lewiston. Included are a "river jester" to entertain the kids, kids' meals 
and nature walks. Rafters float through canyons and camp on beaches at night. 
The trip costs $1,485 for adults, $1,285 for children (must be over five) and 
runs in July and August.
 Surfing in Hawaii. Photograph: Chris Dyball/Innerlight/Getty Images 
Hawaii has dozens of surf schools, and the warm weather and gentle waves 
should make learning a tad more tempting than in chilly Devon. Waikiki on Oahu 
is a great place to start, or try Hanalei on smaller Kauai, which has some 
small breaks. Seegohawaii.com/statewide/guidebook/hawaii-surfing 
<http://www.gohawaii.com/statewide/guidebook/hawaii-surfing> for a list, and 
for a bargain place to stay, try Wwoofing (wwoofhawaii.org 
<http://www.wwoofhawaii.org/>), where you volunteer on a farm in exchange for 
bed and board. DialAFlight (0844 556 6060,dialaflight.com 
<http://www.dialaflight.com/>) has Hawaii trips including flights from £999pp 
for seven nights in Maui from January-May, or £1,899pp for 13 nights on Hawaii, 
Maui and Kauai.

Riding and ranching

A ranch holiday combines the fun of horseriding and cowboy/girl skills with 
exploration of beautiful areas. American Round-Up ranch adventure holidays (
americanroundup.com <http://www.americanroundup.com/>), has a selection, 
includingNew Mexico Cowgirl 
<http://www.americanroundup.com/New%20Mexico/Double%20E%20Guest%20Ranch%20cowgirls.html>
 weeks in February and March for £1,026pp, with full-board cabin accommodation.

Farm Stay US (farmstayus.com <http://www.farmstayus.com/>) has a wide range of 
guest ranches and farms across the US, from a beef cattle ranch in Kansas to a 
winery in Kentucky or an alpaca farm in Illinois.

Cycling

Road cyclists planning a US challenge could turn to the Adventure Cycling 
Association (adventurecycling.org/routes/network.cfm 
<http://www.adventurecycling.org/routes/network.cfm>) which has 41,420 miles of 
routes and lots of ideas and info on its website, from a winter-sun loop 
through Florida to a tour of Vermont's green mountains or a long-distance route 
along thePacific Crest 
<http://www.adventurecycling.org/routes/sierracascades.cfm?pg=more> from the 
Canadian border to Mexico.

Oregon is a great state for mountain bikers, and for sociable riders Mountain 
Bike Oregon (mtbikeoregon.com <http://mtbikeoregon.com/>) has three-day group 
trips that offer single-track riding, camping by the Willamette river, free 
demo bikes, yoga sessions and free beers, in July and August, from $429pp.

Hiking

Incredible Adventures (incadventures.com 
<http://www.incadventures.com/trips/yosemite/yosemiteescape.php>) has a 
three-day guided hiking and camping tour in Yosemite national park for $325pp, 
with picnics amid the giant sequoias.

A new book, Classic Hikes of North America by Peter Potterfield (£25, 
wwnorton.co.uk <http://www.wwnorton.co.uk/book.html?id=3153>), out now, covers 
some of the US's most amazing long-distance treks, the result of three decades 
Potterfield spent hiking the wilderness.
 South Kaibab Trail, Grand Canyon. Photograph: Alamy 
His favourites include the Rim to Rim to Rim in Arizona, a strenuous 44-mile, 
four- or five-day walk from the South Rim of the Grand Canyon, descending on to 
the South Kaibab Trail to Bright Angel Camp near the Colorado river, along the 
North Kaibab Trail to Cottonwood Camp and up to the North Rim, crossing the 
Colorado on the Silver Bridge and hiking back up to the South Rim via the 
Bright Angel Trail.

The Teton Crest Trail, in Grand Teton national park, near Jackson Hole, 
Wyoming, is a moderate 39-mile, three-to-five day trek that is, he says, "one 
of the great backcountry routes on the continent". It starts at Teton Village 
ski resort, and involves camping at Marion Lake, Death Canyon Shelf, the Alaska 
Basin and Lake Solitude.

• Flights extra unless stated
 