
The New York-born scholar Boris Johnson, currently billed as “acting prime 
minister” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/15/boris-johnson-senior-uk-minister-theresa-may-holiday>
while Theresa May walks in the Swiss mountains, will know the only famous 
remark attributed to John Nance Garner. The sharp-tongued Texan, who had the 
misfortune to be Franklin D Roosevelt’s vice-president during the great man’s 
first two terms, onceobserved 
<https://www.cah.utexas.edu/news/press_release.php?press=press_bucket> that the 
number two job wasn’t worth “a bucket of warm spit”.

Sometimes it’s quoted as a pitcher’s worth, sometimes a quart, occasionally 
the liquid in question is warm piss. But everyone getsGarner 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Nance_Garner>’s drift: he regretted taking 
the job. Roosevelt’s next veep, Henry Wallace, got dropped for being leftwing. 
The one after that lucked out. Unassuming Harry Truman succeeded to the Oval 
Office when the ailing president died three weeks before Hitler in April 1945. 
In August he got to drop the bomb.

That’s the whole point. A US vice-president’s job is basically about hanging 
around, to be there just in case. You don’t even get much training. It’s 
history’s posh lottery.

The British deputy premiership 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deputy_Prime_Minister_of_the_United_Kingdom> is 
exactly the same but different. Like most things about our flexibly unwritten 
constitution – so different from all those carefully written ones – being 
deputy prime minister has no formal status or duties, let alone an office to 
call one’s own. We can go for years without having one.

Where the deputy prime minister is comparable to the Washington number two job 
is that the incumbent (when there is one) can make a little or a lot of it and 
is also well placed to pitch for the succession if that’s the way he/she is 
inclined. Some aren’t and it rarely works anyway.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fboris-johnson-acting-prime-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0159721107c83180b84721de3425aaa3d92baad%2F0_176_2723_1633%2F2723.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Acting%20prime%20minister%20is%20still%20a%20long%20way%20from%20the%20top%2C%20Boris%20Johnson%20%20%7C%20Michael%20White%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fboris-johnson-acting-prime-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Acting%20prime%20minister%20is%20still%20a%20long%20way%20from%20the%20top%2C%20Boris%20Johnson%20%20%7C%20Michael%20White%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fboris-johnson-acting-prime-minister%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0159721107c83180b84721de3425aaa3d92baad%2F0_176_2723_1633%2F2723.jpg>
 Winston Churchill and his then deputy Clement Attlee. Attlee ‘surprised 
everyone by trouncing the war hero in the 1945 general election’. Photograph: 
Popperfoto/Getty Images 
It certainly did for the first man to be called deputy prime minister. Clement 
Attlee ran domestic policy in the wartime coalition while Churchill ran the 
war. Modest and loyal, he was bumped up to deputy prime minister in 1942 and 
surprised everyone by trouncing the war hero in the 1945 general election. 
Prime minister for the next six years, the welfare state and decolonisation of 
the empire are his memorial.

Herbert Morrison, deputy prime minister during Attlee’s entire tenure, was 
neither modest nor loyal. Peter Mandelson’s grandfather thought he should have 
been prime minister and made no secret of it. An inveterate plotter, he even 
stood for leader at 67 when Attlee finally retired in 1955, but got hammered by 
Hugh Gaitskell, 18 years his junior.

Never mind, Herbert. It could have been worse. You might have won and made a 
complete pig’s ear of the job, which is what happened to Churchill’s glamorous 
heir-all-too-apparent, Sir Anthony Eden. As an anti-appeasement ally and 
foreign secretary through the war, Eden had been waiting for the old boy to 
call it a day for years and was made deputy prime minister (and foreign 
secretary) when the Tories returned to power in 1951.

Having survived a secret stroke in 1953 and resisted robust hints, Churchill, 
who rightly suspected the highly strung Eden wasn’t up to the job, finally went 
at 90. Eden took over, won a snap election and ruined himself within 18 months 
with the doomed invasion of the Suez canal. Being deputy prime minister with 
high expectations was no longer looking such a good bet. Richard “Rab” Butler, 
deputy prime minister (1962-63) in the dying days of Harold Macmillan’s 
government, was a brilliant administrator who ran Keynesian domestic policy in 
the 50s, but was unloved. When Macmillan was forced out after theProfumo affair 
<https://www.britannica.com/event/Profumo-affair>, he helped stitch up the 
succession against Rab for the second time.

No wonder everyone went off the deputy PM habit for a while. Then in 1979 the 
first woman prime minister shored up her position by making her defeated rival, 
Willie Whitelaw, her deputy. Loyal and shrewd (“Every prime minister needs a 
Willie,” Mrs Thatcher explained in what may or may not have been her only 
joke), Whitelaw, who was also home secretary to start with, lasted until 1988, 
trusted, loved and unambitious.

The following year Mrs T revived the office for her estranged former ally, Sir 
Geoffrey Howe, a consolation prize for having sacked him as foreign secretary. 
Howe was furious and his team boasted that he would run a chain of powerful 
committees. In reality he was marginalised. When he resigned and made a 
devastating Commons attack on her increasingly autocratic style it was a rare 
example of a dormouse killing a lion. Thatcher was out within a month.

John Major, after moving into No 10, also had a deputy PM for tactical, 
back-protecting party reasons. Michael Heseltine, whom he had defeated, proved 
a loyal ally against the Eurosceptic “bastards” and was given the title after 
Major fought off a leadership challenge by one of them, John “Vulcan” Redwood, 
in 1995.

What could be more natural than that Tony Blair, a novice to high office, 
should do the same forJohn Prescott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/johnprescott>, his own defeated rival and 
New Labour’s ambassador to the northern working class, when he moved into 
Downing Street in 1997. Prezza started out with a mega-ministry, gradually 
disassembled amid political and personal turbulence. But he kept the deputy 
prime minister title and left with Blair in 2007. Again, core loyalty was a key 
to survival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fboris-johnson-acting-prime-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fead944eedb6c5a4ef51f5d06b0ee589a7b1ddf86%2F0_58_1728_1037%2F1728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Acting%20prime%20minister%20is%20still%20a%20long%20way%20from%20the%20top%2C%20Boris%20Johnson%20%20%7C%20Michael%20White%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fboris-johnson-acting-prime-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Acting%20prime%20minister%20is%20still%20a%20long%20way%20from%20the%20top%2C%20Boris%20Johnson%20%20%7C%20Michael%20White%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fboris-johnson-acting-prime-minister%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fead944eedb6c5a4ef51f5d06b0ee589a7b1ddf86%2F0_58_1728_1037%2F1728.jpg>
 Tony Blair and then deputy prime minister John Prescott. ‘Core loyalty was a 
key to survival.’ Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
Gordon Brown was his own deputy prime minister, but David Cameron found it 
expedient to make Nick Clegg, his Lib Dem coalition partner, deputy PM with a 
big office and team. Clegg’s error was not to insist on having a real 
department like the Home Office to run. It left him out of too many loops, as 
he realised too late.

Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> shows no sign of 
flattering rivals, since she sacked so many of them. As for “acting PM” 
Johnson, his few days of glory – chancellor Philip Hammond had the train set 
last week – serve to remind voters that modern communications mean a prime 
minister is never really out of touch or control. Johnson is there to open the 
post, probably steaming open her private correspondence while officials make 
the tea for the special poisoned chalice May has given him – the Brexit 
negotiation cup.

So Boris’s prospects depend on what happens next and whether he can dodge the 
usual falling scenery. The White House offers lessons there too. Eisenhower’s 
vice-president, Richard Nixon, lost to Kennedy in 1960, but JFK’s, Lyndon 
Johnson, succeeded when the president was murdered in 1963. Vietnam proved to 
be Johnson’s Suez, forcing him out of office.

'Avoid diplomacy': five guidelines to help Boris Johnson run the country
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2016/aug/16/boris-johnson-acting-pm-five-guideline-run-the-country>
His vice-president, Hubert Humphrey, couldn’t distance himself enough from 
Vietnam and Nixon took the White House in 1968 at his second attempt. Ronald 
Reagan’s vice-president, George Bush Snr, pulled off the succession in 1988 
against hopeless Michael Dukakis, as Al Gore, Bill Clinton’s number two, did 
not against crafty Bush Jnr in 2000. Vice-presidents usually get delegated far 
more real responsibilities now than in John Garner’s day. It’s more of a proper 
school for presidents.

As for Barack Obama, the cerebral outsider, and his vice-president Joe Biden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/joebiden>, much older and the ultimate 
Washington insider/dealmaker, they have unexpectedly become real friends, not 
just expedient business partners. When Obama expressed surprise at this 
development, Biden is said to have replied: “You’re fucking surprised?” But 
Biden decided not to run in 2016 all the same. Some pitchers of warm spit are 
worth more than others.
 