
The pattern has become familiar: a country wins the right to host a tournament 
and there is excitement, then comedoubts about costs and readiness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/africa-cup-of-nations-2017-gabon-draw-football>
, but in the days before the event, the negativity falls away and excitement 
takes over. Not here. In 2015, Gabon stepped in to replace Libya as the hosts 
because of the conflict there but, as the 31st Africa Cup of Nations 
approaches, there is a clear sense a significant proportion of the country does 
not want it to happen.

Afcon 2017: a group-by-group guide to the Africa Cup of Nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/africa-cup-of-nations-2017-group-by-group-preview>
In part that is an issue of expenditure, an increasingly sensitive issue in a 
country in which the national debt isestimated at $12.8bn (£10.56bn) against a 
GDP of $1.4bn <http://countrymeters.info/en/Gabon/economy>. In October the 
government announced cuts to health and education.A leaked budget 
<http://www.mays-mouissi.com/2016/04/28/gabon-463-milliards-fcfa-de-can-2017/> 
suggests $700m has been spent on the tournament, $220m of which has gone on a 
new stadium in Libreville that will not be ready. Instead the stadium built for 
the 2012 Cup of Nations, which was co-hosted with Equatorial Guinea, will stage 
the final – which raises the question of why a new stadium was needed in the 
first place.

Tensions have been heightened by August’s election which was won narrowly by 
the incumbent, Ali Bongo, who succeeded his father in 2009. The defeated 
opposition candidate, Jean Ping, disputed the result, which was eventually 
ratified by the supreme court, leading todays of street demonstrations in which 
at least eight people were killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/gabon-election-results-disputed-incumbent-ali-bongo-victor-jean-ping>
. A media blackout followed, during which the opposition alleges there was a 
widespread crackdown by government forces.

With two of the venues, Oyem and Port Gentil, in Ping heartlands, the 
expectation is for the Cup of Nations to be used as a vehicle for protest, with 
various anti-government Facebook groups, many of them run by exiles in France, 
calling for matches to be disrupted. The former Gabon forward Guy Roger Nzamba, 
once of Southend and St Johnstone, called for Gabonese fans to boycott the 
tournament, while a demonstration against the tournament will be held in Place 
Rio in central Libreville at 1pm on Saturday, four hours before the kick-off in 
the opening match betweenGabon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gabon> and 
Guinea-Bissau.

Amid the welter of bad news for the Confederation of African Football, its 
president, Issa Hayatou, was referred by the Egyptian Competition Authority for
investigation over a television deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/referral-prosecution-1bn-tv-deal-confederation-african-football-egyptian-competition-authority>
. On Monday, a bus carrying schoolchildren to the inauguration of the new 
stadium just outside Oyem crashed. There were no reported fatalities, but there 
was a series of photographs of bloodied children wearing matching Cup of 
Nations T-shirts. There have also been strikes by public sector and oil workers 
in the past fortnight. This is a country ill at ease with itself, regarding its 
second Cup of Nations in five years with suspicion and trepidation.

Guinea-Bissau: intrepid outsiders who will make history at the Cup of Nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/guinnea-bissau-africa-cup-of-nations>
Amid all the politics, there is a gloomy sense of stagnation about African 
football. The base of talent may have got broader but it has not got any higher 
over the past couple of decades. There is no team now to match the talent of 
the Nigeria (who have not qualified) of Kanu, Jay-Jay Okocha, Taribo West and 
Sunday Oliseh, or the Cameroon of Samuel Eto’o, Lauren, Geremi and Rigobert 
Song. What that points to is an open tournament but not necessarily a 
high-quality one.

Ivory Coast won the 2015 tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/feb/09/africa-cup-of-nations-2015-review>
, ending 23 years of frustration, with a side who had just begun to move on 
from the golden generation who had come so close so often under the captaincy 
of Didier Drogba. Since then both Touré brothers, Gervinho and the goalkeeper 
Boubacar Barry, whose unlikely heroics won the penalty shootout in the final 
against Ghana two years ago, have either retired or lost their places. What is 
left is a young side with great potential. Eric Bailly and Wilfried Kanon, who 
both played key roles in Equatorial Guinea, remain in the back four, although 
the Villarreal defender tends to be used at left-back, while Sunderland’s 
Lamine Koné partners Bailly in the middle. The Nice midfielder Jean Seri has 
made more assists than anyone else in France this season, whileWilfried Zaha 
impressed on the right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/wilfried-zaha-england-ivory-coast-no-regrets>
 in his debut in a friendly against Sweden last Sunday.

Ghana remain African football’s great underachievers, without a Cup of Nations 
win since 1982, despite winning the Under-20 World Cup in 2009. Avram Grant 
remains their coach, now with a “lucky” beard. Algeria have an exciting front 
line of Islam Slimani, Riyad Mahrez and Yacine Brahimi, but are on their third 
coach in a year, while Egypt, back in the tournament after a seven-year 
absence, look well balanced with Mohamed Salah, Mohamed Elneny and Ramadan 
Sobhi as well as the eccentric 43-year-old goalkeeper Essam El-Hadary, a 
veteran of their three successive Cup of Nations victories between 2006 and 
2010.

The hosts, who played so well on home soil five years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2012/feb/14/best-worst-africa-cup-nations-2012>
 before a quarter-final penalty shootout defeat to Mali, have probably the best 
striker in the tournament in Borussia Dortmund’s Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang. 
Five years ago, Gabon had fanatical home support. That backing may not be quite 
so unequivocal this time around.
 