
GROUP A

Gabon 

Euphoric support helped drive Gabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gabon> to the quarter-finals the last 
time theyhosted the tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africa-cup-of-nations-2012> – just five 
years ago – butthe mood in the country is different now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/africa-cup-of-nations-2017-gabon-draw-football>
 due to political tension and public dismay following the disputed outcome of 
September’s presidential election. It will be interesting to see the crowd 
reaction to any appearance in a stadium by Ali Bongo, thedeclared winner of 
that election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/24/gabon-court-rules-president-ali-bongo-rightful-winner-of-september-election>
 and, therefore, still at the helm of a country of which he took charge in 2009 
after thedeath of his father, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/08/gabon-omar-bongo-death-reports> 
who had been in power since 1967. Leadership of the national team, meanwhile, 
changes much more frequently and the Panthers may or may not go into this 
tournament under the stewardship of the Spaniard José Luis Camacho, who was 
appointed only last month but has already been threatened with dismissal after 
complaining about the composition of his backroom staff. Gabon have a good 
goalkeeper, the veteran Didier Ovono, but their strength is attacking, with the 
Juventus midfielder Mario Lemina helping to supply the China-based forward 
Malick Evouna and, of course, Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, who will have to excel 
for Gabon to get as far as they did five years go.Key player Pierre-Emerick 
Aubameyang (Borussia Dortmund)

Guinea-Bissau 

Reaching the finals for the first time was a momentous achievement for the 
team from this small country, as they topped a qualifying group including 
Congo, Kenya and the 2012 champions Zambia. Advancing to the knockout stages 
would be even more extraordinary, particularly given Guinea Bissau’s inadequate 
preparations. With the national federation impoverished, the team have not 
played any friendlies since qualification. The manager, Baciro Candé, said 
after qualification that he had convinced several Europe-based players of 
Bissau-Guinean extraction to take part in the tournament but most of them, 
other than full-back Tomas Dabo, had second thoughts in light of the ramshackle 
buildup. Worse, injury has deprived Candé of key players from the qualifying 
campaign, most notably the striker Cicero Semedo. Candé’s final squad is 
entirely Europe-based, although several of the players do not have clubs. Most 
of those who are employed play in Portugal and the manager says they have been 
inspired by that country’s triumph at Euro 2016. They have nobody like 
Cristiano Ronaldo but Zezinho, a former Sporting Lisbon midfielder who now 
plays in Greece, does take a mean free-kick.Key player Zezinho (Levadiakos)

Burkina Faso 

Having missed out on qualification for the last World Cup by a single goal, 
the Stallions reached this tournament thanks to a goal nine minutes into 
stoppage time in a chaotic last qualifier against Botswana. Manager Paulo 
Duarte is in his second stint in charge of the team. On his two previous 
appearances with them in the finals he failed to guide Burkina get beyond the 
group stage. Theyreached the final the year after he left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/10/nigeria-burkina-faso-africa-cup-nations>
 the first time – in 2013 – and many of the players who featured in that 
campaign remain in the squad, though whether the likes of Jonathan Pitroipa and 
Aristide Bancé can still sparkle as they did four years ago remains to be seen. 
If they do, and if Bertrand Traoré flourishes, then Burkinabe’s flair, allied 
to their power and organisation, could take them to the latter stages.Key player
 Bertrand Traoré (Chelsea)

Cameroon 

The Indomitable Lions <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cameroon> have 
long been sabotaged by Incorrigible Administrators and in-fighting so it seems 
unlikely that they will go far in a tournament that they reached by beating 
minnows and drawing twice with South Africa. Seven (at the time of writing) 
players have resisted call-ups,including Liverpool’s Joël Matip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/joel-matip-allan-nyom-left-out-of-cameroon-africa-cup-of-nations-squad-liverpool-west-brom>
 and Schalke’s Eric Choupo-Moting. Not only are they bereft of the tenacity of 
their glory years but Cameroon lack quality, especially creativity, even if 
they do have dangerous full-backs and wide players and Vincent Aboubakar is a 
fine striker.Key player Vincent Aboubakar (Besiktas)

How much do you know about the Africa Cup of Nations? – quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/africa-cup-of-nations-2017-quiz>
GROUP B
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-2017-group-by-group-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b0eeeed332f4c301355be2e086d9dd12af7e690%2F0_144_1880_1128%2F1880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afcon%202017%3A%20a%20group-by-group%20guide%20to%20the%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-2017-group-by-group-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afcon%202017%3A%20a%20group-by-group%20guide%20to%20the%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-2017-group-by-group-preview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b0eeeed332f4c301355be2e086d9dd12af7e690%2F0_144_1880_1128%2F1880.jpg>
 Liverpool’s Sadio Mané is the standout player in a Senegal squad with no 
shortage of attacking options. Photograph: AFP 
Algeria 

Expectation weighs heavily on a talented Algerian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> side who flopped two years ago 
and are in iffy form going into this tournament, bottom of a tough World Cup 
qualifying group. George Leekens, appointed in October as their third manager 
in a year, has hinted at using a 3-5-2 formation in an effort to bolster the 
weakest part of the team (central defence), give more attacking freedom to 
tricksters such asRiyad Mahrez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/riyad-mahrez-african-player-of-the-year-2016>
 and Yacine Brahimi and deploy a pair of strikers with fine scoring records for 
their country, Islam Slimani and El Arabi Soudani. If the team find their 
groove and hold their nerve, their class could enable them to emerge from a 
difficult group that will feature a North African derby with Tunisia and a 
fascinating duel with Senegal, whom they could conceivably meet again in the 
final.Key player Riyad Mahrez (Leicester City)

Senegal

Aliou Cissé is a manager under pressure, as Senegalese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal> fans have doubts about his 
ability to get the best out of a high-calibre squad. They cruised through an 
easy qualification group for this tournament but are labouring in World Cup 
qualification, although, in fairness, their defeat to South Africa could be 
blamed on ludicrous refereeing. With a strong defence built around Kalidou 
Koulibaly and Kara Mbodji, Cissé preaches fluid attacking, with forwards such 
as Sadio Mané and Keita Baldé Diao revelling on the platform given by a 
three-man central midfield consisting of Cheikhou Kouyaté and Idrissa Gueye 
(but also, usually, of Mohamed Diamé, seemingly a favourite of Cissé despite a 
series of wan displays). Cissé recently recalled the Fenerbahce striker Moussa 
Sow, which may be an indication that his faith in the erratic Moussa Konaté is 
fading. With Mame Biram Diouf and Famara Diedhiou also among the attacking 
options, Senegal have the firepower to do damage to anyone. But they also have 
a history of choking.Key player Sadio Mané (Liverpool)

Tunisia 

A competent team that is well organised under Henryk Kasperczak, who is 
managing a country in this tournament for the seventh time, theCarthage Eagles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tunisia> have the ability to make life 
difficult for the group favourites. Algeria are particularly aware of that, 
having been beaten by their neighbours in the 2013 group stage. The scorer of a
wonderful winning goal that day <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pEWsZlp7roI>, 
Youssef Msakni, is in line to make his first appearance at the tournament since 
then, having being recalled by Kasperczak in the hope that he can recapture the 
magic that briefly made him one of the most exciting talents in Africa before 
his career stuttered because of injury and a lucrative move to Qatar. If Msakni 
provides regular ingenuity, then a technically sound side, with a defence 
marshalled by the excellent Aymen Abdennour, could spring surprises.Key player 
Aymen Abdennour (Valencia)

Zimbabwe 

The Warriors <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zimbabwe>’ first appearance 
in the finals since 2006 is unlikely to last long. Not only have they been cast 
into a fearsome group, but their preparations have been hampered byrotten 
administration and rows over payment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/12/zimbabwe-expelled-world-cup-2018-qualifying-debt>
, and they even incurred a fine for submitting their squad late. On the other 
hand, financial hardship and Callisto Pasuwa’s astute management helped breed 
powerful team spirit between players during qualification and they do not seem 
the sort of side to go into any match with an inferiority complex – not when 
their midfield features Vitesse Arnhem’s Marvelous Nakamba and the Kaizer 
Chiefs enforcer Willard Katsande. They have a useful attack thanks to Knowledge 
Musona and the savvy predator Khama Billiat.Key player Khama Billiat (Mamelodi 
Sundowns)

Political unrest in Gabon casts shadow over 2017 Africa Cup of Nations draw | 
Jonathan Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/africa-cup-of-nations-2017-gabon-draw-football>
GROUP C
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-2017-group-by-group-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d6bb2e408f19e0d76f3129972abf8d25dfc81e0%2F0_144_3067_1840%2F3067.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afcon%202017%3A%20a%20group-by-group%20guide%20to%20the%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-2017-group-by-group-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afcon%202017%3A%20a%20group-by-group%20guide%20to%20the%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-2017-group-by-group-preview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d6bb2e408f19e0d76f3129972abf8d25dfc81e0%2F0_144_3067_1840%2F3067.jpg>
 Wilfried Zaha, left, only recently made the decision to play for Ivory Coast 
but will bear much of his side’s attacking burden. Photograph: John 
Sibley/Reuters 
Ivory Coast 

The holders  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/08/ivory-coast-ghana-africa-cup-of-nations-final-match-report>
made heavy work of qualifying, winning only one of four matches in a 
surprisingly closely contested group. But they have shown signs of gaining 
momentum in recent months and could mount a strong defence of their title if a 
couple of recent additions to their squad fulfil the hopes invested in them. 
Jonathan Kodjia has made such as an encouraging start to his international 
career that some Ivorian fans have suggested he is a legitimate heir to Didier 
Drogba, whileWilfried Zaha’s decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/wilfried-zaha-ivory-coast-squad-africa-cup-of-nations>
 to jointhe Elephants <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast> could 
compensate for the injury to Gervinho. Doubts persist about the team’s midfield 
creativity since the retirement of Yaya Touré but they may not need quite as 
much as others, since they have menace out wide and one of the best defences in 
the tournament, albeit in front of a goalkeeper of dubious reliability.Key 
player Jonathan Kodjia (Aston Villa)

Morocco 

The Atlas Lions <https://www.theguardian.com/football/morocco> trumpeted the 
loftiness of their ambitions by jilting manager Badou Zaki last year despite 
being joint-top of their qualifying group and replacing him with Hervé Renard, 
the Frenchman who has won the tournament with Zambia and Ivory Coast. But they 
have yet to find real consistency under the new manager and their quest to 
become African champions for the first time since 1976 has been undermined by a 
slew of injuries to important players, including the striker Oussama Tannane, 
the midfielders Nordin Amrabat and Sofiane Boufal and the nifty creator Younès 
Belhanda. They will still have a degree of ingenuity in front of a Mehdi 
Benatia-led defence, with Mbark Boussoufa, in particular, capable of creating 
chances. But they will not be as creative as they would have been with a fully 
fit squad so will have to achieve a high chance conversion rate if they are to 
advance. When Morocco met Ivory Coast in World Cup qualification in November 
the countries fought out a 0-0 draw and this month’s battle between the pair, 
and with DR Congo, promises to be similarly fierce.Key player Mehdi Benatia 
(Bayern Munich)

DR Congo 

Florent Ibengé has forged a potent collective from an array of skilful players 
spread across many European and domestic clubs, including the fine left-back 
Joyce Lomalisa of AS Vita, the Congolese side that Ibengé runs in addition to 
his national team duties. Ibengé was in charge when DR Congofinished third two 
years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/07/dr-congo-equatorial-guinea-africa-cup-of-nations-match-report>
 and several of the current squad, including Lomalisa, played under him last 
year when the country triumphed at the African Nations Championship, the 
continental tournament for home-based players. Their chances of following that 
up by winning the continent’s most prestigious competition have been reduced by 
the loss of Yannick Bolasie but the Leopards should still prove formidable 
contenders, especially if Neeskens Kebano, the dinky schemer signed by Fulham 
last summer, and the thrilling Villarreal forward Cédric Bakambu are on song. 
The latter partnered (and outscored) Antoine Griezmann when winning the 
Under-19 European Championship with France in 2010 and, having made his debut 
for DR Congo last year, he could now win a senior title with a side spearheaded 
by Dieumerci Mbokani. That is not as unlikely it might sound to fans of Hull 
City.Key player Cédric Bakambu (Villarreal)

Togo 

Claude LeRoy will set a record by managing a team in the finals for a ninth 
time after gettingTogo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/togo> to the 
tournament as one of the best runners-up from the qualifying stage but the 
Frenchman is unlikely to mark that milestone by guiding the Sparrowhawks into 
the knockout stages. Despite trawling European leagues for talented players of 
Togolese origin he has been unable to reinforce his squad since qualification 
so will build the side around players who are past their best, including two 
who are currently without clubs, captain Emmanuel Adebayor and goalkeeper Kossi 
Agassa. Togo will compete ruggedly – especially midfielder Alaixys Romao – and 
Floyd Ayité will carry a threat from wide, but LeRoy’s side will probably be 
outclassed.Key player Emmanuel Adebayor (unattached)

Emmanuel Adebayor hits out at Lyon’s ‘nonsense’ excuse for not signing him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/emmanuel-adebayor-hits-out-lyon-excuse-not-signing-africa-cup-of-nations>
GROUP D
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-2017-group-by-group-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd49636d7bb761a38776f673098e5bc71d0a79fb%2F0_77_3318_1991%2F3318.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afcon%202017%3A%20a%20group-by-group%20guide%20to%20the%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-2017-group-by-group-preview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afcon%202017%3A%20a%20group-by-group%20guide%20to%20the%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-2017-group-by-group-preview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd49636d7bb761a38776f673098e5bc71d0a79fb%2F0_77_3318_1991%2F3318.jpg>
 Ghana’s Andre Ayew will be looking to reproduce his best form after an 
injury-riddled few months at West Ham. Photograph: Issouf Sanogo/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Ghana 

Avram Grant’s squad includes 16 of the 23 players who reached the final two 
years ago but their drab recent form suggests they will not make it that far 
this time unless they spark up and sharpen their attack. Creativity has been in 
short supply – theBlack Stars <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> 
badly need Christian Atsu and André Ayew to recapture the form of two years ago 
– and for goals they are still over reliant on Asamoah Gyan, which is why they 
often fail to translate territorial dominance into wins. They were beaten 2-0 
by Egypt in the World Cup qualifying campaign in November despite enjoying the 
majority of possession in Alexandria and there is a risk of them suffering a 
similar experience against the Pharaohs in Gabon. Uganda are also in that World 
Cup group and Ghana have failed to score against them, too, drawing 0-0 at home 
in October following a glum performance. Concerns about defence have recently 
led Grant to deploy Leicester City midfielder Daniel Amartey at centre-back, 
where the 22-year-old has done well, but only by rekindling Ghana as a force 
going forward can Grant meet the Black Stars’ ambitions and save his job.Key 
player Asamoah Gyan (al-Ahli Dubai)

Mali 

Whenever Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mali> reach the finals 
they tend to get out of their group, although that pattern was smudged two 
years ago when they were eliminated by the drawing of lots. Alain Giresse, back 
in charge for a second spell after leading them to third place in 2012, has a 
solid squad with a couple of snazzy midfielders, especially Adama Traoré and 
Sambou Yatabaré. With their power, pace and cohesion they could jolt any 
opponent but risk being undermined by defensive vulnerability and a fallible 
goalkeeper.Key player Adama Traoré (Monaco)

Uganda 

After several agonising near misses the Cranes eventually earned a return to 
this tournament 38 years after their last appearance. They did so thanks mainly 
to mighty spirit, disciplined defending and the heroics of goalkeeper Denis 
Onyango, who has repeatedly excelled for his country while also helping his 
club, Mamelodi Sundowns, to win the Africa Champions League in October. Isaac 
Isinde is one member of Uganda’s well organised rearguard who will have an 
extra incentive to do well at this tournament, as he is open to employment 
offers after the expiry of his contract with the Ethiopian club St George SC. 
The other players in the squad picked by Milutin “Micho” Sredojevic ply their 
trade with clubs all over the world – from USA and Iceland to Lebanon, Vietnam 
and Kenya – but when they come together they form a sturdy unit, asGhana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> have already found to their cost 
in the World Cup qualifiers. They are not without a threat up front, with 
19-year-old Belgium-based forward Farouk Miya a player to watch.Key player 
Denis Onyango (Mamelodi Sundowns)

Egypt 

After missing the last three editions amid political upheaval, the Pharaohs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> return to the tournament aiming to 
resume where they left off in 2010, when they werecrowned kings for a record 
third time in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/31/egypt-africa-cup-nations-ghana>
. Their latest squad includes four veterans from that period – Ahmed 
Elmohamady, Mohamed Abdelshafi, Ahmed Fathi and the goalkeeper Essam El-Hadary, 
who, at 43, is in line to become the oldest player in Nations Cup history. But 
this solid, technically deft side revolves around far younger talents such as 
Arsenal midfielder Mohamed Elneny, Stoke City’s sparkling winger Ramadan Sobhi, 
Belgium-based forward Mahmoud “Trezeguet” Hassan and, above all, Mohamed Salah. 
Egypt eliminated Nigeria during qualification for this tournament and 
demonstrated their counter-attacking prowess to beat Ghana in a World Cup 
qualifier in November. They will be difficult to beat in Gabon, especially if 
Salah is on song.Key player Mohamed Salah (Roma)
 