
Burkina Faso scored a late equaliser through the centre-back Issoufou Dayo to 
earn a fortuitous 1-1 draw with Cameroon in Group A at theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> on Saturday.

Afcon 2017: Juary Soares header for Guinea-Bissau denies Gabon at the last
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/gabon-guinea-bissau-afcon-2017-match-report>
Dayo touched home a header from close range in a goalmouth scramble from a 
free-kick in the 75th minute to ensure a share of the spoils after Cameroon had 
led at half-time. The captain Benjamin Moukandjo converted a free-kick in the 
35th minute andCameroon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cameroon> 
squandered two more gilt-edged chances after that as they failed to press home 
their advantage.

Moukandjo’s free-kick came after the Burkina Faso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burkinafaso> captain, Charles Kabore, had 
committed a needless challenge on the edge of his box. The Lorient striker 
stepped up and, with virtually no run-up, steered a superb effort high into the 
net.

Cameroon had a second chance with a breakaway on the stroke of half-time after 
Christian Bassogog beat the offside trap and found himself running clear on 
goal, but the Burkina Faso goalkeeper Hervé Koffi made a superb tackle to deny 
Cameroon a two-goal advantage.

After the break, Jacques Zoua’s thunderous strike was parried by Koffi 
straight into the path of Clinton Njie, who scuffed the rebound wide of the 
target. That opened the door for a Burkina Faso revival which saw Banou 
Diawara’s free-kick set up the equaliser.

Cameroon failed to clear a firmly struck free-kick that bounced around 
dangerously before Bakary Koné steered it goalward and Dayo came through to 
apply the finishing touch and claim a first international goal.

Earlier, the hosts Gabon were stunned by a last-minute equaliser as the 
tournament newcomers Guinea-Bissau held them toa 1-1 draw in the opening game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/gabon-guinea-bissau-afcon-2017-match-report>
.
 