
More than half of all Africans are expected to live in cities by 2050, so 
policymakers must ensure this “megatrend” acts as a catalyst for development 
and growth, and does not result in millions of people eking out precarious 
existences in slums, according to the latest African Economic Outlook.

The study 
<http://ftp//ftp.oecd.org/USB%20KEY/PDF%20a%20enregistrer%20in%20cle%20USB/African%20Economic%20Outlook%202016_Ebook.pdf>
 (pdf), produced by theAfrican Development Bank <http://www.afdb.org/en/> 
(AfDB), theOrganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
<http://www.oecd.org/> and the UN’s Development Programme <http://www.undp.org/>
, said authorities must create inclusive growth, jobs, better housing and 
social safety nets, and improve links with rural areas to boost development in 
urban areas, now home to about 472 million Africans.

“As two-thirds of the investments in urban infrastructure to 2050 have yet to 
be made, the scope is large for new, wide-ranging urban policies to turn 
African cities and towns into engines of sustainable structural 
transformation,” the report said. “In order to seize this ‘urbanisation 
dividend’, a number of bold policy reforms are necessary.”

We have one generation to save our cities, global engineering firm warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/31/one-generation-save-cities-arup-urbanisation-population-climate-change-gregory-hodkinson>
In 1950, 14% of Africans lived in urban areas compared with 40% today. By the 
mid-2030s, half are expected to live in cities and towns, with the proportion 
peaking at 56% around 2050. To put this in a historical context, it took Europe 
110 years to move from 15% urban dwellers in 1800 to 40% in 1910.


Many urban dwellers are young – more than half of Africa’s population 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/eBook_AEO2016.pdf> (pdf) 
are under the age of 18.5 and 19% are aged between 15 and 24 years old.

Young people have been variously described as a reason for hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/nov/12/desmond-tutu-africa-hope-youth>
 or a potentialsource of instability 
<http://www.un.org/africarenewal/magazine/may-2013/africa%E2%80%99s-youth-%E2%80%9Cticking-time-bomb%E2%80%9D-or-opportunity>
. The report said nine out of 10 working young people in sub-Saharan Africa are 
poor or near poor, and yet the working-age urban population now supports more 
family members than comparative populations elsewhere.

Mario Pezzini, director of the OECD’s development centre 
<http://www.oecd.org/dev/>, said urbanisation could drive development if there 
is simultaneous job creation and infrastructure investment.


“It is not possible to separate these issues … What we are really talking 
about is how do you create conditions and services, not only to provide a 
better quality of life, which is crucial, but also to create opportunities for 
economic development … If you don’t create infrastructure, the jobs will not be 
there,” he said.

African cities, unlike other agglomeration economies 
<http://www.economicshelp.org/blog/glossary/agglomeration-economies/>, often 
fail to reap the benefits that come when firms and people locate near one 
another, he added.

“Particularly in Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, the 
problem is that you move people from rural areas to the cities and they remain 
in the same conditions … but now living in slums … If there are no advantages 
for people moving, urbanisation will not be synonymous with transformation.”


Despite a slowdown in growth after the commodity-led boom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/13/africa-oil-giants-anxious-times-commodities-boom-oil-metals>
 of recent years, Pezzini said the window of opportunity to get urbanisation 
right had not yet closed, noting that African growth rates are stillrelatively 
high <http://www.worldbank.org/en/region/afr/overview>. But investment is 
needed to turn youthful urban populations into a resource, rather than a risk.


“How do you break this cycle of marginalisation, that is putting people 
outside the mainstream, transforming them into agents against change?” Pezzini 
said.

The report estimated that, on average, African countries would need to spend 
5-7% of gross domestic product, or a minimum of $100bn a year, on public 
infrastructure.

From Addis to Yiwu via Manchester and Washington, the new resilient cities – 
in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/may/25/resilient-cities-addis-yiwa-manchester-washington-in-pictures>
For Pezzini, these funds could come from taxes, remittances and overseas 
development assistance, as well as foreign direct investment. Generally,tax 
collection levels <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/GC.TAX.TOTL.GD.ZS> are 
low in Africa, but could rise if fiscal reforms are implemented.

Last year, net financial flows to Africa were estimated at $208bn, 1.8% lower 
than in 2014, but remittances increased by 1.2% to to $64bn. Official 
development assistance rose by 4% to $56bn.

“[Remittances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/aug/18/global-remittance-industry-choking-billions-developing-world>
] can be leveraged to spur investment and growth, but efforts to maximise their 
development impact face major obstacles. And recent developments in the 
resource-rich countries of the Middle East and Russia and the relative 
stagnation of EU growth suggest that remittances will slow,” the report said.

Under the sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
 – the ambitious global blueprint for development adopted at the UN last year – 
countries have committed to make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, 
resilient and sustainable, with targets relating to safe and affordable housing 
and transport.

Pezzini said this commitment is critical not least because it recognises that 
development must be measured by targets other than GDP growth, and reflects the 
fact that inequalities and challenges exist in cities in the developing and 
developed world.

He said there is no silver bullet to deliver efficient urbanisation. 


“What matters is policies and strategies. That’s what will make the 
difference. Why do you have some areas and regions where things work and others 
not? Policies matter. You may have certain conditions, but you can build on 
them or not, and that depends on the policies and institutions you create.”
 