
Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> has racked up 
£52bn of losses since it was bailed out eight years ago this month: and when it 
reports third-quarter results on Friday it is expected to dive even deeper into 
the red.

The bank’s list of woes seem neverending, ranging from a potential £9bn 
penalty from the US authorities for mis-selling mortgage bonds a decade ago to 
allegations of bad treatment of small business customers. Its share price is so 
far below the 502p average price at which taxpayers pumped £45bn into the bank 
thatthe chancellor, Philip Hammond, has abandoned any attempts to sell off any 
more shares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/philip-hammond-drops-plan-to-sell-cut-price-lloyds-shares-to-public>
.

RBS’s troubles have prompted one thinktank to argue that it is time for a 
radical strategy rethink, after the bank scaled itself down from a global 
business with operations in more than 50 countries to one with a flag in just 
13 and a renewed focus on the UK high street.

“It’s time for the UK government to put all options for the bank’s future back 
on the table and urgently examine whether there are alternatives that could 
deliver better value for taxpayers and the economy,” Laurie Macfarlane, an 
economist at the New Economics Foundation (NEF),argues in a paper published 
this weekend <http://neweconomics.org/taking-control-of-rbs/>.

The vote for Brexit has given the NEF fresh impetus in its call for RBS to be 
broken up into 130 regional UK banks. Macfarlane argues that RBS could turn its 
focus to “lending for investment in production services such as manufacturing, 
retailing and distribution, telecoms, construction and energy”, which are 
spread across the UK.

“Turning it into a network of local banks could therefore help boost 
real-economy lending while investing in communities that have been left behind 
by our London-centric economic model – exactly the kinds of communities who 
voted to leave the EU,” he says.

It is not the first time that the NEF – among others – have called for a 
rethink of the strategy for RBS. Sir Vince Cable calledfor the dismantling of 
the Edinburgh-based bank when he was the business secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/may/04/vince-cable-rbs-break-up> in 
the coalition government. “At the very beginning of our government, we should 
have gone for the breakup option,” the former Liberal Democrat MP says.

“They should be trying to create sensible smaller banks out of the greater 
whole,” Cable adds. However, he acknowledges he has been told that the cost of 
breakup would be too high – illustrated by the problems RBS has experienced in 
trying to spin off just 300 branches, as stipulated by the EU as punishment for 
receiving state aid.

The difficulty RBS has encountered in selling off these branches, intended to 
be rebranded Williams & Glyn, was referred to by Hammond when he announced that 
ambitions to sell off the remaining 73% stake had been put on the back burner. 
“It’s clear that the disposal of RBS shares at a price that recovers taxpayers’ 
investment is not practical at the moment,” Hammond said. The shares closed on 
Friday at 190p.

Hammond’s predecessor, George Osborne, had indicated that selling the 
government’s stake at a profit was not a priority. He sold 5% at 330p a share – 
and a £1bn loss –in August 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/04/rbs-sell-off-george-osborne-defends-1bn-loss>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fcan-rbs-ever-be-privatised-eight-years-52bn-loss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a958f0375c6429a40cd4cd8cd32880af06c9014%2F0_37_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20eight%20hard%20years%20and%20a%20%C2%A352bn%20loss%2C%20can%20RBS%20ever%20be%20privatised%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fcan-rbs-ever-be-privatised-eight-years-52bn-loss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20eight%20hard%20years%20and%20a%20%C2%A352bn%20loss%2C%20can%20RBS%20ever%20be%20privatised%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fcan-rbs-ever-be-privatised-eight-years-52bn-loss%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a958f0375c6429a40cd4cd8cd32880af06c9014%2F0_37_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Ross McEwan, RBS’s chief executive, would be unlikely to welcome a radical 
review of strategy for the bank. Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
Analysts hold out little expectation that the RBS share price will ever get 
back to 502p. According to Bloomberg, the average forecast by analysts is 180p 
a share – and thus, Macfarlane argues, it is time for a rethink: “It is 
becoming increasingly clear that there is no way the taxpayer can make its 
money back by selling RBS back to the private sector.”

The Treasury, though, is unlikely to have much appetite to embark upon a 
strategy reversal. Osborne commissioned a review into whether RBS should be 
split up in 2013. It backed off radical action andinstead focused on putting 
£38bn of troublesome assets into an internal bad bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/01/royal-bank-scotland-losses-internal-bad-bank-rbs>
.

Ross McEwan, now entering his fourth year as chief executive of RBS, would be 
unlikely to welcome a full-blown review either. He has embarked on an effort to 
put a fresh focus on NatWest – the now-revived brand name for RBS’s high street 
banking business in England and Wales –through a new advertising campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/royal-bank-scotland-turns-back-fred-goodwin-era-natwest-ads>
 launched last month, and has turned the focus on the remaining businesses, 
which generate £1bn of profit a quarter. His problem, though, is that those 
profits are being wiped out by tackling the so-called “conduct issues” of the 
past.

Ian Gordon, banks analyst at Investec, also points out that RBS is the 
fastest-growing among its UK peers in terms of lending for mortgages and 
business. “But that is being drowned out by the bigger, more volatile, ‘known 
unknowns’,” says Gordon.

RBS’s problems

■ A settlement, yet to be negotiated, with the US Department of Justice over 
the waymortgage bonds were packaged up a decade ago and sold on to consumers. 
RBS has not been able to estimate the financial impact of this settlement but 
analysts put figures on it ranging from £4bn to £9bn.

■ The sale of 300 branches, to be branded Williams & Glyn, stipulated by the 
EU as punishment for the £45bn taxpayer bailout. The bank admitted in August 
that there was no longer any prospect of spinning this business out onto the 
stock market and is looking for a trade buyer. However, the obvious bidder, the 
UK arm of Spanish bank Santander, is said to have pulled out.

■ A much-delayed report into the treatment of small business customers. The 
investigation, commissioned by the Financial Conduct Authority, began after 
allegations first surfaced in 2013 that the bailed-out bank was deliberately 
wrecking small businesses to make profits.
 