
A test that can track how well a person is ageing could help doctors identify 
patients who are most at risk of dementia and other age-related conditions.

Those picked out as ageing fast could be referred onto clinical trials for 
treatments that try to prevent neurodegenerative diseases orslow the ageing 
process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/aug/04/can-we-reverse-ageing-process-young-blood-older-people>
 itself.

In another use of the test, doctors could check the biological age of organs 
that might be suitable for transplant patients, and use kidneys, livers and 
other tissues from donors who would otherwise be ruled out on the grounds of 
old age.

“As a profiling technique, it is turning out to be really powerful,” said 
James Timmons <https://kclpure.kcl.ac.uk/portal/james.timmons.html>, who led 
the study at King’s College London. “It works in muscle, skin, different brain 
regions and in the blood too.”

The scientists developed the test after studying gene activity in muscle 
biopsies taken from healthy 65-year-olds, and comparing the results with those 
from healthy youngsters. The participants all led sedentary lifestyles, meaning 
they spentless than 2.5 hours a week 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/fitness/Pages/physical-activity-guidelines-for-adults.aspx>
 doing aerobic exercise.

The team found that the activity of 150 genes reliably distinguished between 
the young and old people who took part in the study. Further work confirmed 
that the genetic signature showed up in other body tissues, and gave a good 
indication of how well a person was ageing.

In a dry run, the scientists applied the test to a group of Swedish men aged 
70 who had been tracked for 20 years as part of a separate study. They used the 
test to calculate ageing scores for the men, and found that those with the 
highest scores had the best organ function after 12 years, and were far more 
likely to be alive at the end of the study. “The men who had a really high 
score had almost no chance of being dead at the end of the 20 years,” said 
Timmons.

The researchers went on to look at the genetic signature in people with the 
earliest signs of dementia. They saw a striking difference between those with 
mild cognitive problems and healthy people of the same age, suggesting the test 
can spot people most at risk of developing Alzheimer’s and other 
neurodegenerative disorders. Details of the research are published in the 
journalGenome Biology <http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13059-015-0750-x>. 

The test will help doctors find patients most likely to benefit from clinical 
trials of therapies that hope to combat dementia. But it could have an impact 
in transplant medicine too, where the shortage of donors means many patients 
have a long wait before they receive an organ, or die before a suitable donor 
is found.

“At the moment we have a cut-off age for donors of about 70 years old, but 
with this, we can see whether an organ has a good biological age, and make a 
decision on whether to implant it into a patient or not. We should be able to 
make better decisions, and probably use older donors.”

Dan Belsky <http://sites.duke.edu/danbelsky/> at Duke University School of 
Medicine in North Carolina, who recently demonstrated thatpeople age at 
radically different rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jul/06/old-before-your-time-people-age-at-wildly-different-rates-study-confirms>
, said the findings backed up the theory that biological changes that occur 
with normal ageing are themselves a cause of disease. “If we can eventually 
design interventions to slow or reverse these changes, those interventions will 
work to prevent many different diseases,” he said.

Doug Brown 
<http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=1137&pageNumber=2>
, director of research at the Alzheimer’s Society, said that with the need for 
early intervention, many drugs for Alzheimer’s are now being tested in people 
who show the earliest stages of disease, and sometimes before symptoms even 
begin to show.

He said: “With further development, this research could help in our quest to 
find new treatments for the condition, by identifying people who are more 
likely to develop Alzheimer’s disease so they can participate in clinical 
trials.”
 