
It started life as DIY kit assembled in a spare patch of land for a newly 
homeless friend. Now thistiny wooden cabin <https://www.airbnb.com/rooms/8357> 
sheltering in the oaks and redwoods of Aptos, California, is the most popular 
rental onAirbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb>.

Other properties on the home-sharing website are more glamorous, and others 
are more likely to be tagged by Airbnb’s “wish list” button.

But in terms of actual bookings, The Mushroom Dome Cabin, which describes 
itself as a “geodesic dome loft”, has consistently come out on top since it 
began listing on the site about seven years ago.


Back then, owner Kitty Mrache had been advertising the cabin on Craigslist 
“but I was frustrated with how undependable people were,” she said. “They would 
say they were coming and then wouldn’t show up.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fairbnb-most-popular-rental-california-cabin-kitty-mrache%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bfbe8af772ff6eb915571699f923f12ac22813c%2F0_486_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Airbnb's%20most%20popular%20rental%3A%20a%20tiny%20cabin%20in%20the%20California%20woods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fairbnb-most-popular-rental-california-cabin-kitty-mrache%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Airbnb%27s%20most%20popular%20rental%3A%20a%20tiny%20cabin%20in%20the%20California%20woods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fairbnb-most-popular-rental-california-cabin-kitty-mrache%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4bfbe8af772ff6eb915571699f923f12ac22813c%2F0_486_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Kitty Mrache, owner of Airbnb’s most popular rental. Photograph: Merope Mills 
for the Guardian 
At the time, Airbnb was in startup mode – just 11 months old and, according to 
Kitty, and “going through a lot of challenges”. In those early days, listings 
were either in New York orSan Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco>. The Mushroom Dome Cabin 
was among the first that placed Airbnb outside cities.

“Almost immediately, we began getting reservations,” said Mrache, who runs the 
property with her husband, Michael. But it wasn’t untilAirbnb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> invited them to a party for 
selected hosts, where company employees excitedly claimed they were “rock 
stars” and dragged them off to meet the founders, that they realized “the 
impact we were making or how comparatively successful we were”.

How technology has transformed the travel industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/feb/29/technology-internet-transformed-travel-industry-airbnb>
“We were blown away,” she said of the Airbnb event for its VIP hosts. “We had 
no idea what the culture was like in San Francisco. I used to live there in 
1968 – so it was kind of a shock to me. Almost everybody at the party was hip, 
young and really into loud music. Very fancy clothes. And here we come in our 
laid-back, Santa Cruz dress. I was a little out of place.”

The Mushroom Dome Cabin, originally just 100 sq ft, shares the same 
unpretentious vibe of its founders. But while the cabin has over the years been 
moved, expanded and fixed up from its original pentagonal base, its rustic, 
wooden charm is unchanged.

On Airbnb, the listing goes out of its way to stress its compactness. “The 
cabin is not as big as it looks in this photo,” reads one caption. “The magic 
of a wide-angle lens!” says another, of the minute bathroom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fairbnb-most-popular-rental-california-cabin-kitty-mrache%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7179663dec30d68a81d4b60709572146ea30d1e%2F0_417_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Airbnb's%20most%20popular%20rental%3A%20a%20tiny%20cabin%20in%20the%20California%20woods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fairbnb-most-popular-rental-california-cabin-kitty-mrache%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Airbnb%27s%20most%20popular%20rental%3A%20a%20tiny%20cabin%20in%20the%20California%20woods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fairbnb-most-popular-rental-california-cabin-kitty-mrache%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7179663dec30d68a81d4b60709572146ea30d1e%2F0_417_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
 A view from the cabin’s loft. Photograph: Courtesy of Kitty Mrache 
“I don’t want people to have an illusion that they’re going to [a] large 
place,” Mrache said.

For $110, you can squeeze three people into the cabin. Climb a ladder to reach 
the double bed, and you’ll be in touching distance of the patchwork, wooden 
dome ceiling, a glass section of which looks out to the forest. Down below, 
there’s a futon, and a small table and kitchen. Behind a curtain is a bathroom, 
with composting toilet and tiny tiled shower.

As well as European holidaymakers and Bay area weekenders, many of the guests 
who book are interested in the Tiny House movement. “They want to experience 
what it’s like before they commit to building something and living like that,” 
she added.


“The Mushroom Dome Cabin is a terrific example of some of the more unusual 
homes that are featured on our site,” said a spokesperson for Airbnb, which has 
an 80% replica of Mrache’s cabin in their HQ. “Like all of our superhosts, 
Kitty and Michael are committed to offering extraordinary hospitality, which is 
of course highly desirable to prospective guests.”

But wannabe visitors need to line up. 

The wait list is several months long, with every weekend booked through the 
spring and summer. So popular is The Mushroom Dome Cabin that it had only three 
vacant nights last year. (The couple also now rent a small studio on the 
property – The Hummingbird Haven Studio – and hope to build a treehouse in the 
future.)

“Doing this has made a huge difference to our income,” Mrache said. “For the 
first time, we’re not scraping by.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fairbnb-most-popular-rental-california-cabin-kitty-mrache%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27248b84f7687b9036b287bfa4a1368fb95f02a7%2F0_189_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Airbnb's%20most%20popular%20rental%3A%20a%20tiny%20cabin%20in%20the%20California%20woods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fairbnb-most-popular-rental-california-cabin-kitty-mrache%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Airbnb%27s%20most%20popular%20rental%3A%20a%20tiny%20cabin%20in%20the%20California%20woods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fairbnb-most-popular-rental-california-cabin-kitty-mrache%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27248b84f7687b9036b287bfa4a1368fb95f02a7%2F0_189_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
 A section of the ceiling looks on to the forest. Photograph: Courtesy of Kitty 
Mrache 
In her faded Airbnb logo T-shirt, Mrache said she was aware of criticism of 
Airbnb, and the part the tech company has played in rising rents, especially
around San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/04/san-francisco-voters-reject-proposition-f-restrict-airbnb-rentals>
.

“I understand how that can be a problem in a city if you have a greedy 
landlord renting out multiple listings, which could be for permanent 
residents,” she said. “But in the case of all the people I know renting– they 
don’t want to have a permanent resident in that space. We didn’t want to rent 
out permanently because I have four adult children who like to visit.”

But the Mrache children also have to wait in line. “My kids like to come and 
stay,” she said. “But they have to make an appointment.”
 