
Alan Nicholls opens the door to his sitting room and points to a photograph 
that takes pride of place. His son, also called Alan, has a ball in his hands 
and is standing alongside Peter Shilton, who was the Plymouth Argyle manager at 
the time. “That’s when Alan got called back to the ground after training, after 
being told he’d been picked forEngland Under-21s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england-under-21s>,” Nicholls says.

We walk through to the kitchen where there is a scrapbook full of newspaper 
cuttings on the table, a framed Evening Herald article on the wall – “Nicholls 
was a fleeting star who shone brightly at Argyle” is the headline – and a 
yellow and green Plymouth away shirt hanging from the door.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5a269167149bdc77ab59b0ab3e90671840b74f3%2F0_0_1012_648%2F1012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5a269167149bdc77ab59b0ab3e90671840b74f3%2F0_0_1012_648%2F1012.jpg>
 Alan Nicholls with Peter Shilton, his manager at Plymouth. Photograph: Western 
Morning News 
The shirt, which has “Nicholls” on the back and, poignantly, the number 20 
below, was presented to him at an annual golf tournament in Shropshire, where 
they play for a trophy in his son’s name. It will be worn for the first time on 
Saturday, when Nicholls, together with a group of close friends, makes the 
420-mile round trip from his home in Walsall to watch Plymouth host Exeter in a 
derby that takes place four days before the 20th anniversary of his son’s death.

A hugely talented goalkeeper with a maverick streak, Nicholls was 22 when he 
was killed riding as a pillion passenger on a motorcycle, on the A1 near 
Peterborough, just hours after playing for Stalybridge Celtic and only minutes 
after getting on the bike. Matthew Lindsey, the 25-year-old motorcyclist, also 
died in an accident that wrecked the lives of both families to such an extent 
that even now, almost two decades on, everything feels raw. “I always said to 
Alan: ‘Whatever you do, please don’t go on a motorbike’,” Nicholls’ father says.

Scott Lindsey, Matthew’s brother as well as Nicholls’ housemate and friend, 
was making the same journey back to Scunthorpe in the car for a night out – 
Nicholls was initially travelling with him – and it is harrowing to hear his 
vivid and traumatic account of a Saturday evening that went from laughing and 
joking one minute to identifying two bodies in a morgue a couple of hours later.

For Nicholls it was a tragic end to a colourful and chaotic life, and within 
that a football career that promised so much but imploded almost as quickly as 
it had spectacularly taken off. Nicholls went from playing for non-league 
Cheltenham Town in the Beazer Homes League in 1993 to lining up alongside Sol 
Campbell, Jamie Redknapp and Robbie Fowler for his country in 1994 to being 
sacked by Plymouth in 1995 after one off-field incident too many. Three months 
later he was buried wearing his England shirt.

Trying to piece together the complicated jigsaw puzzle that was Nicholls’ life 
reveals a remarkable and, ultimately, desperately sad tale that has largely 
gone untold outside Plymouth, where the stories of Nicholls’ nocturnal 
existence – he prepared for a man-of-the match debut against Birmingham City by 
going out on the town until the early hours – precocious talent and eccentric 
behaviour, on and off the pitch, are the stuff of legend.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5bec623be62f5f5c2073945d11312afe63cd92a%2F3057_5226_1296_983%2F1296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5bec623be62f5f5c2073945d11312afe63cd92a%2F3057_5226_1296_983%2F1296.jpg>
 England Under-21s v France, May 1994 
He was with Plymouth for only two years, making 79 appearances for the club, 
but for better or worse left an indelible mark on everyone who crossed his 
path. “Alan was like a tornado, he came in one door, went out another, there 
was chaos in between and before you knew it everything was finished,” says Mark 
Patterson, who played alongside Nicholls for Plymouth and tried, as best he 
could, to guide him on the right path. “Nobody will ever know what Alan could 
have done in his career. But, ability-wise, he should have been a millionaire 
by now. He was a hell of a talent.”

At a touch under 6ft, Nicholls was relatively small for a goalkeeper but the 
lack of height never felt like an issue because of his natural ability and a 
level of self-confidence that manifested itself in just about everything he 
did, whether rollocking experienced defenders, dribbling way out of his box or 
coming for crosses in a style that would never be found in a coaching manual. 
“He used to catch things one-handed at times,” Patterson says. “He was almost 
arrogant with it, because he was that good. I always remember my dad watching 
him and saying: ‘He’s a young Shilton.’”

He was not alone in thinking that – and it was the former England goalkeeper 
who showed more faith in Nicholls than anyone. As well as plucking him from 
non-league football and providing him the platform on which to shine in a 
Plymouth team who came close to winning promotion to the second tier in 1994, 
Shilton personally recommended Nicholls for an Under-21 call-up. While it was 
seen as just reward for Nicholls in an outstanding breakthrough season in 
professional football, Shilton would come to regret it.

Although a talented England side went on to win the 1994 tournament in Toulon, 
Nicholls’ only appearance came in a 3-0 defeat against France. While Shilton 
was surprised to learn that Nicholls had performed poorly – he was substituted 
after 78 minutes and culpable in one way or another for all three goals – much 
more disappointing was the phone call he received from Dave Sexton, the England 
Under-21 manager, when the players returned home. “Dave said: ‘Look, Peter, 
I’ve got to ring you because Alan wasn’t very well behaved out there.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc67e7f62eadfc0b8601672f4b6eb62982eeeae67%2F11_9_1100_648%2F1100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc67e7f62eadfc0b8601672f4b6eb62982eeeae67%2F11_9_1100_648%2F1100.jpg>
 Alan Nicholls, left, again with Shilton at Plymouth Argyle. Shilton says he 
tried to be a ‘father figure’ to the goalkeeper. Photograph: Western Morning 
News 
Shilton, who thought highly of Nicholls and admits he tried to be a “father 
figure” to him at Home Park, was left embarrassed by Sexton’s call and he now 
reflects on Toulon as “the turning point” in what had been a hugely promising 
career for his protege up until then.

“For the first time, I felt Alan had let me down,” Shilton says. “I remember 
taking Alan into my office and sitting him down before he went. I said: ‘You’ve 
got a great opportunity now to really put yourself on the map. You’ve done 
exceptionally well since you’ve joined us, so go over there, just keep your 
nose clean and if you get your chance, take it.’ But he didn’t take it. And 
that was Alan, unfortunately. He just didn’t seem to have the capacity to 
handle that sort of thing. For some reason he had a self-destruction button and 
that was the start of it when he went away with the Under-21s. It was probably 
a bit too much too soon. I think Alan went back to his old ways, being cocky 
and Jack the lad, and he probably lost his concentration and his attitude. And, 
you’ve got to say, that was probably Alan’s achilles heel.”

One of the tales that later emerged was that Nicholls had been playing up to 
his England team-mates in a hotel room by showing off his party trick, which 
involved smoking a packet-full of cigarettes at the same time, when Sexton 
gatecrashed the fun. Nicholls, so the story goes, was standing with his back to 
the door and submerged in a cloud of smoke, oblivious to the manager’s presence 
until the laughter stopped. A public dressing down followed the next morning.

There were also reports of a fracas over an unpaid hotel bill and an incident 
is alleged to have taken place involving a taxi after one of the matches, 
although Nicholls told his father that he was unfairly accused on that 
occasion. “Alan was telling me, whether it is true or not, the taxi was wrecked 
and they tried to push the blame on him,” he says. “I can’t remember who the 
other three in the taxi were, but Alan didn’t like that.”

Although Sexton and his staff were keen to see the back of Nicholls and his 
antics, several of the players that were in Toulon at that time speak warmly of 
their former team-mate. Darren Eadie, the erstwhile Norwich and Leicester 
winger, paints a picture of a happy-go-lucky character whose pranks helped to 
create the camaraderie that carried England to success. “Alan was the classroom 
joker but I think that was his way of fitting in, because it was a massive 
achievement for him to get into the squad in the first place,” Eadie says. 
“And, from a player’s point of view, you need somebody like that around when 
you’re away, almost like a Gazza, who will bend the rules a bit. He was a bit 
of an arse but the lads loved it.”

Trevor Sinclair, who was one of several players in that Under-21 squad who 
went on to become a full international, felt the same way. “I only knew Alan 
for a short time but it was a pleasure and when I found out about his death I 
was gutted that such a talent had left us,” he says. “Alan was a big character 
in the dressing room, fun and games all the time, and he didn’t mind people 
laughing at him either.

“I remember one day that someone hid his trainer, and he only had one pair 
with him, so he arrived at a game wearing his England tracksuit with only one 
shoe. Another time we went into Toulon and he’d forgotten his wallet and we 
were starving. Because he didn’t have his own money, I remember me, Jamie and 
Sol said: ‘OK, we’ll buy you a pizza but if we do that you’ve got to eat it in 
a certain time.’ I think he got to the last couple of slices and was almost 
sick. And, let’s get it right here, we won this tournament so all these jokes 
and all this messing about added to the team spirit and the togetherness as 
well as having decent ability.”

Nicholls was a showman in every sense. With Plymouth he turned the pitch into 
a stage and would often engage in banter with supporters while the game was 
going on, which only enhanced his reputation. “His party piece, I always 
remember, was turning around to the crowd and yawning when somebody had a shot 
at goal and it sailed over,” says his father, shaking his head and smiling.

Although Nicholls’ goalkeeping talent was obvious from a young age, so, too, 
was the flaw in his character that meant controversy followed him around. After 
attracting interest from all the top clubs in the Midlands as a schoolboy – he 
was born in Sutton Coldfield – Nicholls joined Wolverhampton Wanderers as an 
apprentice from school but was sacked inside his first year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60eb044db7e231db8298533f4bffe9ec1902120d%2F0_194_2731_3372%2F2731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60eb044db7e231db8298533f4bffe9ec1902120d%2F0_194_2731_3372%2F2731.jpg>
 Trevor Sinclair in action for England Under-21s in 1994 at the Toulon 
tournament where Alan Nicholls also played for the team. Photograph: Tony 
Marshall/Empics Sport 
“The [complimentary] ticket allocation, he started selling them with other 
players there, to make extra money,” Nicholls’ father says. “They were found 
out and they sacked all of them. They released the others but with Alan they 
kept his registration, which meant he couldn’t play first-team football for any 
other league club.”

Nicholls signed for Cradley Town in the West Midlands League Division One, 
which was way down the non-league ladder, and it was not long before Torquay 
came in for him. A deal was agreed with Cradley but the move collapsed because 
Wolves wanted a £5,000 fee as well as a 50% sell-on clause inserted.

Nicholls was effectively trapped in non-league football but he got the move 
that gave him the platform to return to the professional game when he signed 
for Cheltenham Town. Steve Daniels, Cradley’s manager at the time, remembers 
being invited to meet the Conference club’s board. “They asked me why they 
should sign Alan Nicholls,” Daniels says. “I said: ‘Because he’ll play for 
England.’ And I didn’t mean the Under-21s.”

In early 1992 Lindsay Parsons took over as Cheltenham’s manager and by the end 
of the following season he was lending Nicholls his club car to travel back and 
forth to Plymouth on trial. Parsons, who would go on to become Stoke’s chief 
scout under Tony Pulis, describes Nicholls as a “one-off” and admits he used to 
blame him for anything and everything that went wrong off the pitch. But he 
also had a soft spot for him and recognised his huge potential. “I did like 
Nico a lot,” Parsons says. “He would have been a Premier League player, without 
a doubt. He was brave as anything, he had a great left foot, he used to dribble 
the ball out from the penalty box almost to the halfway line, and you’d think 
one of these days he’s going to get caught. He was so cocksure of himself.”

Shilton had heard that Nicholls “could be a bit of a lad and liked a night 
out”, but he knew there was talent in his goalkeeping and in August 1993 
Plymouth paid Cheltenham an initial £5,000 and Wolves a similar sum to finally 
release him from his registration at Molineux. With Ray Newland the No1 and 
Shilton closing in on 1,000 appearances, Nicholls was down the pecking order at 
Plymouth but everything changed three weeks after his arrival when he was given 
a run-out in the second leg of a League Cup tie against Birmingham City. 
Nicholls was so impressive in a 2-0 win that it was impossible for Shilton to 
leave him out.

With one of England’s greatest goalkeepers as his mentor, Nicholls flourished 
and it was not long before Plymouth offered him a new contract amid talk of 
interest from Newcastle United after a number of excellent performances. “Alan 
could make saves that matter,” Shilton says. “He wasn’t the tallest keeper but 
he made up for it with his agility, confidence and bravery. He didn’t make many 
errors and he did have games where he could win us points.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26e43e058014fcf28cabc08a74af53d01632ffee%2F341_393_2210_3703%2F2210.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26e43e058014fcf28cabc08a74af53d01632ffee%2F341_393_2210_3703%2F2210.jpg>
 Alan Nicholls in goal for Cheltenham Town, the second non-league club he 
played for after he was sacked by Wolves for disciplinary reasons.
 Photograph: Barry Coombs/Empics Sport 
All the while Nicholls was enjoying himself off the pitch or, to borrow 
Patterson’s description, “living life at 100mph”. He racked up almost as many 
speeding fines as clean sheets and Plymouth’s nightclubs started to become his 
second home. Everything was fast and furious and there was no time to rest.

“Alan was a really nice boy but he was not the sort of pro who would eat 
breakfast, lunch and dinner and be in bed early in the evening,” says Chris 
Twiddy, who played alongside Nicholls at Plymouth and also shared a house with 
him. “He was restless, he didn’t have the ability to take it easy, he liked to 
be around people, he was a real social boy. I’m not saying he was out on the 
town every night but Alan wasn’t there if we were watching Match of the Day or 
a football game on the TV.”

In Paul Roberts’ book Peter Shilton’s Nearly Men, several of the Plymouth 
players say that Nicholls got away with far too much and that the manager 
should have come down harder on him. Shilton, however, rejects that criticism. 
“I never felt as though I wanted to wield the big stick with him too much,” he 
says. “I kind of wanted to be a bit more like a father figure, I never wanted 
to be really hard on him, I just had a theory that it wouldn’t be the right 
thing to do. And I felt if he was going to make it, he didn’t have anyone 
better to look up to and respect.”

Interestingly, Nicholls’ father says that Shilton was the only person who 
could ever get his son to listen and step back into line. Yet even with Shilton 
there were moments when Nicholls pushed the boundaries. His father cringes at 
the memory of something that happened after a game at Port Vale. “They’re all 
waiting for Shilts to come and I heard Alan, next to the coach, shout: ‘Come 
on, fatty!’ I thought: ‘You can’t speak to your manager like that.’ No one else 
would have got away with it.”

Peter Shilton | Small Talk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/mar/26/small-talk-peter-shilton-interview>
Although Nicholls was loud and, in many people’s eyes, arrogant, Patterson 
suspects that was a largely a “front”. One-to-one Nicholls could come across 
quite differently, as a short note in his father’s scrapbook suggests. A mother 
tells a story about how she approached Nicholls when she saw him in the stand 
at a reserve game to ask if he could sign a birthday card for her 11-year-old 
child. Nicholls offered to get the entire Plymouth squad to autograph it and 
said he would send it on. Instead he drove to Tavistock and turned up with it 
at their front door.

Nicholls’ popularity at Plymouth was rising all the time and for the majority 
of the 1993-94 campaign he was superb on the pitch, so much so that he 
virtually swept the board at the club’s end-of-season awards dinner. Yet he was 
not at his best in the 3-1 play-off semi-final second leg home defeat against 
Burnley that ended Plymouth’s promotion hopes and two weeks later he woke up to 
unforgiving headlines in the national press after that chastening Under-21 
debut against France.

“I remember the game,” Sinclair says. “And I do remember one of the goals; it 
was a speculative effort and he didn’t deal with it well. I think it must have 
been nerves. Almost everyone else was part of a Premier League team and Alan 
was with what was a League One club effectively. I remember Alan taking it 
quite heavily. I also remember the papers being quite relentless the next day – 
it was like: ‘Nicholls Nightmare’, and I did feel for him.”

Hindered by a knee injury as well as a couple of suspensions, Nicholls made 26 
league appearances for Plymouth the following season and there was a growing 
sense within the club that his hedonistic lifestyle was starting to catch up 
with him by the time Shilton departed in January 1995. “Alan did turn up a 
couple of times for training and got sent home because he’d been on the drink,” 
Patterson says. “And I knew exactly where he’d go – he’d always be at mine. He 
was helping with the wallpaper once. But he knew that my wife would tell him 
straight and he knew that he’d get it off me as well. I’d say to him: ‘You’re 
wasting your talent.’”

Yet the penny never dropped. Nicholls had already been sent two letters from 
the club warning him about his conduct – he had been fined £150 by magistrates 
after an incident in a nightclub in Torquay the previous summer – when he was 
arrested in August for drink driving after a collision with a taxi. Neil 
Warnock had taken charge by that point and the manager and the chairman, Dan 
McCauley, decided to cut Nicholls loose and terminate his contract. “He could 
have the world at this feet, but he hasn’t even got his feet on the ground,” 
McCauley told the Evening Herald.

Nicholls’ father is the first to admit that his son was “no angel and got into 
some scrapes”, yet he often wonders if things would have panned out differently 
at Plymouth if Shilton had stayed on as manager, or if his son had not broken 
up with his girlfriend, Lisa, with whom he had a young daughter. “The things he 
used to get up to, knowing Alan, didn’t surprise me,” he says. “Whether he got 
despondent with everything, I don’t know. Splitting up with Lisa … not that I’d 
blame that on Lisa for one minute. Whatever went on there was Alan’s fault.”

Desperate for another chance, Nicholls turned to Parsons, who managed him at 
Cheltenham and was working for Pulis at Gillingham in 1995. Nicholls went on 
trial at Priestfield and ended up signing a one-month contract that expired the 
day after his only first-team appearance, which was a 2-2 draw against Hereford 
United in the Auto Windscreens Shield. After several cruel twists of fate it 
turned out to be his last game in professional football.

On a Friday afternoon a couple of weeks later Nicholls was asked if he would 
be willing to help out Stalybridge, who needed a goalkeeper for their 
Conference game at Dover the following day as their regular No1 was suspended. 
Scott Lindsey, who lived with Nicholls and had recently signed for Dover, 
remembers the two of them laughing at the thought of playing against one 
another.

Everything from that point on is burned into Scott’s memory, right down to the 
amount of fuel his brother put into his motorbike just before tragedy struck. 
On the Friday night Scott dropped Nicholls at the Tollgate Hotel in Gravesend, 
where Stalybridge were staying, and the following morning he remembers hearing 
the sound of a motorbike outside his house in Gillingham.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0bfd0d1f974e0fb7867dcfc111066ea70e682ab%2F0_0_5737_3840%2F5737.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0bfd0d1f974e0fb7867dcfc111066ea70e682ab%2F0_0_5737_3840%2F5737.jpg>
 Scott Lindsey, whose brother Matthew was killed with Alan Nicholls in the 
motorcycle accident, at Swindon Town, where he works as a youth coach. 
Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
Keith, his father, travelled everywhere to see him play but that weekend had a 
problem with his car. Matthew, Scott’s older brother, who never normally went 
to football, offered to take his dad from Scunthorpe to Dover on the back of 
his Yamaha. “It was a superbike, one of the fastest road bikes in the world,” 
Scott says. “My brother was a brilliant bloke. But I just didn’t like the fact 
that my dad had done that for me – it was 210 miles.”

Scott drove Matthew and his dad to a match that Stalybridge won 3-1, with 
Nicholls given the captain’s armband for the day. Uncomfortable with the idea 
of his dad going home on the motorbike, Scott decided he would drive back to 
Scunthorpe and invited Nicholls to come along for a night out. They returned to 
Gillingham to pick up the motorbike and then set off for Scunthorpe, with Scott 
driving his car, his father in the passenger seat and Nicholls in the back. 
Matthew followed on the motorbike.

“We’d come off the A14 and we were on the A1,” Scott says. “There was a garage 
coming up and my brother flashed his lights and put his indicator on, so I 
clocked he wanted to come off. He needed to put a bit of fuel in and he wanted 
a fag. I said to my brother: ‘Are you OK?’ He said: ‘I’m bored of following 
your car.’ Alan turned round and said: ‘If you’re bored I’ll come on the back 
with you.’ I couldn’t believe it because in the car Alan had been saying how 
he’d never get on a motorbike again because he’d done it once and it put him 
off for life.

“Anyway, they started getting kitted up. My dad finished his fag – and this is 
the biggest mistake I made and I have to live with it – I turned round and 
said: ‘Right, we’re going to get going while you’re getting ready, just keep 
heading A1 north, see you in a bit.’

“We drove for 20 minutes to half an hour, I couldn’t see them and I started 
thinking: ‘I’m not happy.’ So I pulled up and we waited. It’s obviously dark 
and every single light you’re thinking: ‘This is them.’ Eventually we turned 
around and we go back, and we go back, and we go back, almost to near where we 
left them, and then we’re seeing blue lights through the trees. I said to my 
dad: ‘That’s them. Something has happened.’”

They drove to the next roundabout and turned the car around but the A1 was 
already closed off. Nicholls had been killed instantly. Matthew died shortly 
afterwards in hospital. No other vehicles were involved and there was no 
evidence of excessive speed, but the road was damp and witnesses said the bike 
braked sharply before fishtailing out of control.

“It was horrific,” Scott says. “We went to the hospital that night, to the 
morgue, and they asked us to identify the bodies. I couldn’t believe what I was 
doing. I’d been having banter with Alan earlier about him never getting on a 
motorbike. I’m now looking at his body, after he’s been killed on a motorbike. 
And I’m looking at my brother, who’s been there for me all my life, and he’s 
lying there as well.”

At 6am the following day Nicholls’ father was told the news that every parent 
dreads and 24 hours later it was splashed across the front and back pages in 
Plymouth. For many of the people who knew Nicholls there was a feeling of 
immense sadness – Shilton remembers being devastated – mixed with a horrible 
sense of inevitability. “Nobody could ever have seen what the outcome was going 
to be with the motorbike accident,” says Patterson. “But I remember having a 
conversation with a few old team-mates and we all agreed this was how it was 
always going to end with Alan.”

Nicholls’ funeral was held at St Paul’s Church in Halesowen, where he is 
buried beneath a headstone carrying the three lions crest and an etching of him 
making a flying save in goal for Plymouth. His father has the original photo of 
that image in his scrapbook and he also has a video of the Dover match, which 
Stalybridge sent on to him with a touching epitaph at the end.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e208cd2f36ffcb90eeefb4aabd93d7d05b1ea00%2F0_0_2816_2112%2Fmaster%2F2816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Nicholls%2C%20the%20maverick%20goalkeeper%20who%20should%20have%20played%20for%20England%20but%20died%20far%20too%20young&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F19%2Falan-nicholls-maverick-goalkeeper-plymouth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e208cd2f36ffcb90eeefb4aabd93d7d05b1ea00%2F0_0_2816_2112%2Fmaster%2F2816.jpg>
 The headstone of Alan Nicholls at St Paul’s Church in Halesowen. Photograph: 
Paul Roberts 
Time has not been much of a healer for Nicholls’ father and he knows that 
returning to Home Park will stir some emotions. He quickly makes the point that 
he “doesn’t want to get upset again” when told that his son was a hugely 
popular player and that the 20th anniversary of his passing will not be 
overlooked. Many fans will reflect on the years that have gone by and wonder 
what Nicholls could have been; others will enjoy some happy memories of what he 
was in a life far too short. “Alan could be a pain in the arse to put it 
mildly,” his father says, smiling. “But he was my boy and I was so proud of 
him.”
 