
The extreme warmth of 2016 has changed so much for the people of the Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> that even their language is becoming 
unmoored from the conditions in which they now live.

 The Yupik, an indigenous people of western Alaska, have dozens of words for 
the vagaries of sea ice, which is not surprising given the crucial role it 
plays in subsistence hunting and transportation. But researchers havenoted 
<http://file///Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/ARC2016.text%20only.embargoed.pdf>
 that some of these words, such as “tagneghneq” (thick, dark, weathered ice), 
are becoming obsolete.

Rapid rise in methane emissions in 10 years surprises scientists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/12/rapid-rise-methane-emissions-10-years-surprises-scientists>
After thousands of years of use, words are vanishing as quickly as the ice 
they describe due to climate change. The native inhabitants are also in peril – 
there are 31 Alaskan towns and citiesat imminent risk 
<http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-551> from the melting ice and coastal 
erosion. Many will have to relocate or somehow adapt.

 “In December, we normally have waters covered in ice but right now we have 
open water out there,” said Vera Metcalf, director of theEskimo Walrus 
Commission <http://www.kawerak.org/ewc.html#>, which represents 19 native 
communities stretching along Alaska’s western coast. “We are so dependent upon 
sea ice conditions. It’s our life, our culture.”

 Arctic sea ice extent slumped to a record low in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/arctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record>
, winnowed away by the warming air, warming seas and unhelpful wind patterns. 
The region’s 2016 temperature has been3.5C warmer than a century ago 
<http://file:///Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/ARC2016.text%20only.embargoed.pdf>
. In some locations the divergence from the long-term average has been an 
eye-watering 20C.

 On 21 November, the decline on the long-term average of sea ice extent for 
that day was 888,000 sq miles (2.3m sq km) – an area 10 times larger than the 
UK, but smaller than the long-term average. “Almost every year now we look at 
the record of sea ice and say ‘wow’, but this year it was like ‘three times 
wow’,” said Tad Pfeffer, a geophysicist at the University of Colorado. “This 
year has been a big exaggeration on the trends we’ve already been seeing.”

 These numbers have resonance for people who require dependable rhythms in the 
environment in order to survive. In remote Alaskan communities, the stores sell 
goods priced to reflect their journey – $20 for a pizza, $15 for a gallon of 
milk. If you can’t butcher a 1,000lb walrus because there is no sea ice to 
support both of you, then you might well be left hungry.

 “The window of opportunity for hunting continues to shrink,” Metcalf said. 
“The communities are worried about this because food insecurity is something we 
are now having to tackle every single day.”

Murmansk's silver lining: Arctic city expects renaissance with ice melt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/22/murmansks-silver-lining-arctic-city-banks-on-ice-melt-for-its-renaissance>
 Metcalf grew up on St Lawrence island, a far-flung piece of the US that sits 
just 36 miles from Russia in the Bering Sea. The island is thought to be one of 
the last exposed fragments of a land bridge that connected North America to 
Asia during the last ice age.

 In 2013, the island’s two main communities managed to catch 
<https://www.adn.com/rural-alaska/article/disaster-declared-subsistence-walrus-hunt-st-lawrence-island/2013/09/03/>
 just a third of the walruses they normally do. Last year, Gambell, the largest 
settlement,snared 
<https://www.adn.com/rural-alaska/article/remote-gambell-regrouping-after-three-years-low-walrus-hunts/2015/07/09/>
 just 36 – down from the 600 it could expect just a few years ago.

 Sea ice is further out from land than it once was and is becoming 
treacherously thin for hunters to traverse. Walruses, which require sea ice for 
resting and giving birth, often have to resort to heaving themselves on to 
crowded strips of land. These grand tusked beasts can trample each other to 
death in such conditions.

 “It’s not like the walrus populations are changing, it’s that the climate is 
changing the conditions,” Metcalf said. “We are trying to plan better but we 
can’t go out every day and hunt. We can try to adapt and hunt caribou or moose 
but it’s not easy. It comes at a cost to us.”
Walrus catch graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-13T12:16:06/embed.html>
The Arctic is warming at twice the rate of the rest of the world and there are 
“early signs” that this temperature increase is speeding up, according to 
Jeremy Mathis, director of the Arctic program at the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration. Mathis moved to Fairbanks,Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska>, in 2007 and even in that time he 
has seen startling changes – the -40C winters he endured in the first few years 
have almost completely disappeared.

 “For people who live in the Arctic, there is no debate over whether their 
environment is changing,” he said. “We are seeing a destabilization of the 
environment in the Arctic. The ice is melting earlier and earlier and coming 
back later and later in the year. For people here that means a clear impact 
upon food security and their way of life.”

 Frost locked deep in the soils is melting, causing buildings to subside. 
Communities are seeing their coastlines erode and are increasingly exposed to 
lashing storms without the protective barrier of sea ice.

 Several Alaskan towns and villages are wrestling over whether to fight these 
changes or retreat to relative safety. Two coastal villages, Shishmaref and 
Kivalina,have voted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/18/alaska-shishmaref-vote-move-coastal-erosion-rising-sea-levels>
 to relocate while a third, Newtok, has taken the first tentative steps to do 
so.

The warmth of 2016 – almost certain to be a global record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/18/2016-locked-into-being-hottest-year-on-record-nasa-says>
 – has added to the sense of haste. The regrowth of sea ice as Alaska enters 
winter has been so painfully slow that many communities will be left without a 
buffer to storms next year. Should a large storm hit, it could prove disastrous.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Falaska-sea-ice-vanishing-climate-change-indigenous-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39befb8ffd1449e21edb70024ba7e182005138c9%2F0_10_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alaska%20indigenous%20people%20see%20culture%20slipping%20away%20as%20sea%20ice%20vanishes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Falaska-sea-ice-vanishing-climate-change-indigenous-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alaska%20indigenous%20people%20see%20culture%20slipping%20away%20as%20sea%20ice%20vanishes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Falaska-sea-ice-vanishing-climate-change-indigenous-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39befb8ffd1449e21edb70024ba7e182005138c9%2F0_10_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 People and a dog hunt for ducks near Newtok, Alaska. Newtok has a population 
of approximately of 375 ethnically Yupik people. Photograph: Andrew 
Burton/Getty Images 
Such a calamity would at least free up money from the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (Fema). The cost of relocating a village of just a few 
hundred people is around $200m – a bill that neither the federal nor Alaskan 
government is keen to pick up. Some people in remote communities note, darkly, 
that a ruinous storm would at least be followed by federal dollars that would 
allow them to fortify or move.

“These communities need to be moved as soon as possible before a large storm 
hits,” said Victoria Herrmann, managing director of theArctic Institute 
<http://www.thearcticinstitute.org/>. “There hasn’t been much guidance as to 
whether they can move or who will pay for it. There are around 230 villages 
affected by sea level rise and they will all need a plan over the next few 
years as sea ice continues to retreat.”

It takes a certain stoic hardiness to live in a place of such frigid cold. But 
Herrmann said that even those who have had to adapt to changes in the past have 
found the unravelling of 2016 “very scary”. She added: “What we are seeing is 
incredible. It’s quite frightening in terms of what it means for the future.”

Trump's transition: sceptics guide every agency dealing with climate change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics>
A solution doesn’t appear imminent. The US has no national sea level rise 
plan, no system to deal with displaced people. Even as the country’s first 
climate change refugees emerge from within its own borders, the issue is very 
much on the sidelines.The incoming president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics>
 isn’t sure what the fuss is about, vacillating between calling climate change 
a “hoax” concocted by the Chinese or simply claiming that “nobody really knows” 
if it exists.

While the politics plays out, wrenching decisions will have to be made. 

“Having to move elsewhere is unimaginable,” said Metcalf. “As an elder told me 
the other day, we are not going anywhere. We’ve been here for centuries. But we 
may have to consider it, for the sake of our children and grandchildren.”
 