
It’s said that Shakespeare wrote The Merry Wives of Windsor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/15/best-shakespeare-productions-merry-wives-of-windsor>
 because Elizabeth I was so taken with the character of Falstaff in Henry IV 
that she demanded he got a play of his own, depicting “Falstaff in love”. 
Elizabeth is not the only person to have thought a minor character might have a 
lot more to say if given the chance. Every actor playing the third 
spear-carrier on the right probably thinks their character is the pivot of the 
drama, and has worked out an entire backstory for them. A really good actor can 
make Celia seem infinitely more interesting than the lovelorn Rosalind; Banquo 
as complex as Macbeth.

Playwrights play this game, too. Tom Stoppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/jan/17/4> did it most famously in 
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/01/rosencrantz-guildernstern-dead-review>
 and Shakespeare’s plays seem particularly ripe for this approach.Katie Mitchell
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/14/british-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell>
, Alice Birch and Chloe Lamford’sOphelias Zimmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/18/ophelias-zimmer-review-katie-mitchell-hamlet-royal-court>
 at the Royal Court reimagines Hamlet entirely from the view of Ophelia and the 
things she hears, sees and experiences from inside her bedroom. As the evening 
progresses, that space feels as if it is becoming smaller and smaller as she 
drowns in the screaming silence that comes with being a character in a play who 
has not been given a voice by Shakespeare. At a post-show discussion at the 
Royal Court, Mitchell said she was working withMartin Crimp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/dec/16/martin-crimp-moliere> on another 
production that aims to put another marginalised young woman – Miranda from The 
Tempest – centre stage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fophelia-minor-characters-shakespeare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5de6b59a3ef5057a95d79feb88e33f57c41f9031%2F0_0_5386_3232%2F5386.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alas%2C%20poor%20Ophelia%3A%20the%20minor%20characters%20who%20deserve%20the%20spotlight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fophelia-minor-characters-shakespeare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alas%2C%20poor%20Ophelia%3A%20the%20minor%20characters%20who%20deserve%20the%20spotlight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Ftheatreblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Fophelia-minor-characters-shakespeare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5de6b59a3ef5057a95d79feb88e33f57c41f9031%2F0_0_5386_3232%2F5386.jpg>
 Suhayla El-Bushra’s The Iphigenia Quartet. Photograph: Helen Murray 
In fact, there’s a lot of it about. Jane Asher played the title role in CP 
Taylor’s Ophelia <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2004/nov/06/theatre.stage> 
at Oxford Playhouse in 1977, and a year later the feminist playwright Melissa 
Murray considered the character from a lesbian perspective. There have been 
some fascinating feminist perspectives: one of my favourites isElaine 
Feinstein’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/audio/2010/mar/12/elaine-feinstein-long-life>
 Lear’s Daughters, which takes you back to the sisters’ childhoods and makes 
you understand why they behave the way they do in Shakespeare’s play.


Sometimes it’s not even a minor character who gets to hold the stage, but one 
who never appears. Characters who traditionally appear only as off-stage 
figures suddenly find themselves in the spotlight, for example inSharman 
Macdonald’s <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/mar/17/theatre> After 
Juliet, which gives voice to a vengeful Rosaline, Romeo’s first love who was 
brushed aside and so quickly forgotten. Helen Cooper’s Mrs Vershinin reclaims a 
woman who never even manages to get on stage in Three Sisters and is described 
only through her unfaithful husband’s eyes. Suhayla El-Bushra’s play, one of 
four making up theIphigenia Quartet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/04/the-iphigenia-quartet-review-gate-london>
 at the Gate, all re-examine Euripides’ Iphigenia in Aulis from multiple 
viewpoints, putting the shadowy victim centre stage.

I’ve always longed to see more of Regina in Ibsen’s Ghosts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/sep/20/richard-eyre-spirit-ibsen-ghosts>
 and find out what happens to her, and I love the eccentric Charlotta in The 
Cherry Orchard who does magic tricks and knows so little about her past.

Which minor characters in major plays do you think deserve a place in the 
spotlight?
 