
Greece’s leftwing prime minister Alexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras> has lambasted international 
creditors supporting the thrice bailed-out country for exacerbating its 
problems by failing to agree on how to address its burgeoning debt problem.


Speaking at the Thessaloniki annual trade fair, where Greek leaders 
traditionally outline economic policy, Tsipras blamed a spat between the EU and 
the International Monetary Fund for putting off badly needed private investors.

“I would say that what is creating conditions of delay in regaining trust of 
markets and investors is the constant clash and disagreements between the IMF 
and European institutions,” he told reporters in a traditional no-holds-barred 
exchange.

The dispute has also held up the nation’s participation in the European 
Central Bank’s quantitative easing programme, which is vital to the restoration 
of confidence and a faster return to growth. “A country which has made such 
harsh adjustment cannot wait much more,” he said of the six years of gruelling 
austerity enforced as the price of rescue from bankruptcy. “It is entitled to 
fair regulation of the debt issue.”

Saving his biggest criticism for Germany – the largest provider of more than 
€300bn (£254bn) in emergency fundsGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> has received since May 2010 – 
Tsipras said resolving Athens’ unmanageable debt pile was not a bilateral issue 
but was of international consequence. Germany, which is holding national 
elections next year, has ruled out addressing the issue in the near future.

Tsipras said: “The problem has an international dimension because a solution 
to this problem will play a decisive role in the development of the European 
economy which, in turn, determines the international economy.” At €380bn, the 
equivalent of 180% of GDP,Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> has 
the highest debt load in the 19-bloc eurozone.

The IMF, citing deep-seated concerns over the country’s debt sustainability, 
has still not decided whether it should participate in the third bailout Athens 
signed up to after months of tortuous negotiations in mid-2015.

In a keynote address before entrepreneurs on Saturday, Tsipras said there was 
finally “light at the end of the tunnel” to end Greece’s downturn, the likes of 
which no advanced western economy has known in modern times.

Greek national output has been slashed by almost a third and unemployment, at 
more than 26%, remains the highest inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. “We are passing from the nadir 
of a seven-year recession to positive signs of growth,” he said, predicting the 
economy would grow by 2.7% in 2017.

In an unexpected departure from his Syriza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syriza> party’s ideological antipathy to 
private enterprise, the leftist leader appealed to international and domestic 
businessmen to invest “without hesitation” in the Greek economy, insisting: “It 
will be mutually beneficial both for you and our country.”

Under his stewardship, his Syriza-led coalition had a five-year plan to create 
a “new Greece” – reinvigorated and free of corruption and vested interests – by 
the time it marked its 200th anniversary as a modern state in 2021.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Falexis-tsipras-greece-criticises-creditors-thessaloniki%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F514d29fc505b978cf20b13373434069591751ac8%2F0_227_3898_2338%2F3898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexis%20Tsipras%20claims%20creditors%20are%20making%20Greek%20crisis%20worse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Falexis-tsipras-greece-criticises-creditors-thessaloniki%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexis%20Tsipras%20claims%20creditors%20are%20making%20Greek%20crisis%20worse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Falexis-tsipras-greece-criticises-creditors-thessaloniki%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F514d29fc505b978cf20b13373434069591751ac8%2F0_227_3898_2338%2F3898.jpg>
 Trade unionists protest in Thessaloniki. Photograph: Sotiris Barbarousis/EPA 
Throughout Greece’s financial ordeal, prime ministers have used the 
Thessaloniki trade fair – the biggest in the Balkan peninsula - to make 
promises that few can ever keep.

In this, Tsipras was no different. Despite the country’s financial 
straitjacket – and threats by creditors that aid will dry up without further 
reforms - he pledged that Greeks would see instant relief in the form of funds 
extracted from a recent auction of private television licences.

The government, he said, would begin using the €246m it had gained from the 
sale towards strengthening the battered welfare state by providing free meals 
at schools, employing an extra 10,000 doctors and securing supplementary 
kindergarden classes for those hardest hit by the crisis.

But as Tsipras spoke, thousands of people demonstrated outside the exhibition 
halls against a government widely perceived to have betrayed its original 
rallying cry to overturn austerity, with trade unionists forecasting that this 
winter may be the worst yet.
 