
Inspired by hero Lleyton Hewitt, Australian teenager Alex De Minaur fought out 
a gruelling five-set win over Austrian journeyman Gerald Melzer in the first 
round of theAustralian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>.


The Australian Davis Cup captain watched from the stands as the 17-year-old 
fought back from a match point down to record a 5-7, 6-3, 2-6, 7-6 (7-2), 6-1 
triumph on his grand slam debut.


Related: Bernard Tomic beats Thomaz Bellucci in the Australian Open first 
round – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/16/bernard-tomic-v-thomaz-bellucci-australian-open-round-one-live>

“Words can’t describe how I’m feeling right now ... definitely the happiest 
moment of my life,” De Minaur said. “I never felt such an unbelievable 
experience with a crowd. They were loud the whole match. I’m pretty sure they 
got me through that match.

“I just wanted to put on a good show, fight for every point. At the end of the 
day it went my way. I couldn’t be happier.”

As Hewitt did so many times at Melbourne Park, De Minaur fought back from the 
brink, saving a match point in the fourth set and working tirelessly 
throughout. The teenager broke Melzer seven times and hit 50 winners in a 
marathon encounter that lasted three hours and 43 minutes.

The Spain-based youngster faces a tough encounter against big-serving American 
No31 seed Sam Querrey in the second round.


“I’ll probably just try to get the return back and then we’ll see what 
happens,” De Minaur said. “But I’m going to try and focus and play my game. 
We’ll see where that takes me. I can’t wait to get back on court.

At the same time, Bernard Tomic won his first match of the summer to storm 
into the second round at Melbourne Park. Australia’s 27th seed blasted past 
Brazilian baseliner Thomaz Bellucci 6-2, 6-1, 6-4 in just one hour 37 minutes 
on Monday.

The statement win comes after the 24-year-old was widely criticised in the 
Open lead-up for supposedly being out of shape. He looked a man on a mission 
from the get-go, showing some lightning footwork to run down a drop shot and 
force a service break in the second game of the match.

Tomic consolidated for a 3-0 lead and never looked back, breaking the South 
American four more times while crunching 12 aces on his own serve. The former 
Open junior champion also hammered 38 winners in reaching the second round for 
the eighth time in nine attempts.

Tomic next plays the Dominican Republic’s Victor Estrella Burgos, who saw off 
Britain’s Aljaz Bedene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/aljaz-bedene-loses-to-victor-estrella-burgos-in-australian-open-first-round>
, on Wednesday for a spot in the last 32.

But there was disappointment for James Duckworth and Sam Groth, who both fell 
in their opening matches.

Duckworth, playing his sixth Australian Open, was beaten by Italian Paolo 
Lorenzi in four sets. The 24-year-old fought back from two sets to love down 
before succumbing 6-4, 7-6 (7-4), 6-7 (7-4), 6-4.

Big-serving local wildcard Groth looked sharp early against Belgian Steve 
Darcis before going down to the world No71 Darcis 3-6, 6-3, 6-2, 6-2 on Monday 
night.
 