
SIGH, CLAUDIO

Where are all the cheese-grinned sausage-makers now, eh? Or those fancy 
spaghetti vendors or the high-end ale pedlars? Or any of the other gurning 
bozos who pitched up at Claudio Ranieri’s press conferences when everything was 
peachy last season, eager to associate their products with the happiest 
sporting triumph of the age? Nowhere to be seen, that’s where. In Ranieri’s 
hour of greatest need all the PR-savvy artisans have vanished. Off making 
pizzas for Antonio Conte, no doubt, or good honest chip butties for Tony Pulis. 
Or jelly babies for Eddie Howe.

Marc Pugh’s half-volley drives Bournemouth past Leicester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/bournemouth-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
So Ranieri is going to have to clamber clear to a fresh air zone all by 
himself.Tuesday night’s 1-0 defeat at Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/bournemouth-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 left Leicester just four points clear of the relegation latrine and confirmed 
that Saturday’s win over Manchester City was not a turning point. No surprise 
there, of course, as not every team in the Premier League is managed by a 
silver spoon-sucking slickster who views tackling and defending as vulgar 
trifles. “The performance was good for us, of course it wasn’t possible to make 
the same performance as against Manchester City, but it was good,” blabbed 
Ranieri after his team’s seventh defeat from eight Premier League away matches 
this season.

The Italian is kidding no one. Even sycophantic hacks have stopped smiling 
with him. His team’s title defence, meanwhile, is provoking laughter even from 
Buster Douglas. “In [Big Cup] we played so well,” continued Ranieri. “In 
Premier League no. Why? I don’t know.” See, definitely not kidding anyone.

What to do now, that’s the question. Admit that everything is as it should be 
this season, that last season was the blip? Recognise that opponents are 
revelling in the hole in his team’s midfield and stop persisting with 4-4-2? 
See if any bakers or sausage-makers will even take his calls any more? Or try 
to inspire a surge to safety by adding a fresh face to the backroom staff, 
someone with a reasonable track record and a big point to prove. Someone such 
as, say, Nigel Pearson?

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Scott Murray from 8pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of Crystal Palace 1-2 
Manchester United, while Tim Hill will be clockwatching the rest of the Premier 
League action to within an inch of its life. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“Such a parting of the ways is always difficult, particularly so on a personal 
level as I have worked very closely with Gary and have got to know him well. 
Our relationship was very strong but in football you can never stand still” – 
Birmingham City suit Panos Pavlakis onBlues’ decision to sack Gary Rowett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/birmingham-city-sack-manager-gary-rowett>
, who took over at St Andrew’s in 2014, steering them away from Championship 
relegation and to the point where they sit today, seventh in the second tier. 
“New owners Trillion Trophy Asia Limited remains determined to lead the club to 
a bright and exciting future,” cheered a club statement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-fiver-claudio-ranieri-leicester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95587088ae9836eb4c264f4d22dc4ad628acc761%2F0_347_5963_3577%2F5963.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20All%20the%20PR-savvy%20artisans%20have%20vanished&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-fiver-claudio-ranieri-leicester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20All%20the%20PR-savvy%20artisans%20have%20vanished&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-fiver-claudio-ranieri-leicester-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95587088ae9836eb4c264f4d22dc4ad628acc761%2F0_347_5963_3577%2F5963.jpg>
 Zola? Pearson!? Photograph: ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
FIVER LETTERS

“First in the queue to suggest José E Gutiérrez (yesterday’s Fiver letters) 
didn’t deserve to win the letter o’ the day” – Sid McDonnell (and 1,056 others).

“I fully concur with the sentiments expressed yesterday by José. Actually, 
last year I submitted a comment to a MBM report referencing Unforgiven, where 
Little Bill Daggett (Gene Hackman) says to William Mundy (Clint Eastwood): ‘I 
don’t deserve to die like this.’ To which Mundy replies: ‘Deserve’s got nothin’ 
to do with it!’ The same applies in sports, absent an egregious refereeing 
mistake, as José noted. On the other hand, I do deserve to win the lottery” – 
Mike MacKenzie.

“Following on from José’s complaint yesterday about Premier League commentary 
that drives him crazy, I’d like to add my own: the use of ‘just about’. As in 
‘he just about dribbled past his man’ meaning he successfully dribbled past his 
man. Here in the USA! USA!! USA!!!, ‘just about’ means ‘almost, but not quite’ 
so I was just about confused the first few times I heard that phrase used 
during a match” – Beau Blackwell.

“When the player in possession loses control, kicks the ball too far ahead of 
themselves and is robbed of it or it goes out, our commentators say they have 
‘overrun the ball’. They havenot! If they leave the ball behind when attempting 
a dribble or, if when expecting a pass, they have made their run too soon and 
the ball is therefore passed behind them,then they have overrun the ball” – 
Richard Fernandez.

“José writes that he was driven away from American sports because of the 
commercials and constant idiotic drivel that passes for commentary. He’s 
obviously never had to sit through a Clive Tyldesley/Andy Townsend gibber-fest. 
Lucky sod” – Lee Gardner.

“If José really doesn’t like constant idiotic drivel, what on earth is he 
doing reading The Fiver?” – David Maddock.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
also tweet The Fiver.Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … 
David Maddock.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/uk?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

NEWS, BITS AND BOBS

Barry Bennell, the former Crewe Alexandra youth-team coach, has been remanded 
in custody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/14/former-football-coach-barry-bennell-remanded-child-sex-charges>
 after appearing in court charged with sexual assaults against a boy in the 
1980s. He is scheduled to appear at Chester crown court on 11 January.

Fresh off a first win in six games, Everton boss Ronald Koeman is swinging for 
the fences, after Arsène Wenger got a huff-on athis team’s 2-1  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
Goodison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/everton-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
. “I am not surprised about Wenger and his comments,”whooped Koeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/arsene-wenger-ronald-koeman-mark-clattenburg-everton-arsenal>
. “It is the third time in a row I won at home against Arsenal as a manager and 
three times in a row it was about the referee.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-fiver-claudio-ranieri-leicester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab239879abfae3432749ba9988281548e6b96db3%2F136_0_2367_1756%2F2367.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20All%20the%20PR-savvy%20artisans%20have%20vanished&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-fiver-claudio-ranieri-leicester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20All%20the%20PR-savvy%20artisans%20have%20vanished&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-fiver-claudio-ranieri-leicester-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab239879abfae3432749ba9988281548e6b96db3%2F136_0_2367_1756%2F2367.jpg>
 Cech, mate. Photograph: McNulty/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
Chelsea’s Eden Hazard is knacked enough to miss out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/eden-hazard-out-chelsea-squad-sunderland-injury-knock-west-bromwich-albion>
 on Wednesday’s trip to Sunderland.

Southend United striker Nile Ranger has been charged with fraud and money 
laundering offences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/nile-ranger-southend-united-charged-fraud-money-laundering>
, in relation to the obtaining of a vulnerable person’s bank account details by 
phone with a view to getting hold of their cash.

Augsburg have axed coach Dirk Schuster after one win in nine Bundesliga games. 
“After deep analysis of the current sporting situation club officials reached 
the conclusion that there were differences with regard to the sporting 
development and the way Augsburg plays football,” sniffed the club.

Spurs are making Paul Mitchell, their head of recruitment, work out his 
16-month notice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/tottenham-hotspur-paul-mitchell-recruitment-notice-period>
 [SIXTEEN-MONTH NOTICE – Fiver Vidiprinter Ed] before leaving the club.

And Kashima Antlers will lose to Real Madrid in Sunday’s Club World Cup final 
afterbeating Atlético Nacional 3-0 in the semis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/kashima-antlers-beat-atletico-nacional-reach-club-world-cup-final>
. “We persevered and persevered and now we’re in the final,” cooed Kashima 
manager Masatada Ishii. “We’ve got one more game which we hope to win. We will 
be fighting for all of Japan.”

STILL WANT MORE?

Marina Hyde gets stuck into football’s latest nuclear affront with inevitably 
entertaining results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/14/loris-karius-neville-gary-phil-liverpool-goalkeeper-sky-sports>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-fiver-claudio-ranieri-leicester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f180cb0e7b25c0cf89e346be5c93bc80b68ab59%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20All%20the%20PR-savvy%20artisans%20have%20vanished&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-fiver-claudio-ranieri-leicester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20All%20the%20PR-savvy%20artisans%20have%20vanished&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fthe-fiver-claudio-ranieri-leicester-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f180cb0e7b25c0cf89e346be5c93bc80b68ab59%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 It’s good. Composite: Manuel Queimadelos Alonso/Getty Images; Matt 
McNulty/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
This is pretty, pretty good: on the road to Ayr United with Hibs fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/away-days-photo-essay-scottish-football-ayr-hibs>
.

When players on loan score against their own clubs, and multisyllabic Malagasy 
surnames.It can only be this week’s Knowledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/when-footballers-on-loan-score-against-their-own-clubs>
.

Ballon sur bitume: celebrating street football in France, courtesy of Iman 
Amrani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/balllon-sur-bitume-street-football-france>
.

Pep Guardiola, Ronald Koeman and the difficulties of tackling a full English. 
By Paul Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/14/pep-guardiola-ronald-koeman-manchester-city-everton-full-english>
.

It’s MLS season review time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/seattle-gerrard-2016-mls-season-review>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>!


JUST ONE MORE SLEEP UNTIL THE FIVER XMAS AWARDS 2016
 