
Economies across Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> risk 
losing out ifLondon’s <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> position as a 
dominant financial centre is threatened as a result ofBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, a deputy governor of the 
Bank of England <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> 
has warned.

Sir Jon Cunliffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/26/sir-jon-cunliffe-profile-bank-england>
 told an audience in London on Thursday that the outcome of the negotiations 
between the UK and the remaining 27 members of theEU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> was “not a zero-sum game”. He said that 
while it was possible that some activities carried out in London would need to 
move elsewhere in Europe, it would take time for any one financial centre to 
acquire the “cluster” effect of the capital, where bankers, lawyers and 
accountants are all assembled in one place.

“It is conceivable that, given time, these effects and the benefits they bring 
in terms of more efficient allocation of capital and risk could be replicated 
elsewhere in Europe,” said Cunliffe. “It is in my view more likely that if they 
are lost in London, they would be lost toEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – for the foreseeable future at 
the least.


“Fragmentation of wholesale financial market activity in Europe, to the extent 
that it occurs, is likely to have a general cost to European economies, 
including the UK. And to the extent that the transition to whatever new 
arrangements will apply is not orderly and smooth, the costs and risks will be 
greater.”
 Sir Jon Cunliffe. Photograph: PA 
Cunliffe told a House of Lords committee earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/lost-city-business-brexit-unlikely-to-go-to-eu-rivals-cunliffe-bank-of-england-new-york>
 that New York would be the most likely winner of any business lost from 
London. Financial centres such as Paris, Frankfurt and Dublin are also jostling 
to win business.

In his speech 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech934.pdf>
 on Thursday, Cunliffe warned the financial services industry that there would 
be no easing of regulation and that the Bank was looking at the fund management 
industry to ensure it can cope with customers withdrawing funds. He repeated 
that the Bank wanted to be certain that the fund management industry would not 
transmit risks across the financial system.

He said that while it is now eight years since the banking crisis, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/dec/28/markets-credit-crunch-banking-2008>
 memories were not about to fade. “As far as the Bank is concerned, there will 
be no going back to the future. The great financial crisis reminded us that the 
failure of the financial system, though rare, is possible,” Cunliffe said.


“Contrary to the received wisdom pre-crisis, we learned that greater scale, 
complexity and sophistication of financial markets can make the system more, 
not less, vulnerable.”


 