
Guy Fawkes is often the most polluted evening of the year. Smoke from bonfires 
and fireworks can build up in our towns and cities. This smoke contains a 
unique mixture of metal particles that are used to propel and colour fireworks. 
These include red (strontium or lithium), blue (copper) and bright green and 
white (barium).

Lead, titanium and antimony produce crackles and sparkles, and potassium, 
aluminium and toxic organic compounds are used as rocket propellants. 
Ironically, these are many of the same pollutants that industry goes to great 
lengths tofilter from the chimneys of waste incinerators 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1352231015300753> and 
factories.

How can we know when the air we are breathing is harmful?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/09/air-quality-harmful-sensors-map-pollutionwatch>
Last weekend, a steady wind dispersed the pollution quickly, avoiding the 
problems seen in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/07/pollutionwatch-fire-smoke> 
when pollution in the West Midlands, Merseyside, Manchester and Yorkshire 
reached the top level of 10 on the UK air pollution index. This year, the 
maximum was measured in Swansea, which reached index level four. Even in Lewes, 
East Sussex,where Guy Fawkes is celebrated with great zeal 
<http://www.lewesbonfirecelebrations.com/>, air pollution remained low this 
year.

It is unclear if Guy Fawkes pollution is mainly caused by fireworks or 
bonfires, or if they are both to blame. New Year and Diwali are celebrated with 
fireworks only, and do not normally lead to widespread pollution in the UK. 
However, this yearDiwali triggered the start of a severe smog episode in Delhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/toxic-smog-covers-delhi-after-diwali>
 that hasextended into November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/07/every-breath-is-an-effort-delhi-residents-suffer-amid-smog-crisis>
.

In Scandinavia, Germany, Switzerland, Austria and parts of the Netherlands, 
Easter is marked by mass bonfire events but no fireworks. During 2014,smoke 
from these fires spread over a wide area 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1352231016304988> including 
northern France.
 