
In five words

 Alleys, imperial architecture, concrete sprawl

Sound of the city

Old Beijingers have a hobby of keeping caged birds that sing – their bright, 
melodic chirps are a pleasant wake-up call, even if you’re not an early riser. 
In the narrowhutongs <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hutong>, their tones echo 
alongside the boisterous conversations of residents, the thick Beijing accent 
unmistakable anywhere. But these oases are never far away from wide-scale 
chaos: bad urban planning from the Mao era means that huge roads cut across the 
fabric of the city, so the sound of cars is a constant in the capital.

Best building
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd31ce7e981c2e8ef8907d742755c4f545f7bd1c8%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Beijing%3A%20caged%20birds%2C%20smog%20and%20internet%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Beijing%3A%20caged%20birds%2C%20smog%20and%20internet%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd31ce7e981c2e8ef8907d742755c4f545f7bd1c8%2F0_0_4256_2832%2F4256.jpg>
 Gives you goosebumps … Zhengyici wooden theatre 
Hidden in the southern part of the historical area of Qianmen, is one of the 
most wonderfully preserved wooden theatres in China, Zhengyici, built in 1688. 
The outside, in keeping with Beijing’s traditional courtyard home style of
siheyuan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/17/story-cities-beijing-earliest-planning-document-history>
, is inconspicuous. But inside, it’s a two-floor space with fantastic acoustics 
for classical performances, and fewer than 100 seats. The roofed stage, when 
flooded with light, flushes bright red – so atmospheric it can give you 
goosebumps. The theatre has hosted Beijing Opera from masters such as Mei 
Lanfang, and today it puts on some of the most original performing arts you’ll 
see in the city, doing “classical with a contemporary twist” very well indeed.

Worst building
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc423d4b32bca88744043fd02350196b7b9a765%2F0_0_4160_3120%2Fmaster%2F4160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Beijing%3A%20caged%20birds%2C%20smog%20and%20internet%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Beijing%3A%20caged%20birds%2C%20smog%20and%20internet%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc423d4b32bca88744043fd02350196b7b9a765%2F0_0_4160_3120%2Fmaster%2F4160.jpg>
 Even worse than the big underpants … housing blocks in the hutongs. 
Photograph: Yuan Ren 
The ugliest building in Beijing isn’t Rem Koolhaas’s controversial CCTV tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/feb/10/beijing-fire-architect-cctv>
, known commonly as the “big underpants” due to its shape. More repulsive are a 
series of residential apartment blocks – bland, occasionally communist in style 
and akin to the UK’s giant housing estates – which can be found bang in the 
city centre.

These blocks were built in the 90s and 00s after the one-storey housing in the 
hutongs was torn down for being too “old”, ironic given that many of their 
rapidly erected replacements have already fallen into disrepair. The complexes 
on the west side of Beixinqiao station, as well as Min An Xiaoqu nearby, are 
particularly oppressive.

Biggest controversy

A year ago it was used to be pollution. But since hazy skies are less of a 
pain in the backside now, everyone is talking abouthow unaffordable the city 
has become 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/12/in-beijing-residents-move-underground-to-find-affordable-rents>
. Housing prices in Beijing have skyrocketed in the last decade, and continue 
to soar inside the fifth ring road. Prices are closing in on those of London 
and New York; completely absurd given that the average salary in Beijing is 
merely a fraction of what it is in these cities (around £500 a month).

Only residents with a Beijing household registration, known as a hukou, or who 
have paid taxes and national insurance for at least five years, can even think 
about buying. For the migrant workers that prop up much of the labour industry, 
many don’t even get basic social benefits and are in danger of being kicked out.

Young people from outside Beijing often rent shared rooms, or even dormitory 
housing (as cheap as £30 or £40 a month),some of them in illegal underground 
basements <http://viiphoto.com/articles/chinas-rat-tribe/>.

Laws imposing higher taxes and deposits on second homes have seen buyers 
circumventing regulations by getting fake-divorced – a privilege given many 
don’t even have the right to buy property in the capital.

Homegrown talent
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0SyT8EXggeY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0SyT8EXggeY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0SyT8EXggeY&media=>
There’s not much in the way of English-speaking talent, but Papi Jiang has 
become China’s biggest internet sensation after her satirical rants on topics 
of popular culture went viral on Youku (A Chinese version of YouTube) earlier 
this year. In her classic “survival guide for males”, she enacts what Chinese 
women really mean when they say reply “nothing” to their partner’s questions, 
including the line: “You don’t know my menstrual cycle and you dare say you 
love me?”

Although she’s originally from Shanghai, the capital is where Papi Jiang 
learnt her trade, honing her performance skills at the prestigious Central 
Academy of Drama, where she returned for graduate studies.

Papi Jiang doesn’t do live shows – the whole point is that she’s a web 
celebrity. You may not understand what she is saying, but this mouthy student 
at the Central Academy of Film is clearly offering Chinese people something 
they crave.

Look on the street
 Street style, the Beijing way. Photograph: Yuan Ren 
Simplicity is a work-in-progress when it comes to high street fashion. While 
the nation is slowly coming round to the idea of less is more – Beijing is at 
the forefront of the transition.

Long, drapey but slightly old-fashioned dresses are a popular style; for 
colder days, skinny jeans and sports trainers is a favourite combination with 
young women. In the summer, “legs out” is go-to for girls – thigh-gripping 
jeans shorts paired with platforms or high heels (with socks) are everywhere. 
But while high on the leg is OK, low cuts on top will still get you a stare.

What is your city’s most under-rated location?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F777fd8b08fc7c8ff323f8a76fc4a0c2bdacf7a6a%2F0_0_5451_3634%2F5451.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Beijing%3A%20caged%20birds%2C%20smog%20and%20internet%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Beijing%3A%20caged%20birds%2C%20smog%20and%20internet%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F777fd8b08fc7c8ff323f8a76fc4a0c2bdacf7a6a%2F0_0_5451_3634%2F5451.jpg>
 Haunting … the former Duan Qirui government building. Photograph: Jens Schott 
Knudsen 
Next to Zhangzizhonglu underground station is a complex that is mysterious and 
spectacular. The Duan Qirui Former Government Building, constructed in the 
early 20th century, is unkempt. Many of the buildings are disused, with the 
back ones acting as dormitories for Beijing’s Renmin University (a bit 
underutilised, you would think, given the historical value of the site). Anyone 
can stroll in, although the complex is gated – say you’re visiting Peanut Cafe 
and keep striding along.

What does Beijing do better than anywhere else?

The Jianbing. These are crispy folded pancakes with an egg cracked on to them 
and spread out with a wooden spatula, all on a flat round pan. A layer of deep 
fried crispy dough is later added in the middle, sprinkled with hot and savoury 
sauces, spring onions and coriander, and then folded over. Different types of 
pancakes are often on offer, including wholegrain, purple rice and buckwheat 
rice.

Best Instagram

Jens Schott Knudsen <https://www.instagram.com/pamhule/> is a lawyer and 
freelance photographer who has lived in the Chinese capital since 2012 and has 
collaborated with historians and urban planners to document the city’s rapid 
change. He likes to shoot early or late in the day, when Beijing “feels like a 
different world”, he says. “At 6am it’s quieter, less crowded, but there is 
still a lot of life on the streets – from sleepy eyed workers to school 
children lining up for breakfast snacks.”

How green is your city?

Not very. Beijing is known for its smoggy days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/16/beijing-airpocalypse-city-almost-uninhabitable-pollution-china>
, but things are improving since the government decided something had to be 
done – all the news coverage from abroad was becoming an embarrassment. There 
has been an effort to shut down polluting industries around the city since, or 
at least move them elsewhere.

While no congestion charge exists, different digits on vehicle number plates 
are banned from the roads on different days of the week 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/china/10386738/Beijing-to-impose-odd-even-car-ban-during-heavy-pollution.html>
. The city that was once home to “a million bicycles” is forgoing them for 
public transport and cars though.

And to shortcut the route of cleaning up pollution, the city has plans to 
literally “blow away” urban smog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/21/china-to-build-ventilation-corridors-in-beijing-to-help-tackle-air-pollution>
, particularly in winter when it’s worse, by creating “ventilation corridors”, 
channels for the wind through the city’s green spaces.



Moment in history 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F19122141&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F19122141> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F19122141&media=>
Beijing was a fortified city with an extensive system of inner and outer city 
walls, gates, watchtowers and defence that was not just mechanically advanced, 
but architecturally spectacular.

That all changed in 1949 when, with a view to making Beijing the next Moscow, 
Mao ordered the tearing down of Beijing’s city wall 
<http://www.economist.com/node/1408613>, which ran in a circle along what is 
now the inner ring road. With the city’s defence destroyed (it took decades to 
pull down), much of the inside also underwent reconstruction in the 90s – 
historical areas were heavily rebuilt and turned into featureless apartment 
blocks. Parts of the inner city have since become heavily commercialised, such 
as the area near the Drum and Bell tower – the old clock towers of Beijing; 
Nanluoguxiang alley close by has been made into a famous “snack street” that is 
now forever chockablock with people and waste – a no-go area for locals.

Top insider’s tip 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c5802e122df7350e4b2776b0c4009ec280262b2%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Beijing%3A%20caged%20birds%2C%20smog%20and%20internet%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Beijing%3A%20caged%20birds%2C%20smog%20and%20internet%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c5802e122df7350e4b2776b0c4009ec280262b2%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Locals’ snack street … Huguosi Dajie. Photograph: Ziyun Ma 
The tourist areas of Nanluoguxiang and popular spots in the old city are best 
skipped for a more authentic version of old Beijing in Huguosi Dajie, named 
after a temple that no longer stands –si means temple and huguo mean protect 
the country. The streets surrounding it are where locals go for snacks (xiao chi
); Huguosi Xiaochi is a popular joint, as well as many other restaurants on the 
same stretch. There used to be a huge market, but when it was shut down in 
recent years, many of the stalls spilt on to Mianhua Hutong, which now 
overflows with food vendors and fresh produce.

Five to follow

Beijing Postcards <https://www.facebook.com/beijingpostcards/?fref=nf>

Sinica Podcast <http://popupchinese.com/lessons/sinica/> 

Do hits  <https://soundcloud.com/dohits>

City explorers <http://burbex.org/>

Ancient Beijing <http://www.panoramio.com/user/11690>

About me
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff95a9426e0e314e05f35a6c2830fb014eb127534%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20guide%20to%20Beijing%3A%20caged%20birds%2C%20smog%20and%20internet%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20guide%20to%20Beijing%3A%20caged%20birds%2C%20smog%20and%20internet%20satire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Finsiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff95a9426e0e314e05f35a6c2830fb014eb127534%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 From me … Photograph: Daniel Gea 
Yuan is a Beijing-born, Beijing-based journalist and writer who has studied in 
the UK. You can follow her on Twitterhere 
<https://twitter.com/girlinbeijing?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
. Her Beijing food adventures are documented on her Instagram accounthere 
<https://www.instagram.com/watchmeeating/>. 
 