
Ana Ivanovic, the former world No1 and 2008 French Open champion, has retired 
from tennis at the age of 29, the Serb confirmed on Wednesday.

“There is no other way to say this. I have decided to retire from professional 
tennis. It was a difficult decision but there is so much to celebrate,” 
Ivanovic said on her Facebook page. “Don’t be sad, be optimistic alongside me. 
My love and my greatest thank you to all of you.”

Roger Federer ready for ‘unique’ new year after six-month injury layoff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/roger-federer-return-injury-hopman-cup>
Ivanovic announced her retirement from tennis in a video, saying she no longer 
feels fit enough to compete at the highest level.

“I played so many memorable matches. But staying at those heights in any 
professional sport requires top physical form and it’s well-known that I have 
been hampered by injuries,” Ivanovic said.

“I can only play if I perform up to my own high standards. I can no longer do 
that, so it’s time to move on.”

Ivanovic became the first Serbian woman to win a grand slam tournament when 
she beat Russia’s Dinara Safina in the 2008 French Open final, following in the 
footsteps of her compatriot Novak Djokovic, who clinched the Australian Open 
title the same year.

The Australian Open Series: Federer, Nadal and local hopefuls tune up for 2017
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/29/australian-open-series-federer-nadal-local-hopefuls>
“I began dreaming about tennis when I was five,” Ivanovic said in the video. 
“My dear parents backed me all the way and by the time I was the world No1 and 
won Roland Garros in 2008, I have seen the heights I never dreamt of 
achieving,” she added.

Her French Open victory catapulted Ivanovic to the summit of the WTA world 
rankings but she occupied top spot for a only nine weeks and dropped to 22nd at 
the end of 2009 after a dramatic loss of form.

Ivanovic returned to the top five in 2014, reaching the French Open 
semi-finals in 2015 to spark hopes of a revival, but slipped to 63rd this year 
after losing to the Czech player Denisa Allertova in the US Open first round, 
her final match on the WTA tour.

Sport in 2016: a dichotomy of soaring highs and desperate lows | Richard 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/23/2016-review-sport-dichotomy-soaring-highs-desperate-lows>
“I am so excited about what comes next. I will become an ambassador of sport 
and healthy life and will also explore opportunities in business, beauty and 
fashion, among other endeavours,” Ivanovic added.

“Beyond that, who knows. All I can say is that I have lived my dreams and 
really hope to have helped others do so as well.”
 