
I seem to have grown up with the Stabat Mater 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stabat_Mater>. I sang it as a boy, my perception 
of the crucifixion was coloured by its beauty and sadness. And now, I’ve set it 
myself. Its composition has engrossed me for many months but last year I 
completed my Stabat Matersetting for the Sixteen 
<http://thesixteen.com/whats-on/macmillan-stabat-mater/> and string orchestra (
Britten Sinfonia <https://www.brittensinfonia.com/>), and next week 
<https://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=19193> it gets its 
premiere at the Barbican.

The text is a 13th-century hymn meditating on the suffering of Mary, the 
mother of God, as she stands at the foot of the cross.Stabat Mater Dolorosa 
(“The grieving mother stood … at the foot of the Cross”) – these are the first 
words ofa long poem 
<http://www.preces-latinae.org/thesaurus/BVM/SMDolorosa.html>, 20 stanzas in 
full, whose subject is Mary as she beholds her dying son. For devout Catholics 
– and themany great composers who set these words 
<http://www.stabatmater.info/composer/chronologically/> – this is a kind of 
ultimate, spiritualKindertotenlied 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kindertotenlieder> (a song on the death of a 
child). The poem goes beyond mere description. It invites the reader and the 
listener to partake in the mother’s grief as a path to grace, and as part of a 
believer’s spiritual journey.

The author of the poem is not known. One candidate is the Franciscan monk 
Jacapone da Todi who died in 1306, another is Pope John XXII (who died in 
1334), or Pope Gregory XI (d. 1378). It’s a difficult text to set – the mood of 
tragedy is sustained and all-consuming, and the 20 verses follow a set rhythmic 
pattern. This has not deterred generation after generation of composers, drawn 
to it through the centuries.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3qx_JjPrh5M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3qx_JjPrh5M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3qx_JjPrh5M&media=>
Some of the earliest are the most beautiful, especially those by Josquin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3qx_JjPrh5M> and Palestrina 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gDI5FdXnJdc>. The earlier settings, written in 
the 15th century, were exclusively for liturgical use and in many ways are much 
more simple and austere than later settings, which became more elaborate, 
influenced by secular music. The most popular of these is probablyPergolesi 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xHQVtYzjLao>’s, from 1736, which is also one 
of the most substantial. His work, like many of those of the 18th and 19th 
centuries, is too unwieldly for anything other than concert performances.

There’s nothing wrong with that, but to my ears there’s both a functionality 
and a purity about the earlier voice-only settings. My own work is for the 
concert stage and a string orchestra, but perhaps within it there’s a murmur of 
these ancient settings – a deliberately archaic feel to my writing, that looks 
back to them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVJr5Gzaa2ig&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVJr5Gzaa2ig>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVJr5Gzaa2ig&media=>
From the 20th century there are beautiful settings by Szymanowski, Poulenc and 
Arvo Pärt. And today there have been new settings of the poem by very different 
composers, from the neo-complexJames Dillon, whose flinty 80-minute masterpiece 
was written for the BBC Singers and the London Sinfonietta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/25/james-dillon-stabat-mater-review-huddersfield-festival>
, to the neo-pastoral solace ofCecilia McDowall 
<http://www.ceciliamcdowall.co.uk/biography>, whose comforting version I have 
just heard receive its Scottish premiere atthe Cumnock Tryst 
<http://www.thecumnocktryst.com/> earlier this month. The great liturgical 
texts, especially those associated with the crucifixion, seem to have an 
irresistible attraction to composers of today, whether they are conventionally 
religious or not.

Some have, in the past, been unnerved by its “Mariolatry” but the sheer beauty 
and pathos of the words have usually overcome Protestant objections. The 
suffering, broken heart of Mary is recapitulated in the lives of many, and 
artists with an empathy for our shared humanity will always return to embrace 
it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fjames-macmillan-composor-stabat-mater%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc68d9db076d480291c5c214c4f80b67260e9657c%2F0_890_3059_1835%2F3059.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turning%20a%2013th-century%20hymn%20into%20a%20modern-day%20elegy%20for%20war%20and%20loss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fjames-macmillan-composor-stabat-mater%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turning%20a%2013th-century%20hymn%20into%20a%20modern-day%20elegy%20for%20war%20and%20loss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fjames-macmillan-composor-stabat-mater%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc68d9db076d480291c5c214c4f80b67260e9657c%2F0_890_3059_1835%2F3059.jpg>
 The Mother’s grief as a path to grace … the Stabat Mater scene as depicted in 
Pieta by Rogier van der Weyden (1399-1464). Photograph: Getty Images/DeAgostini 
I first met John Studzinski, founder of the Genesis Foundation 
<http://www.genesisfoundation.org.uk/>, in 2008 when he commissioned me, 
Roxanna Panufnik and Will Todd to set words of a prayer byPadre Pio 
<http://www.catholic.org/saints/saint.php?saint_id=311>. It was he and Harry 
Christophers, founder and conductor ofthe Sixteen <http://thesixteen.com/>, who 
suggested the Stabat Mater for a large-scale work, prompted by his belief that 
Mary’s grief at the foot of the cross is recognisable to hundreds of thousands 
of parents around the world, especially today, in a time of war and migrant 
crisis.

I know the Sixteen well. I’ve composed smaller a cappella works for the group 
but this is my first large-scale score for them. They sang my Seven Last Words 
From the Cross with me in Amsterdam in 2009, and that was the springboard for 
composing this more substantial hour-long work. Stabat Mater starts with the 
cluster that ends that earlier work, and then heads from these dying embers in 
a new direction. I’ve set the complete text with 20 verses cast into four 
movements. The challenge for the composer is the sorrowful mood throughout but, 
because the scenario is a violent one, there was huge scope to move towards 
something much more dramatic and enervating.

And it’s a text I know well, too. Parts of it have featured in several of my 
previous compositions, not least in my first opera Inés de Castro, Seven Last 
Words From the Cross and my two Passion settings. In 2007’s St John Passion I 
used excerpts of the text in its seventh movement as a commentary on the moment 
when Mary beholds her dying son on the cross. You can even find the Crucifixion 
narrative in my orchestral music – in my orchestral trilogy Triduum, and in the 
piano trio Fourteen Little Pictures, which is based on the 14 stations of the 
cross. Perhaps these were all in various ways preparations for the complete 
setting.


 * On 15 October the Barbican the choral music of Sir James MacMillan. The 
event includes the world premiere of hisStabat Mater 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=19193> and the London 
premiere of hisSeven Angels 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=19196>. Further 
performance dates for Stabat Mater atwww.thesixteen.com 
<http://www.thesixteen.com/> 
 * 


 