
Andre Gray scored his first Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> hat-trick and his manager, 
Sean Dyche, expects the 25-year-old Burnley striker to get even better in 2017.

Burnley equalled their joint-largest Premier League victory by demolishing 
Sunderland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland>, whose woeful 
defending was typified by Papy Djilobodji’s dire afternoon, as Gray scored 
three times inside an hour.

Josh King seals easy Bournemouth win to leave Swansea rooted at the bottom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/swansea-city-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>
A seventh home victory of the season was rounded off by Ashley Barnes’ penalty 
asBurnley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> moved up to 11th, nine 
points clear of 18th-placed Sunderland, who claimed a consolation through 
Jermain Defoe.

The win came five days after Gray’s late winner against Middlesbrough and the 
forward, who missed four games earlier in the yearowing to a Football 
Association ban for historical homophobic tweets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international>, maintained his excellent form.

Last year’s Championship player of the year helped Burnley win promotion and 
Dyche believes there is more to come from the former non-league striker. “He’s 
still a work in progress and he can only add to his confidence level and belief 
playing at this level,” he said. “I don’t think any player just arrives in the 
Premier League and you just roll out there and learn instantly, some but not 
many. It takes time. I’ve said about people like Steven Defour still adapting 
to what the Premier League offers and Andre’s the same – he’s had an 
unbelievable journey in the last four seasons and he’ll continue to learn. All 
of our players are. He’s got that fearless streak in him if he misses. He’s got 
a real firm mentality.”

Gray also had a helping hand from Djilobodji, who was sucked into an aerial 
duel with team-mate John O’Shea for the striker’s first goal before losing him 
for the second and third.

An early injury to Lamine Koné, which forced O’Shea in alongside Djilobodji 
hindered matters, but David Moyes fumed after Sunderland were undone by routine 
attacks.

“We couldn’t really cope with old-fashioned English style balls down the 
channel, balls forward, balls over the top,” the manager said. “We didn’t deal 
with it well. We didn’t give ourselves a chance defensively. We didn’t cope 
with anything well at all.”

Islam Slimani heads relieved Leicester to victory over West Ham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/leicester-city-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
Moyes added: “It was a poor performance – really, really bad – and defensively 
we were all over the place. The players have to take responsibility as well as 
me. You can ask me questions about myself and my future, that’s fine. We’re in 
the bottom three, I know that.”

With Victor Anichebe also picking up a hamstring injury, Sunderland enter a 
new year with little reason for optimism. “We have always said if we could do 
we would, but everyone knows we have got restraints,” Moyes said of possible 
signings. “I think with what we have got, of course we need help. So let’s hope 
maybe something happens and we can do that. Ellis [Short, Sunderland’s owner] 
is saying let’s see what’s out there, and maybe we can do something.”

Dyche will see little reason to spend greatly. At the end of 2016, when his 
side won 14 of their 22 games at home and lost only three, the Burnley manager 
reflected on a memorable 12 months.

“It’s certainly a very strong way to finish off a very important calendar 
year,” Dyche said. “We got promoted and were almost instantly written off. I 
think it’s a strong mentality to keep looking beyond that and saying what are 
we about, what can we focus on and what can we deliver in order to win games.

“There’s a nice humility about us because we know we’re not the real deal, we 
know we’re not just going to run through the Premier League and run over 
everyone but there’s an inner belief.” 
 