
The only Scottish independence Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> is interested in this week is 
his own and, unshackled from extraneous distractions, he is doing an excellent 
job of rediscovering the focus that went missing in the early stages of the 
French Open last month.

He would not be drawn on the sensitive issue of another referendum in his 
homeland after taking care of business againstLu Yen-hsun in the second round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/30/andy-murray-reaches-wimbledon-third-round-lu-yen-hsun>
 on Thursday; nor will he be diverted from his task against the Australian John 
Millman on Saturday.

Novak Djokovic two sets down against Sam Querrey at Wimbledon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/01/novak-djokovic-sam-querrey-two-sets-rain-wimbledon>
However, he did pause to sympathise with Heather Watson, who was troubled 
again by Twitter trollsafter losing on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/30/wimbledon-2016-heather-watson-knocked-out-by-annika-beck>
. “I delete Twitter from my phone normally over the big competitions,” he said. 
“I don’t have my phone. If there is something I want to read about on Twitter 
then I just Google it, so I don’t read anything about myself because you know, 
what is the point really?

“Obviously there are a lot of people who give you support, but Twitter is not 
always the most pleasant place to hang out. So you try to ignore it as much as 
you can. The thing that is important at times like that, after a tough loss 
like Heather’s or a disappointing defeat, is being around the people you like, 
your family. They are the ones who are hurting with you and who really care 
about the result and make you feel better.

Andy Murray gets off to strong start, supported by baby daughter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/28/andy-murray-gets-off-to-strong-start-supported-by-baby-daughter>
“It is tempting [to go on] because that is the kind of world we live in now. 
Social media, everyone is on it. It is huge. But there is a time and a place 
for it. I think when you have lost a difficult match it is best to stay away.

“I don’t read [notifications] any time I am around major competitions. I have 
only been on Twitter, I think, once in the last three months, and that was after
Marcus Willis’s match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/marcus-willis-takes-seven-games-off-roger-federer-ive-earned-a-beer-i-think>
, because it was just such a great story and amazing to see that.”

The interaction he does enjoy is with other athletes – and Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> will be crawling with elite 
practitioners from all sports on Saturday, as is the tradition. “It is nice,” 
he says. “Any of my family who have been in [the crowd with other athletes], 
they have enjoyed it.” Two years ago, the former world boxing champion Johnny 
Nelson took a seat in Murray’s player box. “And on the Saturday, any time other 
athletes come into watch your sport, I like that.

“Not everyone, but most sportsmen and women like watching other sports as 
well, watching the biggest competitions and learning, getting to chat to some 
of them.” Murray spared time during the US Open last year to support Rory 
McIlroy in a golf tournament and they both went to the basketball at Madison 
Square Garden that night.

“Who would I like to come and watch me the most? I don’t know – it is 
difficult, I don’t really know – but any time any of the big names come along 
to watch it is nice and I have got to meet a few of them over the years.”

As for a non-tennis event he would like to attend, boxing is the obvious 
choice for one of the sport’s biggest fans. He says: “I’d like to go and watch 
a fight in Vegas, like a world title fight. It would be nice to watch another 
British athlete fighting over there. I actually had a chance, the day I won the 
Olympics here, I had tickets for the 100m final. But, because I finished late I 
couldn’t make it. I would like to see a World Cup final live. So, yeah, there 
are a few sports I would like to see.”

As an innocent distraction from his third-round match against Millman, the 
conversation served pretty well in the end.
 