
Andy Murray will face his long-term rival Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> in the final of the Qatar 
Open following a straight sets victory over Tomas Berdych.

Novak Djokovic beats Fernando Verdasco to reach Qatar Open final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/novak-djokovic-beats-fernando-verdasco-qatar-open-final>
The world No1 had won his last six meetings with the Czech, including last 
year’s Wimbledon semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/andy-murray-reaches-wimbledon-final-win-tomas-berdych>
, and there seemed very little chance of that run ending in Doha. He won with 
relative ease, outclassing his opponent to wrap up a 6-3, 6-4 success in an 
hour and 43 minutes.

Murray went on court in the knowledge defending champion Djokovic was awaiting 
the winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/novak-djokovic-beats-fernando-verdasco-qatar-open-final>
 and showed no signs of repeating the stuttering start he made to his 
quarter-final win over Nicolás Almagro the previous day.

After the first three games went with serve, the Scot broke to make it 3-1 and 
from there he never looked back as he produced one of 10 aces to clinch the 
opening set with just 48 minutes on the clock.

Berdych, coached by the former Wimbledon champion Goran Ivanisevic, showed 
some resistance early in the second set but could not capitalise on a couple of 
break points in the second game before immediately failing to hold his own 
service.

The pair then exchanged breaks before Murray saw the set out to set up a 
tantalising final with Djokovic, who saved five match points on his way to 
defeating Fernando Verdasco earlier in the day.

Murray, who won the tournament in 2008 and 2009, has now recorded 28 
consecutive victories. “I want to try and keep it going, I feel a little bit 
like this year’s a fresh start,” he told Eurosport.

“The end to last year was a great way to finish the year but it’s great to be 
through to the final here and a great match against Novak tomorrow to look 
forward to.

“It’s been the perfect week to get ready for the Australian Open.”

On the performance of world No10 Berdych, Murray said: “I played him at the 
end of last year and he was playing super aggressive there so I kind of 
expected that a little bit tonight.

“I saw his match yesterday and he was playing more aggressive maybe than in 
the past so I was maybe better prepared for it this time than at the end of 
last year.”
 