
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> defeated 
Uzbekistan’s Denis Istomin 6-3, 7-5 in the second round of the Miami Open but 
had his composure disrupted by a heated exchange with the chair umpire over a 
rogue ball.

Facing break point at 2-2 in the second set, Murray noticed that a women’s 
ball had somehow got into the on-court mix. Women use different balls at the 
Miami Open and they have a red stamping to differentiate them.

“That’s unbelievable. That’s one of the women’s balls. I could have just hit a 
shot with it,” Murray complained.

Though the rogue ball was removed from play, Murray was clearly flustered and 
netted a groundstroke in the next rally to lose the game, before giving the 
umpire another earful. “It’s not right. Do you know how different the balls 
are?” Murray asked.

Rafael Nadal retires from Miami Open after becoming ill in match
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/rafael-nadal-miami-open-retires> 
The umpire said he was fully aware but could do nothing about what had 
transpired. Murray then settled down, immediately broke back and closed out the 
match without further incident.

Despite a victory that was untidy at times, Murray was content afterwards, 
tellingthe ATP World Tour website 
<http://www.atpworldtour.com/en/news/murray-downs-istomin-miami-2016>: “I was 
hitting the ball cleanly. It’s just the shot selection tonight could have been 
better, I think.”

Murray, who has reached the Miami final four times, winning in 2009 and 2013, 
will face Bulgaria’s Grigor Dimitrov in the third round.

“[Dimitrov] is obviously a top-quality player,” Murray said. “I know I’ll need 
to play good tennis and be a little bit more disciplined than I was tonight.”

The No2 seed will be pleased to progress after a day dominated by high-profile 
exits and withdrawals. Rafael Nadal’s was the most notable, the fifth seed
retiring in the third set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/rafael-nadal-miami-open-retires> 
against Damir Dzumhur after suffering dizziness.

Sergiy Stakhovsky and the 30th seed Thomaz Bellucci also retired from their 
respective matches against Jack Sock and Mikhail Kukushkin, adding toRoger 
Federer’s withdrawal on Friday without playing, due to illness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/25/roger-federer-miami-open-juan-martin-del-potro>
.

Heather Watson comes from set down to reach fourth round of Miami Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/heather-watson-miami-open-tennis>
The strangest exit of the day belonged to the world No34, Sam Querrey. Serving 
to stay in the match at 4-5 in the third set against Adrian Mannarino, the 
American fell 0-40 down after a series of listless serves and wild backhands. 
He was issued a point penalty as a result, handing his opponent a 6-7, 6-2, 6-4 
win without the need to even contest his three match points.

The fourth seed, Stan Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka>, also exited the 
tournament, losing 6-4, 6-3 to world No51 Andrey Kuznetsov in just an hour and 
19 minutes. Kuznetsov closed the match out with a love hold followed by a break 
to love. John Isner also departed, the 13th seed beaten in a final-set 
tie-break by his fellow American Tim Smyczek.

But there was straight-sets progress for the remaining seeds in action – Kei 
Nishikori, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, Milos Raonic, Gael Monfils, Pablo Cuevas, Nick 
Krygios and Alexandr Dolgopolov.
 