
Andy Murray has never been fitter or more content at this time of the year 
and, if he wins theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> at the 10th attempt, 
it will be a fitting end to the most satisfying season of his career.

It is easy to take the nation’s best player for granted because he delivers 
success so regularly, rarely more so than in the run of 19 unbeaten matches 
that have carried him to four tournament victories in a row, among eight for 
the year that includedWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/andy-murray-wins-wimbledon-2016-milos-raonic>
 andthe Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/andy-murray-beats-juan-martin-del-potro-rio-2016>
, and the place coveted above all others, theworld No1 ranking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/andy-murray-becomes-tennis-world-no1-milos-raonic-walkover-paris>
. Murray says holding on to that is not at the forefront of his thinking. It 
will, surely, be lurking somewhere in quieter moments.

While there will be no Roger Federer or Rafael Nadal to block his progress in 
Greenwich this week, Murray will be tested well enough byMarin Cilic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/marin-cilic> in his first match on Monday 
night. Thereafter he has equally tough matches against Stan Wawrinka and Kei 
Nishikori in the round robin games in order to get into the semi‑finals. Beyond 
that? There is every chance the tournament will get the final it needs.

Andy Murray says era of tennis’s big four could be over
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/andy-murray-atp-tour-finals-tennis-big-four-rafael-nadal-roger-federer>
The notion that Murray has only to remain standing to finish the year as the 
best player in the world was put into sharp relief fully a day before he steps 
on court – and the reminder that the season has one demanding week yet to run 
came, predictably enough, from the player he has displaced at the top of the 
rankings,Novak Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>.

The Serb’s win on the first afternoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/novak-djokovic-dominic-thiem-atp-world-tour-finals>
, in three sets of contrasting levels over Dominic Thiem, was full of raking 
forehands, deep and wide, and he showed the sort of spikiness afterwards that 
suggests he is not in London for the sightseeing. Djokovic may be recovering 
still from the lingering arm injury that contributed to hisexit in the 
quarter-finals against Cilic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/04/novak-djokovic-defeat-andy-murray-world-no1>
 last week in Paris, where Murray went on to end his 123-week run at the top of 
the sport, but there is nothing wrong with his spirit.

Djokovic did not take kindly to the suggestion that a petulant smash of the 
ball into the crowd after losing the first set on Sunday might have injured a 
fan. This is a man who means business.

Murray, meanwhile, remains the darling of the media – at least the locals – 
and does not lack for friends either among his rivals. Several of them believe 
he has the stamina and the power to hold off what will undoubtedly be a 
concerted effort by Djokovic to reclaim his No1 spot.

Partisan fans should spare Andy Murray the vitriol and enjoy this golden era | 
Richard Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/11/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-tennis-partisan-fans>
Wawrinka, probably the biggest threat in Murray’s group, said: “It is amazing 
what he is doing just now, his consistency, his level. He deserves completely 
to be world No1. It is not only about the last 12 months. It is about the last 
10 years. For sure he can sustain it. It is going to be interesting, because he 
is really close with Novak.”

Nishikori, who is also on Murray’s side of the draw, added: “He is a great 
player, a great person off the court too. Always been the same guy, a very nice 
guy, a very hard worker who has been pushing and pushing to get there for many 
years.”

As for Cilic, he was full of praise for Murray’s achievement – with a caveat. 
“In order to do that, you have to start 10 years back and Andy has been 
unbelievable since he came on the Tour. He was at the top of the rankings the 
last eight, nine years. Also, you could see he was a little bit more motivated 
when it came to smaller tournaments this year. He really wants to win every 
match. That has been really good for him the last six months.”

But Cilic warned: “On the other hand, Djokovic hasn’t played much the second 
half of the year, so he is going to be extremely motivated as well. It is going 
to be extremely exciting to see how everything is going to play out.”

There is no doubt there is more excitement about this tournament than usual. 
There have been a lot of tired legs dragging themselves through the concluding 
days of the season over the years but the fight for the No1 ranking has added 
much-needed spice.

And, if anyone were looking for more intrigue, it is there in the form of 
Murray’s former coach Jonas Bjorkman, who is now with Cilic. “Having Jonas on 
my side now is definitely a big plus but I have to obviously focus on myself 
and my tennis,” Cilic said.

Cilic won the last time they met, in the final in Cincinnati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/andy-murray-marin-cilic-cincinnati-masters-us-open>
 this year, but Murray has won 11 of their 14 matches. It would be a surprise 
if he does not make it 12 on Monday night.
 