
The final weeks of the season are playing out like a half-decent episode of 
Poirot, with subtexts all over the place. The audience is not quite sure if the 
plot that has been building around the main antagonists, Andy Murray andNovak 
Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>, will yet deliver 
another twist.

In the story so far, Murray, a quietly spoken Scot from Dunblane, has 
unexpectedly snatched the hero’s mantle from his turbulent, one-time close 
friend from Belgrade and is determined to hang on to it for as long as he can. 
The title Djokovic surrendered in Paris was as good as his personal property, 
so long had he been regarded as the king of tennis.

Novak Djokovic finds a way to edge past Milos Raonic yet again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/novak-djokovic-milos-raonic-atp-world-tour-finals>
On the face of it we are here to discover which of the eight players from 
eight countries will prevail in the final chapter of the year’s activities, the
ATP World Tour Finals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals>
. It means a lot to each of them but Murray and Djokovic have their own battle 
to fight as well.

Day four of the drama unfolds on Wednesday night, when Murray can stick the 
dagger a little deeper into his rival by beating Kei Nishikori in the second 
match of his round robin group, having seen off Marin Cilic in two imperious 
sets on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/14/andy-murray-marin-cilic-atp-world-tour-finals-02>
. If he can stay in front of Djokovic until the last ball is struck on Sunday 
evening, that mantle of dominance will be his.

And such are the quirks of the ranking system, he will more than likely remain 
at No1 in the world well into the summer, given he has so few points to defend 
in some of the early-season matches. Djokovic has to back up his deeds of the 
first half of 2016, when he was just about unbeatable.

Murray insists he is not thinking about that. His mind is on Nishikori, who 
beat him in the US Open quarter-final and gave him a good argument in the Davis 
Cup. While the rest of us can keep our eye on the top of the mountain, Murray 
only reluctantly talks about his other prize.

In a corridor in the bowels of the O2 Arena in Greenwich, shortly after he had 
demolished Cilic, the player who last week beat Djokovic for the first time in 
15 attempts, Murray was asked if had received at least a mug from his wife, 
Kim, with “No1 Dad” on it.

“No, I haven’t had any No1 Dad mugs,” he laughed. “I’ve got mugs similar to 
that for my wife but she hasn’t got me any yet. I don’t know what that means.”

He looked and sounded as relaxed as he has all season, still strong after a 
killer end-of-year schedule in which he arrived here with 19 wins on the spin 
and four titles. He has the bonus of having his rehired coach, Ivan Lendl, with 
him, which he finds reassuring, although he is quick to pay tribute to his 
full-time tour adviser, Jamie Delgado.

Andy Murray blasts past Marin Cilic at start of ATP World Tour Finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/14/andy-murray-marin-cilic-atp-world-tour-finals-02>
“It was a bit different [when they met at Wimbledon, after Lendl’s return from 
a two-year absence] because they didn’t know each other,” Murray said. “I think 
both of them will have gained each other’s trust, especially with what I have 
done since the US Open. Jamie has been there the whole time.

“We have not been able to do loads these last few days on the practice courts; 
there has not been much time. But, in the off-season, it will be good to see 
how they work together in a training environment where I am able to work on 
some stuff.

“During the Wimbledon period, when Ivan first came back, he kind of took the 
lead and it was quite new for Jamie but I think the off-season will be good.”

The on-season hasn’t been too shabby, either.
 