
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> produced another 
dominant display to record a comfortable 6-3, 6-2 win over the American Steve 
Johnson and book his place in the third round of the Shanghai Masters.

The world No2 had been given a bye into round two, and was soon on the 
offensive to follow on from hissuccess at the China Open last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/andy-murray-grigor-dimitrov-china-open-final-tennis>
.

Nick Kyrgios in new row: not returning shots and serving without effort
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/nick-kyrgios-row-serving-without-effort-not-returning-shanghai-masters>
Murray survived an early break chance against him in the opening game, before 
forcing a break of his own to love in game six.

Another unanswered service game from the 29-year-old saw him move into a 5-2 
lead against the man whom he defeated in the Olympic quarter-finals en route to 
gold in Rio.

Murray’s greater athleticism around the court was key as the Scot went on to 
close out the first set in 41 minutes.

Johnson, the world No24 from California, was finding it difficult to get a 
foothold in the match and let frustrations get the better of him with some 
colourful language at the start of the second set. The American then received a 
warning for smashing a ball away as he faced three break points in the third 
game.

Murray, though, did not let the opportunity slip, as he converted the next 
chance to move 3-1 ahead, with Johnson bemoaning an earlier line call to the 
umpire during the break.

The Briton did not relinquish control, keeping pressure on Johnson’s next 
serve, and delivered another break as the American lashed a baseline return 
wide.

Murray held to lead 5-1, and although Johnson reduced the deficit, it was only 
delaying the inevitable as the British number one served out for the match, 
completing victory in one hour and 16 minutes. Next up for Murray will be Lucas 
Pouille after the French 13th seed beat Nicolas Almagro.

Murray said in a court-side interview with Sky Sports: “There was a tight 
start, but then once I got ahead I managed to keep the momentum. I played well 
tonight, I like the conditions here and hopefully I can continue that tomorrow.”

Murray added: “It will be a hard match [against Pouille]. He goes for his 
shots, serves well and is quick around the court.

“He takes quite a lot of risks out there, and likes the big matches. He is 
very consistent in his results and I will try and put in a good performance to 
get through it if I can.”

Kyle Edmund, however, fell to the world No3 Stan Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka> in their second round 
encounter.

Aiming for a major scalp, Edmund was instead beaten 6-3, 6-4 and had to settle 
for words of praise from his conqueror as his day’s reward.

Novak Djokovic looks sharp on return to action in Shanghai Masters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/11/novak-djokovic-wins-return-shanghai-masters-fognini>
Wawrinka claimed the only break of the opening set in the eighth game, and 
then aimed to steam through the second after striking first for a 2-0 lead.

But the 21-year-old Edmund made a fight of the contest by winning the next 
three games, bringing the set back on serve and showing Wawrinka he would need 
to step up his game again.

The US Open champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/stan-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-us-open-final-2016>
 rose to the challenge in the ninth game, and then fended off three break 
points in the next to seal victory with a sliced backhand winner into the 
corner. Edmund, at full stretch on the forehand, was unable to put the ball 
back into play.

Wawrinka, who dismissed talk of becoming a possible future world No1, said he 
had been wary about facing Edmund, who entered the world’s top 50 this week.

He said: “I saw him play the last few days. This year I’ve seen he’s been 
playing really well recently. I was expecting a really tough match because he’s 
improving a lot.“He’s a dangerous player. I’m really happy with the way I 
controlled the match more or less with my game. There were a lot of positives 
for me.”
 