
Andy Murray’s love of boxing is well documented and a little misleading. He is 
no frustrated pugilist (marooned as he is between light-heavyweight and 
cruiser), but watching men – or women – fight is not an easy experience for 
him, although he admits he is hooked on it. It is a familiar paradox.

As Murray readies himself for Wimbledon and Novak Djokovic, he might allow 
himself time in front of the television at home in Oxshott on Saturday to see 
if his fellowLondon Olympian Anthony Joshua 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/12/anthony-joshua-wins-gold-boxing> 
can repel the challenge of the unbeaten American Dominic Breazeale to retain 
his world heavyweight title at the O2 Arena, which has become the Watford 
fighter’s Wimbledon.

“He should win, shouldn’t he?” Murray asks rhetorically. He should, Andy. 
There follows an engaging discussion about the parallels and the differences 
between the sports, as Murray reveals how he can go toe to toe on the tennis 
court, but prefers to dance. “I get unbelievably nervous watching boxing,” he 
says, “the shakes almost. It’s difficult to explain. It’s that balance. Most 
people who watch boxing like to see knockouts, but at the same time I don’t 
want to see someone get hurt. It’s a bit of dilemma.”

Agnieszka Radwanska happy to rely on a deft touch and brains not brawn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/24/agniezska-zadwanska-deft-touch-brains-brawn-wimbledon>
In a couple of sentences, the tennis player talks to the boxer. They share 
much, yet are worlds apart. “I can’t watch it if it’s someone I know. When I 
was younger I could watch stuff online, like people breaking legs. Now I can’t 
watch that stuff anymore. When I watch a big fight, I get a big adrenaline 
rush, very nervous. I appreciate them as athletes. I appreciate the skill and 
the bravery, everything they show to do it. It’s an incredibly tough sport.

“There are similarities with tennis: taking time away from your opponent, 
neutralising their strengths, finding their weaknesses. When someone watches a 
tennis match they say stuff like, ‘Why doesn’t he just play to his forehand?’ 
But when you get out there on the court, it’s not that easy. The same with 
boxing.

“There are things I won’t see that boxers would see – like Floyd Mayweather, 
for instance. You might think he’s easy to back up and get him on the ropes. 
But, if it was that simple, everyone would do it. It’s the same with tennis. 
The best players make it look simple, but it’s incredibly difficult.

“There are times in points and times in matches where you want your opponent 
to make mistakes, you aren’t trying to hit winners, but you’re trying to put 
the ball in awkward and difficult positions. Then there are times when you have 
to go in there and assert yourself, try and finish points. There are definitely 
similarities between the two sports.”

Occasionally in boxing, two fighters will “go at it”, forgetting the niceties. 
It happens in tennis, too, but Murray is not a knockout artist. He would rather 
be Mayweather. “It doesn’t happen too often to me, but it does happen,” he 
says. “It’s not the best way to play. But some players spend their whole 
careers that way, hitting every ball as hard as they can, not really thinking. 
It’s a bit like a slugger in boxing. That’s their strength and that’s what they 
do well. They stick to it, even though they have the technical abilities to do 
something else. I try to avoid doing that as much as I can, but it does happen.”

There have been moments – such as in an unforgettable quarter-final against 
Djokovic at the US Open in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/04/andy-murray-falls-to-novak-djokovic-in-us-open-quarter-final>
 when, for a period in the second set, Murray hit the ball as hard and as flat 
as any of us courtside could remember. He thrashed it at sharp angles from the 
right side of mid-court with such precision and power that the Serb could not 
put a racket on most of them. It was exhilarating, like watching a fighter 
going for a knockout. But Djokovic soaked it up to win on points.

“The thing with that is,” Murray says, “it’s great when you’re hitting it 
clean, hitting it well. But when you’re hitting it hard and flat you’re giving 
yourself such a small margin over the net. Someone like Rafa [Nadal], one of 
his strengths is that he hits the ball so hard, with so much top-spin, he 
almost takes the net completely out of play.

“If you start to miss a couple when you hit the ball [flat and hard], the 
errors can pile up quite quickly. It’s a tactic that works if you can execute 
it, but it’s not that easy, not that high percentage, because of the lack of 
spin. If you can execute it for long enough, it works.”

There is, he says, “stuff coming back” as well, just as in boxing. An attacker 
has to maintain his own poise and balance in defence. “Tennis players play so 
many matches, their IQ is high when it comes to tactical stuff,” he says. “If 
you’re hitting the ball from the same place all the time and you’re hurting 
them, they start to hit the ball to a different position on the court. You 
can’t just keep doing the same things. If I’m just hitting crosscourt forehand, 
crosscourt forehand and it’s working [as he was against Djokovic in New York] 
they are going to change the direction of the ball to my backhand. Then it 
totally changes the way the point is played.”

Murray employs the mind games on court. He gets such a buzz from the challenge 
of pitting his intelligence against Djokovic, Nadal and Roger Federer that 
lesser contests sometimes drain him of his focus and, in a twinkling, he can be 
flirting with defeat by someone he should be beating in straight sets.

At Roland Garros last month, he was dragged through 10 stressful sets against 
the 37-year-old Radek Stepanek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/24/andy-murray-fights-back-stepanek-french-open>
, the crafty old Czech bruiser, then the 22-year-oldFrench ingenu Mathias 
Bourgue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/25/andy-murray-beats-mathias-bourgue-french-open-five-sets>
 – both of them ranked outside the top 100. It was not until the booming serves
of Ivo Karlovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/27/andy-murray-beats-ivo-karlovic-french-open>
 andJohn Isner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/andy-murray-french-open-john-isner-stan-wawrinka-milos-raonic>
 concentrated his mind – each lasting three quick sets – that he found a 
pleasing rhythm against theartful Richard Gasquet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/01/andy-murray-richard-gasquet-french-open-quarter-finals>
 and themuscular defending champion, Stan Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/03/french-open-2016-andy-murray-stan-wawrinka-match-report>
. They brought out the best in him en route to the final, buthe could not hurt 
Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/french-open-2016-final-novak-djokovic-beats-andy-murray>
for long enough.

“I do enjoy the challenge,” Murray says. “Against certain players you can get 
away with not playing well. In matches like that, however, [against the best] 
weaknesses get exploited, but they are also good matches to learn from because 
those guys can play very good tennis, defensively and offensively.

If they are just wanting to rally and stay neutral, they can do that as well. 
“Novak has improved his volleying, but Roger and Rafa are also two of the best 
volleyers. Novak returns exceptionally well. In those matches, everyone does 
everything well. It’s not like there’s loads of weaknesses to exploit. It takes 
time to work things out and also to find a weakness. If there’s something 
they’re struggling with they might not show it. If it’s 1-all in the first set, 
you might easily get to five-all, six-all when the stress and the nerves and 
the pressure start to build a little bit.”

They call the rounds 10, 11 and 12 of a world title fight the championship 
rounds. That is when fighters discover if they have what it takes to win the 
title. In tennis, those moments arrive in the final of a slam, after six 
five-setters over a fortnight that either build or break a player’s confidence.

Murray has in his corner a second who could not look more like a boxing 
trainer, Ivan Lendl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/andy-murray-ivan-lendl-coach>. 
He will sit with inscrutable menace in his box on Centre Court and, when Murray 
glances up at him occasionally for inspiration, he will get a subliminal 
message that he is good enough to go into the championship rounds, where the 
real fighting takes place.
 