
Andy Murray finally voiced the unthinkable when he said on Saturday that the 
Big Four, the elite club which he will captain for as long as he can holdNovak 
Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> at bay, could be 
without its founding members, Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal, within 12 months.

“I think next year will be interesting,” the new world No1 said on the eve of 
theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> at the O2 Arena in 
Greenwich. “That will be the time to sort of tell whether it’s done and that 
era is past.”

Federer, who dropped out of the top 10 for the first time in 14 years this 
month, and Nadal, who, like the Swiss, is absent because of injury, have 
struggled to stay in touch with Murray and Djokovic. And, whenthe Serb’s run of 
123 weeks as world No1 came to an end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/andy-murray-becomes-tennis-world-no1-milos-raonic-walkover-paris>
 in Paris last weekend, the story shifted dramatically again.

Andy Murray is the 26th men’s No1 in tennis – but how does he compare? | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/05/andy-murray-mens-no1-tennis-compare>
Murray, who has been thrust to the top of the mountain against most 
expectations but who has earned the honour in the course ofan unbeaten run of 
19 matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/06/andy-murray-paris-masters-beat-john-isner-no1-tennis>
, made his prediction with a sense of regret rather than celebration. He 
acknowledges that Federer and Nadal have been probably the two best players in 
the history of the game and he knows that, when fit and in form, they demand 
total respect.

But, at 35 and 30 respectively, they have been unable to avoid the inevitable 
drag of physical decline. The sharpness of hand and eye is ever so slightly 
dulled, the flexibility not what it was. The muscles and bones ache more 
deeply. The passion? Even Djokovic, the sport’s iron man, admits that comes 
under pressure too. But it all starts with the moving parts.

“When somebody is not playing for six months like Roger,” Murray said, “then 
they can’t maintain their ranking and they are not competing for the biggest 
events. Rafa, just when he was starting to play better, he had this wrist issue 
and that has set him back a bit.Stan [Wawrinka] winning at the US Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/stan-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-us-open-final-2016>
 against Novak in the final was a bit of a surprise, maybe.”

The main battlefield for a little while has featured three players: Murray, 
Djokovic and Wawrinka. Form suggests that is the way it will play out on the 
banks of the Thames this week. If Djokovic can win every match, he will reclaim 
his crown; if Murray can match or better his results, he will finish the year 
as No1, something only 16 players have done since the computer rankings began 
in 1973. Murray would rather not be among the nine who reached the top and slid 
down quickly.

His peers are impressed. Kei Nishikori, who plays Wawrinka in the afternoon 
match on Monday before Murray’s evening opener against Marin Cilic, said: “It 
is great to see a new No1 player. For sure I think he is going to stay there a 
long time. But Novak is going to be playing strong as well, and Stan won the US 
Open. It won’t be easy for him.”

What makes the sacrifices more bearable for Murray is his young daughter, 
Sophia.Her arrival in February brought him obvious calm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/29/andy-murray-grand-slam-daughter-fatherhood>
 and she has become the centre of his and Kim’s lives.

Andy Murray: ‘I want my daughter to be proud of her dad when she grows up’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/29/andy-murray-grand-slam-daughter-fatherhood>
“She started crawling [on Thursday],” he said. “I wasn’t there, unfortunately. 
I was practising. There’s video of it and I saw it this morning for myself. 
It’s nice. Anyone who’s a parent will say that.

“Even though it’s baby steps, small steps, it’s nice to be around when that’s 
happening and that’s why this period of the year is great.” It was also why he 
declined an invitation to be at Wembley forScotland’s World Cup qualifier 
against England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/england-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
 on Friday – which might be as well.

“I will get to see her every day for the next four and a half weeks before I 
go off to Miami. I will get to spend a bit of time with her over Christmas and 
she is coming at the beginning of the year to some of the tournaments in the 
Middle East. So I will get to spend a lot of time with her.”

Some critics a little way removed from Murray’s circumstances suggested 
fatherhood might undermine his focus. He could not disagree more. “The thing 
is, it has distracted me in a good way. All of my focus isn’t on tennis now, 
which is a positive. Maybe before, tennis was like my life – and now it isn’t. 
I still want to do well but it’s true that, when I finished in Paris, I was 
really happy that I won but I wanted to go home and see my family and that’s 
more important now.

“Maybe my focus is a little bit different but I’m not dwelling on wins and 
losses as much. I feel a lot more level-headed through the year emotionally. 
I’m not as up and down. My mood isn’t based on: ‘OK, I won a tournament. That’s 
amazing.’ And then, when I’ve lost, I’m not way down here, either. I just feel 
a lot more stable throughout the year.”

Djokovic, who admits he has struggled with off-court problems as well as an 
injury to his right arm which stubbornly refuses to heal, is also keeping his 
day job in perspective. He was a little touchy on Friday when asked if he felt 
back to normal after what he himself had saidduring the Olympics in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/novak-djokovic-rio-2016-juan-martin-del-potro>
 had been a difficult time.

“What makes you say that?” he asked his questioner. “I am my normal self every 
day. I was talking about having certain ups and downs. ‘Not emotionally myself’ 
is too strong. I think.”

He did concede his game lately was “not quite up to the standard of the last 
12, 15 months, the high standard of results that I have had. Probably [injury 
and his private life] have taken its toll a little bit. I didn’t get to recover 
a little bit. I had to dig deep, take some time to reflect on everything.”

Djokovic is wounded, still. But that is when he is at his most dangerous, as 
any member of the Big Four would agree.
 