
Anyone But Murray, eh? The ABM meme could hardly seem more tatty and 
irrelevant now, seven years after it was spawned with spite and ignorance, 
before the difficult Scot had proved Little Englanders and other snipers wrong 
with his eloquent tennis racket.

Instead, the question that is now being asked – and answered in the 
affirmative – across nearly every media platform is an uplifting one: isAndy 
Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> this country’s 
greatest-ever athlete?

Andy Murray concerned about father’s wedding, not knighthood or Spoty title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/andy-murray-dad-wedding-spoty-knighthood>
The response has reached a crescendo of approval, with confirmation that the 
nation has voted him the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year for a record 
third time.

We are notoriously reluctant to embrace genius, as if such a judgment betrayed 
arrogance, but Murray, the most humble of champions, is building a case to put 
aside such quibbles – not that he is leading any trumpet charge in his own 
cause.

The Daily Telegraph recently declared him their “greatest ever”. But, even 
post-war – a perhaps more relevant gauge of his worth – Murray stands out.

There have been a score of generational heroes to celebrate since these awards 
began in 1954 and Murray was as clear a favourite to do the hat-trick as were 
any of his predecessors to win even once.

Jim Laker’s 19 Australian wickets at Old Trafford in 1956 lifted England’s 
cricketing gloom and there was no runner-up. Motor racing’s Stirling Moss edged 
the boxer Billy Walker in 1961 but neither won a world championship in their 
respective sports. The track and field athlete Mary Rand was the nation’s 
Olympic sweetheart in 1964, Bobby Moore her football World Cup equivalent two 
years later.

Virginia Wade was the tennis darling in Wimbledon’s centenary year, 1977, her 
victory embroidered by the Queen celebrating her Silver Jubilee with her first 
visit to the All England Club in 15 years. Her Majesty was back on Centre Court 
33 years later to see Murray beat Jarkko Nieminen, and the Scot showed the Finn 
how to bow towards the Royal Box, which appalled republicans and appeased 
monarchists – unlike his advocacy of Scottish independence in 2014.

How Andy Murray chased down Novak Djokovic to end 2016 on top of the world | 
Andy Bull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/16/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-world-no1-2016>
If his midnight aberration on Twitter with his brother, Jamie, fed into the 
tired ABM narrative, only the Daily Mail seemed much bothered. Gradually, 
Murray was winning over the nation, rarely with such power and resonance as 
when leading Great Britain to the country’sfirst Davis Cup in 79 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/andy-murray-davis-cup-great-britain>
 last year in Ghent. Surely, he had nothing left to prove.

Johanna Konta, newly installed in the WTA top 10 and Britain’s unchallenged 
No1, first met Murray when she was an ingenue from Australia via Bournemouth 
and he was a scrawny 15-year-old at the Sánchez-Casal Academy in Barcelona. 
Every bit as diffident as Murray, Konta said on Sunday: “I don’t think I’m in 
any position to comment on how deserving he is to win but, from a tennis 
standpoint, and from the way I know his journey more intimately, being a tennis 
player, what he has achieved is ridiculous. It’s incredible.”

She added: “He’s definitely transcended his sport now, in a way very few 
athletes ever get to do. He’s more than just a tennis player. He’s become an 
all-round athlete superstar, not just in this country, but globally. Very few 
people ever get to do that. In that context, he is definitely the most 
deserving.”

Murray never saw it panning out like this. He famously said four years ago, 
afterconquering his peers at the US Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/11/andy-murray-us-open-novak-djokovic1>
, that if he won only one grand slam title in his career he could retire a 
happy man. He is 29, fitter than ever and has won two since then, both of them 
at Wimbledon, most recently last July, and there is every likelihood he will 
add a fourth major to his collection in Melbourne next month, buoyed by 
displacing Novak Djokovic as the world No1. Retirement is at least three or 
four years away.

Andy Murray’s work ethic is behind his rise to No1 and he can stay there | 
Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/21/andy-murray-world-no1-novak-djokovic>
Murray has never defined his life or his tennis career by accolades or the 
praise of others, however welcome those might be. He has always judged himself 
by the amount of effort he has put in, before a tournament and during it, in a 
particular point – however slim the chances of winning it – game, set, match or 
tournament.

There was a time when he prioritised the slams but Ivan Lendl, more 
influential in his career than any single mentor bar his mother, Judy, 
convinced Murray that he needed to maintain a rush of intensity throughout the 
season if he were ever to topple Djokovic, whom he had trailed almost since 
they first met. It took immense dedication and fitness but Murray has proved 
equal to the challenge.

After returning from Rio with a second Olympic gold medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/andy-murray-beats-juan-martin-del-potro-rio-2016>
, it was this refocusing that helped him win five Tour titles and 25 matches in 
a row at the end of the 2016 season that kept him ahead of Djokovic in the race 
to the ATP’s No1 ranking. The Serb, so confident of a calendar slam after 
beating Murray in the Australian and French Open finals, collapsed at Wimbledon 
as his personal life intruded on his tennis and injury compounded his dilemma.

Murray forged on, holding off Djokovic’s late charge and beating him 
convincingly in the final of the last tournament of the season, the ATP World 
Tour Finals at the O2 Arena in Greenwich last month.

He deserves every trinket that has come his way and the word is there is one 
more to come. If Murray does get the call to Buckingham Palace for a knighthood 
in the New Year honours list, as has been strongly rumoured, he will at least 
know how to bow.
 