
Andy Burnham <https://www.parliament.uk/biographies/commons/andy-burnham/1427>
, Labour’s candidate to become the mayor of Greater Manchester, has accused his 
party of getting its priorities over Brexit wrong by placing single market 
access at the top of the list ahead of controlling immigration.

Labour needs to take back control of the immigration debate | Andy Burnham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/take-back-control-immigration-debate-labour>
The former shadow home secretary suggested the referendum result was not about 
putting the economy first, as the party leader, Jeremy Corybn, and astring of 
senior Labour colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/21/hard-brexit-disaster--working-people-labour-mps-letter>
 have suggested, but instead a clear vote in favour of ending free movement 
across Europe.

Writing in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/take-back-control-immigration-debate-labour>
, Burnham said Labour’s “collective failure” to tackle concerns over jobs, 
wages, housing and schools linked to migration had contributed to the loss of 
the referendum.

But he claimed that politicians were still scared to speak out over the issue 
because, even in the wake of the Brexit vote, they knew they might face a 
hysterical reaction.

“Accusations of ‘pandering to Ukip’, xenophobia or even racism are thrown 
around quite freely. This has the chilling effect of making people who speak 
out fearful of doing so again,” writes Burnham, who was himself compared to 
Nigel Farage after telling parliament thatLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> had failed to speak out on the 
issue.

Burnham’s comments underline the extent to which Labour has been grappling 
with the fallout from the Brexit vote, with deep divisions between the party’s 
leadership and a number of northern England MPs about how to respond to the 
challenge.

Sources suggested that his intervention was a deliberate break from national 
Labour policy and the first step in efforts to develop a distinctive northern 
voice for the party as he seeks to win the mayoralty inManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>.

In his article, the MP for Leigh talks of a “growing class divide” on the left 
of politics in which some middle-class Labour remain voters look down on those 
who backed leave as “uneducated or xenophobic”.

Burnham said it was simply not true to suggest that northern communities did 
not value the role migrants played in society, nor that people were hostile to 
refugees.


“But while it is right to point out that immigration provides an overall net 
benefit to the country, many of us have been slow to realise that it has a 
differential impact on different places,” he said.


Burnham argued that Labour activists had been hearing concerns on the doorstep 
about immigration for at least a decade. While some could be dismissed as 
“xenophobia or, worse, racism”, not all could.

He said: “The time has come for the left to break out of this dysfunctional 
cycle of denial and overreaction. By specifying single market access as our 
highest priority in the Brexit negotiations, we are getting things in the wrong 
order. The implication of this position is that ifEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> made accepting full freedom of 
movement its price, we would accept it. That is it is not what people voted 
for.”

The comments place Burnham on a collision course with a number of senior 
Labour figures, including his successor as shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, 
who recently used an interview in the Guardian to warn againsther party turning 
into “Ukip-lite” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/26/labour-will-not-win-a-general-election-as-ukip-lite-says-diane-abbott>
 by shifting to the right on immigration.

The shadow business secretary, Clive Lewis, recently argued  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/clive-lewis-labour-eu-free-movement-corbyn>
that Labour needed to push for the best possible access to the single market, 
claiming “the Tories have started from the other end”.

Keir Starmer, the shadow Brexit secretary, has argued Labour’s priority should 
be the single market and jobs while admitting there was clearly a need to act 
on free movement.

Abbott reacted to Burnham’s comments by claiming he was “getting it back to 
front”.


“I’m not accusing him of pandering to Ukip,” she said. “I’m just saying he’s 
wrong. He’s wrong that we don’t talk about immigration and he’s wrong to say we 
don’t have any answers.”

She expressed surprise that Burnham did not want to put the single market 
first. “It is really important that we do put jobs and our standards of living 
first – and that means some sort of access to the single market,” she said.

Abbott pointed out that Ed Miliband had made three speeches on immigration – 
“three more than any other Labour leader”. He had focused a party political 
broadcast on the issue in 2015 and had even distributed mugs that called for 
immigration controls.

She argued that Corbyn was tackling the issue by trying to “boost the factory 
inspectorate, increase prosecutions for the minimum wage and stop agencies 
directly recruiting abroad.” He wanted to see an end to exploitative zero-hour 
contracts and the introduction of a migrant impact fund.


“There is a problem for the party around immigration,” she said. “That is 
because so many MPs want to move right on immigration policy because they think 
that will protect them from Ukip.” People wanted fair rules and reasonable 
management of migration, said Abbott.

Dealing with views on immigration is not just posing a major challenge for 
Labour but for the entire left, with union leaders also trying to respond to 
anger among members.

Launching his bid on Friday to be re-elected as general secretary of the Unite 
union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/16/len-mccluskey-unite-workers-do-best-when-labour-supply-is-controlled>
, Len McCluskey said: “Unions understand that workers have always done best 
when the labour supply is controlled and communities are stable. While we must 
reject any form of racism, and help refugees fleeing war, we must also listen 
to the concerns of working people.”

He called for new safeguards “to stop companies cutting costs by slashing 
workers’ wages and transforming a race-to-the-bottom culture into a 
rate-for-the-job society”.
 