
Andy Murray is in his second Olympic singles final, this time against Juan 
Martín del Potro <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/juan-martin-del-potro>, 
after demoralising Kei Nishikori in two quick sets here on Saturday. Del Potro 
later battled for three hours and eight minutes to subdue Rafael Nadal 5-7, 
6-4, 7-6 – so the Scot should have an edge in freshness in the final on Sunday, 
with history his travelling companion once again.

If Murray wins a second gold medal he will be the first person in the 15 
Olympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> at which tennis 
has had full recognition to assert his dominance back to back. No wonder he was 
so keen to be here, while some others thought it a trip not worth the effort.

The world No2 can legitimately claim, at 29, to be playing at the apex of his 
skills and ambitions. He has finally tamed clay over the past year or so,won a 
second Wimbledon title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/andy-murray-wins-wimbledon-2016-milos-raonic>
, reached the finalsin Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
 andRoland Garros 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/french-open-2016-final-novak-djokovic-beats-andy-murray>
 and stands ready to return to the point where his rise beganin London four 
years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/andy-murray-olympic-gold-great-britain>
, in the singles final of the Olympic Games. That triumph catapulted him into 
his grand slam breakthrough at the2012 US Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/11/andy-murray-us-open-novak-djokovic1>
. Could the same be happening here?

Rafael Nadal and Marc Lopez win tennis gold in Olympic men's doubles final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/rafael-nadal-wins-tennis-gold-in-olympic-mens-doubles-final-in-rio>
Murray is on a winning sequence of 17, the longest of his career, and has lost 
only three times in 38 matches since Miami. Meanwhile Novak Djokovic, his 
conqueror in the Australian and French Opens, has succumbed to what appears to 
be a combination of emotional and physical meltdown – having withdrawn from the 
Cincinnati Open this week with a wrist injury and no certainty to line up at 
Flushing Meadows in a fortnight – so Murray, who heads for Cincinnati after 
Rio, can rightly be regarded as the best player in the world right now.

He will put a strong case for that if he wins on Sunday. He can seal it, if he 
wins New York. Beyond that? A knighthood in the New Year honours, perhaps. It 
was rumoured earlier in the summer (when his brother, Jamie, got a gong); 
Andy’s big day at the Palace may not be far away.

“The last four months definitely have been the best period of my career,” 
Murray agreed. “My job is to try and keep that going, keep up this consistency 
that I’ve had.

“I’ve played not my best tennis this week but found a way to win. Often in 
events you have matches like the one yesterday [when he was dragged into a 
three-set dog-fight after bagelling Steve Johnson] and the one against [Fabio] 
Fognini [surviving a similar blip]. If you can get through them, you can start 
to find your form and feel better as the tournament goes on.

“I’ve had that a few times. It happened at Queen’s [Club]. At Wimbledon I had 
that match against [Jo-Wilfried] Tsonga that really could have gone either way 
in the fifth set. I’m just happy I’ve come through those ones and made it a 
great, great few months.”

On a gorgeously warm afternoon on Centre Court Murray made sure of his place 
in the final by battering Nishikori 6-1, 6-4 with his most consistent and 
convincing tennis of the tournament. After wild fluctuations in form the 
previous couple of days Murray finally got it right from start to finish.

Nishikori might as well have phoned his score in for the first set, so off the 
pace was he. Thereafter the match went along more traditional lines.

Nishikori, first in the serving cycle, led until the fifth game of the second 
set, which he surrendered to love with a string of loose strokes, and the crowd 
picked up the simple but loud chorus of “Murray! Murray!”. It was not quite a 
samba beat: more rat‑a‑tat-tat, not dissimilar to the rhythm of his 
uncomplicated shot-making.

This was Murray at ease with his tennis. There was no wind to speak of, as 
there had been most of the week, no external factors or worries: just a 
determined but bamboozled opponent. Nishikori, nevertheless, was always 
dangerous, because when he hit cleanly off the ground it was with intent. He 
hung on through deuce to give himself a sliver of a chance at 3-4 but he was 
not convincing. His serve had gone to pot and there was desperation in his 
all-or-nothing groundstrokes.

After an hour and 12 minutes of efficient and calculated tennis Murray served 
for the match.

The largely pro-Murray crowd, nevertheless, went wild when Nishikori fought 
back to deuce (they wanted their money’s worth), and even crazier when Murray 
won the rally of the match with a stretched backhand down the line that left 
his Japanese opponent spent and stranded in mid-court. Nishikori obliged on the 
second match point with a closing unforced error, his 23rd. Murray hit 15, 
alongside 15 clean winners and three aces. It was a clinical and ruthless 
performance – just what he needed after the excitement of the previous two days.

In the second semi-final, as the fast‑setting sun began to sink over the 
nearby mountains, Nadal found himself in much choppier waters against Del Potro 
in the Battle of the Dodgy Wrists. The Spaniard, returning here after 10 weeks 
out, soaked up five aces and 17 clean winners, three off the serve, to take the 
first set.

The Argentinian needed only one break to take the second, and the third was 
rich with enough twists and turns to fill a Gabriel García Márquez novel, 
decided in the end as one suspected it might be: a tie-break.
 