
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> will open the 
defence of his Olympic singles title against Serbia’s Viktor Troicki in Rio.

The Wimbledon champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/andy-murray-wins-wimbledon-2016-milos-raonic>
,who will carry the Great Britain flag at the opening ceremony on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/03/andy-murray-great-britain-flag-bearer-rio-2016-olympics-opening-ceremony>
,won gold four years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/andy-murray-olympic-gold-great-britain>
 by beating Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer back to back.

This time his path looks significantly less daunting, with Spain’s David 
Ferrer his potential quarter-final opponent while he is seeded to meet Kei 
Nishikori in the last four.

The British women’s No1 Johanna Konta is seeded 10th and received a kind draw 
against the world No290 Stephanie Vogt of Liechtenstein, whileHeather Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson> will face China’s Peng Shuai.

Konta and Watson are teaming up in the women’s doubles and take on Serbia’s 
Jelena Jankovic and Aleksandra Krunic in round one.

There were gasps at the draw in the Olympic Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Centre when the world No1 Djokovic 
was paired with the former US Open champion Juan Martín del Potro.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fandy-murray-victor-troicki-olympic-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06f97c12e5479c6dae5905d4802ca445396f8207%2F0_63_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Murray%20to%20play%20Serbia%E2%80%99s%20Viktor%20Troicki%20in%20Olympic%20tennis%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fandy-murray-victor-troicki-olympic-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Murray%20to%20play%20Serbia%E2%80%99s%20Viktor%20Troicki%20in%20Olympic%20tennis%20tournament&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fandy-murray-victor-troicki-olympic-tennis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06f97c12e5479c6dae5905d4802ca445396f8207%2F0_63_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Johanna Konta will pair up with Heather Watson in the doubles. Photograph: 
Paul Chiasson/AP 
The Argentinian, whose ranking has dropped after virtually two years out with 
wrist problems, defeated Djokovic to win bronze in London in 2012.

Only five of the world’s top 10 and half of the top 20 have travelled to Rio, 
but the saving grace is that Djokovic, Murray and Rafael Nadal are all here.

Nadal, who faces Argentina’s Federico Delbonis in the first round, has not 
played since wrist problems forced him out of the French Open more than two 
months ago but declared himself fit for singles and doubles.

Britain’s other entrant in the men’s singles, Kyle Edmund, will take on 
Australia’s Jordan Thompson in round one.

Murray also has high hopes of success in the doubles with his brother Jamie 
and the second seeds will play the Brazilians Thomaz Bellucci and Andre Sa in 
the first round.

Serena Williams begins her bid for a fifth Olympic gold medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/04/serena-williams-beats-maria-sharapova>
 against Australia’s Daria Gavrilova but there will be no all-Williams final 
after Venus was also drawn in the top half. The sisters could meet in the last 
four. The women’s draw has been less badly hit by withdrawals, with 15 of the 
top 20 present.

Play begins on Saturday while the mixed doubles entries will be finalised on 9 
August.
 