
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> had to earn his 
place in the Qatar Open quarter-finals after a difficult 7-6, 7-5 win against 
the Austrian Gerald Melzer. The pair shared four breaks of serve in an opening 
set that was taken to a tie‑break by Melzer, who fought back from 5-0 down to 
6-6 in the first-set decider.

The second set was just as frustrating for Murray despite the world No1 
hitting 10 aces and seeing 78% of his first serves in, but he edged past his 
26-year-old opponent to set up a meeting against Spain’s Nicolas Almagro.

Serena Williams on shock loss: ‘I’m trying to think of a word that’s not 
obscene’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/serena-williams-shock-loss-word-not-obscene-tennis-results>
The world No44 sealed his place in the last eight with a 7-6, 7-6 victory 
against Germany’s Philipp Kohlschreiber. The world No2Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> eased into the next phase 
with a 6-3, 6-4 win against Argentina’s Horacio Zeballos in 1hr 13min. Fernando 
Verdasco defeated the fourth seed David Goffin to advance to the quarter-finals 
in Doha with a 6-1, 7-6 win against the Belgian, while the evergreen Radek 
Stepanek was a 6-3, 6-2 victor against Arthur De Greef.

The third seed Tomas Berdych won the battle of the Czechs as he defeated 
compatriot Jiri Vesely 7-6, 1-6, 6-1 while the big-serving Ivo Karlovic 
defeated Karen Khachanov 7-6, 7-6.

Britain’s Kyle Edmund will face the world No4 Stan Wawrinka in the Brisbane 
International quarter-finals after both players came through their second-round 
matches on Wednesday. Edmund progressed when his opponent Lucas Pouille retired 
when he was trailing the Briton 6-3, 3-1, while the second seed Wawrinka 
defeated Viktor Troicki 7-6, 6-4.

The third seed Kei Nishikori joined the last eight after defeating the 
qualifier Jared Donaldson 4-6, 6-4, 6-3.

But eighth seed David Ferrer crashed out of the event following a 4-6 7-5 7-5 
defeat at the hands of Australian Jordan Thompson.

In the Aircel Chennai Open, number one seed Marin Cilic fell to a second round 
defeat to world number 117 Jozef Kovalik by a 7-6 (7/5) 5-7 7-5 scoreline.

Both men earned two breaks apiece during the match but the 24-year-old Slovak 
used his timely second to his advantage in the decider to serve out one of his 
biggest victories in his career so far.

Third seed Albert Ramos Vinolas needed just over an hour as he dropped just 
two games in his comfortable 6-2 6-0 success over Belgium’s Steve Darcis.

Israel’s Dudi Sela produced a routine 6-2 6-2 win over South Korea’s Chung 
Hyeon while Russian Daniil Medvedev won 6-4 6-3 against Yen-Hsun Lu.
 