
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> has expressed his 
disappointment at Michael Downey’s decision to return to Canada two years 
before the end of his five-year term as the chief executive of the Lawn Tennis 
Association, leaving the British game struggling again for direction.

“I wasn’t really surprised,” Murray said on Saturday as the world No1 prepared 
for his first match at the Australian Open on Monday,against the Ukrainian 
outsider Ilya Marchenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/13/andy-murray-near-misses-novak-djokovic-australian-open-tennis>
. “Everyone thought that’s always what was going to happen there.”

Andy Murray eager and ready to avenge near-misses at Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/13/andy-murray-near-misses-novak-djokovic-australian-open-tennis>
Murray was unsure if the next chief executive should be British but said: 
“They [the LTA] need someone that’s going to be in it for the long haul. They 
just have to have a 100% commitment to British tennis.” He paused as his 
mother, Judy, arrived, and said: “Oh, look, there’s someone that has that.”

When he jokingly asked her if she was interested in applying for the job, she 
replied: “I think somebody asked me that once before and I said I’d rather die.”

Her younger son said: “It’s disappointing because it’s just another change. 
Someone new will come in with a different direction for another three, four 
years, then it will change again.

“For a system that maybe everyone would say has not really worked for quite a 
long time, for change to happen, you need someone or a team in there that’s 
going to be in it for not just a few years.

“You can’t expect results immediately. I don’t think there should be loads of 
pressure on that person to get stuff done straightaway. But I’d like to see a 
long-term appointment so that there’s a chance for change to happen, but then 
stick. If you just do three years, then another three years, keep switching all 
the time, it’s not good for anyone.”

Kyle Edmund, who plays his first match on Tuesday, on the other side of the 
draw against the Colombian Santiago Giraldo, agreed, but sympathised with 
Downey’s circumstances.

Australian Open men’s form guide: the players to watch in Melbourne | Jacob 
Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/13/australia-open-mens-form-guide-players-to-watch>
Downey revealed his wife’s mother has dementia. The British No2 said: “I would 
see him when I was back at the NTC [National Training Centre]. I always found 
him, whenever I engaged with him, very easy to get on with.

“The departure was surprising, because I don’t think anyone saw it coming and 
the reasons, I think, were personal and family orientated. Family is over 
everything in life. I see it that way, anyway. When people have to make 
decisions based on that, then it’s understandable.”

He agreed with Murray that Downey’s early exit will lead to more upheaval. 
“It’s maybe a shame [because] you build up a relationship and then it’s over. 
At the minute at the LTA, it’s just lots of building process going on, a new 
performance director. But three years isn’t enough time to get the plan [Downey 
put in place] going.

“At my age, where I’m at now, it doesn’t matter too much, because I’m doing my 
own thing in terms of my tennis. I don’t have to rely on the federation so 
much, which is good. But I don’t know who’s coming in next. We’ll see.”
 