
Andy Murray survived a scare to book his place in the semi-finals of the Qatar 
Open with a hard-fought victory over Nicolás Almagro, whileJohanna Konta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> battled to the last four of 
the Shenzhen Open.

Nick Kyrgios could be the best in the world, says Rod Laver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/05/kyrgios-could-be-best-in-world-says-rod-laver>
Murray began slowly in Doha and appeared frustrated for much of the match as 
he battled to a 7-6, 7-5 success over the unseeded Spaniard. It was the first 
time the pair had faced each other in almost three years and Murray’s only 
defeat in five matches against the current world No44 had come at the 2008 
French Open, when they met for the first time.

Despite those statistics and being a strong favourite for this one, the world 
No1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/datablog/2016/nov/25/andy-murrays-path-to-becoming-world-tennis-no-1-in-data>
 was broken in the first game after dropping his first four service points and 
he struggled to recover from the stuttering start. The next six games went with 
serve, although Murray squandered three break points in the fourth before he 
eventually levelled at 4-4. He finally wrapped up the opening set after being 
taken to a tie-break but Almagro’s resistance showed little sign of being 
broken.

The 31-year-old was clearly enjoying the challenge of taking on a superior 
opponent, much to the detriment of Murray, who, after securing an early break 
in the second set, immediately surrendered the initiative as he served a double 
fault to lose the next game.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fandy-murray-qatar-open-semi-finals-johanna-konta-shenzhen-open%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c07544fabecf7678708dba3d7dfa34da58c45ee%2F0_30_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Murray%20survives%20scare%20to%20reach%20Qatar%20Open%20semi-finals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fandy-murray-qatar-open-semi-finals-johanna-konta-shenzhen-open%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Murray%20survives%20scare%20to%20reach%20Qatar%20Open%20semi-finals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fandy-murray-qatar-open-semi-finals-johanna-konta-shenzhen-open%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c07544fabecf7678708dba3d7dfa34da58c45ee%2F0_30_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 Johanna Konta of Britain hits a return against Kristyna Pliskova on the way to 
a three-set victory. Photograph: STR/AFP/Getty Images 
The set then followed a similar pattern to the first, with both players 
holding serve until Murray made a crucial breakthrough in the 11th game. It 
took him 14 points to do so as Almagro once again dug in to save two breaks 
before eventually succumbing. Murray, who won the competition in 2008 and 2009, 
then saw out the following game to line up a meeting with Tomas Berdych, who 
beat Jo-Wilfried Tsonga 7-5, 6-3.

“It was a tough match today, very close both sets, obviously,” Murray told 
Eurosport. “Nico was playing very aggressive, going for his shots and it was 
hard conditions tonight. It was very windy, so it was tough to get into much of 
a rhythm.

“I served pretty good; second serve points won was where the difference was in 
the match. I won 61% of mine, I think he won 48% of his, so that was the 
difference.”

The defending champion, Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>, also advanced to the 
semi-finals by beating the Czech qualifier Radek Stepanek 6-3, 6-3.

Konta is one victory away from her third WTA final after she beat Kristyna 
Pliskova 6-4, 6-7, 6-3 in the Shenzhen Open quarter-finals in China. Konta will 
play another Czech, Katerina Siniakova, in the semi-finals.

Aljaz Bedene survived a three-hour tussle with Martin Klizan to reach the 
quarter-finals of the Chennai Open. It needed a huge effort from the 
Slovenian-turned-Briton, ranked 101, as he prevailed 7-6, 6-7, 7-6 after three 
hours and four minutes. Bedene must recover quickly for a match against the 
fifth seed, Benoît Paire, on Friday.
 