
Andy Murray and Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> can only play each other in 
the first major of the season in the final, which is a fortnight on Sunday. If 
it comes to pass, it must be like having a never‑ending appointment with a mad 
dentist armed with a rusty drill, given they have spent 20 hours and 41 minutes 
on court here in five brutal matches – nearly a day out of their lives.

As everyone is aware, Djokovic has prevailed each time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
, winning finals in 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2016. In 2012, he won a semi-final of 
awe-inspiring mutual pain in four hours and 50 minutes, prompting Murray – who 
had to rest for a day to recover – to express his gobsmacked admiration for his 
nemesis who, within two days, somehow foundfurther reserves of energy to grind 
down Rafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/29/australian-open-novak-djokovic-rafael-nadal>
 in the final over five sets and five hours and 53 minutes, still the longest 
slam final.

Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to win the 2016 Australian Open final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
That was the height of attritional tennis, when strength of mind and legs 
ruled pure skill – although there was an abundance of that as well. But times 
have changed. Nobody could sustain that level of suffering indefinitely. 
Matches and points are shorter. Players who were glued to the baseline now 
venture to the net in search of early kills. Volleying is a resurrected art.

To nobody’s surprise, two of the arch exponents of the new game are Murray and 
Djokovic – except that there has now been a power shift.

Surprising even himself, Murray has displaced Djokovic at the top of the 
rankings and, seeded No1 here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/21/andy-murray-world-no1-novak-djokovic>
, begins his campaign on Monday against Ilya Marchenko, whom he beat in the 
second round in 2011. Djokovic has a tougher opener on Tuesday, against 
Fernando Verdasco, who had five match points against him in Doha a couple of 
weeks ago. The intrigue at Melbourne Park resides with them. Can Murray hold 
off Djokovic to not only win his first Australian Open but keep his No1 
ranking? He will do so if he wins his semi-final, which on the evidence of the 
draw, will be Stan Wawrinka or Marin Cilic. Djokovic is probably heading for a 
semi-final against Nadal or Raonic.

Dan Evans reaches Sydney final after battling past Andrey Kuznetsov
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/dan-evans-sydney-andrey-luznetsov>
Patrick McEnroe, for one, thinks Murray can remain king of the mountain, 
although, as he observed on ESPN, it will be hellishly tough for him. “Andy 
will handle being No1 just fine,” he said. “He’s been around long enough to 
know what it takes. He’s worked extremely hard to get there. Quite honestly, I 
didn’t think he could get there. But it was a hell of an effort to do it. It 
was his consistency, being able to win a lot of matches every tournament, to be 
able to win on clay, which he hadn’t done in the past.

“I don’t think he’s going to lose it because he can’t handle being No1. I 
think he’s going to lose it if Djokovic steps up and plays better, which is 
certainly possible.”

Murray agrees with him. “[Getting to No1] just felt like a reward for years of 
hard work,” he said on Friday. “I had never expected it. I had always been 
behind some of the great players of all time. It wasn’t really on my radar and 
it just happened.

“I love this event. I have been really close a number of times – it has just 
never happened for me, but I don’t think that will change my mindset so much 
coming into the event this year.

Australian Open: Novak Djokovic beats Rafael Nadal to win men's title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/29/australian-open-novak-djokovic-rafael-nadal>
“If I play my best tennis I’ll have a shot of winning. And it’s one that I’d 
love to win because there have been so many near misses.”

He will not need reminding that his first defeat in an Australian final was 
against Roger Federer, whom he could meet in the quarter-finals. He would find 
losing to the 35-year-old Swiss, who has been away from the game for six months 
while recovering from knee surgery, at least as tough to take as falling short 
for a fifth time to Djokovic – although he does not seem in the mood to do 
either.

He remains the standout British player of this and every other generation – 
althoughDan Evans surprised everyone but himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/dan-evans-sydney-andrey-luznetsov>
 by reaching his first ATP World Tour final in Sydney and will arrive in 
Melbourne in buoyant mood. If he were to defeat the Argentinian Facundo Bagnis 
in the first round, he would be on course for a more rigorous examination by 
the seventh seed, Marin Cilic.

Aljaz Bedene should beat the veteran Víctor Estrella Burgos and possibly the 
off-key Bernard Tomic. But Cilic stands in his way too, in round three – unless 
Evans has more surprises for us.
 