
Stan Wawrinka does not think Andy Murray can beat Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> to win the French Open on 
Sunday. But Andy Murray does. More than once in the past fortnight he has 
reminded anyone asking that, although he might be the first British player to 
reach the men’s final here in 79 years, that does not define the limits of his 
ambition.

He is here only to win – and what he did to Wawrinka, the defending champion, 
on Court Philippe Chatrier over two and a half hours on Friday suggests he is 
as well prepared as he has ever been to go one further than Bunny Austin did in 
losing to Henner Henkel in 1937.

Andy Murray beats Stan Wawrinka to reach French Open final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/03/french-open-2016-andy-murray-v-stan-wawrinka-live>
Not for the first time Murray wants to eclipse Fred Perry, the player whose 
ghost has haunted British tennis down the decades and who became the only man 
from these islands to win the title at Roland Garros when he beat Baron 
Gottfried von Cramm 6-3, 3-6, 6-1, 6-3 in 1935.

Murray accounted for the world No4 6-4, 6-2, 4-6, 6-2 with probably his best 
ever performance on clay – and there have been a few of them lately, including a
straight-sets win over Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-rome-claycourt>
 in the final of the Italian Open in Rome three weekends ago. Did he regard his 
form and the weight of history as a distraction or a comfort?

“I use it as motivation, if anything,” he said, “but I didn’t necessarily 
expect to be here a few years ago, so I’ve got to try and enjoy it. I’m proud I 
have managed to reach the final of all four [majors]”.

Novak Djokovic overpowers Dominic Thiem to reach French Open final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/03/novak-djokovic-overpowers-dominic-thiem-to-reach-french-open-final-tennis>
This will be his 10th slam final, for a return of two titles – but he has 
never played anyone but Roger Federer or Djokovic on the final Sunday of a 
major. That is some mountain to climb after a fortnight’s slog and few have 
been as arduous as here, where the air and the clay have been heavy and damp 
nearly every day. The pressure on Murray is the tennis equivalent of thebulging 
river Seine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/03/paris-river-seine-floods> 
pushing on the banks of Paris.

Djokovic hit such heights of excellence in dismantling the precocious 
challenge of the 22-year-old Dominic Thiem in Friday’s other semi-final that 
there could be no question about his favouritism in the final. But, as Murray 
pointed out, they have their own challenges now.

“Novak is trying to win the career slam, so it’s a huge match for him, and I’m 
trying to win my first French Open as well. Neither of us knows how many more 
chances we’ll have to win here. It tookRoger [Federer] a long time to win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jun/07/roger-federer-wins-french-open> 
this one. It’s a very tough event to win. There is a lot riding on the match 
for both of us.”

Murray can rarely have played better on any surface, let alone on clay, where 
he has the best winning ratio, 85%, of any player on the Tour over the past 12 
months, a remarkable statistic given his previous long struggles to master the 
red dirt. But, as Rafael Nadal, the nonpareil of clay, observed in Monte Carlo 
recently, “Andy is not just a great player on clay. He is a great player on all 
surfaces.”

He has to be in this era, otherwise he would be ground underfoot like all the 
others who are near to the top of the mountain but unable yet to touch the sky, 
such perennial nearly men as Tomas Berdych and now David Goffin, alongside old 
favourites, David Ferrer and the injured Jo-Wilfried Tsonga.

Although Murray is 7,735 points adrift of Djokovic in the ATP World Tour 
rankings, no one is closer, numerically or in form and talent. The seedings 
here have done their job: they have brought together the two best players in 
the world right now and maybe for a couple of years at least, to come.

It is irrelevant that 30-year-old Nadal, whose wrist has collapsed, and 
34-year-old Federer, battling back pain, are absent injured. It is unlikely 
either of them would have reached the final weekend, given they were on 
Djokovic’s side of the draw. Murray did have the easier route on paper – but he 
discovered soon enough how misleading paper can be when he had to fight through 
10 tough sets against two players outside the top 100,Radek Stepanek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/24/andy-murray-fights-back-stepanek-french-open>
 andMathias Bourgue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/25/andy-murray-beats-mathias-bourgue-french-open-five-sets>
, just to get into the third round.

Since then he has built momentum nicely. On Friday he hit a mesmerising peak. 
His racket work was so clean and precise he hit only 22 unforced errors and won 
82 of the 135 quick-kill points of four shots or less.

Wawrinka was so frustrated by Murray’s impeccable defence, especially in the 
first two sets, that he was forced to risk clean winners – 41 to Murray’s 25 – 
rather than build points.

“It’s impossible to say,” Murray replied when asked if that was his best 
performance on clay. “On clay I’ve played some good ones but to play at that 
level kind of in the semis of theFrench Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/frenchopen> is very pleasing.

French Open 2016: Serena Williams reaches final by beating Kiki Bertens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/03/french-open-2016-serena-williams-final-kiki-bertens>
“There was a lot of pressure there, as well, today. I was just really happy 
with the way that I handled everything, and it was for sure one of the better 
matches that I have played on clay throughout my career.”

Wawrinka, powerless to haul Murray down, even after nicking a tight third set, 
said: “Andy played really so well today. He was the strongest on the court. 
It’s as simple as that. He knew what to do against me.”

Then, when asked who would win on Sunday, he said, “I think Novak, as always – 
even though their recent matches were very tight. But, when he’s at his best, 
he can beat anybody.”

And Djokovic is undoubtedly back to his best.
 