
It is not the US Open without a storm, on the court or in the air, and Andy 
Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> is a player who knows how 
to handle both better than most.

When he was on his way to winning the title here in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/11/andy-murray-us-open-novak-djokovic1>
, his fellow Scots Alex Ferguson and Sean Connery famously invaded his press 
conference in celebratory mood after he hadbamboozled Tomas Berdych in the 
semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/08/andy-murray-tomas-berdych-us-open>
, a match in which a fierce gale wrecked the Czech’s high ball-toss.“Scotland 
invented the world,” Ferguson declared. “Today we invented the wind.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/09/alex-ferguson-andy-murray-us-open>

The air whipped less frenetically in the final but was still enough to 
disconcert Novak Djokovic, while Murray held his nerve for his breakthrough 
major.

“There’s certain winds that I like,” Murray laughed moments after moving 
smoothly through to the third round, where he will play the Italian Paolo 
Lorenzi, who beat Gilles Simon in four hours and 54 minutes late on Thursday, 
the longest match of the tournament so far. Murray spent less than half that 
time beatingMarcel Granollers in straight sets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/01/andy-murray-marcel-granollers-us-open-straight-sets-flushing-meadows-roof>
 earlier in the evening.

US Open 2016: Johanna Konta beats Belinda Bencic to reach last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/us-open-2016-johanna-konta-beats-belinda-bencic-to-reach-last-16>
And he did it under the new roof, drawn across to protect the cavernous Arthur 
Ashe Court from the surrounding rain – and wind. New York has long suffered 
September storms, to the point where five finals in a row were postponed until 
the Monday. It would suit Murray, however, if the roof remained open and at 
least some of the elements intruded.

“When the wind is swirling everywhere, I personally don’t enjoy playing in 
that,” he acknowledged. “I don’t know any tennis players who do. But, when 
there’s a strong breeze and it’s consistent the whole time, I like that. I feel 
like it’s a lot easier to adjust to that. It doesn’t work against me.”

He welcomed the arrival of the roof, though. “It will help the quality of 
tennis, less wind. There’s not as much sun on the court either during the day, 
so the conditions are a little bit easier to play in. Should make for better 
tennis, I think.

“But it’s an outdoor event. The roof’s there obviously to have tennis going 
when it’s raining, for TV and stuff. But, if the rain stops, I’m happy with 
[the referee opening the roof]. Obviously, the timings need to be smart with 
that. The time to do it would be at the end of a set, probably.”

Murray pretty much made a lone British charge four years ago; this time he has 
Dan Evans andKyle Edmund <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kyle-edmund> for 
company, and it is the first time since Wimbledon in 1999 that three British 
players have reached the third round of a slam.

Kyle Edmund beats Ernesto Escobedo in straight sets in US Open second round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/31/kyle-edmund-beats-ernesto-escobedo-us-open-tennis>
Then it was Tim Henman, Greg Rusedski and Danny Sapsford. The last time it 
happened here, in 1968, the British trio were Peter Curtis, Paul Hutchins and 
Roger Taylor.

Evans was heroic in his four-sets win, completed around midnight, over the 
excellent young German Alexander Zverev. “It was probably the best win of my 
career,” Evans said at a press conference in the small hours of Friday morning. 
“The situation and circumstances, late, difficult mentally. To come back in the 
fourth and get on top was good.”

And he did it on the now notorious Court Four, small and rammed with passing 
traffic. No playing under a roof for Dan Evans. Yet.

“It was tough again,” he said of the constant noise and interruptions from the 
gangway that separated his playing area from Court Five. “I played on that 
court the other day, so I sort of knew it was going to happen.”

Evans plays Stan Wawrinka on Sunday and joked: “Hopefully that will be on 
Court Four”. It is a tough ask for the world No64 going up against a double 
slam champion ranked 61 places ahead of him, but Evans takes everything in his 
stride.

If he does end up under the roof on the main showcourt, it will not bother 
him. He had two good wins at Wimbledon, against Jan-Lennard Struff and theworld 
No33 Alexandr Dolgopolov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/30/wimbledon-dan-evans-dolgopolov-federer-third-round>
, beforelosing to Roger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/01/roger-federer-beats-dan-evans-wimbledon-second-round-tennis>
 in the third round.

Andy Murray overcomes ‘tough and tricky’ spell against Marcel Granollers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/01/andy-murray-marcel-granollers-arthur-ashe>
“It’s going to be good fun, a bit like Wimbledon,” he said. “Had a good win 
there, and then played Federer. It will be on a good court. Look forward to it. 
Never hit with him, never played against him. It’s going to be interesting.

“I think everyone’s obviously doing pretty well at the minute. It could easily 
have been different. Kyle played [Richard] Gasquet. I played [Rajeev] Ram. We 
both could lose those matches, and you would have sat here with only Andy again.

“It just happens in certain tournaments, doesn’t it, where you get through? 
Other tournaments, none get through. Like this week, there’s a feelgood factor. 
Let’s see what we can do.”

Heather Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson> put some of 
her earlier disappointment in singles behind her when she teamed up with 
Michaella Krajicek of Holland to win her opening doubles match 6-2, 7-5 against 
the Americans Raquel Atawo and Abigail Spears.
 