
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> continued his 
impressive form with a 6-1, 6-3 victory against Lucas Pouille, of France, to 
secure a place in the Shanghai Masters quarter-finals.

Murray, who landed the China Open title last week, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/andy-murray-grigor-dimitrov-china-open-final-tennis>
 had coasted past the American Steve Johnson on Wednesday, and the 13th seed 
Pouille was also given little opportunity following another dominant display by 
the British No1.

Nick Kyrgios fined for behaviour in Shanghai Masters defeat by Zverev
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/nick-kyrgios-fined-shanghai-masters-lack-of-best-efforts>
Pouille was broken in his first two services game as Murray, producing a range 
of attacking winners from across the baseline, raced into a 5-0 lead before 
closing out the first set in 40 minutes. The Scot continued his momentum into 
the second set, breaking the world No16 Pouille in the first game to open up a 
3-1 advantage.

Pouille, beaten by Murray at the Rome Masters, finally began to find his range 
as the set continued with serve. Murray, however, remained on the offensive 
himself as he closed in on victory at 5-3.

The Scot, 29, missed a couple of match points on Pouille’s next service game, 
before rifling a return down the line to secure a comfortable victory in 1hr 
19min. Next up for the world No2 will be either the sixth seed Gaël Monfils of 
France or the 11th-seeded Belgian David Goffin, who play in the late match on 
Thursday.

Meanwhile, the British women’s No1 Johanna Konta has withdrawn from the Hong 
Kong Open because of an abdominal strain. The world No9, wholost in the China 
Open final on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/johanna-konta-china-open-final-agnieszka-radwanska>
, pulled out of the tournament shortly before her second-round match against 
Wang Qiang. Konta occupies the final qualifying position for the season-ending 
WTA Finals in Singapore. But the 25-year-old, the first British woman in the 
top 10 since 1984, could now be overtaken by Dominika Cibulkova.

“I was really looking forward to making this week last as long as possible. It 
wasn’t as long as I would have liked, but I need to look after my body first,” 
Konta said. “I need to make sure I make the right decisions for my health.”

Heather Watson, the British No2, was beaten in straight sets in her 
second-round match by the former No1 Caroline Wozniacki.
 