
A group claiming to be part of the international hacking network Anonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous> has taken over Victoria’s 
Human Rights Commission website with a nonsensical message about its social 
network AnonPlus.

Instead of the commission’s website and its pages, a message from AnonPlus 
appears on the screen which says the group is “non-criminal”. It is unclear why 
the commission’s website was targeted.

“Every person who has the goodwill to act is welcome,” the message, which does 
not make grammatical sense, says.

“AnonPlus spreads ideas without censorship, creates spaces to spread directly 
through mass defacement, publish news that the media filtered and managed for 
the consumption of who controls, we do that to restore dignity to the function 
of the media: media should be free, without censorship and must limit itself to 
‘show what’s happening’ and don’t ‘say to us what’s wrong and what’s right’.

The message continues: “AnonPlus puts offline sites that actively contribute 
to the control of the masses from the corrupt, that by manipulating information 
and opinions create false realities: this is censorship!

Islamic State Twitter accounts get a rainbow makeover from Anonymous hackers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/17/islamic-state-twitter-accounts-rainbow-makeover-anonymous-hackers>
“AnonPlus not act for personal or political causes, has no leaders, moves to 
the interests of the people and we will fight until the leadership and the 
powership will lead into the hand of people: unique owner of the free world.”


At the end of the message, the group writes that no data was stolen or deleted.

“Only home page was chanced,” the message continues. “We are not criminal we 
are AnonPlus.”

There is a link to the group’s Twitter account which was last active about two 
weeks ago. The group has not responded to requests from Guardian Australia for 
comment.

On Twitter the commission said it was working to fix the issue. “Apologies in 
the meantime for any inconvenience caused,”the tweet 
<https://twitter.com/VEOHRC/status/816095043282796544> said.

A media spokeswoman told Guardian Australia the commission was aware of the 
breach and was working to rectify the issue.

“The reason behind today’s activity is unknown,” she said. “No demands have 
been made to the commission. We would like to make clear that no privacy breach 
has occurred as personal data is not held on this site.”
 