
Antibiotic-resistant superbugs are a fundamental threat to global health, UN 
secretary general Ban Ki-moon recently told a general assembly meeting. Failure 
to address the problem, he said, would make it “difficult if not impossible” to 
provide universal healthcare, “and it will put the sustainable development 
goals in jeopardy”.

UN meeting tackles the 'fundamental threat' of antibiotic-resistant superbugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/20/un-declaration-antibiotic-drug-resistance>
For pharmaceutical companies the attention on antimicrobial resistance has 
also brought a focus on one of its key drivers: the unabated environmental 
pollution of drug factories in developing countries.


 In India and China, where a large proportion of antibiotics are produced, the 
poorly regulateddischarge of untreated wastewater 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4775002/> into soils and rivers 
is causing the spread of antibiotic ingredients which cause bacteria to develop 
immunity to antibiotics, creating superbugs.

A study 
<http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/38730/title/Resistant-Wastewater/>
 of wastewater factories in China found that antibiotic-resistant bacteria were 
not only escaping purification but also breeding. For every bacterium that 
entered one waste treatment plant, four or five antibiotic-resistant bacteria 
were released into the water system, tainting water, livestock and communities.

 Superbugs are able to travel quickly through air and water, aboard airplanes 
and through global food supply chains. By 2050, the total death toll worldwide 
as the result of contracting an infection that proves resistant to treatment is 
expected toreach 10 million people 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwil2sf2yevPAhUmKsAKHTAYCe0QFggeMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Famr-review.org%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2F160518_Final%2520paper_with%2520cover.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHW2kUqLrJQU_uo5nzoFMnlP_Oxhw&sig2=Dzqt3_iteMJ62_P4hWz-cw&cad=rja>
 (pdf).

Environmental pollution is now a material issue for the pharmaceuticals 
sector. Global investors such as Nordea and BNP Paribas have raised concern 
about the potential damage to global health and environment, and are worried 
that a local factory pollution scandal in India could affect thevalue of a 
global pharma company 
<http://www.nordea.com/en/responsibility/responsible-investments/responsible-investments-news/2016/New%20report%20on%20pharma%20industry%20in%20India.html>
 in their portfolio. As the world goes on a global quest to combat 
antimicrobial resistance, the focus on industry pollution will continue grow.

Last month 13 pharmaceutical companies signed a declaration 
<http://www.ifpma.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Roadmap-for-Progress-on-AMR-FINAL.pdf>
 (pdf) calling for collective action on antimicrobial resistance. They 
committed to review their manufacturing and supply chains and assess good 
practice in controlling releases of antibiotics into the environment. They also 
committed to establish science and risk-based targets for discharge 
concentrations of antibiotics and to reduce the environmental impact of 
manufacturing discharges by 2020.


Most global sectors now have a corporate platform where companies seek to 
tackle intractable sustainability challenges. For pharma companies, the 
Pharmaceutical Supply Chain Initiative (PSCI) was set up to demand better 
social and environmental conditions in the communities from where drugs are 
supplied. However,only 12%  
<https://www.ft.com/content/8a7ed3a6-7128-11e6-a0c9-1365ce54b926> of the 140 
largest global pharmaceutical companies are members of PSCI according to sector 
analysts.

Voluntary corporate initiatives are necessary but by no means sufficient to 
address the industry challenge of environmental pollution. This is partly 
because not every company signs up and partly because better government 
policies and law enforcement on the ground are necessary to ensure voluntary 
commitments are achievable.

The governments where global pharma companies are domiciled – including the 
UK, US and Switzerland – must play a role. Companies must collaborate with 
governments to encourage and support a tougher stance on law enforcement in 
developing counties. At Earth Security Group we call thisbusiness diplomacy for 
sustainable development 
<http://earthsecuritygroup.com/strategy-briefs/earth-security-index-2016>.

The aid budget of agencies such as the UK Department for International 
Development could be used to strengthen pollution controls in sourcing 
countries such asIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>. This would be 
a win-win for health in developing countries and for national business 
interests abroad.

Many in the global pharmaceutical industry have called upon governments to 
collaborate on the threat 
<https://amr-review.org/sites/default/files/Press%20notice%20Jan%2021%202016.pdf>
 of the increasing antibiotic resistance, through their Declaration on 
Combating Antimicrobial Resistance. The signatories of this declaration and 
PSCI must now also urgently work with governments to achieve the goal of 
curbing environmental pollution in drug manufacturing

Ultimately, business diplomacy goes beyond corporate philanthropy and 
corporate social responsibility, by focusing on the deeper governance failures 
that threaten progress on sustainable development as well as the license to 
operate of global companies. Pharmaceutical companies now need to cooperate 
with governments, to root out pollution from their global supply chains.

 * This article was amended on 26 October to clarify that the Declaration on 
Combating Antimicrobial Resistance, and not the PSCI, has called on governments 
to collaborate on antimicrobial resistance.
 