
Antonio Conte <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> has backed 
the policy at Chelsea under which players receive a bonus only if they claim 
trophies rather than win individual league or cup fixtures or qualify for 
Europe.

The club, whose players earn a basic salary of up to Eden Hazard’s £200,000  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/eden-hazard-antonio-conte-chelsea>
a week, restructured their bonus policy before José Mourinho’s return to 
Stamford Bridge in 2013, with the Portuguese willingly adopting the changes and 
publicly questioning whether top professionals are motivated effectively by 
financial incentives for individual matches. Those sentiments are shared by 
Conte, whose side will attempt at Middlesbrough on Sunday to secure a sixth 
consecutive top-flight win.

“When you win a game during the championship, you win a battle,” said the 
Italian, who secured the Premier League’s manager of the month award for 
October. “One battle. When you win a trophy, you win the war. I like this.

“I love to win the war. To win the war it’s important also to win the battles 
during the championship. One’s a consequence of the other. But, for sure, we 
know that this championship is very difficult because there are a lot of good 
teams. And, I repeat, we are working very hard to fight with this team until 
the end.

“I see a chance to build something important with Chelsea here [and implement] 
a new method and philosophy. These are the most important things. Then it’s 
logical, when you play this championship, that you want to fight until the end 
to win the title or for a place in the Champions League. But for me now it’s 
important to work with the players, to continue to build something of 
importance forChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> for the 
present and the future.”

Eden Hazard: ‘If I ever leave Chelsea, it will be after winning the league’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/eden-hazard-antonio-conte-chelsea>
Conte will take a full-strength squad to Teesside, with Cesc Fàbregas fit 
after a thigh injury and Hazard andDiego Costa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/diego-costa> recovered from minor knocks 
and niggles. The Italian is conscious that the momentum built up in the period 
since Chelsea’s last league defeat, at Arsenal September, could be checked by 
the international break and has worked feverishly in training at Cobham this 
week to ensure his players hit the ground running.

“We have been working over these days to avoid this and to find the right 
concentration and focus,” Conte said when asked how to ensure the pause in the 
campaign does not derail progress. “On Sunday we know we’ll have a tough game 
against a strong team who drew with Arsenal and Manchester City. But I must be 
honest: there is this possibility, that our momentum might be stopped, so 
that’s why we’ve been working very hard to avoid this.

“It would be normal that the focus, the concentration, would be a bit lower in 
this situation, so we have to keep them high. I’m worried. I’m worried about 
keeping this level of concentration, that high intensity and right spirit. 
That’s why we have worked so hard in training. When you win four or five in a 
row, that’s what you have to think about.”

Costa, the Premier League’s leading scorer with nine goals to date this 
season, had been released early from the Spain squadby the national manager, 
Julen Lopetegui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/12/spain-england-julen-lopetegui-wembley>
, after aggravating a slight groin complaint picked up in the5-0 win over 
Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/05/chelsea-v-everton-premier-league-live>
. That meant the strikermissed the friendly with England on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/england-spain-international-friendly-match-report>
. But Conte is confident the player, who remains one booking from a one-match 
suspension, will feature at the Riverside.

“Diego is an example for all, a player who works so hard with or without the 
ball, and I want to continue this way,” Conte said. “If he continues to score, 
I’ll be very happy. But I’ll be happier still to see this commitment, this 
work-rate during training and in games, to work for the team. If all the 
players are able to think in this way, it’s fantastic and we’ll be a good team, 
a very tough team to play.

“Diego is showing he can control himself. It’s fantastic, I think, that Diego 
is improving a lot under a lot of aspects. For me now, Diego is one of the best 
strikers in the world. He must continue that, working in this way, with his 
commitment and work-rate. It’s fantastic to see his work during the games, but 
also in training.”
 