
It all started for me when I saw a picture of Maggi Hambling’s painting Gulf 
Women Prepare for War 
<http://www-art.newhall.cam.ac.uk/the-collection/by/artist/id/128/name/Maggi+Hambling+CBE/artwork/216>
. In the foreground, a woman veiled in black expertly handles a rocket 
launcher, while in the background a chorus of her comrades, similarly engaged, 
line the horizon. The painting speaks of practicality and strength, and women 
in extreme situations who are driven to violent means. It also challenges a 
western vision of Middle Eastern women as passive and nonpolitical.

The painting electrified me. It expressed the spirit of everything I was 
thinking about. How far should women go to take power that is denied them? How 
can women from different cultures share their knowledge to improve and 
understand the female experience? How can I talk more openly and radically 
about the need for women to wrest power from oil and money?

As a female artist, it is depleting and silencing to wait to be given a chance 
to create something. You just have to do it. So I have made a science-fiction 
opera about women saving the human race from the effects of climate change. I 
dreamedOpera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> for the Unknown Woman 
not as a work of utopian fiction, but as a manifesto for the present.

Opera is the art form I turned to because it harnesses the galvanising power 
of the singing voice to make an emotional connection for the audience with the 
epic stakes of this human and planetary crisis. We have woven our sonic worlds 
from a range of voices, starting with contemporary classical opera and moving 
through folk and world music. The music marries digital, electronic processes 
with contemporary classical instrumentation. I collaborated withKatarina 
Glowicka <http://www.glowicka.com/> to create musical worlds that map the 
fragile detail of human thought on epic vistas of cosmological time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-women-take-centre-stage-new-opera-for-the-unknown-woman-melanie-wilson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faff39a14fe864fe87af942ebe3a2e443b6e9be76%2F0_375_5619_3371%2F5619.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arias%20of%20engagement%3A%20why%20women%20take%20centre%20stage%20in%20my%20new%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-women-take-centre-stage-new-opera-for-the-unknown-woman-melanie-wilson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arias%20of%20engagement%3A%20why%20women%20take%20centre%20stage%20in%20my%20new%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-women-take-centre-stage-new-opera-for-the-unknown-woman-melanie-wilson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faff39a14fe864fe87af942ebe3a2e443b6e9be76%2F0_375_5619_3371%2F5619.jpg>
 Galvanising power … Melanie Wilson’s Opera for the Unknown Woman. Photograph: 
Karen Robinson 
Opera suited our purposes well. It is an art form that deals with the 
emotional lives of characters who are often ensnared by patriarchal social or 
political bonds, and therefore provides fruitful musical and political ground 
to experiment on.

I want the piece to be a rallying cry to women and men everywhere. Opera for 
the Unknown Woman <http://fueltheatre.com/projects/opera-for-the-unknown-woman> 
allies female empowerment and social equality with our ability to tackle 
climate change. It says to women: rise up, take power, demand change – for 
yourselves, for your children, for everyone. It finds the roots of these 
changes in language, specifically the toxicity of the words “nature” and 
“natural” when used to contain and punish women. It also sees change in the 
effort of women collaborating, in contesting ways of how they see themselves 
and are seen by others.

Is opera the most misogynistic art form?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/26/is-opera-the-most-misogynistic-art-form>
In it, I have placed the experiences of 11 women from around the world 
alongside each other on stage. They include a climate science journalist from 
Jamaica, a graffiti artist from Tunisia, a farmer from Ghana, a education 
reformer from India and a feminist activist from China. They range from young 
to old, and span working and middle classes. They are all, in their own ways, 
challenging the patriarchy and the dominance of money.

There are many versions of power, and it’s important not to judge new 
structures on against the actions of the old. As an artist who has also 
performed her work, I have encountered heedlessness to the detail of my message 
because of the gentleness of my spoken voice. Through all of my work, I have 
tried to draw attention to different ways of listening, and this opera is the 
loudest riposte I have yet made to the dismissive charge of “femininity”.

Opera can challenge its sexist evolution, once diverted from being used as the 
mouthpiece of a male narrative, which has driven so many of its best-known 
examples in the past. The goal now is to repurpose the tool for our needs, 
making the journey from a female voice that suffers to a female voice that 
speaks up and out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-women-take-centre-stage-new-opera-for-the-unknown-woman-melanie-wilson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa169387fb776464a769f0d9bc5d449c430ff8d9%2F0_314_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arias%20of%20engagement%3A%20why%20women%20take%20centre%20stage%20in%20my%20new%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-women-take-centre-stage-new-opera-for-the-unknown-woman-melanie-wilson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arias%20of%20engagement%3A%20why%20women%20take%20centre%20stage%20in%20my%20new%20opera&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fwhy-women-take-centre-stage-new-opera-for-the-unknown-woman-melanie-wilson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa169387fb776464a769f0d9bc5d449c430ff8d9%2F0_314_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Philip Venables’s opera 4.48 Psychosis, based on Sarah Kane’s play. 
Photograph: Stephen Cummiskey/Royal Opera House 
Important, exciting work is reinterpreting the operatic canon for contemporary 
feminism is taking place. This includesKatie Mitchell’s take on Lucia di 
Lammermoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/10/lucia-di-lammermoor-review-royal-opera-katie-mitchell-diana-damrau>
, and the operatic adaptation of female-authored works such as4.48 Psychosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/25/448-psychosis-review-sarah-kane-philip-venables-opera>
. My goal is to make new myths and new musical aesthetics for opera, which also 
and perhaps more fittingly aligns with the coalescing genre ofnew British music 
theatre <http://www.newbritishmusictheatre.org/artists/>. I come from a 
background that uses experimental theatre and sound art to create new stories 
and experiences. There is great effort and trial for my characters, but they do 
not die. This is important, because we need a broad iconography for women that 
exceeds sacrifice and waste.

Two-thirds of the way through Opera for the Unknown Woman, Obax from Ghana 
says: “The work is seeing ourselves differently, and being seen with sustained 
imagination.” This is the work I am taught by the women who have gone before 
me, and it is the work I offer to the women to come. Yet it is hardly work, for 
in the crucible of the theatre, words and sounds connect us and affirm the 
strong force of our being and our ability to change.

I made the opera with clear-eyed hope, under the credo “small changes unlock 
power”. I made it with a team of creatives who are 95% female, because I don’t 
want to only talk about female power – I want to enact it.

• Opera for the Unknown Woman 
<http://fueltheatre.com/projects/opera-for-the-unknown-woman> premieres at the 
Wales Millennium Centre’s Festival of Voice <http://festivalofvoice.wales/>, 
from 8-12 June. Then touring until 24 June.
 