
Arsène Wenger has turned biblical in his quest for Champions League success 
after Arsenal drew Bayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/arsenal-drawn-against-bayern-munich-in-champions-league-last-16-draw>
 in the last 16 of the competition.

Arsenal’s Wenger out to change what went before against Bayern Munich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/arsenal-arsene-wenger-bayern-munich-manchester-city-leicester-city-champions-league>
The German champions have knocked Arsenal out of European competition in two 
of the past four seasons and beat them5-1 in the group stage last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/bayern-munich-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
, while the Gunners have failed to progress beyond the first knockout round in 
each of the past six seasons. But Wenger does not believe his side need a 
miracle this season, and is instead looking to the book of Genesis for 
inspiration.

“Look, the last six years we have not come past the last 16,” he said. “They 
said that God made the world in seven days and this is the seventh day for us! 
So we have to get a special day.”

To continue the religious analogy, Wenger talked about the “guilt” he feels 
about previousChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> performances. “I am 
responsible for the results so I don’t want to escape when I don’t meet the 
expectations of people who love this club,” he said. “You feel guilty because 
you always question yourself first and your decision making. I think that’s 
completely normal.”

Wenger said that, of the knockout stage defeats, his side’s two-leg reverse 
againstMonaco in 2014-15 season hurt the most 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/25/arsenal-monaco-champions-league-last-16-match-report>
. “I feel the year we failed is against Monaco because we wanted to make the 
difference too much in the first game,” he said.

In the first leg of the tie Arsenal chased the game after going 2-0 down at 
home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2015/mar/17/monaco-arsenal-champions-league-live>
. The Gunners scored an injury-time goal through Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain but 
then conceded again before the final whistle. Arsenal went on to win the second 
leg in the principality 2-0, but went out of the tournament on away goals.

“We conceded a third goal in the last minute of the game because even at 2-1 
we wanted absolutely to win and we had thrown everything forward,” Wenger said. 
“That is what we have to show we have learned.”

Champions League last 16: Tie-by-tie analysis | Michael Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/12/champions-league-last-16-analysis>
Wenger is confident that his team can do better this season, hand of God or no 
hand of God, partly helped by the order of the tie. As a result of winning 
their qualifying group,Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> 
get to play the second leg against Bayern at home.

“If we can keep our strength away from home that can help us,” he said, with 
his side unbeaten away from the Emirates Stadium this season. “Let’s have a 
good first game then we can finish the job at home.

“I must say, though, that the best way to have momentum is to go into the 
Champions League with a good position in the league. Then the belief is high. 
And so I am convinced that is absolutely vital.”

The Frenchman finished his thoughts on the draw with a rousing coda. “We are 
all here to change history. We are here to make history so we have to change 
what happened before. And make it better.”
 