
This was one of those rare, if precious, occasions when everything came 
together beautifully 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/06/basel-v-arsenal-champions-league-live>
. Arsenal would have expected to dazzle out on the turf, where the 
effervescence of their attacking play parted even the freezing fog. However, 
even in leaving Basel’s players utterly dizzied and deflated, it still took 
something just as exceptional across the border in France for this to end as 
the perfect night.

Basel 1-4 Arsenal: Champions League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/06/basel-v-arsenal-champions-league-live>
The true surprise was reserved for the Parc des Princes, where Ludogorets 
Razgrad, who were supposed to be this group’s whipping boys, twice led Paris 
Saint-Germain and ultimately secured the point that stripped their hosts of the 
initiative. While the whistles shrilled in the French capital,Arsène Wenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsene-wenger> could delight in Lucas 
Pérez’s first hat-trick as an Arsenal player and offer a thumbs up to his 
allies up in the stand. Monday’s draw in Nyon could still pair his team with 
daunting opponents. Bayern Munich and, potentially, Real Madrid could lie in 
wait but, for only the second time in seven years, the Premier League club have 
won their group and have avoided any of four or five particularly imposing 
rivals in the process.

Given how everything clicked here, they are more likely to receive a bye if 
their good fortune persists. Wenger’s assessment of this as a “good, a positive 
night” underplayed the reality. His team selection, which had initially 
appeared risky, paid off to spectacular effect, with Alexis Sánchez and Mesut 
Özil – starters when this might otherwise have appeared an apt opportunity to 
offer either or both a rest – were heavily involved in all four of Arsenal’s 
goals. Pérez was the principal beneficiary, all those niggling injuries 
apparently behind him as he revelled against dithering opponents, and ended 
looking far more like a£17.1m striker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/30/arsenal-lucas-perez-deportivo-signs>
 than he has in any of his previous appearances for the club.

Yet the whole side excelled. Some of their football was exquisite, all subtle 
if constant movement and accurate delivery. Better teams thanBasel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/basel> would have been swept aside but 
the Swiss club put up no resistance whatsoever.

They should have taken note of the warm-up drill played out between Özil and 
Sánchez near the halfway line half an hour before kick-off as the pair 
pummelled passes at each other, delighting in their ability to cushion the most 
ferociously struck effort on their instep or lay them off first time to an 
admiring Shkodran Mustafi. It was clear they were in the mood – and just as 
obvious from the outset that the home side never stood a chance of containing 
them.

The locals ended up admiring everything Arsenal conjured while their own 
players wilted at the breathless nature of the approach play. Éder Balanta had 
been tormentedback at the Emirates in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/arsenal-basel-champions-league-match-report>
 but will presumably be waking in a cold sweat at the thought of Sánchez 
gliding at him with menace for some time to come. Özil’s contribution was just 
as incisive, his gathering from the Chilean’s lofted pass and first-time 
reverse pass across the six-yard box for Alex Iwobi to tap in the fourth 
summing up the majesty of it all. When he wanted to turn it on, he simply 
flipped the switch.

Balanta and Adama Traoré, not for the first time, were left disorientated and 
horribly off the pace. There was no one near Iwobi as he converted beyond a 
helpless Tomas Vaclik.

In truth, that merely maintained a theme. Pérez had revelled most up to then, 
a player in the right place at the right time to convert his team-mates’ 
rat-a-tat exchanges. There was a beauty, eight minutes in, to Sánchez’s pass, 
flighted over Marek Suchy, which was collected by Kieran Gibbs on the gallop. 
He slipped his centre across the goalmouth, with Vaclik stranded at his near 
post and Balanta air-kicking at the loose ball, then slipping over. As the 
Colombian struggled to regain his feet, Pérez took his time to collect on his 
left foot before tapping in.

Champions League roundup: Ángel Di María’s late goal is not enough for PSG
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/champions-league-roundup-angel-di-maria-saves-psg-ludogorets>
Traoré and Michael Lang had been just as culpable for granting Sánchez and 
Gibbs the space in which to revel but resistance was probably futile.

There were in excess of 30 untroubled passes pinged between Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> players to take them to the 
half-time whistle – and they had been just as slick in the buildup to their 
second. Gibbs and Iwobi, then Granit Xhaka and Aaron Ramsey, and finally Özil 
and Sánchez had all enjoyed time on the ball unchallenged before the German 
slid a diagonal pass into the area. Taulant Xhaka failed to intercept, with 
Vaclik pushing out Gibbs’s shot and Pérez slamming in the rebound.

This team’s second Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> hat-trick of the term 
was secured just after the interval as Suchy’s attempt to find Geoffroy Serey 
Die was thwarted by Gibbs’s sharp interception. The left-back, outstanding all 
night, belted a pass at Sánchez who flicked the ball infield with his heel – as 
he had so matter-of-factly back in that warm-up – into the space between 
Balanta and Traoré. There darted the Spaniard Pérez to plant a shot towards the 
far corner, which Vaclik should have kept out. It summed up Basel’s night that, 
instead, it flew in.

Seydou Doumbia’s riposte mattered little in what time remained, with focus 
turning increasingly to events in Paris. Wenger will have afforded himself a 
little punch of the air in delight when Wanderson thrust Ludogorets back ahead 
and the only anxiety of the evening was endured in what stoppage time remained 
after Ángel Di Maria’s late equaliser. But this was a saunter. The hope is, on 
Monday, the draw is just as kind.
 