
Arsenal will face Bayern Munich in the last16 of the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>, a draw that will lead 
to a great level of frustration among the club’s staff and supporters given 
they topped their group for the first time since 2012.

Having finished above Paris Saint-Germain in Group A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/arsene-wenger-arsenal-top-their-group>
, Arsenal hoped to be rewarded with a favourable tie. Instead, however, they 
will face the Bundesliga champions and five-time winners of Europe’s elite 
competition.

Champions League last 16: which clubs will qualify for the quarter-finals? 
– poll
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/champions-league-last-16-draw>
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>, 
meanwhile, have been drawn to face Monaco, having finished behind Barcelona in 
their group, while Leicester City, who came top of Group G will face Sevilla..

Elsewhere, the holders Real Madrid will face Napoli, while Barcelona take on 
Paris Saint-Germain. Benfica were drawn against Borussia Dortmund and fellow 
Bundesliga side Bayer Leverkusen are to take on Atlético Madrid.

This will be the fourth out of the past five seasons that Arsenal have faced 
Bayern in the Champions League. Arsène Wenger’s side lost to the Germans at 
this stage in2012-13 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/13/bayern-munich-champions-league-match-report>
 and 2013-2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/11/bayern-munich-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 and they had one win apiece in the group stages in 2015-16.

Arsenal face Bayern Munich in Champions League last 16 draw – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/12/champions-league-last-16-draw-live-arsenal-man-city-leicester>
Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have not progressed 
beyond the last 16 since 2009-10 when they defeated Porto, but lost to 
Barcelona in the quarter-finals. Since then they have lost six times in 
succession at this stage, twice to Bayern, twice to Barcelona, and also to 
Milan in 2012 and Monaco in 2015.

Manchester City’s Pep Guardiola, who failed to win the Champions League in his 
three years atBayern Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich>
, will know his side could have been paired with more illustrious opponents 
than Monaco, although the French side defeated Tottenham twice in the group 
stage and are just a point behind Nice at the top of Ligue 1 after their 4-0 
win at Bordeaux on Saturday.

Leicester’s first taste of European Cup knockout football sees them meet the 
Europa League holders Sevilla, a side now managed by Jorge Sampaoli and 
currently sitting in third place in La Liga.

Champions League last 16

Bayern Munich v Arsenal

Manchester City v Monaco

Sevilla v Leicester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity>

Real Madrid v Napoli

Benfica v Borussia Dortmund

Porto v Juventus

Bayer Leverkusn v Atletico Madrid

Paris Saint-Germain v Barcelona

First legs to be held 14/15 February and 21/22 February, with second legs on 
7/8 March and 14/15 March.
 