
Alexis Sánchez has been declared fit by Chile for Tuesday’s World Cup 
qualifier against Uruguay, after Arsène Wenger warned that playing the forward
could be a “suicidal decision” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/arsene-wenger-alexis-sanchez-suicidal-injury>
 which would leave the 27-year-old on the injury list at Arsenal for months.

Sánchez suffered what Wenger said was a hamstring injury in training 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/alexis-sanchez-arsenal-chile-calf-tear-injury-world-cup-qualifier>
 with Chile and missed their game against Colombia last week. Arsenal’s manager 
expressed concern that Sánchez would be pressed into action and suffer a 
serious setback and will watch anxiously how his key forward copes against 
Uruguay.

Alexis Sánchez playing for Chile would be suicidal decision, says Arsène Wenger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/arsene-wenger-alexis-sanchez-suicidal-injury>
Chile’s coach, Juan Antonio Pizzi, said Sánchez was ready to return, along 
with Manchester City’s goalkeeper Claudio Bravo and the Bayern Munich 
midfielder Arturo Vidal.

“Sánchez was not ready for the game in Colombia, but we knew the injury was a 
small one and we could have him for this match. The three of them [Sánchez, 
Vidal and Bravo] are available to me for tomorrow,” Pizzi told a press 
conference.

He added of Sánchez: “It’s not that he hasn’t trained, he’s trained every day, 
even when we were in Colombia he did a different kind of work. Yesterday he 
took part in full training.”

Pizzi also dismissed any suggestion the injured players’ clubs had sought to 
influence his selection decisions.

“At no time have we received pressure from any club. My stance is that I will 
never use a player who is not fit or capable of playing,” he said in quotes 
reported by the South American media.

“All of the clubs can remain calm, we are very respectful of our players. The 
health of our players is paramount, we will never force any player who has not 
got the medical all-clear.”

Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> play at Manchester 
United on Saturday in a lunchtime kick-off. Whether Wenger would look to start 
Sánchez there given the swift turnaround from flying back from Chile is 
unclear. He made clear last Thursday, though, his fears over the player’s 
fitness after Sánchez suffered what Chile described as a “low-grade muscle 
injury”.

“I got a text last night [to say] that he has a hamstring injury,” Wenger told 
beIN Sports. “The team from Chile has travelled without him and they kept him 
to try and get him fit to playUruguay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uruguay> for the second game on Tuesday 
night.

“I believe that with a hamstring injury we have to get access for our medical 
staff to the MRI scan to see what grade it is, how bad it is and make 
absolutely sure they don’t make any suicidal decision that could harm his 
future for two or three months.

“That is absolutely important. It’s a grey area between the national team and 
the club team and of course they look at their own results which I can 
understand but we have to preserve the health ofAlexis Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/sanchez-alexis>.

“He always wants to play and that’s where it is a more sensitive case because 
he’s always ready to play even when injured.”
 