
Forget the Big Apple: if you’re planning a trip to the US in 2017, Asheville, 
North Carolina, needs to be on the itinerary, according to travel guide 
publisher Lonely Planet.

The city in the Blue Ridge Mountains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/sep/24/blue-ridge-mountains-music-road-trip-virginia-bluegrass-old-time>
, which has a thriving arts, architecture and music scene, has been selected as 
the number one US destination for next year by Lonely Planet, topping its 
annual list of the most exciting places to visit in the US.

Asheville was praised for its “welcoming, creative spirit and eclectic 
architecture”. Lonely Planet credited its River Arts District, a hub for more 
than 200 artists, as well as its foodie culture – which spans a vibrant craft 
beer and spirits scene, along with internationally acclaimed restaurants.

Second place went to a region, western Washington, which was used as a 
location in David Lynch’scult TV show Twin Peaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/22/twin-peaks-dark-legacy-david-lynch>
. With the series making a return in 2017, there is likely to be renewed 
interest in it as a pilgrimage point for fans.

Lincoln, Nebraska, was in third place. The city celebrates its 150th 
anniversary in 2017 with a host of festivals and special events.

Other destinations to make the list included California’s Low Desert – home of 
the world’s largest aerial tramway – plusAtlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/18/top-10-art-galleries-attractions-atlanta>
, Georgia, andDenver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/oct/06/top-10-craft-beer-bars-denver-colorado-us>
, Colorado.

“This year’s list is incredibly diverse, spanning from coast to coast, giving 
a panoramic tour of America,” said Rebecca Warren, managing editor of Lonely 
Planet’s US magazine.

“Some of them are on the public’s radar, while others are just emerging, and 
they all offer compelling reasons to visit in 2017.”

The full list, which is selected by Lonely Planet’s US destination editors, 
writers and travel experts is available online at at  
<http://www.lonelyplanet.com/best-in-us>lonelyplanet.com/best-in-us 
<http://www.lonelyplanet.com/best-in-us>.
 