
The Outer Sunset district of San Francisco has always attracted resilient 
types. While its seemingly endless rows of two-storey stucco homes flowing down 
to Ocean Beach may not have escaped the influence of San Francisco’s tech boom, 
the area retains its independent character – there’s something of the frontier 
spirit, untamed and imperfect and free, that still defines the miles-long 
stretch of sand that forms the edge of the city. “This is where the poets live, 
this is where the artists live, this is where the surfers live. They just kind 
of keep it quiet,” says resident artist Eric Rewitzer.

San Francisco’s restaurant scene: no such thing as a bad lunch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/dec/06/san-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin>
In the 19th century, the Outer Sunset was miles from the edge of town. Few 
ventured this far out of the city, to an area then known simply as the “Outside 
Lands” – a treeless landscape of rolling sand dunes and fog. Those who did took 
up residence in abandoned horse-drawn cars dumped in the sand, and it became 
known as Carville-by-the-Sea, only renamed Sunset by a property developer who 
built some houses there in 1887 and wanted to overwrite its reputation as a 
wasteland.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fsan-francisco-up-and-coming-outer-sunset-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437659457021%2F2b199dbe-604f-4c0c-bed0-bc771e8ae9da-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arty%20living%20in%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20rising%20Outer%20Sunset%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fsan-francisco-up-and-coming-outer-sunset-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arty%20living%20in%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20rising%20Outer%20Sunset%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fsan-francisco-up-and-coming-outer-sunset-district%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437659457021%2F2b199dbe-604f-4c0c-bed0-bc771e8ae9da-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Ocean Beach, in Outer Sunset. Photograph: Bryan Kitch 
Now, this small community on the edge of the city is slowly being transformed 
into a pricey beach town, but the surfers, artists and poets who were here 
before the dotcoms and Silicon Valley moved in are making the most of the 
changes. Rewitzer and his artist wife, Annie Galvin, run printmaking classes 
from their base,3 Fish Studios. <http://www.3fishstudios.com/>

San Francisco: talking ‘bout a permanent revolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/sep/13/-sp-san-francisco-neighbourhoods-pico-iyer>
Head over to Noriega and 46th, and you’ll come across Indosole 
<http://indosole.com/>, a company founded by Kyle Parsons that uses recycled 
materials to create hand-crafted shoes. It shares a building withSan Franpsycho 
<http://sanfranpsycho.com/>, run by Andy Olive and Christian Routzen, a 
lifestyle and clothing brand that is popular with the surf community from which 
it arose. Its premises are decorated with a mural by local artistZio Ziegler 
<http://www.zioziegler.com/>.

And none of this is an accident. Parsons and Routzen met when both were 
starting their businesses – their friendship grew as they supported each 
other’s brands at local events like the Union Street Festival and the North 
Beach Festival. Eventually, it was only natural that the two companies share a 
space. Thanks to Ziegler, that space is now an iconic facade known locally as 
“The Church of Surf”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fsan-francisco-up-and-coming-outer-sunset-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437659511038%2F8e830c32-c31d-474c-9c0e-35ee2447455f-2060x1545.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arty%20living%20in%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20rising%20Outer%20Sunset%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fsan-francisco-up-and-coming-outer-sunset-district%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arty%20living%20in%20San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20rising%20Outer%20Sunset%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjul%2F25%2Fsan-francisco-up-and-coming-outer-sunset-district%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437659511038%2F8e830c32-c31d-474c-9c0e-35ee2447455f-2060x1545.jpeg>
 Trouble Coffee and Coconut Club Photograph: /Bryan Kitch 
They’re joined by other independents, like Mollusk Surf Shop 
<http://mollusksurfshop.com/> on Irving Street, which consistently exhibits the 
work of local artists. A block away on Judah Street isTrouble Coffee & Coconut 
Club 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Trouble-Coffee-and-Coconut-Club/56373211579>, a 
hole in the wall that serves up inch-thick slices of toast, strong coffee and, 
true to its name, fresh coconuts. A few doors up, you’ll findOuterlands 
<http://outerlandssf.com/>, a restaurant that has a delicious and seasonal menu 
based on fresh, local ingredients – it collaborates with nearby farms and 
ranches to source its produce. Outerlands offers a warm respite after an 
afternoon surfing the waves.

Further south, on Taraval at 47th Avenue, is the Riptide 
<http://riptidesf.com/>. Just two blocks from the beach, this is a honky-tonk 
bar that offers stiff cocktails, live music and a living-room feel, complete 
with a moose head on the wall. The bar is a meeting place for locals, as well 
as a cosy spot to curl up next to a fire on a foggy evening.

Like the rest of the neighbourhood, the Riptide may not be fancy, but it’s 
unashamedly true to itself. Things aren’t always perfect on the edge.
 