
Despite early indications that some housing markets in the mining states will 
hit the skids, the Australian mortgage-financed housing bubble continues to 
grow. The Reserve Bank of Australiais pushing to find a scapegoat 
<http://www.afr.com/news/economy/trade/rba-governor-philip-lowe-worried-about-donald-trumps-promise-to-cut-open-trade-20161115-gsq3q0>
 to lay blame for economic challenges that may arise within the Australian 
economy. That scapegoat is the US president-elect, Donald Trump.

Today’s reality indicates the housing bubble is a serious issue, amplified by 
the RBA cutting the cash rate too low. This, combined with evidence of our 
financial system’s poor andhighly questionable lending standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/05/white-collar-by-banks-in-australia-is-rife-and-going-unchecked-inquiry-told>
 to homeowners and property investors, which regulators and government refuse 
to acknowledge, is a financial disaster in the making.


Housing inequality is a failure to govern, and the market is not the answer | 
John Falzon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/29/housing-inequality-is-a-failure-to-govern-and-the-market-is-not-the-answer>
The impact of Trump winning the US election has sent mixed signals for the 
global economy. For the RBA, the challenge of a Trump presidency is 
Washington’s potential shift to protectionism on the back of what could be a 
significant and much-needed makeover of the country’s transportation 
infrastructure. Hence, Trump’s policies may be inflationary for the real 
economy.

The post-Trump election bounce in US bond yields has already fed into an 
increase in borrowing costs in Australia 
<http://www.news.com.au/finance/business/banking/us-election-result-hits-australian-home-buyers-with-mortgage-interest-rates-on-the-rise/news-story/c47b87969d51419e0861068587d076a8>
. At the same time, wage growth languishes in its lowest spell since the second 
world war andhouseholds are struggling under a gigantic debt burden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/reserve-bank-governor-warns-against-higher-level-of-household-debt>
 of more than $2tn dollars.

Rising bond yields mean that the government or banks have to pay a higher 
yield (interest rate) to borrow money because the market is starting either to 
demand greater reward for risk – or to combat real economy inflation in a 
nation that has its banking and household sectors already highly leveraged. 
That is a significant challenge for any highly leveraged asset class that has 
overshot the runway. Australian property is one such asset.

Higher lending rates in Australia may dent one of the largest residential 
construction booms in modern western history – evidenced bythe staggering crane 
count, outnumbering major cities in the US and Canada. 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-10-21/real-estate-warning-more-cranes-in-australia-than-us/7954108>
 So far, it has defied gravity purely through the continuous expansion of 
leverage.


The boom occurring in the eastern capital cities was not orchestrated by 
Trump. It was, however, led by the executives at the RBA without meaningful 
evidence as to why Sydney, Melbourne or Brisbane need all these new high-rise 
apartments in the first place when rental yields have crashed.

10 economic consequences of Donald Trump's election win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-economic-consequences-us-election-growth>
At his maiden parliamentary hearing as the RBA governor in September, Philip 
Lowe denied that low interest rates and large mortgage growth were primary 
factors driving Australia’s historical high and rising housing prices. Instead, 
he argued thelack of homes was a major cause of our high housing prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/22/interest-rates-may-be-cut-again-new-reserve-bank-governor-says>
.

For Lowe’s shortage theory to hold true, rental incomes would have risen 
significantly. If there is a limited supply in housing, you would also find the 
rise in the cost of renting significantly outpacing the rise in household 
income. Outside of the GFC (a one-off shift when Kevin Rudd opened the 
floodgates to foreign students) and locations affected by the mining sector 
boom, rent growth has been anaemic. Indeed, rents have not even kept up with 
wage growth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fas-australias-housing-bubble-gets-bigger-the-reserve-bank-prepares-to-blame-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F939316b2b7365a53badea3eb0f5b9f2e447636d2%2F0_0_4652_2631%2F4652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20Australia's%20housing%20bubble%20gets%20bigger%2C%20the%20Reserve%20Bank%20prepares%20to%20blame%20Trump%20%7C%20Lindsay%20David&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fas-australias-housing-bubble-gets-bigger-the-reserve-bank-prepares-to-blame-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20Australia%27s%20housing%20bubble%20gets%20bigger%2C%20the%20Reserve%20Bank%20prepares%20to%20blame%20Trump%20%7C%20Lindsay%20David&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fas-australias-housing-bubble-gets-bigger-the-reserve-bank-prepares-to-blame-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F939316b2b7365a53badea3eb0f5b9f2e447636d2%2F0_0_4652_2631%2F4652.jpg>
 A chart showing Australian house prices, household income, rents, GDP per 
capita, construction costs and population over the 30 years from 1986 to 2016 
based on ABS data. Photograph: LF Economics 
In Australia’s case, as the chart above suggests, housing price growth has 
outstripped all other factors including rents and household income, hence the 
rental yields have fallen over the years. As recent history tells us, there is 
no greater giveaway that a housing market is experiencing a debt-fuelled bubble 
than a market with ever-compressing rental yields and ever-expanding household 
liabilities.


It appears the RBA is ready to lay blame on Trump’s expected departure from 
decades of mainstream economic policy rather than accept accountability for the 
conditions it has helped stoke in the housing and mortgage markets. Australia 
has accumulated (ratio-wise) the highest or close to the highest level of 
household debt in the world – recklessly accumulated under Lowe’s watch as 
deputy governor and now governor.

'Lying in wait for your next chapter': the Sydney real estate nightmare | Paul 
Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/lying-in-wait-for-your-next-chapter-the-sydney-real-estate-nightmare>
The Australian bubble was not orchestrated by Trump but by a team of highly 
paid central bankers who have assisted in turning our housing market and 
futures into a leveraged casino seemingly for the benefit of banks (whom 
without public debate the RBA has committed $300bn for a bank bailout 
facility), property developers, and landowners.


With household debt continuing to grow at about double the rate of nominal GDP 
and household income, it is clear Lowe and the RBA have no plan to deal with 
this colossal hobgoblin in our own backyard. If theAustralian economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-economy> ends up like that of 
the US or Ireland after the GFC, RBA chiefs have no one to blame but themselves 
and will not be able to use the oft-employed excuse: “We didn’t see it coming.”

 