
MAKE THE FIVER GREAT AGAIN

You won’t believe this, reader, but the Fiver thought it knew when it had 
taken a gag too far, repeated it and pushed it until folks started thinking it 
wasn’t a joke at all but a manifestation of unspeakable dumbness and spite. Now 
we realise we were wrong. We now understand, long-suffering reader, that the 
Fiver has not been pushing its gags far enough. There is only a short step from 
a tasteless joke to an evil masterplan and we, the Fiver, have been guilty of a 
lack of ambition. Today is a time for uncomfortable truths and big ideas – big, 
ugly, stupid ideas – and so today the Fiver announces its intention to run for 
president of the universe. We can make it happen, reader, we really can. We 
have Purple Tin.

The first thing the Fiver will do when it’s in charge is abolish boringness. 
That’s easier said than done, of course, so it’s the perfect headline policy. 
We may nail down the nitty-gritty if and when, and it might involve banning 
no-news days. Such as today. As you’re probably aware, nothing of any 
consequence has happened anywhere in the world today, unless you include the 
statement from Chile’s FA that Alexis Sánchez’s injury ismerely “low-grade” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/arsenal-alexis-sanchez-injury-manchester-united-chile>
 so he should not be out for too long – but when has downplaying an injury to a 
key Arsenal player been news? If it was worth talking about, Roy Keane would 
have already dismissed itwith weary disdain. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/roy-keane-hits-out-ronald-koeman-everton-republic-of-ireland-james-mccarthy>

Wayne Rooney may or may not have exhibited weary disdain when dismissing an 
offer to play in China earlier this season but apparentlyhe did dismiss it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/wayne-rooney-turned-down-offer-play-china-benjing-guoan>
, according to Luo Ning of the Chinese Super League club Beijing Guoan. “We 
indeed made an approach for Rooney at the beginning of the season but he’s 
informed us that he wants to stay in Manchester United,” sobbed Ning today 
before perking up, showing off his autograph book and adding: “We even met his 
agent!”

“Rooney says he’ll keep playing in the Premier League as long as his health 
allows,” concluded Ning. You see, reader, you have to have faith.

QUOTE OF THE DAY I

“I knew Trump would win” 
<https://twitter.com/fizzer18/status/796233691764813824?lang=en-gb> – Long 
accustomed to commenting on a result long after the contest has finished, Phil 
Neville wades into the political debate.

QUOTE OF THE DAY II
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ffiver-wayne-rooney-manchester-united-china-beijing-guoan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b0692a92c6dba75b20a18decaeb37b224ef9622%2F0_0_713_954%2F713.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20As%20long%20as%20his%20health%20allows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ffiver-wayne-rooney-manchester-united-china-beijing-guoan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20As%20long%20as%20his%20health%20allows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ffiver-wayne-rooney-manchester-united-china-beijing-guoan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b0692a92c6dba75b20a18decaeb37b224ef9622%2F0_0_713_954%2F713.jpg>
 Mourinho’s scarf game ain’t got nothing on this! 1-0! Photograph: Twitter 
FIVER LETTERS

“Oh, Fiver! How you must be rubbing your hands with glee over your success in 
ensnaring at least one minor pedant (yesterday’s Fiver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/the-fiver-suffering-for-the-sake-of-the-people>
) with your provocative “swashbuckling Liverpool” item (Monday’s Fiver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/07/swashing-their-particular-buckles-once-again>
). As the “better pedant” whose goading Bryan Matthews foretold, I confirm that 
swashbucklers do indeed swash (strike violently) their own or their opponents’ 
bucklers (small, round shields) rather than buckle their swashes. The Fiver got 
it right! Even a stopped clock and so on and so forth” – Tony Crooks.


“Actually a top pedant would not explain how any of Bryan Matthews’ cursory 
research has anything to do with buckling for the simple reason that it does 
not. The origins of the word lie in the buckler, a small shield which was 
strapped to one’s arm in order to keep the hand free. A swash buckler, 
therefore is the equivalent of the swagger stick still carried by sergeants 
major. Far from either buckling a swash or swashing a buckle a swashbuckling 
Liverpool would be wielding a swashbuckler, albeit, in accordance with Fifa 
rules, a metaphorical one!” – Barry Etheridge.

“Long time reader, first time writer. Re yesterday’s quote of the day where 
you mentioned everyone’s favourite German (as a Dutchman I have never had to 
put these two words together without a negative/swearword before or after) 
energy drink provider. Red Bull is Austrian” – Pim van Baarsen.

“Good of you to highlight the Football Weekly show starring AC Jimbo at the 
London Palladium 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/football-weekly-live-in-london-26602443625>
 in yesterday’s Fiver. By sheer co-incidence I also got an email inviting me to 
take part in the pre-sale for Simple Minds’ acoustic gig at the same venue in 
May next year. Fans of seeing once mighty + popular acts re-hashing material 
from the 1980’s at the Palladium really are spoilt for choice” – Ian Sargeant.

“I see the apocalypse is upon us. Quite keen to get FM 2017 before I lock the 
door of the bunker. When are you sending them out?” – Peter Charsley [Soon - 
Fiver Ed].

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
letter o’the day is Barry Etheridge, who receives a copy of Football Manager 
2017 <http://www.footballmanager.com/games/football-manager-2017> from those 
good people at Football Manager Towers, and it’s out now! We’ve got plenty more 
copies to give away, so if you want one, keep the letters coming.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email – is expensive, but supporting us isn’t. If you 
value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS’ FEDERATION AWARDS

The Football Supporters’ Federation have announced the shortlists for their 
annual awards in association with Virgin Media and, as is customary, The Fiver 
hasn’t been nominated in a single category. Nevertheless, we’re pleased to 
pretend we’re pleased that Football Weekly has been nominated for the gaudy 
Best Podcast bauble, Big Paper has been nominated for the Best Big Paper gong 
while Proper Journalists David Conn and Owen Gibson are both up for Best 
Writer. You know what to do – vote early and vote often in these and other 
categoriesby clicking on this link 
<https://www.surveymonkey.co.uk/r/fsf-awards-2016>.

BITS AND BOBS

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ffiver-wayne-rooney-manchester-united-china-beijing-guoan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d27de5ee87e092a2d79a6d0cb65de4a075e7bdb%2F0_158_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20As%20long%20as%20his%20health%20allows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ffiver-wayne-rooney-manchester-united-china-beijing-guoan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20As%20long%20as%20his%20health%20allows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ffiver-wayne-rooney-manchester-united-china-beijing-guoan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d27de5ee87e092a2d79a6d0cb65de4a075e7bdb%2F0_158_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Joshua McCormack shakes hands with the players when he was mascot at a 
Rochdale game in August. Photograph: Rochdale AFC 
Checkatrade Trophy news I: Rochdale have named terminally ill five-year-old 
Joshua McCormack in their matchday squad to face Hartlepool this evening. “He 
has touched the hearts of everyone at Rochdale Football Club since we met him 
for the first time back in February,”said boss Keith Hill. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/five-year-old-joshua-mccormack-named-rochdale-checkatrade-trophy-squad>

Checkatrade Trophy news II: only 308 supporters turned up at Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/checkatrade-trophy-crowds-fail-attract-1000>
 last night.

Greece + arson attack on refereeing chief = no football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/greece-suspend-football-arson-attack-refereeing-chief>
.

Chile have been magnificently vague in declaring that Alexis Sánchez has 
picked upa low-grade muscle-twang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/arsenal-alexis-sanchez-injury-manchester-united-chile>
 on international duty. Nobody seems to know whether he’ll be fit for next 
Tuesday’s qualifier with Uruguay or Arsenal’s match against Manchester United a 
week on Saturday.


Having only scored 10 goals in the last two games, Liverpool’s lack of 
firepower has left Jürgen Klopp worried, so he’sput Rostov forward Sardar 
Azmoun on his January wishlist. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/liverpool-move-for-rostov-forward-sardar-azmoun>

Henrikh Mkhitaryan had a dream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/manchester-united-henrikh-mkhitaryan-dream>
.

Meanwhile, José Mourinho has, in true Football Manager style, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-players-improve-luke-shaw-chris-smalling>
 has told Manchester United to do it for the fans.

Northern Ireland will wear black armbands – not poppies – against Azerbaijan 
on Friday. “The Irish FA is committed to marking Armistice Day with appropriate 
acts of remembrance,”trilled a suit. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/northern-ireland-armbands-poppy-armistice-day>

Jonjo Shelvey has been charged with directing racially abusive language at an 
opponent by the Football Association. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/newcastle-jonjo-shelvey-charge-fa-allegedly-abusing-wolves-player>

STILL WANT MORE?

Assume you’ve got some friends, then amaze them by regurgitating the Knowledge 
as your own original patter. This week:matching shirt numbers and names 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/footballers-with-shirt-numbers-to-match-their-names-the-knowledge>
.

Want to understand Pep Guardiola’s football? Look at Joshua Kimmich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/englische-woche/2016/nov/08/joshua-kimmich-pep-guardiola-germany-bayern-munich>
.

One for the gardeners and florists: Marina Hyde investigates the poppy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/09/england-scotland-war-poppies-footballers-remembrance-day>
.

The forgotten story of … Sam Weller Widdowson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/09/forgotten-story-sam-weller-widdowson-nottingham-forest-england-scotland>
: a remarkable footballer who also played cricket for Nottinghamshire, became a 
referee, founded the Amateur Cup and even helped to invent shin pads.

Good old Benfica, the world’s 26th richest club, are refusing to pay Vasteras, 
a Swedish third division club, €250,000.Alan Smith explains why 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/benfica-vasteras-victor-nilsson-lindelof>
.

Two years ago, Brazil were pipped by Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/08/germany-brazil-world-cup-semi-final-match-report>
 in the World Cup semi-final, and now, 28 months later, Brazil return to Belo 
Horizonte where they will take on an ailing Argentina.Here’s Jonathan Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/09/brazil-argentina-belo-horizonte-world-cup-qualifying>
.

Because of its passion, passion and serious passion, the Premier League is the 
most competitive top division in Europe.But is it really? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/nov/09/premier-league-predictable-la-liga-ligue-1-bundesliga-serie-a>
 Martin Laurence investigates.

With USA-Mexico relations at an all-time high, Saturday’s match between the 
two sides could not be more timely.Here’s a Joy of Six to celebrate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/09/the-joy-of-six-classic-moments-from-the-mexico-usa-football-rivalry>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>.AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


ARE WE GOING TO DO STONEHENGE TOMORROW? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OGSSe1voBz0&app=desktop>
 