
Former junior Wimbledon champion Ashleigh Barty could become Australia’s next 
multi-sport wonder after revealing her plans to return to tennis after a season 
of cricket.


Barty quit tennis 17 months ago after struggling to deal with the demands of 
the sport. She spent the summer playing in the Women’s Big Bash League with her 
home-town team Brisbane Heat. But the fire still burns and Barty will give her 
first sporting love a second crack – which could begin as early as this month 
in Perth.

Guardian Australia writers' tips for the breakout sports stars of 2016 – part 
II
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/31/guardian-australia-writers-tips-for-the-breakout-sports-stars-of-2016-part-ii>
“I was very young, but I turn 20 this year and it’s a different perspective on 
life and tennis in general,” she told the WTA website. “If it works, great. If 
it doesn’t, I can’t really complain. I’ve had a phenomenal career for the short 
time that I did play. I’m just prepared to work up that slow grind up the 
[second-tier tour] ITFs and hopefully be up with the [first-tier tour] WTA 
soon.”

Barty reached a career-high world ranking of 129 in 2013 as a 17-year-old and 
was seen as a likely contender to eventually replace Sam Stosur as Australia’s 
No1 woman. That year, she made grand slam doubles finals at the Australian 
Open, Wimbledon and the US Open and won a rubber at the Fed Cup.

Barty said enjoying that level of success before she turned 18 contributed to 
swapping her racquet for a bat and pads. “It was obviously phenomenal, but it 
all happened a little bit too quickly,” Barty said. “I went from not being 
known anywhere in the world to winning junior Wimbledon and six months later 
playing the Australian Open. I was a victim of my own success, really.”

Barty previously nominated cricket’s team camaraderie as a key reason to turn 
her back on the isolating lifestyle of professional tennis.

Her WBBL coach, Andy Richards, said Barty was pondering whether she could do 
both. “We’ve left the door open ... we’ve spoken about it,” he said. “Tennis is 
international and it’s different times of the year but she could play both 
without too many issues I think. She’s only 20. I still believe in due course 
she’ll get back with cricket at some stage.”

Barty made a splash by scoring 39 on debut for the Heat and while she 
struggled for the rest of the campaign, she continued to score runs at club 
level. Richards said he could have seen Barty earning a call-up to the 
Australian cricket team, alongside dual-international Ellyse Perry.

“With another 12 months in the game, she wasn’t going to be far away,” he 
said. “She’s currently our leading run-scorer in club cricket in Brisbane. I 
think she could definitely play both.”
 