
Austin is too much like Los Angeles, locals gripe – high-rises and high 
prices. I don't see it that way. I see it as the only place to live if you're 
going to live in Texas. You won't get the full Austin experience in a day or 
two. You'll need a week. And that week starts as you step off the plane at 
Austin–Bergstrom airport, where you will be greeted by live music from local 
bands. And while you wait for your luggage, check out the statue of Barbara 
Jordan, orator, educator, civil rights activist, and the first African-American 
woman from the south elected to Congress.

Rent a car – you'll need it. Get in and tune the radio to KUTX 
<http://kutx.org/> for the sounds and news of Austin. Check in to the historic 
and hauntedDriskill Hotel <http://www.driskillhotel.com/> and go to the bar for 
a drink and more live music.Grab a free copy of the Austin Chronicle and check 
out what's happening in the city.

Odds are there will be a festival going on: South by Southwest 
<http://sxsw.com/> film and music festival; Moontower 
<http://www.austintheatre.org/site/PageNavigator/moontower_home.html> comedy 
festival;Austin City Limits <http://www.aclfestival.com/> music festival; Texas 
book festival <http://www.texasbookfestival.org/>; and perhaps most 
Austincentric of all,Eeyore's birthday party <http://www.eeyores.org/> – a day 
of costumes, drumming, beer and bare breasts.
 Photograph: aeschleah/flickr 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/aeschleah/4666379893/> 
Step out to Congress Avenue, turn right and walk to the Texas State Capitol. 
Watch the protestors as you do. Walk across the street for a stroll through the
University of Texas. If there's a university sporting event, go to it. There'll 
be tens of thousands of screaming fans dressed in khaki, white, and burnt 
orange drinking beer.

After sobering up, drive north to the suburb of Round Rock – the home of Dell 
computers. You're there for the giant, yellow (or are they orange?) Round Rock 
doughnuts and a Round Rock Express baseball game. Enjoy the doughnuts, hot 
dogs, beer, and fireworks in one of the most conservative towns in the US and 
know that just a few blocks away there's a good chance a kink party is going on 
and someone is tied to a Saint Andrew's cross and being flogged.

Then, drive back to the east side of town, which is the trendy haunt for local 
hipsters.Many of them will tell you should have been in line at 9am to buy a 
meal atFranklin Barbecue. Walk to the Eastside Showroom 
<http://eastsideshowroom.com/> for cocktails, dinner, and music. Or drop by 
Liberty <http://www.thelibertyaustin.com/> bar, order a cheap drink, pet a dog, 
and get a $3 bacon ball atPaul Qui's East Side King <http://eskaustin.com/> 
food truck - a venue that has won an award for its food from the James Beard 
Foundation in New York. If you want to spend a few more dollars eat atJustine's 
Brasserie <http://www.justines1937.com/>Justine's may be, perhaps the only 
restaurant with a website that features a black-and-white video of naked women 
in a bath. And you just may feel like you're in a Fellini film as you dine.
 Photograph: Alamy 
Go back to the Driskill, back to Congress Avenue, and look south. You'll see 
the new high-rises, the Congress Avenue Bridge that's home to 1.5 million bats, 
and Lady Bird Lake. Walk along the shore and take your picture at the statue of 
blues guitar legend Stevie Ray Vaughan. Afterwards cool off with a swim in the 
naturally cold waters ofBarton Springs pool 
<http://austintexas.gov/department/barton-springs-pool>, where you can sunbathe 
topless.

As the sun sets, stand on the Congress Avenue bridge and watch the bats 
emerge. They turn the sky black. This is what I mean when I say you can't do 
Austin in a day or two. But at least while you wait for your flight on the way 
out, you can keep touring. Eat Salt Lick Barbecue and Amy's Ice Creams and shop 
at BookPeople for a copy of Secret Sex Lives: A Year on the Fringes of American 
Sexuality … because I'm doing the best I can to keep Austin weird.

Suzy Spencer, Austin resident and author of four true crime books and a memoir,
Secret Sex Lives: A Year on the Fringes of American Sexuality 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Secret-Sex-Lives-American-Sexuality/dp/0425219364>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 