
Australia and Timor-Leste <https://www.theguardian.com/world/timor-leste> have 
agreed to begin negotiations on a permanent maritime boundary between the two 
countries, potentially ending years of dispute over the lucrative oil-rich 
Timor Gap and closing a chapter of mistrust and enmity between the two 
neighbours.

Canberra and Dili have agreed to tear up the controversial Certain Maritime 
Arrangements in the Timor Sea 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/dfat/treaties/2007/12.html> (CMats) treaty 
that divides future revenue from the Greater Sunrise oil and gas reserve, where 
an estimated $40bn worth of oil and gas lies beneath the Timor Sea.

Timor-Leste has sought to abandon the agreement for years, alleging it was 
unfairly negotiated because of Australian espionage.

Dispute over how to delineate the sea boundary between the two countries has 
marred relations since Timor-Leste won its independence in 2002, but most 
acutely in 2012, when Australia was revealed to have spied on Timor-Leste’s 
cabinet by bugging its cabinet room under the pretext of renovations.

The two countries have been taking part in a year-long compulsory 
conciliation, overseen by the permanent court of arbitration (PCA) in The 
Hague, over the maritime boundary dispute. The conciliation is taking place 
behind closed doors, but, in an unprecedented move, the foreign affairs 
ministers of Australia and Timor-Leste, along with the PCA, announced key 
developments in the negotiations on Monday.

Terminating the CMats treaty is a significant shift in position for Australia, 
which had maintained the treaty was valid and should remain in force. The 
treaty will cease to exist three months from Timor-Leste’s formal notification.

The treaty established a temporary maritime boundary for 50 years. After 
terminating it, both countries have agreed to negotiate on a permanent boundary.

Australia fails in attempt to block Timor-Leste maritime boundary case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/australia-fails-in-attempt-to-block-timor-leste-maritime-boundary-case>
“The parties recognise the importance of providing stability and certainty for 
petroleum companies with interests in the Timor Sea and of continuing to 
provide a stable framework for petroleum operations and the development of 
resources in the Timor Sea,” the joint statement from foreign affairs ministers 
Julie Bishop and Hernâni Coelho said.

“The governments of Timor-Leste and Australia have each confirmed to the other 
their commitment to negotiate permanent maritime boundaries under the auspices 
of the commission.”

Under the Law of the Sea 
<http://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/unclos/unclos_e.pdf> 
and established state practice, any negotiation over a maritime boundary is 
likely toestablish a boundary equidistant between the two countries 
<https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/timor-sea-boundary-dispute-australia-out-step-international-best-practice-0>
, which would put the majority of the Greater Sunrise oil fields within 
Timor-Leste’s territory.

However, Australia’s position has always been that the maritime boundary 
should lie closer to Timor-Leste,at the edge of Australia’s continental shelf 
<https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-interpreter/east-timor-border-be-careful-what-you-wish>
. That boundary would put Greater Sunrise under Australian control.

Australia’s demarcation at the edge of the continental shelf is not widely 
supported. The majority ofinternational legal opinion supports the principle of 
equidistance 
<http://ntba.asn.au/wp-content/uploads/The-Maritime-Boundaries-of-East-Timor.pdf>
.

Professor Clive Schofield from the Australian National Centre for Ocean 
Resources and Security at the University of Wollongong told Guardian Australia 
Monday’s announcement marked a significant shift in Australia’s position, and 
“a step Australia was reluctant to take”.

CMats “failed” as a treaty, Schofield said, because it did not ensure 
sufficient confidence for Greater Sunrise to be exploited - with particular 
concern over the direction of a pipeline from it - and because it did not “put 
to rest” controversy over the maritime boundary.

“I do believe what makes bilateral relationships work is trust. In that sense, 
the controversy over spying allegations fatally damaged CMats as a treaty.”

Schofield said because of the uncertainty over Greater Sunrise, and 
particularly the pipeline, the time for its profitable exploitation might have 
already passed, a development that would harm Timor-Leste much more than 
Australia. Timor-Leste is dependent on oil and gas revenues for its sovereign 
wealth fund, and existing fields are approaching the end of their viability.


On Timor, Australia looks like it's denying an impoverished neighbour its 
birthright | Ben Saul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/29/on-timor-australia-looks-like-its-denying-an-impoverished-neighbour-its-birthright>
Schofield said negotiations over the Australia-Timor-Leste boundary were 
likely to start from an equidistant line. “I would firmly expect the states to 
start with drawing a median line ... and there are not, to my mind, compelling 
reasons to shift that line one way or another.”

But Schofield said the third player in any maritime boundary negotiations – 
Indonesia – could be even more problematic for both Australia and Timor-Leste.

The dispute over the Timor Sea has preempted and then overshadowed the short 
and chequered history between independent Timor-Leste and Australia.


In 1975, as Portugal moved towards decolonisation, the resistance movement 
Fretilin declared Timor-Leste independent. Nine days later, the newly free 
nation was invaded by Indonesia’s military in breach of international law, and 
to widespread international condemnation.

In 1979 Australia became the only western nation to offer de jure recognition 
of Indonesia’s forced annexation, so the two countries could begin negotiations 
over the Timor Sea’s resources.

The Timor Gap treaty was signed (the then foreign affairs ministers Gareth 
Evans and Ali Alatas famously clinking champagne glasses in a plane above the 
Timor Sea) between Australia and Indonesia in 1989. That treaty did not 
establish a maritime boundary but provided for shared exploitation of petroleum 
resources in the part of the seabed claimed jointly by both countries.

Australia was Timor-Leste’s saviour in 1999, leading the Interfet force which 
restored order in the country after the vote for independence and retribution 
by pro-Indonesia militias.

But in 2002, just two months before Timor-Leste became independent, Australia 
secretly withdrew from the maritime boundary dispute resolution procedures of 
the UN convention on the law of the sea, and the equivalent jurisdiction of the 
international court of justice, so that it could not be compelled into legally 
binding international arbitration.

Australia has never formally admitted spying on Timor-Leste during CMats 
negotiations, though it didraid the Canberra offices of Timor-Leste’s lawyer 
Bernard Collaery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/04/australia-secret-service-raids-lawyer-and-former-spy>
, and seized the passport of the intelligence agent who blew the whistle on the 
spying operation.


• Australian Associated Press contributed to this report 
 