
Top five

1. Angelique Kerber

Kerber had a fairytale 2016, coming in as an outsider to win two grand slam 
titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/angelique-kerber-karolina-pliskova-us-open-final>
, anOlympic silver medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/monica-puig-puerto-rica-gold-medal-history-rio-2016-womens-singles-monique-kerber-tennis>
 and take the world No1 spot from the seemingly indomitable Serena Williams, 
who had held it for 186 consecutive weeks. She ended last season on a slightly 
off note, losing early in all three tournaments following her victory at the US 
Open, and then losing in the final of the WTA Finals in Singapore. Her 
preparation for Melbourne has been equally lacklustre, with early defeats in 
Brisbane and Sydney. Going into the year’s first grand slam as a reigning 
champion for the first time in her career will be a new feeling, though, and 
may just kickstart her new year.

Johanna Konta reaches women’s final in Sydney as Dan Evans claims first top-10 
win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/daniel-evans-claims-first-top-10-win-laura-robson-fails-to-make-australian-open-tennis>
2. Serena Williams

By Serena standards, 2016 was below par – most notably her dramatic exit from 
the US Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/09/serena-williams-out-of-us-open-with-shock-loss-to-karolina-pliskova>
 in the semi-finals. That stinging defeat against Karolina Pliskova spelled the 
end of her record-tying run as the world No1 and of her season, as she sat out 
the end of the year. It was not all bad, though, as Williams did reach three 
major finals andequalled Steffi Graf’s grand slam singles titles record at 
Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/09/serena-williams-angelique-kerber-wimbledon-womens-final-report>
. Judging from her return to the tour, however, there is work to be done if she 
is to claim her seventh championship in Melbourne – she lost in the second 
round at Auckland against the No72 Madison Brengle off the back of 88 unforced 
errors. But few would bet against the self-proclaimed greatest of all time, 
especially chasing a record 23rd grand slam title.

3. Agnieszka Radwanska

Perhaps regarded as the best player on the tour not to have won a grand slam, 
Radwanska will be hoping 2017 is her year. Though she won a couple of smaller 
tournaments last year and made the semi-finals of the WTA Finals in Singapore, 
her slam record is consistently average. She crashed out in the fourth round of 
the US Open, and has only ever reached a grand slam final once,in 2012 at 
Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/07/serena-williams-agnieszka-radwanska-wimbledon>
. Her Melbourne preparations have been limited to the Shenzhen Open, where she 
reached the quarter-finals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Faustralia-open-womens-form-guide-players-to-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04d79793d01c4f2c429c8abb3cca3608d680e55d%2F0_79_2713_1628%2F2713.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20Open%20women%E2%80%99s%20form%20guide%3A%20the%20players%20to%20watch%20in%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Molly%20McElwee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Faustralia-open-womens-form-guide-players-to-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20Open%20women%E2%80%99s%20form%20guide%3A%20the%20players%20to%20watch%20in%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Molly%20McElwee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Faustralia-open-womens-form-guide-players-to-watch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04d79793d01c4f2c429c8abb3cca3608d680e55d%2F0_79_2713_1628%2F2713.jpg>
 Agnieszka Radwanska is seeking a first grand slam final appearance since 2012. 
Photograph: Dan Himbrechts/EPA 
4. Simona Halep

Halep will be looking to better her first-round defeat at the 2016 Australian 
Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>. Last year she won 
three WTA titles and retained her reputation for consistency as a top‑10 
fixture since 2014. However, despite having a decent 2016, she failed to reach 
a semi-final in any of the slams. The Romanian’s start to 2017 is not much to 
go on when predicting her chances in the first slam of the season, only having 
competed at Shenzhen, and losing in her second match. However, it is often 
forgotten how young the world No4 is as, at only 25 years old, her best form 
may be yet to come, especially by today’s standards.

5. Karolina Pliskova

The youngest of the top five, the 24-year-old Czech had a stand‑out year in 
2016. She made headlines shocking Serena Williams in straight sets at the 
US Open semi-finals, becoming one of only four women to beat both Williams 
sisters in the same grand slam tournament, and progressing to the first major 
final of her career. Pliskova was also the biggest server of the year, racking 
up the most aces of any woman on the tour, and has started 2017 on a positive 
note, winning her first tournament of the year at Brisbane. Her height, strong 
serve and cool head at big moments last year makes her one to watch for the 
tournament.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Faustralia-open-womens-form-guide-players-to-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe498a29124f9576d5fb155d5f4b4e8c4ee082c67%2F0_11_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20Open%20women%E2%80%99s%20form%20guide%3A%20the%20players%20to%20watch%20in%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Molly%20McElwee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Faustralia-open-womens-form-guide-players-to-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20Open%20women%E2%80%99s%20form%20guide%3A%20the%20players%20to%20watch%20in%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Molly%20McElwee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Faustralia-open-womens-form-guide-players-to-watch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe498a29124f9576d5fb155d5f4b4e8c4ee082c67%2F0_11_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Karolina Pliskova has begun 2017 positively, winning in Brisbane. Photograph: 
Chris Hyde/Getty Images 
Three to watch

Johanna Konta (No10 seed)

Konta’s stunning rise to the top echelons of women’s tennis began with an 
amazing run in 2015, but peaked almost a year ago when she made the Australian 
Open semi-finals, ranked 47 at the time. Her aim no doubt will be to at least 
equal such success, this time with the added pressure of top‑10 status. She 
finished 2016 consistently, reaching the latter stages of tournaments, and her 
warm-up to the first major of the yearhas been confidence-instilling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/daniel-evans-claims-first-top-10-win-laura-robson-fails-to-make-australian-open-tennis>
, reaching the final in Sydney, especially as fellow top-ranking players 
struggled. A British woman had not been ranked in the top 10 since 1984, let 
alone won a grand slam – Virginia Wade was the last in 1977. Konta is shaping 
up to be Britain’s best bet since.

Limping Nick Kyrgios only a long shot but a fascinating Australian Open looms 
| Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/limping-nick-kyrgios-only-a-long-shot-but-a-fascinating-australian-open-looms>
Garbiñe Muguruza (No7 seed)

The world No7’s 2016 may have been heralded as the breakout performance of the 
year, if not for Angelique Kerber bagging her first two majors. Muguruza’swin 
at the French Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/garbine-muguruza-beats-serena-williams-french-open-final-match-report>
 made waves, finally fulfilling the potential she had long shown signs of. The 
rest of the season did not live up to the hype however, but she has come back 
in 2017 looking strong in her opening few matches in Brisbane, before having to 
retire because of a right thigh injury. If she recovers well she could be a 
real contender in Melbourne.

Dominika Cibulkova (No6 seed)

Coming off the back of a sensational end to 2016, reaching the finals in Wuhan 
and winning the WTA Finals in Singapore, the Slovakian will be intent on 
continuing her success into the new year. The world No6 has not yet fully 
emerged as a contender in any of the majors, but that could well change. Her 
form at the end of last year was arguably the best it has been throughout her 
career, and it shows in her sitting well within the top 10 for the first time. 
Her start to 2017 has been slower, losing fairly early in both Brisbane and 
Sydney, but she will definitely have her eyes set on making it late into the 
second week at Melbourne Park.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Faustralia-open-womens-form-guide-players-to-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a7c97d7868591caa40db920b0526921398f295a%2F0_51_3673_2203%2F3673.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20Open%20women%E2%80%99s%20form%20guide%3A%20the%20players%20to%20watch%20in%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Molly%20McElwee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Faustralia-open-womens-form-guide-players-to-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20Open%20women%E2%80%99s%20form%20guide%3A%20the%20players%20to%20watch%20in%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Molly%20McElwee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Faustralia-open-womens-form-guide-players-to-watch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a7c97d7868591caa40db920b0526921398f295a%2F0_51_3673_2203%2F3673.jpg>
 Dominika Cibulkova hit a rich vein of form towards the end of last year. 
Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP 
Others to watch

With the top‑ranking players Madison Keys, Petra Kvitova and Victoria Azarenka 
sitting out the first major of the season, we may see re-emerging stars break 
back into the top tier.Caroline Wozniacki finished 2016 in great form, winning 
in Hong Kong and Tokyo, and making her first grand slam semi-final appearance 
since 2014 at the US Open.Venus Williams also reached her first grand slam 
semi-final in almost six years, albeit with a quieter end to the year. The 
two-time grand slam championSvetlana Kuznetsova could also have a hand in 
proceedings, as the world No9 had a strong end to the 2016 tour. The surprise 
Olympic gold-medallistMonica Puig could be an outside threat, as could Eugenie 
Bouchard who, though ranked No49, is having a confident warm-up to the 
tournament.
 