
Three parts of Queensland’s Pacific Motorway have been ranked among the 10 
most dangerous stretches of highway in Australia.

The Australian Automobile Association released its Australian road assessment 
program report <http://ausrap.aaa.asn.au/report?page=australia> on Wednesday, 
pinpointing the locations of crashes that led to 15,339 casualties and more 
than 900 deaths on Australian highways between 2010 and 2014.

Nine of the 10 most dangerous hot spots were concentrated in three states: New 
South Wales, Queensland and Tasmania.Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> highways accounted for 
four of the 10 worst.

Phones need software to stop drivers becoming distracted, ministers say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/mobile-phones-drivers-distracted-ministers-roads>
Three parts of the Pacific motorway – between the Gateway and Logan motorways, 
the Smith Street Freeway and NSW border, and the Logan Motorway and Smith 
Street Freeway – were ranked as the fourth, sixth and eighth most dangerous 
respectively.


There were 23 deaths across the three sections of the motorway between 2010 
and 2014, said an RACQ spokesman, Paul Turner.

“The number of people dying on the Pacific Motorway is truly frightening and 
we need the federal and state governments to deliver the upgrades needed to 
reduce this statistic,” he said.

“We desperately need safety improvements on this motorway between the Gateway 
Motorway and the NSW border, including funding for eight lanes in the northern 
section and six lanes in the southern section.”


A 24km section of Sydney’s Western Motorway, between Concord and the M7, was 
rated as the country’s worst stretch of road. The Western Motorway was the site 
of 788 casualty crashes and six deaths between 2010 and 2014, when it carried 
an average of 94,050 cars a day.

NSW’s Hume Highway between Campbelltown and Casula was ranked the third most 
dangerous. Seven people were killed and 726 injured on the 45km section of 
highway.

Tasmania’s Bass Highway, East Tamar Highway and Midland Highway were all named 
in the top 10. A seven-kilometre stretch of the Bass Highway was deemed the 
second most dangerous in the country, recording 67 casualty crashes and one 
death, despite carrying a relatively low volume of 14,700 vehicles a day.

The AAA released the crash data before the busy Christmas holiday period on 
Australia’s roads,creating an interactive map <http://ausrap.aaa.asn.au/> and 
linking the data with electorates to put pressure on politicians. The report 
comes after successive increases to the road toll in the past two years, 
bucking along-term trend of improvement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/18/australias-road-toll-at-record-low>
.

The toll climbed from 1,065 in the year to November 2014 to 1,110 the 
following year and 1,185 in 2016, according to the Bureau of Infrastructure, 
Transport and Regional Economics.

Now Mike Baird is banning P-platers from using map apps? Big mistake | 
Kristina Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/29/now-mike-baird-is-banning-p-platers-from-using-map-apps-big-mistake>
The AAA’s chief executive, Michael Bradley, said the highways report should 
put pressure on governments to better target investments in road safety.

“Australia’s motoring clubs are calling on all governments to make targeted, 
effective investments in road safety and we urge them to use our statistically 
based analysis to help make those investments,” Bradley said.

An NRMA spokesman, Peter Khoury, said Sydney drivers shouldn’t be disheartened 
by the report. He said upgrades were under way for a number of NSW roads 
including the Pacific Highway, the Western Motorway and the Great Western 
Highway.

“The Pacific Highway upgrade will be completed in the next three years and 
anyone who drives a car in Sydney knows how crucial WestConnex will be to 
solving the traffic crisis on Parramatta Road and the M4/Western Motorway,” 
Khoury said.

The 10 most dangerous highways in Australia:

 * Western Motorway, from Parramatta Road, Concord, to M7 Westlink (NSW)

 * Bass Highway, from Nine Mile Road to Stowport Road (Tasmania)

 * Hume Motorway/Freeway, from South Western Motorway/M5 to Narellan Road, 
Campbelltown (NSW)

 * Pacific Motorway, from Gateway Motorway to Logan Motorway (Queensland)

 * East Tamar Highway, from Alanvale Connector to Dalrymple Road (Tasmania)

 * Pacific Motorway, from Smith Street Freeway to NSW border (Queensland) 
 * Midland Highway, from Evandale Main Road to Howick Street (Tasmania) 
 * Pacific Motorway, from Logan Motorway to Smith Street Freeway (Queensland)

 * Bruce Highway, from Sarina to Mackay (Queensland) 
 * Great Northern/Victoria Highway, from Kununnurra turnoff to the Northern 
Territory border (Western Australia)
 