
Top five 

1. Andy Murray

Back for more and as hungry as ever, whatever he might say about the 
possibility of his knighthood quenching his thirst for success, the 29-year-old 
will be confident of claiming his first Australian Open title after the 
relentless winning run that lifted him tothe top of the rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/21/andy-murray-world-no1-novak-djokovic>
 for the first time in his career last year. Yet,despite holding off Novak 
Djokovic in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-atp-tour-finals>
 to finish 2016 as the world No1, the Wimbledon andOlympic champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/andy-murray-beats-juan-martin-del-potro-rio-2016>
 has been a beaten finalist on five occasions in Melbourne. For all of Murray’s 
outstanding play in this tournament down the years, he is still carrying some 
mental baggage.

2. Novak Djokovic

This time last year, it was unthinkable that the Serb would not begin 2017 as 
the world No1. But after completing the career slam withvictory in the French 
Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/french-open-2016-final-novak-djokovic-beats-andy-murray>
 in June,a shock early defeat at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/02/novak-djokovic-knocked-out-wimbledon-sam-querrey>
 shook Djokovic to the core. His mood darkened, his form nosedived, there were 
allusions to problems away from the court and Murray overtook him. But 
Djokovic, who parted company with Boris Becker at the end of the season, looked 
close to his best again during his recentvictory against Murray in Doha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-qatar-open-match-report>
 and thedefending champion’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
 history in Melbourne means he is the slight favourite to win a record seventh 
Australian Open title.

3. Milos Raonic

Previously written off as too one‑dimensional to threaten the top players, the 
Canadian has emerged as a serious threat after making huge strides in 2016.He 
pushed Murray hard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-australian-open-semi-final>
 despite losing their Australian Open semi-final in five sets and reached his 
first grand slam final when he fought backto defeat Roger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/milos-raonic-roger-federer-wimbledon-semi-final-match-report>
 at Wimbledon.Murray was too strong in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/andy-murray-wins-wimbledon-2016-milos-raonic>
, but Raonic is clearly on the right path and his challenge is to play with 
more belief in the key moments. No longer so reliant on his monstrous serve, he 
has become more rounded, developing his game by attacking the net more 
aggressively. He is capable of going all the way.

4. Stan Wawrinka

One of the most unpredictable players on the tour, Wawrinka’s inconsistency is 
his greatest strength in a way. While there are times when it looks as though 
he has never picked up a racket before, he has the ability to blow his 
opponents away with sustained spells of blistering tennis when he explodes into 
life. The former champion won his third major whenhe beat Djokovic in the 
US Open final last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/12/stan-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-us-open-final-2016>
 and, although he struggled with injuries and fatigue at the end of last 
season, the 31-year-old possesses an array of fearsome weapons that could carry 
him to his second Australian Open title.

5. Kei Nishikori

Skilful and elegant, the 27-year-old’s cerebral game makes him one of the most 
watchable players around. The Japanese star is a former US Open finalistwho has 
beaten Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/andy-murray-kei-nishikori-five-set-epic-us-open>
 and Djokovic at slam level and he knows this is the year when he has to push 
on. Nishikori has often cracked under the strain of keeping up with the 
grinding physicality at the top. A hip problem that threatens to undermine his 
chances in Melbourne will only fuel the argument that he is too brittle to make 
the most of his vast talent.

Three to watch

Roger Federer (No17 seed)

Strange though it seems to introduce the greatest player of all time as the 
world No17, it can be seen as a sign of the times that Federer finds himself in 
his lowest ranking since 2001. Yet it says much for Federer’s unwavering belief 
in his talent that the 35-year-old decided not to retire after missing the 
second half of last year with a knee injury and it should not be forgotten that 
he began 2016 as the world No3. He remains dangerous at the highest level. 
However, his low seeding means that he is likely to face a tough draw and that 
could hold him back given his lack of match practice.

Marin Cilic (No7 seed)

The powerful Croatian possesses a big game and a fine pedigree given that he 
is a former US Open champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/09/marin-cilic-kei-nishikori-us-open-final-2014>
. Yet while he qualified for the ATP World Tour Finals in November, it will be 
interesting to see how he has recovered from the disappointment of Croatia’s 
defeat to Argentina in the Davis Cup final. Victory was in sight for Croatia 
when Cilic led Juan Martín del Potro by two sets in the fourth rubber in Zagreb,
only for the Argentinian to force a decider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/juan-martin-del-potro-argentina-davis-cup-title-croatia>
 after a stirring 6-7, 2-6, 7-5, 6-4, 6-3 victory. Argentina won the tie 3-2 
and Cilic will do well to bounce back from that setback.

Dominic Thiem (No8 seed)

A debutant at the World Tour Finals after a breakthrough campaign, the 
exciting young Austrian’s immense promise shone brightly last year. His run to 
the semi-finals at Roland Garros was one to cherish, along with victories 
against Federer in Rome and Stuttgart. The 23-year-old still has plenty of room 
for improvement, however, after receiving a couple of harsh lessons at 
Wimbledon andthe US  Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/05/juan-martin-del-potro-us-open-dominic-thiem-quarter-final>
. Bearing in mind how his form dipped at the end of 2016, he will be determined 
to make a statement of intent in Melbourne. He is yet to make it past the first 
week, though.

Others to watch

Granted, Rafael Nadal is not the most inspiring of picks as a dark horse given 
that he is the owner of 14 slams. Looking beyond Del Potro would have been 
difficult if he had been ruled out by injury again, while intrigue surrounds
Nick Kyrgios, Gaël Monfils and Lucas Pouille, and maybe even Grigor Dimitrov if 
he discovers greater focus. But it will be fascinating to see how Nadal fares 
after the world No9’s return from injury. Time has taken its toll on the 
30-year-old’s weary frame and he has not reached the last eight of a slam since 
the French Open in 2015, but he has spoken positively about his hopes of 
returning to his former heights.
 