
An Australia Day <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day> 
billboard featuring two girls in hijabs has been removed from a site in 
Melbourne after threats were made to the company behind it.

The digital sign featured rolling images of people from various cultural 
backgrounds, and one picture of two Muslim girls in front of the Australian 
flag sparked furious debate among social media users.

Hundreds of people criticised the image for being “too politically correct” or 
not a true reflection of Australia Day.

The large billboard, hosted by outdoor media company QMS, was used to promote 
an RACV-sponsored festival in Kings Domain Gardens next week and also included 
Victoria’s official government and Australia Day logos.

Victoria’s multicultural affairs minister, Robin Scott, said QMS chose to take 
it down due to a number of threats.

I created the burkini to give women freedom, not to take it away | Aheda 
Zanetti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/24/i-created-the-burkini-to-give-women-freedom-not-to-take-it-away>
“Anyone who considers this a victory needs a refresher on the true meaning of 
Australia Day,” Scott said. “It is about bringing people together and 
celebrating the diversity which makes this state and this country great.

“It’s very disappointing to see a small minority attacking proud Australians 
for their love of their country.”

QMS declined to comment on the threats received.

Angry comments about the sign, erected alongside a freeway interchange between 
Peninsula Link and Connect East at Cranbourne, began on Friday when it was 
shared on Facebook by a number of far-right groups including the United 
Patriots Front.

By Monday thousands of people had shared the image of the girls in hijabs.

“This isn’t a reflection of Australia Day, are we losing our own culture to be 
politically correct??,” Sydney woman Liz Parker wrote on Facebook.

But not everyone was critical.

Gina Rose posted: “We are a multicultural nation, if you have a problem with 
that, maybe you should leave.”

The RACV said the billboard was part of a broader Victorian government 
campaign to promote Australia Day.

“RACV is proud to be the major supporter of the Victorian government’s popular 
Australia Day festival, which celebrates everything that makes our country 
great,” it said in a statement.

The photograph used for the billboard 
<http://www.australiaday.vic.gov.au/2016-australia-day-at-docklands/#PhotoSwipe1484620377549>
 was taken in Melbourne on 26 January 2016, and displayed on the Victorian 
government’sAustralia Day gallery 
<http://www.australiaday.vic.gov.au/2016-australia-day-at-docklands/>. It shows 
that the two young girls were holding Australian flags as they attended events 
at Docklands.
 