
1 Novak Djokovic

Barring unlikely fitness problems or a dramatic loss of form, the world No1 
will be the undisputed favourite in every event he enters. Djokovic’s 2015 
seasonwas one of the greatest of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/20/novak-djokovic-public-acclaim-grand-slam-titles>
. Losing only five matches and securing 10 titles, he became the first player 
to win three grand slam titles and six Masters events in the same year, while 
he joined Rod Laver and Roger Federer in being the only men in the Open era to 
play in all four grand slam finals in a single year. His cool victories over 
Federer atWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/12/novak-djokovic-roger-federer-wimbledon-2015-final>
, theUS Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/13/novak-djokovic-wins-us-open-2015-final-over-roger-federer-after-epic-battle>
 and theATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/22/novak-djokovic-roger-federer-atp-world-tour-finals>
 showed he is no longer affected by partisan crowds and his target this year 
must be to win the calendar slam, having been denied by Stan Wawrinka inthe 
French Open final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/french-open-2015-stanislas-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-win>
. Djokovic’sdestruction of Rafael Nadal in Doha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/09/novak-djokovic-beats-rafael-nadal-qatar-open>
 was ominous and few will bet against him winning his sixth Australian Open

First round opponent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/15/andy-murray-alexander-zverev-australian-open-2016>
: world No51 Hyeon Chung, Kor

2 Andy Murray

Having fully recovered from his back surgery in 2013, Murray is oozing belief 
after one of his most consistent seasons. He finished as the world No2 for the 
first time and finally got to grips with clay, winning his first titles on the 
dirt inMunich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/04/andy-murray-wins-munich-open> and
Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/10/andy-murray-clay-rafael-nadal-madrid>
, and then crowning his year by leading Great Britain to theirfirst Davis Cup 
triumph for 79 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/andy-murray-davis-cup-great-britain>
. Another highlight was ending an eight-match losing run against Djokovic, 
winning hisfourth title of 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/16/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-rogers-cup-tennis>
 by beating his great rival in MontrealFirst round opponent: world No83 
Alexander Zverev, Ger Yet Murray will be looking for improvement in the slams 
and he is looking for a new assistant coach after ending his short alliance 
with Jonas Bjorkman. He has not beaten Djokovic or Federer in a major since 
winning Wimbledon in 2013. He has been close – but not close enough.

3 Roger Federer

It is going on four years since Federer last won a grand slam but the 
34-year-old remains as classy as ever. Having started 2015 bylosing to Andreas 
Seppi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/23/australian-open-roger-federer-andreas-seppi-report>
 in the Australian Open third round, he ended it by losing to Djokovic in the 
last match of the season. It is wrong to say that there is no reason why 
Federer cannot add to his 17 grand slam titles when Djokovic’s might is an 
ongoing frustration but t he Swiss player continues to delight with the 
imagination, variety, purity and quality of his game. Yet for all the aesthetic 
beauty of Federer’s tennis, he still wants to win and he has adjusted his 
schedule accordingly. He will play no clay events in the buildup to the French 
Open, which has been taken as a sign that he wants to stay fresh for Wimbledon 
and the Rio Olympics.

First round opponent: world No117 Nikoloz Basilashvili, Geo

4 Stan Wawrinka
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Faustralian-open-2016-preview-top-five-men-novak-djokovic-andy-murray-roger-federer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F208ca2ed27d8aeadddb90300d08e251f69eea75a%2F27_69_4041_2425%2F4041.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20Open%202016%20preview%3A%20how%20the%20top%20five%20men%20are%20shaping%20up%20%7C%20Jacob%20Steinberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Faustralian-open-2016-preview-top-five-men-novak-djokovic-andy-murray-roger-federer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20Open%202016%20preview%3A%20how%20the%20top%20five%20men%20are%20shaping%20up%20%7C%20Jacob%20Steinberg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Faustralian-open-2016-preview-top-five-men-novak-djokovic-andy-murray-roger-federer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F208ca2ed27d8aeadddb90300d08e251f69eea75a%2F27_69_4041_2425%2F4041.jpg>
 Stan Wawrinka won the 2015 French Open by beating Novak Djokovic. Photograph: 
Ian Langsdon/EPA 
The 2014 Australian Open champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/26/stanislas-wawrinka-rafael-nadal-australian-open>
 is capable of beating anyone on his day – and equally capable of losing to 
anyone on his day. Wawrinka’s powerful approach and single-handed backhand 
makes his game one of the most enjoyable on the men’s tour and it has regularly 
troubled Djokovic, who was overwhelmed by a blizzard of fearsome winners from 
the Swiss No2 when they met in the French Open final last June. Wawrinka has 
finally capitalised on his obvious potential and he will fear no one in 
Melbourne, having recorded wins over every other player in the top four last 
year. Yet he is curiously unpredictable. Despite beatingNadal on clay in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/16/rafael-nadal-crisis-clay-stan-wawrinka-defeat-italy>
, his form before the French Open was poor – and then he went and clinched his 
second grand slam title, thanks to wins over Federer and Djokovic at Roland 
Garros. Perhaps the next step for Wawrinka is to find more consistency.

First round opponent: world No265 Dmitry Tursunov, Rus

5 Rafael Nadal

The great Spaniard had a year to forget in 2015. With numerous injury lay-offs 
taking their toll, he waspummelled by Tomas Berdych 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/27/australian-open-nadal-berdych-match-report>
 in Australia,embarrassed by Fabio Fognini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/05/rafael-nadal-cedes-two-set-lead-for-first-time-in-shock-loss-to-fabio-fognini>
 in New York,stunned by Dustin Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/02/dustin-brown-rafael-nadal-wimbledon>
 at Wimbledon and, most painfully of all, toppled by Djokovic in Paris. The 
king of clay’s one-sided defeat by the world No1 in theirFrench Open 
quarter-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/03/french-open-novak-djokovic-rafael-nadal>
 was a seismic moment, seemingly stripping what little was left of Nadal’s 
aura. If he was no longer unbeatable on his favourite surface, if a new order 
had been established, then what was left? Yet Nadal is the ultimate competitor 
and he was looking more like his old self towards the end of the year, rising 
from No10 to No5 and beating Wawrinka and Murray in the World Tour Finals. 
However hHis comprehensivesemi-final defeat by Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/21/novak-djokovic-rafael-nadal-atp-world-tour-finals>
, however, and recent loss in Doha, showed that Nadal was still below his best. 
All the same, he is looking like a threat again, albeit with a tough opening 
match in Melbourne.

First round opponent: world No47 Fernando Verdasco, Sp

Andy Murray and Rafael Nadal bristle with intent before Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/15/andy-murray-rafael-nadal-australian-open-draw>
Australian Open 2016 draw: Andy Murray opens against Alexander Zverev
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/15/andy-murray-alexander-zverev-australian-open-2016> 