
Australian cars are consuming up to 35% more fuel and emitting four times more 
noxious gas than their manufacturers claim, according to a new study.

The Australian Automobile Association has released a report saying 
<http://www.aaa.asn.au/news-and-publications/news/article/?id=vehicle-emissions-tests-reveal-real-world-performance>
 10 popular car models used more fuel in real-world tests than in the 
lab-controlled results on fuel efficiency labels.

The CEO of the AAA, Michael Bradley, is pushing for mandatory on-road testing 
and says the report is designed to inform two government reviews, as well as the
ministerial forum into fuel emissions 
<http://www.minister.industry.gov.au/ministers/frydenberg/media-releases/turnbull-government-review-approach-vehicle-emissions>
, which was established shortly after the2015 European Volkswagon emissions 
scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/sep/23/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-explained-diesel-cars>
.

Will real-world emissions tests clean up diesel cars? | Karl Mathiesen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/22/will-real-world-emissions-tests-clean-up-diesel-cars>
The AAA’s report discovered that on average, fuel efficiency labels 
underestimated fuel consumption by 20%.

“The discrepancy between official figures and the real world fuel consumption 
figures has been increasing over time, most likely as a result of manufacturers 
optimising technologies to ensure compliance with their CO2 obligations,” it 
said.

Bradley told the ABC’s AM <http://www.abc.net.au/am/content/2016/s4590765.htm>
: “We’re seeing up to about 35% difference between what the sticker says and 
what the car actually uses.

“We’re not saying the information being presented is wrong. It’s just that 
there’s clearly a very big difference between what a car does in a laboratory 
and when you drive it round on the streets of Melbourne.”


Bradley told AM that the AAA would like to see the Australian system brought 
into line with international and European standards. Starting from September 
2017, the European Union will require on-road testing rather than laboratory 
conditions.

“What we’re saying to the Australian government is we should be doing real 
world emission testing in Australia … that’s what consumers deserve.”

The government is considering tightening emissions regulations. An impact 
statement is due to be released assessing the possibility of a transition to 
new stricter European standards, known as “Euro 6”. Australia currently uses 
the “Euro 5” standard, which was introduced in 2009.


The forum into fuel emissions 
<https://infrastructure.gov.au/roads/environment/forum/> is also due to release 
a report on 31 March that outlines a draft plan for new measures. Launched at 
the end of October 2015, the forum accepted submissions from stakeholders until 
8 April this year.

A strongly-worded submission from consumer advocacy group Choice  
<https://infrastructure.gov.au/roads/environment/forum/files/Choice.pdf>advised 
the government to bring in “stringent real-world testing”.


“Without a reliable standard on emissions … Australia risks becoming a dumping 
ground for inefficient and dirty cars, costing consumers at the pump,” the 
report read.

Diesel cars' emissions far higher on road than in lab, tests show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/21/all-top-selling-cars-break-emissions-limits-in-real-world-tests>
It also noted that 89% of consumers considered fuel efficiency rating an 
important factor in deciding which make of car to purchase.

A submission from Toyota Australia 
<https://infrastructure.gov.au/roads/environment/forum/files/Toyota_Motor_Corporation_Australia.pdf>
 also revealed the car manufacturer “supports the introduction of Euro 6 
emissions standards” and “supports a testing regime which aims to reduce 
real-world emissions”.

The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission are also conducting a 
market study into car retail sales and hosting a forum in Melbourne on Tuesday 
to discuss the accuracy of fuel efficiency labels.


The AAA’s tests were conducted on public roads in Brisbane and Melbourne, in 
83 kilometre trips split into one third urban, one third rural and one third 
freeway.

 