
The Australian Open junior champion Oliver Anderson is the latest tennis 
player to be charged with match-fixing, according to reports in Australia. The 
talented 18-year-old wasnamed by the Age newspaper 
<http://www.theage.com.au/sport/tennis/tennis-match-fixer-charged-after-country-victorian-tournament-20170105-gtm861.html>
 in Melbourne as being approached to throw the first set of his first-round 
match at the Traralgon Challenger tournament in October against another 
Australian, Harrison Lombe.

Victorian police confirmed they had charged an 18-year-old man with “engaging 
in conduct that corrupts a betting outcome”, adding that they had worked 
closely with bookmakers in their investigation. They did not reveal the name of 
the player but said he would appear at the Latrobe Valley magistrates court on 
2 March.

In the match which forms the centre of the allegations, Anderson was broken at 
4-4 in the first set after two double faults and went on to lose the first set. 
However, he recovered to win the match by taking the next two sets 6-0, 6-2.

Anderson, who is ranked No743 in the world, lost his next match at the 
US$50,000 (£40,000) tournament,which was played by those on the second rung of 
professional tennis.

The Guardian can reveal that the Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Integrity Unit, which was 
considerably beefed up following a series of revelations last year about 
impropriety in the sport, was also involved.

Andy Murray made to fight for his quarter-final place in the Qatar Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/andy-murray-qater-open-novak-djokovic>
A spokesman told the Guardian “The TIU has worked closely with Victoria Police 
in Australia to support their investigations into alleged match fixing in 
tennis. Investigation and prosecution of corruption allegations by law 
enforcement agencies takes precedence over tennis disciplinary action. Once any 
criminal proceedings have been concluded, the TIU will continue to progress 
investigations under the Tennis Anti-Corruption Program.”

Any player who is found guilty of match-fixing by the TIU would face a 
sanction ranging from a suspended sentence to a $250,000 fine and a life ban. 
Last year a Guardian investigation exposed a series of problems in the lower 
levels of tennis, including revelations thatsix umpires had been secretly 
banned or suspended for taking bribes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/09/revealed-tennis-umpires-secretly-banned-gambling-scam>
 from betting syndicates in exchange for delaying the entry of live scores into 
their official computers. This allowed crooked gamblers to place bets already 
knowing the outcome of the next point.

A number of players have also been suspended for match-fixing in recent 
months. They include the world No187 Marco Cecchinato, who was banned for 18 
months and fined €40,000 (£34,000), after he was accused of fixing two of his 
matches and using confidential information for gambling. Two of his 
accomplices, Riccardo Accardi and Antonio Campo, were also suspended. 
Meanwhile, the Mexican tennis player Daniel Garza wasbanned for six months and 
given a $5,000 fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/daniel-garza-banned-fined-match-fixing-tennis-tournament-mexican-player-tiu>
 after being found guilty of a match-fixing charge.

An independent review into the integrity of tennis, which will examine 
allegations of corruption in the sport and the effectiveness of existing 
anti-corruption practices and procedures, is expected to report shortly.
 