
Often within sight of the Malverns, Black Mountains or Radnor Forest, our 
12-day walk along theHerefordshire Trail <http://www.herefordshiretrail.com/> 
leads from place to place around the county. Massive oaks used to be pollarded, 
and, in derelict orchards, clumps of mistletoe colonise old trees. Wayside 
hedgerows are loaded with haws, rotting blackberries, holly and spindle 
berries; crab apples strew rough lanes andbullaces keep yellow leaves and 
wrinkled purple fruit <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qsQBlqqQAPI>.

Churches, from Dore Abbey 
<http://www.visitherefordshirechurches.co.uk/dore-abbey/> to Pudleston 
<https://www.achurchnearyou.com/pudleston-cum-whyle-st-peter/>, are decorated 
with flowers, fruit and swags of hops for harvest festivals. Pheasants bred for 
shoots feed and shelter in scrubby woods and, aboveLeintwardine 
<http://www.information-britain.co.uk/county9/townguideLeintwardine>, mature 
birds scuttle and glide between coverts of maize as five red kites wheel 
overhead.

Mist shrouds Arthur’s Stone 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/arthurs-stone/> (a neolithic 
tomb), but mostly clement weather enhances landscapes, as when afternoon sun 
gilds trees and pink earth inGolden Valley 
<http://www.visitherefordshire.co.uk/explore/golden-valley.aspx>. Days later we 
descend from windswept hills into the tranquillity of sunlit parkland at
Brampton Bryan <http://www.aboutbritain.com/towns/brampton-bryan.asp> with its 
huge, stag-headed, chestnuts.

A walk of ‘diversified pleasings’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/cornwall-fowey-polruan-south-west-coast-path>
Sheep are ubiquitous, particularly in the west towards Offa’s Dyke 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/offas-dyke/>. Memorable, 
beneath a rainbow, is the farmer on a quad bike checking his flock with his 
four dogs, and then, one early morning, sheep trailing through dewy pastures 
overlooked byBache Camp <http://www.megalithic.co.uk/article.php?sid=22193> (an 
iron age hill fort east of Leominster). In arable areas turnips, grown as a 
break crop, provide keep for sheep in winter.

Plenty of grass allows bullocks to remain out on pastures and we encounter 
just three herds of the distinctive Herefords – between St Tysilio’s church and
Sellack suspension bridge <http://www.geograph.org.uk/photo/462183> (across the 
Wye); nearKilpeck Castle 
<http://www.gatehouse-gazetteer.info/English%20sites/1409.html>, and lastly in 
the parish ofEdwyn Ralph 
<http://www.gatehouse-gazetteer.info/English%20sites/1379.html>, where young 
calves lie in the warmth, overseen by cows and older offspring.

Much of the red-earthed arable land is already cultivated, sown with winter 
cereals, marked with the tramlines of crop spraying for mould and weed control. 
On the final lap, towards Bishop’s Frome, the roar of machinery announces the 
ongoing collection of apples for cider. Here too are hop gardens, and a farmer 
tells us that he is constructing a new kiln and planting an extra 40 acres of 
hops.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>



 