
Poultry owners across Britain have been told they must keep their chickens, 
ducks and geese away from wild birds 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/avian-flu-prevention-zone-extended> until 
the start of spring to counter the threat of avian influenza.

Keepers, including people with just a few backyard hens, must place poultry 
indoors or take other measures to reduce the chances of them coming into 
contact with wild birds.

The prevention measures were initially imposed on 6 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/bird-flu-warning-keepers-told-to-keep-poultry-inside>
 but keepers had been hoping that birds used to roaming free would be allowed 
out this month.

On Wednesday, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) 
announced that the restrictions would be maintained in England until 28 
February. Similar moves were made in Scotland and Wales and there is a 
Britain-wide ban on poultry shows and gatherings.

It comes a day after the Welsh government said a backyard flock in south-west 
Waleshad been slaughtered after catching avian flu. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/03/avian-flu-found-in-backyard-flock-in-welsh-village-pontyberem>

The H5N8 strain of avian influenza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/190000-ducks-destroyed-at-six-dutch-farms-after-bird-flu-outbreak>
 has been circulating in Europe for several weeks. An outbreak was confirmed in
turkeys at a farm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/16/bird-flu-louth-turkey-farm-lincolnshire-h5n8>
 in Lincolnshire on 16 December. The disease has also been found in wild birds 
in Wales, England and Scotland.

Public Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England advises 
that the risk to public health remains very low and the Food Standards Agency 
is clear that bird flu does not pose a food safety risk for UK consumers.

England’s chief veterinary officer, Nigel Gibbens, said: “Anyone who keeps 
poultry such as chickens, ducks and geese, even as pets, must take action to 
stop them coming into contact with wild birds to protect them from avian flu.

“Birds should be moved into a suitable building, or if that isn’t possible 
owners must take sensible precautions to keep them away from wild birds, like 
putting up netting to create a temporary enclosure and keeping food and water 
supplies inside where they cannot be contaminated by wild birds.

“Even when birds are kept indoors a risk of infection remains so keepers must 
also practice good biosecurity, for example by disinfecting footwear and 
equipment and washing clothing after contact with birds.”

The chief veterinary officer in Wales, Christianne Glossop, said: “Even when 
birds are housed, there remains a risk of infection and keepers of poultry and 
other captive birds should ensure that every effort is made to prevent contact 
with wild birds.”
 