
The backyard recycling of lead-acid car batteries is the number one source of 
chemical pollution in the world’s poorer nations and leads to millions of years 
of healthy life being lost, according to a new report.

The World’s Worst Pollution Problems <http://www.worstpolluted.org/>, 
published by NGOs Pure Earth and Green Cross Switzerland on Tuesday, reveals 
the top 10 most polluting industries in low and middle-income countries.

Mining <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/mining>, leather tanning, 
rubbish dumps and the dye industry are among the most polluting activities 
harming health and causing early deaths. The NGOs estimate 200 million people 
are at risk in the 50 nations they analysed.

Old lead acid batteries are increasingly reused as some nations lack lead 
deposits and the rising number of cars is driving an upsurge in demand. 
However, in poorer nations the batteries are often opened with axes or hammers 
and the melting of the recovered lead takes places in homes.

As a result, lead is spread throughout homes and communities and the dumping 
of battery remnants pollutes local soil and water supplies. Children are 
particularly vulnerable to the lead pollution, which can profoundly affect 
their development. South-east Asia is a hotspot for informal lead-acid battery 
recycling, but it also occurs in Africa and Central and South America.

Richard Fuller, president of Pure Earth, said chemical pollution is a growing 
and under-reported problem: “Pollution and the diseases that it causes have 
become a massive and extremely costly global problem.” He said the pollution 
can be tackled but poorer nations can lack the resources to do so, meaning 
those people most in need end up further marginalised.

David Hanrahan, a senior adviser at Pure Earth, said: “Large as these numbers 
[of people at risk] are, they are almost certainly underestimates. In itsmost 
current figures, the World Health Organisation reports 
<http://who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2016/deaths-attributable-to-unhealthy-environments/en/>
 that an estimated 23% of all deaths in 2012 - representing 12.6 million people 
- were attributable to environmental risk factors, including pollution.” He 
said the WHO estimated 20% of all cancers resulted from pollution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbackyard-battery-recycling-is-biggest-chemical-polluter-for-poorer-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff977625306a81a1571fcb59161ae6b0b74a3724e%2F0_0_4608_3303%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Backyard%20battery%20recycling%20is%20biggest%20chemical%20polluter%20for%20poorer%20nations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbackyard-battery-recycling-is-biggest-chemical-polluter-for-poorer-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Backyard%20battery%20recycling%20is%20biggest%20chemical%20polluter%20for%20poorer%20nations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fbackyard-battery-recycling-is-biggest-chemical-polluter-for-poorer-nations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff977625306a81a1571fcb59161ae6b0b74a3724e%2F0_0_4608_3303%2F4608.jpg>
 A miner and his daughter in Pagangbila, Sulawesi, Indonesia. Small-scale 
artisanal gold mining releases more mercury into the environment than any other 
sector worldwide. Photograph: Larry C. Price/Pure Earth 
Another industry highlighted in the new report is small-scale artisanal gold 
mining, where individuals digs for gold and use highly toxic mercury to collect 
the precious metal. This activity produces 20% of the world’s gold production 
but releases more mercury into the environment than any other sector worldwide. 
It is estimated that artisanal gold mining occurs in up to 55 countries and 
employs between 10-15 million miners.

The report estimated that up to 1.6m “disability adjusted life years” (Dalys) 
are lost each year as a result of artisanal gold mining. A Daly is a year of 
healthy living lost by a person as a result of harm to their health. Informal 
lead-acid battery recycling is responsible for up to 4.8m lost Dalys each year, 
the report said.
 