
The British banking industry was scrambling to restore consumer confidence and 
tighten security yesterday, after a ring of Indian call centre workers was 
exposed for selling private information from UK bank accounts.

The Sun newspaper reported that Kharan Bharee, described as a Delhi-based 
computer expert, was buying the pin and credit card numbers, private addresses 
and passport details of British account holders from call centre employees, 
then selling them to would-be identity thieves.

The paper's undercover reporter claimed to have purchased confidential account 
details of 1,000 Britons for around Â£3 each.

In response, big banks and building societies, including Lloyds TSB, HSBC and 
Barclays, were yesterday working with City of London police to address apparent 
security breaches, while reassuring customers that the outsourcing of call 
centres to India was, by and large, a safe practice.

"We have strict procedures in those call centres whereby staff are required to 
put all belongings in a locker and can't take bags or mobile phones to work 
stations," said a Lloyds TSB spokesperson.

"They should not have access to information like passport details and bank 
passwords ... so we are investigating how this has happened. The first we heard 
about it was when we were contacted by City of London police. We are taking the 
allegations very seriously."

Lloyds TSB, like many other big banks, has sub-contracted its call centre 
operations to India, where cheap labour and favourable tax laws save the 
company millions each year. And while some banking officials reaffirmed their 
faith in the practice yesterday, City of London police warned that cases of 
identity theft from Indian call centres were not new phenomena.

"It was a practice we were aware of," said Orna Joseph, spokeswoman for City 
of London police. "But it's quite rare in the scheme of things ... and we have 
been attempting to contact Delhi police over this."

Yesterday, the deputy commissioner of New Delhi police's economic offences 
wing said he had yet to receive any information from the City of London 
authorities, and had not sought to detain Mr Bharee for questioning.

Meanwhile, Kiran Karnik, chief of India's leading software corporation, the 
National Association of Software and Service Companies (Nasscom), maintained 
India was a "trustworthy" destination for the outsourcing of call centres. Mr 
Karnik also told AFP that Nasscom would help authorities in pursuing call 
centre workers involved in illegal selling of customer information.

But despite those assurances, Steven Philippsohn, senior partner and head of 
fraud litigation at the London law firm Philippsohn Crawfords and Berwald, 
warned that companies risked exposing the confidential information by 
outsourcing call centres.

"The hazard with offshore operations is that data protection laws are often 
not in place and are difficult to enforce," he said.

In a curious twist, the Royal Bank of Scotland, apparently among banks to have 
had security breached by Mr Bharee, revealed it did not have an out-sourced 
offshore call centre. "We have no data in India," said Howard Moody, group 
director of communications.
 