
A vote to leave the EU could harm economic growth and have a serious impact on 
the pound and other UK assets, theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has said, as it 
took steps to prepare for June’s referendum.

Minutes to the Bank’s latest policy meeting showed its nine-strong monetary 
policy committee voted unanimously to leave interest rates at their historic 
low of 0.5%. The committee said uncertainty ahead of what was expected to be a 
close EU vote appeared to be weighing on investment decisions, and policymakers 
said economic growth could slow as a result in the second quarter of the year.

The minutes showed that as the 23 June vote nears, policymakers discussed the 
likely implications for monetary policy of a vote to leave the EU.

“Such a vote might result in an extended period of uncertainty about the 
economic outlook, including about the prospects for export growth. This 
uncertainty would be likely to push down on demand in the short term,” the 
minutes said.

“A vote to leave could have significant implications for asset prices, in 
particular the exchange rate. The MPC would have to make careful judgements 
about the next effects of these potential influences on demand, supply and 
inflation. Ultimately, monetary policy would be set in order to meet the 
inflation target, while also ensuring that inflation expectations remained 
anchored.”

A Reuters poll this week found that 17 of 26 economists thought a vote for 
Brexit could prompt the Bank to cut interest rates for the first time since the 
financial crisis.

The minutes continued: “Whatever the outcome of the referendum, the MPC would 
use its tools to achieve its inflation remit.”

The Bank highlighted signs that increased uncertainty might already be 
beginning to weigh on demand, among them reports of deferred investment 
decisions, delayed private equity deals and company flotations, and reports 
from lenders that demand for finance from large companies had dipped.

“Taken together, these developments highlighted the risk that the economy 
could slow somewhat in the second quarter,” the minutes said.

They also said it would be harder to read data over the coming months.

“Referendum effects are likely to make macroeconomic and financial market 
indicators harder to interpret over the next few months, and the committee is 
likely to react more cautiously to data news over this period than would 
normally be the case,” they said.

The Bank’s policymakers reiterated their previous message that when interest 
rates do start to rise they will do so “more gradually and to a lower level 
than in recent cycles”.

Surveys and official figures have pointed to a slowdown in the UK economy in 
recent months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/08/weak-industry-data-set-to-weigh-on-uk-economy-steel-production>
, with some companies saying they aredelaying hiring and investment decisions 
until after the EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/04/uk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list>
.


The minutes follow a warning from the International Monetary Fund this week 
thata British vote to leave the EU risked doing damage to the whole region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/12/imf-says-britain-leaving-the-eu-is-a-significant-risk>
, spilling over into an already fragile global economy.

In its latest World Economic Outlook 
<http://www.imf.org/external/ns/cs.aspx?id=29> the IMF downgraded its growth 
forecast for the UK to 1.9% for 2016, compared with a forecast for 2.2% made in 
January.
 