
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> is due to provide 
a snapshot of the strength of Britain’s biggest lenders after assessing their 
resilience to a dramatic economic downturn and sharp fall in house prices.

Threadneedle Street will announce the outcome of its  annual health check of 
the six biggest banks 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Documents/stresstesting/2016/keyelements.pdf>
 – and one building society, Nationwide – on Wednesday, alongside its 
assessment of the major risks to the financial system in the wake of the Brexit 
result.

The Bank will also scrutinise the effectiveness of measures aimed at limiting 
the risks in the housing market. It has previously said it is concerned about 
the ability of some households to keep paying their debts if unemployment rises 
and wage growth stalls.

RBS takes biggest knock of UK banks in EU-wide financial stress test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rbs-and-barclays-struggle-in-eu-wide-banking-stress-test>
The results will be the focus for investors. The banks being tested are 
Barclays, HSBC, LloydsBanking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> 
Group, Royal Bank of Scotland, the UK arm of Spanish bank Santander and 
Standard Chartered, which is based in London but has most of its activities in 
emerging markets.


The tests were introduced in the wake of the 2008 banking crisis and are based 
on hypothetical scenarios devised by the Bank. “In the Bank’s 2016 stress 
scenario vulnerabilities across financial markets and the global and UK 
economies crystallise,” the Bank said.

The test also incorporates projections for fines and other costs associated 
with misconduct, although the Bank said: “There remains a very high degree of 
uncertainty around any approach to quantifying misconduct cost risks facing UK 
banks.”

The Bank has set out an imaginary five-year period in which there is a 
“synchronised global downturn” under which the global economy contracts by 1.9% 
– as it did during the financial crisis. It has also incorporated domestic 
factors: a 31% fall in house prices, 42% reduction in commercial property 
prices with the economy contracting by 4.3% and unemployment rising by 4.5 
percentage points. The dollar rises against emerging market currencies and the 
oil price troughs at $20 per barrel.

When the pan-European banking regulator, the European Banking Authority, 
published the results of its assessment on major lenders earlier this year,RBS 
took the biggest hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rbs-and-barclays-struggle-in-eu-wide-banking-stress-test>
 to its financial strength of any UK bank subjected to the health checks.

It is the third annual test by the Bank of England. In the first, run in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/16/bank-stress-tests-co-op-lloyds-rbs>
, the Bank had focused on risk to UK householdswhile in 2015 on global risks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/01/bank-stress-tests-rbs-and-standard-chartered-weakest-in-crash-scenario>
, such as a contraction in China and parts of the eurozone.

Ireland is 'ideal home' for European banking regulator after Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/ireland-ideal-home-european-banking-regulator-brexit-dublin>
A year ago, when the results of the 2015 tests were published 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/01/bank-stress-tests-rbs-and-standard-chartered-weakest-in-crash-scenario>
, Bank of England governorMark Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> had said the biggest lenders 
were strong enough to withstand the pressures in the global economy.

The stress test results will be published at the same time that Carney sets 
out the issues monitored by the Bank’sfinancial policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-policy-committee> committee, 
originally set up by the coalition government to try to avoid a rerun of the 
2008 crisis.

The FPC has also said it will use its half-yearly financial stability report 
(FSR) to set out its review of the policy measures announced in June 2014 “to 
insure against the risk of a marked loosening in underwriting standards and a 
significant rise in the number of vulnerable households”.

At the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/26/bank-of-england-limit-large-loans-housebuyers-mortgage-lenders>
, the Bank set out measures to restrict lenders’ ability to lend more than 15% 
of their mortgages to customers needing to borrowing four and half times their 
income. It also toughened the test imposed on customers through the mortgage 
market review, which tests customers’ ability to repay their loans.
 