
Japan’s central bank has made a shock decision to adopt negative interest rates
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/interest-rates>, in an attempt to 
protect the flagging economy from market volatility and fears over theglobal 
economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/global-economy>.

In a 5-4 vote, the bank’s board imposed a 0.1% fee on deposits left with the 
Bank of Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bank-of-japan> (BoJ) – in 
effect a negative interest rate.

The move, which follows the similarly aggressive precedent set by the European 
Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/negative-interest-rates-european-central-bank>
 in June 2014, is designed to encourage commercial banks to use excess reserves 
they keep with the central bank to lend to businesses.

The surprise decision came just days after the bank’s governor, Haruhiko 
Kuroda, suggested he had dismissed any drastic easing measures to boost 
business confidence.

On Friday, the bank said it had not ruled out a further cut. “The BoJ will cut 
the interest rate further into negative territory if judged as necessary,” it 
said in a statement.

It said the move was intended to lessen the risk to Japanese business 
confidence from turbulence in the global economy, a week after data showed the 
Chinese economy hadgrown at its slowest pace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/china-economy-grows-at-slowest-pace-in-25-years-latest-gdp-figures-show>
 for a quarter of a century in 2015.

Some BoJ board members are reported to have voiced concern that slumping Tokyo 
stocks could threaten attempts to get firms to boost capital expenditure.

The shift to negative interest rates – which in effect “taxes” financial 
institutions for parking excess reserves with the BoJ – is seen as an attempt 
to dragJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> out of its deflationary 
mindset.

Policymakers have been trying to achieve that through qualitative and 
quantitative easing, under which the BoJ expands its monetary base through the 
aggressive purchase of Japanese government bonds and risky assets.

But with so few assets let to buy, that policy appears to have run its course, 
according to some analysts. “I think this is a regime change and the BoJ’s main 
policy tool is now negative interest rates,” said Daiju Aoki, an economist at 
UBS Securities in Tokyo. “This shows that the ability to buy more Japanese 
government bonds is limited.”

The decision took some analysts by surprise. “Kuroda had been saying that he 
didn’t think something like this would help so it is a bit surprising and it’s 
clear the market has been surprised by it,” said Nicholas Smith, a strategist 
at CLSA based in Tokyo.

“The banking sector is getting smoked right now, though everything else seems 
to be doing just fine. This has obviously had a big effect oninflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/inflation> and on inflation expectations.”

Markets had been divided on whether the central bank would opt for more 
stimulus as slumping oil costs and soft consumer spending have ground inflation 
to a halt in the world’s third biggest economy.

Earlier on Friday, official data showed Japan’s inflation rate came in at 0.5% 
in 2015, way below the BoJ’s 2.0% target, as the government struggles to 
convince cautious firms to usher in big wage hikes to stir spending and drive 
up prices.

“The 2% target is now totally out of reach,” said Taro Saito, economist at NLI 
Research Institute.

The bank extended the deadline for achieving its 2% inflation target to the 
first half of fiscal 2017 from its previous estimate of the second half of 
fiscal 2016.

Other data published on Friday pointed to a weak economy with spending by 
households in December falling 4.4% from a year ago and monthly industrial 
production contracting 1.4%.

The BoJ cut its core consumer inflation forecast for the coming fiscal year 
beginning in April to 0.8% from 1.4% projected three months ago.

The authorities will be hoping negative interest rates encourage commercial 
banks to lend more to promote investment and growth.

The rate cut had an immediate knock-on effect, sending shares on the Nikkei 
average up by more than 500 points early on Friday afternoon. However, shares 
soon plunged back down again as traders digested the broader implications of 
the move, which forced down the value of the yen and which could spark a 
currency war.

“The fact markets pared back this bounce soon after the announcement may in 
some respects reflect growing market concern that central banks are delving 
into a tit-for-tat currency devaluation war,” said Angus Nicholson at the 
online trading firm IG in Melbourne.

“And the grand macro-economic elephant in the room is what happens if China is 
forced into a major one-off devaluation in retaliation. Markets are unlikely to 
react well to a big yuan devaluation, and the further the ECB and the BoJ force 
their currencies down the more they push China to act.”

The decision came a day after the prime minister, Shinzo Abe, lost one of the 
key architects of his inflation-oriented economic policy, known as “Abenomics”. 
Akira Amari wasforced to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/28/japans-economy-minister-akira-amari-resigns-bribery-allegations>
 as economy minister on Thursday following allegations that he and his aides 
received bribes from a construction company. Amari has denied any wrongdoing.

Jesper Koll, chief executive officer at WisdomTree Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, applauded the BoJ’s decision. “I’m 
very happy with governor Kuroda’s leadership today – adopting negative rates is 
exactly what was needed to re-assert the relentless, pro-active and pro-growth 
determination that underlies Abenomics,” he said.

“The fact that Kuroda has gone out on a limb – with a 5-4 vote – reasserts 
that this is his BoJ, not the technocratic non-risk taking BoJ of the past. As 
we keep insisting, this is not a business-as-usual leadership team.
 