
President Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> 
designated two national monuments at sites in Utah and Nevada that have become 
key flashpoints over use of public land in the west, marking the 
administration’s latest move to protect environmentally sensitive areas in its 
final weeks.

The Bears Ears national monument in Utah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/utah> will cover 1.35m acres in the Four 
Corners region, the White House said. In a victory for Native American tribes 
and conservationists, the designation protects land that is considered sacred 
and is home to an estimated 100,000 archaeological sites, including ancient 
cliff dwellings.

It’s a blow for state Republican leaders and many rural residents who fear it 
will add another layer of unnecessary federal control and close the area to 
energy development and recreation, a common refrain in the battle over use of 
the American west’s vast open spaces.

In Nevada, a 300,000-acre Gold Butte national monument outside Las Vegas would 
protect a scenic and ecologically fragile area near where rancherCliven Bundy 
led an armed standoff against government agents in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/11/cliven-bundy-arrested-charges-oregon-milita-standoff>
. It includes rock art, artifacts, rare fossils and recently discovered tracks.

Climate change will mean the end of national parks as we know them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/22/climate-change-national-parks-threat>
The White House and conservationists said both sites were at risk of looting 
and vandalism.

“Today’s actions will help protect this cultural legacy and will ensure that 
future generations are able to enjoy and appreciate these scenic and historic 
landscapes,” Obama said in a statement.

His administration has rushed to safeguard vulnerable areas ahead of 
President-elect Donald Trump’s inauguration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/24/obama-administration-conservation-public-land-trump>
. It has blocked new mining claims outside Yellowstone national park and new 
oil drilling in the Arctic Ocean.

Obama’s creation and expansion of monuments covers more acreage than any other 
president.

But Trump’s upcoming presidency has tempered the excitement for tribal leaders 
and conservationists, with some worrying he could try to reverse or reduce some 
of Obama’s expansive land protections.

Congressman Rob Bishop of Utah, who opposes the Bears Ears monument, has 
suggested presidents have the power to undo monuments, though it has not been 
done before.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbarack-obama-national-monuments-utah-nevada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faad072459d94de011483a3755164e247922461c2%2F0_45_2900_1740%2F2900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%20designates%20two%20national%20monuments%20in%20west%20despite%20opposition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbarack-obama-national-monuments-utah-nevada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%20designates%20two%20national%20monuments%20in%20west%20despite%20opposition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbarack-obama-national-monuments-utah-nevada%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faad072459d94de011483a3755164e247922461c2%2F0_45_2900_1740%2F2900.jpg>
 Bears Ears national monument in Utah. Photograph: Francisco Kjolseth/AP 
A coalition of tribes pushed for the creation of Utah’s eighth national 
monument, though they asked Obama to make it about 500,000 acres larger than 
the monument he named on Wednesday.

Tribal members visit the Bears Ears area to perform ceremonies, collect herbs 
and wood for medicinal and spiritual purposes, and perform healing rituals.

The Navajo Nation president, Russell Begaye, called it an exciting day for his 
tribe and people of all cultures.

“We have always looked to Bears Ears as a place of refuge, as a place where we 
can gather herbs and medicinal plants, and a place of prayer and sacredness,” 
Begaye said. “The rocks, the winds, the land they are living, breathing things 
that deserve timely and lasting protection.”

The Navajo Nation is one of five tribes that will get an elected official on a 
first-of-its-kind tribal commission for the Bears Ears monument. The panel will 
provide federal land managers with tribal expertise and historical knowledge 
about the area, federal officials said.

Tucked between existing national parks and the Navajo reservation, the 
proposed monument features stunning vistas at every turn, with a mix of cliffs, 
plateaus, towering rock formations, rivers and canyons across wide expanses 
covered by sagebrush and juniper trees.

Opponents agree the area is a natural treasure worth preserving but said the 
federal designation would create restrictions on oil and gas development as 
well residents’ ability to camp, bike, hike and gather wood.

No new mining and oil and gas development will be allowed within the monument 
boundaries, said Christy Goldfuss, managing director of the White House Council 
on Environmental Quality.

Members of Utah’s all-GOP congressional delegation had backed a plan to 
protect about 1.4m acres at Bears Ears, while opening up other areas of the 
state for development.

To many residents in the small, predominantly Mormon town of Blanding that 
sits near the new monument, the proposal is a thinly veiled, repackaged push 
from environmental groups who recruited tribes after previous attempts at the 
designation fizzled out.

In Nevada <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nevada>, retiring Democratic 
senator Harry Reid has pushed for protections at Gold Butte, a remote area 
north-east of Lake Mead, but GOP members of the state’s congressional 
delegation have been vocal opponents.

Bundy is one rancher who does not recognize federal jurisdiction in the area. 
He was accused of illegally allowing his cows to roam there after failing to 
pay more than $1.1m in fees and penalties.

He has pleaded not guilty to charges in the 2014 standoff with US agents 
trying to round up his cattle.
 