
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> is refusing to settle 
with the US Department of Justice over allegations it deliberately sold 
mortgage bonds to investors that it knew contained “craptacular loans”.

The DoJ’s legal filing 
<https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/united-states-sues-barclays-bank-recover-civil-penalties-fraud-sale-residential-mortgage>
 outlines an array of colourful descriptions of the types of mortgages that it 
alleges were used by Barclays to package up in bonds – known as residential 
mortgage bond securities – which could be sold on to investors.

It accuses Barclays of selling investors RMBS “backed by loans it knew were 
made to borrowers who were not creditworthy and which were supported by house 
appraisals it knew were inflated”.

Barclays' defiance of US fines has merit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/23/barclays-defiance-of-us-fines-has-merit>
The DoJ said Barclays was not lending to customers itself but using loans from 
mortgage lenders Fremont, New Century, WMC, Countrywide, and IndyMac as the 
basis of the bonds it was selling.

To support its case the DoJ published conversations between bankers which it 
claimed proved they knew they were selling poor investments. They included:

• One Barclays banker in charge of reviewing the deals observed that one loan 
pool was “about as bad as it can be”.

• On another occasion, the same banker said this “scares the shit out of me”. 
He also remarked about a package of loans from Wells Fargo that “we have to eat 
their shit loans”.

• A Barclays salesperson described “the deluge of Fremont garbage being put 
out there”, the DoJ said.


Barclays, becoming the first major lender to fail to reach a settlement with 
the DoJ, said itrejected the claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/22/us-justice-department-accuses-barclays-over-mortgage-misselling>
 made in the complaint. “Barclays considers that the claims made in the 
complaint are disconnected from the facts. We have an obligation to our 
shareholders, customers, clients, and employees to defend ourselves against 
unreasonable allegations and demands. Barclays will vigorously defend the 
complaint and seek its dismissal at the earliest opportunity,” the bank said.

The filings do not contain any clues about the size of the settlement that the 
DoJ was hoping to reach with Barclays, although the bank is thought to have 
been prepared to pay up to $2bn (£1.6bn). There are reports the DoJ wanted 
double that amount.

The DoJ said one of the companies conducting analysis for the bank, Valuation 
Stream, referred to “craptacular loans” that sellers such as New Century were 
originating to keep up loan production as the application volume began to 
decline.


The language used by bankers has been exposed in the past, notably in 2012 
when the bank was the first major lender to befined for rigging Libor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/27/barclays-chief-bob-diamond-bonus-fine>
. Then, the City regulator published email exchanges in which Barclays staff 
were offered bottles of Bollinger champagne as payment for favours, or their 
names printed in “golden letters”. Other exchanges involved emails in which 
traders remarked “always happy to help,” “for you, anything,” or “done … for 
you big boy,” after submitting rates that were incorrect.
 