
Before I moved to Paris, I lived in Amsterdam for almost 20 years. It’s small, 
quiet and clean – almost everything that opposes good photography, in my 
opinion. I always ended up shooting in thered-light district 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/jan/15/amsterdam-sex-workers-unlikely-victims-gentrification-red-light-district>
, hoping for something crazy and unexpected to happen. I started to feel like a 
goldfish, circling round and round, bored.

I was intrigued by the prostitution in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> – especially having come from 
Amsterdam, where it is organised and sex workers are protected. Around the 
corner from my new place, on a boulevard in the 18th arrondissement, there are 
groups of eastern European women selling their services. On my way to 
photograph there one night, I passed by this guy slumped in a chair in the 
street. I recognised him – I had seen him peeing against a tree.

Street view: London as seen by homeless photographers – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/oct/10/cafe-art-mylondon-homeless-calendar-2017>
At first, I kept walking, feeling sorry for him. I’m never sure if I am 
actually helping homeless people or just taking advantage of someone’s misery 
when I take such a picture. But I walked back. His posture, the objects around 
him, the light – it all seemed like a film set. Though an old man, there was 
something childlike and innocent about the way he was sleeping, so completely 
vulnerable.

I always use available light. Here, I was lucky to have a streetlight 
reflecting beautifully on to the metal blinds. I took the first picture from 
relatively far away, getting closer with every shot, until I was near his head. 
Then I took two steps back, realising I had to have the whole chair in.

Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> has this lovey-dovey side that 
tourists are drawn to: the impressive architecture, the croissants, red wine 
and cheese. But at night, it’s tougher and gloomier, a pretty sinister place. I 
found the poverty shocking: I saw a family with three children sleeping rough 
on a double mattress, a teenager breastfeeding her baby on some shabby corner 
and an old man sleeping in a phone booth. And Parisians would just walk past, 
not blinking an eye, as if it was the most normal thing in the world to see a 
guy with no legs pushing himself about on a little board with wheels, begging. 
I wanted to give all of them money, but hardly had any myself. The problem 
seemed so omnipresent that I kind of lost hope.

I love raw, grainy, blurry images – when photography isn’t used to explain a 
situation, but to capture the human experience instead. I observe from a 
distance, without intervening, without breaking the moment or momentum. I don’t 
walk up to people and ask if I can take their picture – that would ruin 
everything, although sometimes you do meet someone and it’s beautiful. 
Occasionally, I force myself in front of people. I know it’s ugly and awkward, 
but I steal a picture if I really need to have it – and if I know I can 
physically defend myself. That’s the reason I swim four times a week. I’ve got 
a healthy sense of ethics, but sometimes you have to be able to let go.

Bart Koetsier <http://bartkoetsier.com>’s CV
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fbart-koetsiers-best-photograph-a-sleeping-man-slumped-in-a-chair-on-a-paris-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb65106fb743594018e68fd37269820a67c975356%2F250_21_2300_1380%2F2300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bart%20Koetsier%E2%80%99s%20best%20photograph%3A%20a%20sleeping%20man%20slumped%20in%20a%20chair%20on%20a%20Paris%20street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fbart-koetsiers-best-photograph-a-sleeping-man-slumped-in-a-chair-on-a-paris-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bart%20Koetsier%E2%80%99s%20best%20photograph%3A%20a%20sleeping%20man%20slumped%20in%20a%20chair%20on%20a%20Paris%20street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fbart-koetsiers-best-photograph-a-sleeping-man-slumped-in-a-chair-on-a-paris-street%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb65106fb743594018e68fd37269820a67c975356%2F250_21_2300_1380%2F2300.jpg>
 Bart Koetsier. Photograph: Koos Breukel 
Born: Doorwerth, the Netherlands, 1975

Education: Forestry (unfinished), biology (unfinished), physiotherapy 
(unfinished), Photo Academy Amsterdam (graduated)

Influences: “Anders Petersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jan/15/anders-petersens-best-photograph-cafe-lehmitz>
,Michael Ackerman <http://www.agencevu.com/photographers/photographer.php?id=1>,
Trent Parke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/mar/12/excavating-histories-trent-parkes-black-rose-art-gallery-south-australia-in-pictures>
,Jacob Aue Sobol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/nov/04/veins-anders-petersen-aue-sobol-photographs>
 – photographers who have a subjective vision.”

High point: “When a picture resembles a Francis Bacon painting.”

Low point: “Walking night after night with no results.”

Top tip: “Read Down and Out in Paris and London by George Orwell.”
 