
An important part of Britain's economic future is being determined by a 
committee sitting in Basel,Switzerland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland>. That committee is not 
responsible to the UK government, is not part of the European Union, indeed is 
answerable only to an informal grouping of leading central bankers known as the 
Group of 10 (though it has 13 members).

The Basel Committee, also known as the Committee on Banking Supervision, is 
rewriting the rules of banking. Its decisions will affect the conduct of 
monetary policy, the stability of financial institutions throughout the world, 
and your mortgage.

The way things are going at the moment, it's making some very big mistakes. 

The Basel Committee was set up at the end of 1974, as central banks and 
financial regulators tried to get a grip on newly liberalised international 
financial markets. The collapse of the old Bretton Woods system and the need to 
hedge the new risks associated with fluctuating exchange rates, had led to the 
wholesale dismantling of financial controls. Exchange controls were abolished. 
Domestic restrictions on cross-market access for financial institutions were 
scrapped. Quantitative controls on the growth of credit were eliminated. 
Today's global market in monetary instruments was created. But regulators were 
trapped in increasingly irrelevant national boundaries.

A framework of international regulation was soon needed. When the Bankhaus 
Herstatt collapsed in 1974, its unfunded dollar liabilities seriously 
threatened the American banking system, an eventuality that neither German nor 
United States regulators were equipped to tackle. So the Basel Committee was 
established to coordinate the work of national regulators trying to deal with 
international problems. Later the Committee moved on from coordination to rule 
making, notably promoting the capital adequacy rules for banks introduced in 
1988. More recently it has produced a detailed catalogue of regulatory 
principles designed to guide banking regulators around the world.

Today, the Basel Committee is creating a new framework for international 
financial regulation known as Basel II. This is an international banking accord 
that will replace the capital rules of 1988, and is intended to mitigate the 
risks haunting modern financial markets. The thinking behind Basel II embodies 
the central principles to be deployed in the future regulation of all financial 
institutions, not just banks. And these principles will not just guide what 
national regulators do. They will also be adopted by the IMF.

The IMF has been quietly reinventing itself as a financial regulator. Spurred 
into action by its painful failure to manage (or even understand) the Asian 
financial crises of 1997, it has set up a Financial Sector Assessment Program. 
This program conducts detailed appraisals of national financial institutions 
(public and private). The UK is being assessed at the moment.

The principles underpinning Basel II are a reaction to the failings of the 
1988 capital adequacy rules that are now frequently circumvented by clever 
financial innovators. Future capital requirements are to be far more flexible, 
and more closely aligned to free market forces.

Basel II is built on three pillars: Pillar One - the determination of 
regulatory capital, heavily influenced by the use of banks' internal risk 
weighting models and the views of ratings agencies; Pillar Two - banking 
supervision; and PillarThree - market discipline enforced by greater disclosure 
of banks' financial status and their internal risk management procedures.

In normal times the Pillar One and Pillar Three proposals may promote 
stability. But when a crisis hits, they will make things worse by strengthening 
the very forces they are supposed to counteract.

First, firms' internal risk management systems are, by definition, market 
sensitive. The models may differ in detail, but they are constructed on similar 
analytical principles, estimated on similar historical data, and sensitive to 
the same market information.

Good risk managers hold a portfolio of assets that are not volatile and the 
prices of which are not highly correlated - not correlated in normal times that 
is. But in a crisis the volatility of a given asset may rise sharply. The 
models will tell all firms to sell. As all try to sell, liquidity dries up. As 
liquidity dries up, volatility spreads from one asset to another. Previously 
uncorrelated assets are now correlated in the general sell-off, pumped up by 
the model driven behaviour of other institutions caught in the contagion. So 
whilst in normal times models may encompass a wide range of behaviour, in 
extreme circumstances they will encourage firms to act as a herd, charging 
toward the cliff edge together.

Second, the emphasis on disclosure reduces the diversity of information that 
has in the past created diversity of action. Today, information is ever more 
readily available, and disclosure of price sensitive information is legally 
required. Insider dealing on private information is, rightly, characterised as 
market abuse. But the attainment of equal information is bought at a cost - 
increased likelihood of herd behaviour as all react in the same way to the same 
news.

Third, it's no good relying on Pillar Two (enhanced supervision) to reduce 
herding. An essentially subjective, personal interaction between bureaucrat and 
risk-taker will be neither consistent nor effective, particularly on an 
international scale.

So, in extremis, when regulation really matters, it will work the wrong way, 
reinforcing destabilising behaviour. All this is not confined to banking. 
Regulators are responding to seamless financial markets by requiring common 
rules. Sir Howard Davies of the Financial Services Authority has argued that in 
banking and insurance 'where the risks are the same, the capital treatment 
should, in principle, be the same'.

The core idea of Basel II is that market disciplines, whether direct or 
mediated through banks' own risk-modelling, should be placed at the heart of 
financial regulation. But the reason regulators exist is that markets don't 
always work efficiently to achieve society's goals. Just as the environmental 
watchdog is there because the market encourages polluting behaviour (imposing 
costs on society as a whole rather than the polluter), so the financial 
regulator is there because financial risk takers expose society to far greater 
losses than they might suffer themselves.

The situation is made even worse by the IMF's plan to impose Basel II 
throughout the world. Handing financial regulation back to 'market discipline' 
will nullify the progress that has been made to create a system of 
international regulation.

Efficient regulation requires that the domain of the regulator should be the 
same as the domain of the market. There have been some important improvements 
in the past decade, notably Gordon Brown's success in persuading the G7 to set 
up the Financial Stability Forum. This brings together national regulators, 
central banks, treasury departments and international institutions to tackle 
international financial problems on a coordinated basis.

Nonetheless, the international regulatory structure remains limited, patchy, 
even incoherent. It has developed in response to crises rather than as a 
coherent reaction to the international transmission of financial risk. Basel II 
should provide the intellectual rigour that has been lacking. It fails to do so.

There is no new approach to the task of flexible rule-making in seamless 
financial markets. Instead, the proposed reforms hand the future back to just 
those markets that have a track record of instability. It's a cop-out. We will 
all pay the price.

Â· Lord Eatwell is Acting Director of the Cambridge Endowment for Research in 
Finance:www.cerf.cam.ac.uk <http://www.cerf.cam.ac.uk> 
William Keegan is on sabbatical
 