
This year’s latest wellbeing craze, hygge (pronounced hue-gah) is the Danish 
export that sits somewhere between popular philosophy (file next to 
mindfulness) and shrewd marketing ploy.


Although hygge has no direct translation into English, it’s widely used to 
describe a moment or feeling that is cosy and contented. Think of coming in 
from the brisk Danish winter to the candlelit interior of a traditional Scandi 
home: heavy rugs and thick knitwear, mulled wine by the fireplace, woollen 
slippers.

Hunting for hygge, a new ingredient in Denmark’s recipe for happiness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/hunting-for-hygge-a-new-ingredient-in-denmarks-recipe-for-happiness>
For its followers, the arrival of hygge to our always-on world is a much 
needed reminder to pause and savour small comforts. For its critics, it’s 
merely afashionable term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/22/hygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend>
 helping to shift seasonal products.

But perhaps it could help with a pressing problem in the UK. Hygge is about a 
feeling of wellbeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/11/hygge-the-danish-art-of-living-cosily-on-its-way-to-uk-bookshops>
 and enjoying life. With11.7 million working days  
<http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/dayslost.htm>lost to stress, depression or 
anxiety between 2015 and 2016, could businesses draw ideas from it to improve 
staff wellbeing? And, as a consequence, boost small business productivity?

Fans suggest it could ease anxiety. “Hygge is being able to let yourself 
actually enjoy life, like stopping and taking the time to watch a lovely 
sunset,” says Victoria Filtness, director ofGame PR <http://www.gamepr.co.uk/> 
in West Yorkshire. “I went to Copenhagen two years ago and I’d bought a city 
guide book, which mentioned hygge in passing.” Filtness fell in love with the 
concept, eventually setting up her own blog,This Hygge Life 
<http://www.thishyggelife.com/>. 

From adding plants and soothing orange light bulbs to your office, to 
regularly turning your phone off, there are simple suggestions on how to hygge 
your working life. “I think hygge is something that I have been doing 
subconsciously my entire adult life,” Filtness adds.

This is common, according to Jeppe Linnet 
<http://linnetresearch.dk/about-jeppe-linnet/>, a Danish anthropologist 
specialising in hygge. “Having spent some time among people in Britain and 
seeing how they resonate with the concept, I think it actually captures 
something that [British] people need a word for.”

But isn’t hygge in the workspace fairly contradictory? Isn’t it at odds with 
the idea of working hard, and working efficiently? “Work is not the first thing 
that you will associate with hygge, that’s for sure,” says Linnet. “However, I 
would say that all well-functioning workplaces have space for hygge.”

Nicky Rudd, managing director of content creation and events agency, Padua 
Communications <https://www.paduacommunications.com/>, which has offices in 
Hampshire and Surrey, agrees. “It may be a buzzword [in the UK] for now, but I 
try and make it so that everything I do has balance and is cozy and warm.”

Rudd believes that company culture can incorporate hygge and tries to bring 
the concept into her office. She says her approach includes allowing flexible 
hours and encouraging staff to enjoy the natural beauty surrounding the office 
on the edge of the New Forest. “We’ve built our work around what we want to get 
out of life, rather than being constrained by stressful, fixed-hours jobs.”

Yet, according to Linnet, hygge is much more than having time to relax. “Hygge 
as an experience has a big social component. Being with others is at the core 
of the concept. The term is more readily used when people talk about their 
experience of being with someone.”

Being considerate towards colleagues could be a simple way to bring hygge to 
the workplace. “You could say that it is about being forthcoming and friendly 
and accepting towards other people,” says Linnet. “It is the opposite of being 
judgmental, challenging, and condescending. It’s basically trying to create the 
sense in other people that they are allowed to be [who they are].”

The hygge conspiracy | Charlotte Higgins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/22/hygge-conspiracy-denmark-cosiness-trend>
To Linnet, having a laugh in the staffroom, the shared eye-roll between 
colleagues, the spontaneous scream at making a sale – all of these things can 
be hygge. “[It] also means building physical spaces that are a bit home-like, 
even in an office building, a corner where you can hide a bit ... and regain 
some courage and energy.”

In Denmark, a nation recently credited with being the happiest country, 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-35824033> these safe and home-like 
spaces are a common feature. “We have an indoor piazza where everyone eats 
together every lunchtime,” says Lasse Skole Hansen from digital travel agents,
Momondo <http://www.momondo.co.uk/>, headquartered in Copenhagen. “This is a 
very common idea in Danish offices and makes for a really hygge situation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fend-of-year-burnout-bring-hygge-work-productivity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe68aef2b0df383ffc20f3e6205cb2adfbcc1c2a1%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Battling%20end-of-year%20burnout%3F%20Bring%20some%20hygge%20to%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fend-of-year-burnout-bring-hygge-work-productivity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Battling%20end-of-year%20burnout%3F%20Bring%20some%20hygge%20to%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fend-of-year-burnout-bring-hygge-work-productivity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe68aef2b0df383ffc20f3e6205cb2adfbcc1c2a1%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The piazza where colleagues eat together at Momondo. 
Alongside office plants and art on the walls, the business has “acoustically 
secured” cocoons. They are used for work or social chat among colleagues and 
are designed to muffle sound, so you can sit in an open area and have a private 
conversation.

For asset management company, Crayon 
<https://www.crayon.com/en-gb/software-asset-management/>, based in 
Scandinavia, hygge has yielded tangible, and sizable, results. “We have been 
working with hygge for some time,” says Kristian Joos, Crayon’s Denmark country 
manager. “We have not only seen greater cross-pollination of ideas, but also 
our investment in workplace design and flexible working is having [a positive 
effect on staff retention and recruitment].”

With such potential benefits, some small businesses have been adopting the 
Danish philosophy in workplace design, even when budget and space is tight.

“We’ve gone to great lengths to make our offices very comfortable and 
accommodating,” says Dan Rogers, CEO of the London office ofPeakon 
<https://peakon.com/>, a Danish tech company that runs an employee engagement 
platform.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fend-of-year-burnout-bring-hygge-work-productivity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faeb4bd4bd81df67a5406ee5e0f921a9274fec184%2F0_0_864_1080%2F864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Battling%20end-of-year%20burnout%3F%20Bring%20some%20hygge%20to%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fend-of-year-burnout-bring-hygge-work-productivity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Battling%20end-of-year%20burnout%3F%20Bring%20some%20hygge%20to%20work&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fend-of-year-burnout-bring-hygge-work-productivity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faeb4bd4bd81df67a5406ee5e0f921a9274fec184%2F0_0_864_1080%2F864.jpg>
 Peakon’s office, with the team dog. Photograph: Peakon 
Peakon focused on maximising the space and facilities it had with minimal 
tweaks, such as using warm colours in the decor and spending wisely on good 
quality lighting, comfortable seating and a well-stocked kitchen. “Ultimately, 
your office has to be a place where employees want to spend time, and one of 
the easiest ways to do that is to make it homely.”

Linnet emphasises that hygge is subjective. “There has to be some diversity; 
there is a risk that hygge becomes too feminine, too motherly, too many pillows 
and rugs and candles. There should be space for some masculine energy, and for 
some challenge and some intensity as well.”

Rogers says: “A nice working environment has a huge impact on employee 
wellbeing, and on an employee’s desire to be in the office, which has a 
commensurate effect on productivity and performance.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 