
How much of the Netflix series The Crown has Alan Yentob seen, I wonder. When 
I interviewed him some years ago, my impression was that he doesn’t have much 
time for the watching of television: too many meetings to hold, too many people 
to meet. Either way, the BBC’s former creative director seems to be in a bit of 
a state about it. “That was going to come to the BBC,” he saidin an interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/13/alan-yentob-last-impresario-bbc>
, at once fluttering and defensive, which was published last week. “They wanted 
to go to the BBC and they knew the BBC couldn’t afford it all.” An idea to 
co-produce the drama had, he said, come to nought and so the glorious property 
went off to be anointed with oil elsewhere. “Netflix said, ‘We don’t need to 
share it. We will just do it.’ Now that is a world that is difficult.”

What Yentob meant – his “world” is not our world – was that it is difficult to 
compete financially with a company such asNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix>. Is this true? I suppose it is. 
Even ifThe Crown’s £100m budget has been exaggerated, there is no doubting the 
fact that its wallet is, for the time being, fat and wide open. Nevertheless, 
his comments read to me like so much buck-passing and not only because Peter 
Morgan, the writer ofThe Crown, has said only that the BBC “wavered” when he 
brought the idea to them (this, incidentally, is typical: weary writers and 
programme-makers everywhere will tell you that the BBC, paralysed by indecision 
and a certain left-over haughtiness, prefers a long and endless silence to the 
simple words “yes” and “no”).

What is perfectly obvious to the viewer seems somehow to have eluded Yentob 
and this is thatThe Crown’s lavish production design – £30,000 alone for a copy 
of the Queen’s wedding dress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/08/still-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle>
, a gown she paid for in 1947 with her clothing coupons – is the least of the 
reasons for its success.

Most of the series’ magnificence, and all of its considerable wit, is down to 
two things and two things alone. First, there is Morgan’s writing, which 
combines so brilliantly an exaggerated empathy for what I’m probably not 
allowed to call the royals’ plight with an uncanny ability to use half-truths 
(and even complete untruths) to achieve some (possibly dubious) higher 
veracity. Second, there are the performances, which are so dextrous as to be 
unnerving. Every time Claire Foy, aka HM the Queen, carefully places one hand 
over the wrist of the other, isn’t it as though some unseen person has opened a 
window behind you?

My hunch is that the BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> could very 
well have afforded these things – a great writer, some amazing actors – and 
simply done away with the 700 extras, the ever-shifting locations, the CGI 
required to enable the Duke of Edinburgh to face down a rogue elephant on his 
and Lilibet’s honeymoon. The thing would still have worked, and beautifully, 
too.The Crown is a historical soap opera, not Star Wars.

No one expects the BBC to compete with Netflix. What we’d really like is for 
the BBC to ape it

Yentob’s inference (“that is a world that is difficult”) was that Netflix is 
imperilling the BBC. This proposition, too, is distinctly lacking in 
perspective. Painful as it is to be kicked out of heaven – these days, Yentob 
is just (just!) another programme-maker, albeit one whose modish arts 
documentaries always get the green light – he mustn’t confuse his own plight 
with the BBC’s.

Netflix, of course, does not release its viewing figures; it doesn’t have to, 
given that it funds itself via a subscription model rather than with 
advertising. But when it comes to growing its subscriber base, it isn’t all 
plain sailing. In the second quarter of 2016, the numbers of new subscribers 
fell some way below expectations (just 1.7m net worldwide 
<http://variety.com/2016/digital/news/netflix-adds-far-fewer-subscribers-than-expected-in-q2-1201816499/>
). In the third, it recovered, adding 3.57m, a figure it said was driven by 
excitement around its original content.

The trouble is, excitement isn’t something you can just go out and buy. Variety
reported that Netflix believesNarcos, its drug cartel drama, and Stranger Things
, its 1980s supernatural thriller, drewmany of the new subscribers 
<https://media.netflix.com/en/press-releases/youre-still-hooked-and-netflix-knows-why>
. But it had nothing to say about Baz Luhrmann’sThe Get Down, a show about the 
origins of hip-hop that was reportedly as expensive asThe Crown to make, 
perhaps because it is thought to have been a flop. There are no official 
viewing figures forThe Crown. But at least one entertainment website 
<http://www.thewrap.com/the-crown-netflix-tv-ratings-debut/> reports that, in 
the US at least, the numbers have been underwhelming (its opening weekend drew 
fewer than 500,000 viewers). This doesn’t surprise me. LikeMad Men, critically 
acclaimed but never popular, it is too singular to be a hit.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJWtnJjn6ng0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJWtnJjn6ng0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJWtnJjn6ng0&media=>
Watching the exquisitely crafted episode – almost a two-hander – in which 
Graham Sutherland (Stephen Dillane) painted his infamously sallow portrait of 
Churchill (John Lithgow), I felt I was watching a play, one that might thrill 
audiences at the National Theatre, but would never in a thousand years make it 
to Broadway or even the West End. I pay £5.99 a month for Netflix (except when 
I don’t, because I’m one of those who opt in depending on what’s on) and this 
seemed like good value at that moment. Still, this doesn’t make me typical. 
Some of my best friends remain unconvinced thatThe Crown isn’t just Hello! 
magazine in a Norman Hartnell frock.

If it’s this beauty and singularity that Yentob envies, well, that’s great – 
and perhaps his colleagues in drama will pick up some future series ofThe Crown 
when Netflix tires of the numbers (it is only fully committed to one more).

My guess, though, is that this isn’t the crux of his complaint, that what he 
really envies are Netflix budgets. Fair enough, I guess. Isn’t the point, 
though, that no one expects the BBC tocompete with Netflix? What we’d really 
like is for the BBC to ape it, if only by showing a bit more courage and 
determination. It can afford to do this, not financially, but in the sense that 
it, too, does not need to play the ratings game (even if you wouldn’t know it 
sometimes). Faced with risk, it could say “yes” occasionally, and with 
conviction and enthusiasm; and failing that, it could say “no” and explain why 
and move on, swiftly.

It might also, now and then, deploy a little of the obvious pride Netflix has 
in the shows it makes. Why is it so nervous and weedy? If I were Yentob, I 
wouldn’t be telling a journalist a mournful little story aboutThe Crown and how 
it got away. I would be praising to the high heavens shows such asHappy Valley, 
The A-Wordand Fleabag; I would never stop going on about how covetous Netflix 
must be of the BBC’s talent, of all the things it can still do on such a 
relatively tiny budget.
 