
Almost 26,000 people sought advice about domestic abuse from the BBC over the 
phone and online in 2016, driven by a gripping storyline onThe Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> and the BBC1 documentary 
Behind Closed Doors.

Helen Titchener’s abuse by husband Rob in The Archers also covered issues 
including sexual abuse, emotional distress and self-harm, and culminated in her 
beingacquitted of attempted murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/11/the-archers-verdict-on-helen-titchener-lights-up-social-media>
.

It prompted 635 people to call the Action Line service, almost three times the 
largest number ofcalls for any single storyline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/29/eastenders-holby-city-most-calls-bbc-advice-action-line>
 on a programme between 2012 and 2015. In total, 24,400 people visited the 
service’s webpages on domestic abuse and more than 1,350 called for advice 
during the year.

A donation page inspired by the storyline to raise money for a rescue fund for 
women suffering domestic abuseraised more than £135,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/sep/08/my-donation-page-inspired-by-the-archers-has-raised-over-135000>
 over seven months.

Louiza Patikas, who plays Helen Titchener, said: “As part of my research into 
this storyline, I met victims of domestic violence and coercive control, and 
soon learned that abuse can happen to anyone. TheBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Action Line is so important, both for 
victims of abuse and for the people who support them, so they have somewhere to 
go for advice and help.”

The Action Line number, shown at the end of BBC programmes dealing with issues 
that may affect viewers’ lives, was set up in 1995; during 2016 there were more 
than 500 on-air trailers for the service.

In total, more than 24,000 people called the BBC Action Line over the year for 
advice on issues including domestic violence, cancer and dementia, and there 
were more than 264,000 visits to its website. The total number of calls was 
down slightly on last year, but the number of web visits almost doubled.

The BBC’s dementia season led to a larger number of calls than The Archers, 
with almost 700 people getting in touch by phone and 8,784 visits to a 
dedicated webpage.

More than 3,900 people called about emotional distress prompted by programmes 
such as Panorama and EastEnders, and more than 1,400 people called about sexual 
abuse.

Keith Jones from the BBC’s Audience Services division said: “The BBC is 
committed to covering challenging topics and bringing them to the attention of 
our audiences, but it’s also vital that we provide the off-air information to 
help them, in partnership with the many organisations around the UK that can 
provide support and are willing to do so.”
 