
Jeremy Bentham 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/548af165e4b064b2bfc85901/1289119>’s 
axiom, “It is the greatest happiness of the greatest number that is the measure 
of right and wrong”, was invoked in this first of two BBC National Orchestra of 
Wales Great Brits concerts, featuring composers who ostensibly have rebelled 
against tradition.David Sawer 
<http://www.rayfieldallied.com/artists/david-sawer/>’s The Greatest Happiness 
Principle specifically references Bentham and his brother Samuel’sPanopticon 
<https://www.ucl.ac.uk/Bentham-Project/who/panopticon>, and the work’s bright 
and tight flow, with its darker, mischievous final sting of organised 
orchestral mayhem, seemed as fresh as when BBCNOW premiered it two decades ago.

Conductor Clark Rundell <http://www.hazardchase.co.uk/artists/clark-rundell/> 
brought an expansive richness to the string processionals ofHoward Skempton 
<http://www.skempton.info/4681.html>’s Lento, conceived as a companion to 
Wagner’s Prelude to Parsifal. Ironic then that the strings, albeit now fewer, 
were rather overindulged inMichael Nyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/michael-nyman>’s Concerto for Harpsichord 
and Strings. SoloistMahan Esfahani <http://www.mahanesfahani.com/>’s ebullient 
ostinati will doubtless emerge more clearly in the future broadcast; here it 
was the expressiveness he brought to the poignant tango episode which stood out.


The rhythms of Charlie Barber <http://www.charliebarber.co.uk/>’s Shut Up and 
Dance found the vibraphone and marimba players grooving through their solo 
lines; in turn they served to underline the gently waltzing lullaby aura of 
Jesus’ Blood Never Failed Me Yet byGavin Bryars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gavin-bryars>. The quality of the old man’s 
recorded voice never fails to be haunting, the more so as it faded out against 
the high divisi violins suggesting Lohengrin and the Holy Grail, linking us 
back to the Skempton. All the composers, bar Nyman, were present, adding to the 
feelgood factor.


 * Great Brits 2 is at Hoddinott Hall, Cardiff, on 3 February 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/epzbp6>.


 