
As a small business owner, you must look after your profits and your staff – 
so how do you juggle the two?

Managers (including those who run or work within a small business) put in an 
extra 29 days of work per year and have reported rising levels of stress, 
according to the Chartered Management Institute’s 2016 Quality of Working Life
study 
<http://www.managers.org.uk/~/media/Files/Quality%20of%20working%20life/Quality%20of%20Working%20Life%20-%20full%20report%20-%20January%202016.pdf>
.

How can they relieve some of the pressure? What’s the secret to striking a 
balance between running an efficient business and supporting staff? We tackled 
these questions and more during ourlive Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/live/2016/dec/06/how-to-be-a-good-boss-live-chat>
 on how to be a good boss.


Live chat: how to be a good boss – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/live/2016/dec/06/how-to-be-a-good-boss-live-chat>
The first question came from reader Kathy B, who wanted to know the most 
important factor in an employee engagement programme. “What would you start 
with?” she asked.


John Yates, group director at ILM <https://www.i-l-m.com/>, said employee 
engagement programmes should address the issues that are most important to 
staff. He said the best way to gauge these issues was to survey your team, 
making sure that the survey includes the right questions and that management 
follows up on the results.


Natalie Weaving, director at digital marketing agency The Typeface Group 
<http://thetypefacegroup.co.uk/>, said that in order to make sure her staff are 
engaged she likes to know what motivates them – from money to career 
development to who they work with. “I recommend identifying this early doors 
(even add it to the recruitment process and review during appraisals),” she 
said.

Jonny Gifford, research adviser for organisational behaviour at the CIPD 
<https://www.cipd.co.uk/>, added that before any employee engagement strategy 
is implemented, a business needs to define what engagement means for them. 
“Typically it is about focusing on mutual gains employment, the good of the 
employee and the organisation in tandem,” he said.

The next question came in from reader Michelle Godfrey. She asked how to 
manage employees’ expectations about wage increases. She added: “We are a 
small, private company and can’t set the pay scales that some are used to from 
previous positions, as we can’t predict the future. It seems to raise a lot of 
questions about when or how much a pay rise would be.”

Weaving suggested that performance-related pay or a commission scheme can help 
staff to increase their own pay, but only as they help the business perform 
better.

Hire the intellect and mentality. Worry about the skills and experience less. 
Few have the confidence to do this
Stephen Archer 
She added that pay rises can be small. “What would be the true effect of a 1% 
increase on wages year-on-year to you as a business versus recruiting a new 
member of staff?” she asked. She pointed out that the cost of recruiting 
someone new can be hefty.


If a business can’t afford to raise wages or if staff aren’t money-driven, 
what’s the best way to motivate them? Yates emphasised the impact of leadership 
on staff motivation. He said: “Soft skills [communication, collaboration, 
problem-solving] are vital in leaders, who need to recognise when staff are 
getting stressed out, and provide them with the room to relax and grow.”

Reader Jack Hayter asked a question on managing responsibility – he is a sales 
manager who has recently moved from a big business to a small one. He explained 
that the difference in size means he now reports directly to the business’s 
director, where before there were several layers of management. “How would you 
deal with the increase in responsibility and who and how you report to [your 
boss]?” he asked.

Yates suggested a management coach to help with such a change. “Someone you 
can talk things through with, who isn’t your boss. And a good coach will just 
help you to work out your own solutions, without much direction, so after a 
while you realise that you’re doing fine by yourself.”


The advice from David Hilbert, marketing director at Kia Motors UK 
<http://www.kia.co.uk/kia-business-fleet-cars/>, was to begin a new management 
role by planning how you will communicate effectively across the business, such 
as what team meetings will be like and when and how you will report to your 
manager. “Putting in place a clear framework and then setting appropriate 
expectations will give you confidence that you are in control and demonstrate 
to your manager or director that you have thought about the communication 
required to work effectively,” he added.


Annie Peate, policy adviser, education and skills, at the Federation of Small 
Businesses <http://www.fsb.org.uk/>, emphasised the value of formal leadership 
and management training. “It’s crucial to honing your skills, which in turn can 
be pass on to others,” she said. “Find out what’s out there to suit your needs 
and give it a go. You can only benefit.”

With the freelance and temporary workforce growing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/feb/17/sharing-economy-freelance-landscape>
, many businesses face the challenge of managing freelancers or contractors. 
The panellists were asked for their advice on this.


Four ways to manage digital nomads
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jul/19/four-way-manage-digital-nomads-google>
Weaving said: “Treat them as an extension to your business, not an outsider. 
We have a hot desk and every one of [our freelancers] comes in on a weekly 
basis (their choice).”


Julianne Ponan, owner and CEO of Creative Nature 
<http://www.creativenaturesuperfoods.co.uk/>, added that she often uses 
contractors and freelancers. “The main challenge I have found is ensuring that 
they communicate with the rest of the team. It’s important that you treat them 
as an extended arm to your company, with regular communication.”


Finally, the panel discussed how a business owner or manager can make sure 
they hire the right person for a job the first time.

Stephen Archer, director of Spring Partnerships 
<http://www.spring-partnerships.com/>, said: “Hire the intellect and mentality. 
Worry about the skills and experience less. Few business have the confidence to 
do this, but it pays off.”


Weaving added: “Get references and don’t discount people who can’t work 
‘traditional’ hours. There is a huge skill set going to waste who are those 
parents that are wanting to go back to work, but also do the school run.”


Deciding your criteria for a good candidate, and sticking to it, is important 
for avoiding bias in the hiring process, Gifford said, because it prevents you 
from taking on mini-mes who look and sound the same as you.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 