
Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> produced its youngest, 
and first unseeded, men's champion yesterday when 17-year-old Boris Becker of 
West Germany, defeated the eighth-seeded American, Kevin Curren, 6-3, 6-7, 7-6, 
6-4 to win the £130,000 champion's prize.

Becker, from Leimen, near Heidelberg, is almost two years younger than the 
previous youngest holder - Wilfred Baddeley, in 1891.

Unseeded players had contested the final on eight previous occasions but none 
had even won a set. Becker is the first West German to win. In the 1930s Baron 
Gottfried von Cramm was three times runner-up, and in 1967 Wilhelm Bungert came 
second to John Newcombe.

After yesterday's match it was Newcombe, in his capacity as a commentator, who 
said of Becker: 'There's no limit to what he can achieve. He has tremendous 
ability to live with pressure.'

Becker's was a remarkable performance of maturity and skill. Only once in a 
match lasting three hours and 18 minutes was his serve broken. Though Curren 
had knocked out John McEnroe and Jimmy Connors with his power serving he could 
never keep pace with Becker.

Contestants had been warned when Becker won Queen's - his first title - three 
weeks ago that he had to be taken seriously.

A bad fall forced Becker to retire last year, but this time he bristled with 
confidence throughout the two weeks. Yet when he met the press he had no idea 
that he had won £130,000.

'That's a lot, isn't it?' said the boy who goes to his coach for pocket money.

To put his victory into perspective, the boys' singles final yesterday was won 
by Leonardo Lavalle, of Mexico, who will be 18 a week today.

Becker's home town exploded with delight yesterday, writes Anna Tomforde. An 
estimated 20 million West Germans were glued to their television sets, and 
afterwards Mr Kurt Weber, of Becker's Blue and White tennis club, said: 'We 
knew he could do it. He just had to serve well. We were all amazed at how cool 
he kept.'
 