
When Beethoven died, in 1827, a will was found among his papers, made by him 
during a dangerous illness in the year 1802, and addressed to his brother Carl, 
and his nephew Ludwig Beethoven. His brother died before him; and this will, 
which remained in the possession of his brother’s widow, has now been sent to 
England for the purpose of being sold to relieve the urgent necessities of 
herself and her family. It is in the hands of Messrs. Cramer and Co. of 
Regent-street.


It was during Liszt <https://www.theguardian.com/music/franz-liszt>’s recent 
visit to London that the will was sent to him by the widow of Beethoven’s 
brother, accompanied by a letter from that lady, describing in most affecting 
language the melancholy circumstances of herself and her daughter. “Had I not 
borne the name of Beethoven,” she writes, “I should never have dared to trouble 
you with my request; though your character for generosity is acknowledged all 
over Europe, so much genius and talent having seldom been combined with such 
benevolence. My present unhappy condition is the cause of my troubling you with 
this letter, as I am in danger of being completely destitute if your assistance 
does not soon arrive, my creditors having consented to wait no longer than is 
requisite for me to receive an answer to this letter.”


“The more speedily,” she adds, “the assistance comes, the more valuable it 
will be, for through it alone can we be saved from destitution; and the 
gratitude of myself and my child will be without bounds.” If Beethoven himself, 
in his latter days, though still living in the midst of professed patrons, 
friends, and admirers, made an appeal to the generosity of the English public, 
it is the less surprising, though not the more creditable to his countrymen, 
that such an appeal should now be made by his surviving relatives.


Beethoven’s will, which is wholly in his own handwriting, is a precious relic. 
Its contents are most deeply interesting and affecting. The following passages, 
which we extract from it, will enable the reader to form an estimate of this 
great man’s real character, and to imagine what he might have been under 
happier circumstances:—


“My mind was formed, from my cradle, for the gentler feelings of our nature, 
while it seemed destined to achieve something great. To this I always found 
myself irresistibly impelled. But, when only six years of age, I was unhappily 
attacked by a disease, which was rendered still more afflicting by the mistakes 
of the physician under whose care I was placed. After lingering, year after 
year, in the hope of recovery, I was at last doomed to the unhappy prospect of 
an incurable evil.

Though born with an ardent and lively disposition, and a mind alive to the 
pleasures of society, I was obliged to withdraw from them, and lead a life of 
solitude. Sometimes, indeed, I made an effort to participate in social 
enjoyment; but, alas! my efforts only made me doubly feel my incapacity. How 
could I be always saying, ‘Speak louder – I am deaf!!’ When I would willingly 
have mixed among you, my misfortune was felt with double keenness, from the 
conviction that I must forego the delights of social intercourse, the sweets of 
conversation, the overflowings of the heart.

When I ventured to appear in society, I felt myself, as it were, an 
excommunicated being. If circumstances compelled me to appear in the presence 
of strangers, an indescribably agitation seized me – I was tortured by the fear 
of being conspicuous only by my infirmity. I was persuaded to go into the 
country, where I tried to join in the society of my neighbours. But how bitter 
was my mortification when someone near me would stand listening to the tones of 
a flute, which I could not hear, or to the shepherd’s song, rising from the 
valley, not one note of which I could distinguish! Such things almost drove me 
to despair, even raised in my mind gloomy thoughts of seeking relief in 
self-destruction.

Thus have I continued to drag on a miserable existence – truly miserable, 
inasmuch as with so sensitive a bodily frame, any sudden change was capable of 
hurrying me into the most violent extremes. Yes, patience, I must take thee for 
my guide, till it shall please the fates to cut the thread of my existence. Be 
it for better or worse, I am prepared to meet the issue; though, for a man in 
his twenty-eighth year, it is no easy task to become a philosopher; and still 
more difficult for an artist than for any other man.

I hereby declare you the joint heirs of the little property, if so it can be 
called which I have been able to lay up. Share it equally and justly; live in 
harmony together, and help each other. Whatever you may have done against me, 
be assured that it has long since been forgiven. I thank you in particular, my 
dear brother Carl, for the affectionate attentions I have of late received from 
you. I sincerely hope that your life may be more free from cares and sorrows 
than mine has been. Teach your children to love virtue; she alone, and not 
perishable gold, can make them happy. I speak it feelingly, and from 
experience: it was her hand that upheld me in the midst of the ills of life. To 
her influences, next to that of my art, do I owe the blessing of not having 
terminated my existence by suicide. Live virtuously, and love one another.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fbeethoven-will-for-sale-archive-1840%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe90a300782c209cf528db97eda868447ee14c7b8%2F0_1_1551_931%2F1551.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beethoven's%20will%20for%20sale%20-%20archive%2C%2019%20August%201840&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fbeethoven-will-for-sale-archive-1840%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beethoven%27s%20will%20for%20sale%20-%20archive%2C%2019%20August%201840&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fbeethoven-will-for-sale-archive-1840%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe90a300782c209cf528db97eda868447ee14c7b8%2F0_1_1551_931%2F1551.jpg>
 Manchester Guardian, 19 August 1840.  