
Beijing will create an environmental police force aimed at tackling deadly 
smog, after the Chinese capital spent the first week of 2017 mostly shrouded in 
a thick haze of pollution.


The new law enforcement outfit will patrol the streets, eyes peeled for 
open-air barbecues, trash burning and dusty roads that violate regulations, the 
city’s acting mayor Cai Qi said at the weekend.

Related: China smog: millions start new year shrouded by health alerts and 
travel chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/china-smog-millions-start-new-year-shrouded-by-health-alerts-and-travel-chaos>

Beijing will also shut its last coal-fired power plant and reduce coal 
consumption by 30% 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-01/07/c_135963207.htm> this year, Cai 
said according to state media. Officials will shut 500 factories and 300,000 
older vehicles will be taken off the road.

“There is still a long way to go to meet the expectation of the public,” he 
added, admitting he wakes up every morning and checks the air quality, along 
with the weather report.

The capital is frequently beset with toxic smog and levels of harmful air 
pollution in 2015 were more than eight times those recommended by the World 
Health Organization.

China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> declared a “war on pollution” 
in 2014, but has struggled to deliver the sweeping change many had hoped to see 
and government inspections routinely find pollutions flouting the law.

Last week, inspection teams from the environment ministry found some companies 
resuming operations 
<http://www.shanghaidaily.com/nation/China-to-improve-smog-response-ability/shdaily.shtml>
 despite a government ban, known as a “red alert”, aimed at curbing smog. More 
than 500 construction sites and businesses and 10,000 vehicles violated 
measures to reduce air pollution.

But Beijing’s new police squad may do little to help residents breathe easy. 

Its focus on local, street-level sources of pollution ignores the steel 
factories and coal-fired power plants just outside the city limits in 
neighbouring Hebei province, or the more than 5m cars clogging the roads. Cars 
account for about 31% of the most harmful type of air pollution, according to 
China’s environmental ministry.

Related: An insider's guide to Beijing: caged birds, smog and internet satire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/17/insiders-guide-beijing-caged-birds-smog-internet-satire>

While officials are aware heavy industry and automobiles are the largest 
sources of pollution, the government has been reluctant to impose sweeping 
change for fear of economic repercussions and potential unrest from fired 
workers.

“The root cause of the region’s smog problems, from a long-term perspective, 
is an unclean industrial and energy mix, which requires big changes,” said Chen 
Jining, China’s environmental minister, adding thathe “felt guilty” 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2017-01/07/c_135963213.htm> about the toxic 
haze.

Beijing education authorities did bow to public pressure last week, agreeing 
to install air purifiers in school classrooms after more than a year of 
campaigning by concerned parents.

A study earlier this year 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/2056553/smog-linked-third-deaths-china-more-deadly-smoking-study-finds>
 found acrid air is linked to at least one million deaths a year in China, and 
contributed to a third of all fatalities in major cities, on par with smoking. 
Another research paper said the smog had shortened life expectancies by five 
and a half years in parts of China.
 