 During the election campaign, I was stuck for a few hours at the London Muslim 
Centre in the East End. I was there to hear a press briefing from Oona King who 
was fighting George Galloway. I was early and she was late so I killed time by 
sitting in on a conference with the vibrant title of 'Women and Entrepreneurial 
London'.
It was impressive. In the bright, modern building, bright, modern Bengali 
women discussed ways of creating new businesses in a miserable corner of London 
where jobs were badly needed. The practical advice stopped stone dead when 
assistants wheeled in a wide-screen television so that an imam from the local 
mosque could describe what careers were open to Muslim women. Very few, it 
turned out.

He informed the audience that they had no need for feminism. God had given 
roles to men and women and the woman's divinely ordained task was to look after 
her husband, produce children and then look after them too. This didn't leave 
much time for entrepreneurial dynamism, and just about the only firm he could 
imagine them having the spare hours to manage would be an internet business, 
which presumably could be run when the husband's meal had been cleared away and 
the children tucked up in bed.

Had the Archbishop of Canterbury told women members of the Confederation of 
British Industry that they must look after Dad and the kids, there would have 
been hell to pay, not least for the assumption that the women were Christians 
and should take instructions from him. But at a conference supported by public 
bodies - the University of East London helped organise it and there was some EU 
money sloshing about - a cleric delivered a sermon which rendered the avowed 
aim of helping women start companies all but impossible to achieve. No one 
raised an eyebrow.

For the purposes of official classification, they weren't British or 
British-Asians or English or working class or Londoners or Bengalis or women. 
They were Muslims and their religious leaders must have a large say in how they 
lived.

Anti-racism used to mean treating people equally. Differences in skin colour 
or religious faith counted for little when set against the universal claims of 
common humanity. No cliche was more pleasing to the liberal mind than the 
assertion that we were all the same under the skin. To say that feminism was 
fine for whites but not for browns would have been an outrageous assertion of 
racist values. Now there are different rules for different religions. In the 
name of the noble virtues of tolerance and broad-mindedness, liberal people 
have segregated with the enthusiasm of an apartheid police chief and left 
common humanity out in the cold.

The derision that greeted Hazel Blears's suggestion that we should look again 
at how Britain slices up its peoples showed how fixed segregationist attitudes 
have become. It was inevitable but extraordinarily shallow. Inevitable because 
the longer a government stays in power, the harder it becomes for politicians 
to be creative. Past follies and swindles discredit original thinking and poor, 
old Blears only had to open her mouth for journalists to remember the dome and 
Cool Britannia and imagine her as a New Labour minorities tsar switching the 
population's identities like a clothes designer ordering hemlines to change for 
the spring collection.

She was still right, though. Her critics forgot that there's nothing concrete 
about today's classifications. They are as arbitrary and transient as Paris 
fashions and just as likely to feel worn out and look preposterous after a few 
years.

Until the 1980s, people talked about 'blacks'. This was an incredibly broad 
term which covered not only Afro-Caribbeans (who had large differences of their 
own), but anyone from the Indian Subcontinent or, at the broadest, anyone with 
a dark skin. When vastly different peoples were lumped together, it was easy to 
pull the concept apart. What did the son of a Hindu doctor from East Africa 
have in common with the daughter of a Jamaican nurse? Nothing it would appear. 
But the use of 'blacks' or later 'blacks and Asians' made sense. The doctor's 
son and nurse's daughter may have seemed as distant as it is possible to 
imagine any two people in Britain being, but they had a common interest in 
fighting colour prejudice. The Commission for Racial Equality still works on 
this old notion of solidarity, but everywhere else it is in retreat.

A simple thought experiment shows how much is at stake when categories change. 
Suppose the government or the EU offer Â£1 million for a community centre in the 
East End. If it's just called a community centre, then all will feel 
comfortable using it and the probability will be that local trade unionists or 
activists in the Labour or Liberal Democrat parties will be in control. If it 
is an 'Asian' community centre, then the white working class won't feel 
welcome. If it's a Muslim, Sikh or Hindu centre or, less likely in the East End 
these days, a Jewish or Irish Catholic centre, then all other religions will 
stay away and the odds are that clerics and the devout will be taking the 
grants and the cultural power.

The most exclusive of these scenarios is the religious and, until recently, 
liberals would have instinctively shied away from the explicit sectarianism. 
Their caution evaporated in the 1990s. Socialism was dead. A fundamentalist 
wave was sweeping all the world's religions, and if people believed that 
religion mattered most to them, segregation by faith could seem the 
free-thinking thing to do.

As so often, liberal intentions brought reactionary consequences. During the 
wars of the former Yugoslavia, the victims of oppression objected ferociously 
to being described as 'the Muslims'. The Serbs weren't called 'the Orthodox' 
and the Croats weren't called 'the Catholics'. The decision of most diplomats 
and commentators to call the Bosnians 'the Muslims' was a tacit endorsement of 
Serbian claims that they were a faction fed by ancient hatreds, rather than 
citizens of a democratic and multi-ethnic nation facing a murderous assault 
from the agents of foreign powers.

Exiles still remember the jaw-dropping moment on Newsnight when Kirsty Wark 
insisted on describing a member of the Bosnian government as a spokesman for 
'the Muslims'. His protestations that he was, if it was any of her business, a 
Catholic in his private life got him nowhere.

In Britain, too, Muslims must pay a price for confessional politics. They have 
the highest male unemployment rate. At 14 per cent, it is three-and-a-half 
times the rate of what, in a sign of the times, the Office of National 
Statistics insists on calling 'Christian men'. (It must mean white men but 
clerical correctness stops it saying so plainly.)

Yet unemployment is not a sectarian issue. Measures to alleviate it in 
London's East End or Pennine mill towns will help the unemployed of all faiths 
and none. Although Muslims are suffering disproportionately, the Muslim Council 
of Britain's website has nothing to say about poverty and joblessness. Its 
campaigns in the past two years have been sectarian, occasionally repellently 
so.

Many are about extending religious privilege, most notably the drive to ban 
the incitement of religious hatred. A recent anti-semitic entry heightens the 
sectarian mood by denouncing a forthcoming Panorama investigation into the 
legitimacy of unelected 'community leaders' as a Jewish conspiracy: the 
Panorama team is furthering a 'pro-Israeli agenda', a charge which isn't 
levelled at the BBC too often.

'If you want a society that is really welded together, there are certain 
things that unite us because we are British,' said Hazel Blears in her clumsy 
way. Indeed they should, but I wonder if she realises how many people have an 
interest in ripping the welding apart.
 