
Discredited health blogger Belle Gibson’s social media posts stating she had 
cured her terminal brain cancer “naturally” are being used as evidence against 
her in court.

Annabelle Natalie Gibson failed to appear in Melbourne’s federal court on 
Tuesday for a hearing with Consumer Affairs Victoria.

In May the consumer watchdog started legal action against Gibson over the way 
she marketed her Whole Pantry app and book.

Consumer Affairs says Gibson engaged in “unconscionable conduct” by claiming 
she was diagnosed with brain cancer in 2009 and given four months to live but 
thenhealed herself naturally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/06/belle-gibson-facing-legal-action-over-deceptive-claims-lifestyle-changes-could-cure-cancer>
 after rejecting conventional treatments.

The watchdog also accuses her of engaging in misleading or deceptive commerce 
by making the claims to promote her Whole Pantry app and book.

The app was available for purchase between August 2013 and May 2016.

Consumer Affairs’ barrister Catherine Button noted Gibson publicly stated she 
had a stroke at work and was subsequently diagnosed with a malignant brain 
tumour in June 2009.

Gibson told her Facebook and Instagram followers she started receiving oral 
chemotherapy for her cancer before abandoning conventional medicine.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fbelle-gibson-interview-60-minutes-wellness-blogger-cancer-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435276293193%2FBelle-Gibson-60-Minutes-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disgraced%20wellness%20blogger%20Belle%20Gibson%20fronts%20cameras%20on%20Australia%E2%80%99s%2060%20Minutes%20program%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fbelle-gibson-interview-60-minutes-wellness-blogger-cancer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disgraced%20wellness%20blogger%20Belle%20Gibson%20fronts%20cameras%20on%20Australia%E2%80%99s%2060%20Minutes%20program%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fbelle-gibson-interview-60-minutes-wellness-blogger-cancer-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435276293193%2FBelle-Gibson-60-Minutes-001.jpg>
Disgraced wellness blogger Belle Gibson fronts cameras on Australia’s 60 
Minutes program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jun/26/belle-gibson-interview-60-minutes-wellness-blogger-cancer-video>
“I pulled myself out. My doctors freaked out but they couldn’t stop me,” 
Button quoted Gibson as saying.

Gibson told her large social media following she started “getting back to 
basics” and opted for healthy foods and natural therapies which healed her 
cancer, the court heard.

“Her publisher went out and published her book on the basis of her claims,” 
Button said on Tuesday.

Penguin paid Gibson’s company almost $264,000 for The Whole Pantry cookbook, 
according to court documents.

The book was released in October 2014 and withdrawn from sale five months 
later.

Button said Gibson claimed she fell pregnant two weeks after being told she 
couldn’t have children because of her cancer.

The barrister also read out excerpts from a transcript of a 60 Minutes 
interview with Gibson last year during which she admitted she had never had 
cancer.

The hearing before Justice Debra Mortimer continues.
 