
Israeli police have questioned the prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu>, for the second time 
over allegations that he improperly accepted gifts from wealthy businesspeople.

Israeli media said investigators had arrived at Netanyahu’s official residence 
in Jerusalem on Thursday.Questioning on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/benjamin-netanyahu-denies-corruption-ahead-of-police-questioning>
 lasted more than three hours. Police had no immediate comment.

Few details of the allegations against Netanyahu have been officially 
released, with Israel’s justice ministry disclosing only that the prime 
minister was being questioned “on suspicion of receiving benefits from 
businesspeople”.

Israeli media have reported that Netanyahu accepted “favours” from 
businesspeople inIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> and abroad.

Netanyahu has repeatedly denied wrongdoing, portraying the accusations as a 
witch-hunt against him and his family by a hostile media opposed to his 
hardline government.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fbenjamin-netanyahu-questioned-again-israeli-police-gifts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22bdcddfef3cc78d0b41529172e1e298f9744d04%2F516_54_2935_1762%2F2935.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benjamin%20Netanyahu%20questioned%20again%20by%20Israeli%20police%20over%20gifts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fbenjamin-netanyahu-questioned-again-israeli-police-gifts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benjamin%20Netanyahu%20questioned%20again%20by%20Israeli%20police%20over%20gifts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fbenjamin-netanyahu-questioned-again-israeli-police-gifts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22bdcddfef3cc78d0b41529172e1e298f9744d04%2F516_54_2935_1762%2F2935.jpg>
 Benjamin and Sara Netanyahu. Photograph: Reuters 
He has pointed to previous suspicions raised against him, none of which 
resulted in any criminal proceedings, as a sign that he has done nothing wrong 
in this most recent allegation as well. “There won’t be anything because there 
is nothing,” has been his refrain.

Serving his third consecutive term with a stable coalition government, 
Netanyahu is on track to become Israel’s longest-serving leader, should he 
complete his full term in office in 2019. He does not appear to have any 
serious foreseeable challenger to his rule.

While the investigation is still in its infancy, it could put pressure on 
Netanyahu to step down. His predecessor, Ehud Olmert, did so in 2008 just 
months before he was formally indicted on corruption-related charges.Olmert is 
now serving a prison sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/15/ehud-olmert-israeli-ex-pm-19-month-prison-bribery>
 after being convicted of accepting bribes.

After eight years in office, in addition to an earlier term in the 1990s, 
Netanyahu has garnered a reputation as a cigar-puffing socialite who is as 
comfortable rubbing shoulders with international celebrities as he is making 
deals in parliament.

Scandals have dogged him and his wife, Sara, over their lavish tastes. There 
have beeninvestigations into the alleged misuse of state funds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/31/police-question-sara-netanyahu-over-household-spending>
 and an audit of the family’s spending, even including sums spent on laundry and
ice-cream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/15/binyamin-netanyahu-ice-cream>. 
They have denied any wrongdoing.
 