
Libraries <https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> are among my favourite 
places on the planet, and I’m lucky that one of Berlin’s best, the Luisenbad 
library, is in the northern suburb of Wedding, where I live. It’s reached by a 
dark path between a burger joint and a kebab shop, or by a walk along the Panke 
river. Both lead to a bright courtyard with an impressive neo-baroque building 
dating from 1888, the old tile lettering Kafe Küche still visible to the left 
of the entrance.

As the name – literally (Queen) Luise’s Bath – indicates, it was originally a 
public pool named after a Prussian queen; over the years it has been a 
restaurant, a coffee shop and a cinema. A protected building since 1978, it was 
extensively refurbished in 1995 byaward-winning architects 
<http://www.chestnutt-niess.de/> Rebecca Chestnutt and Robert Niess.

Today’s library is a friendly and bright space, with a large reading garden, a 
stucco-decorated “Cherub Hall” that dates from 1912 and is now used for 
readings and events, and a children’s library with books in 40 languages. The 
new design also pays tribute to the chequered history of the area: the side of 
the building opposite the new glass-and-concrete reading room was left as 
found, displaying layers of history in the form of tiles from the old pool and 
raw brick penetrated by bullet holes from 1945’s Battle of Berlin.
• Travemünder Straße 2, berlin.de 
<http://www.berlin.de/stadtbibliothek-mitte/bibliotheken/bibliothek-am-luisenbad/>
. Open Mon-Fri 10am-7.30pm, Sat 10am-2pm, closed Sun

Marcel Krueger <https://marcel-krueger.squarespace.com/> is co-author of 
Berlin: A Literary Guide for Travellers (IB Tauris 
<http://www.ibtauris.com/Books/Literature%20%20literary%20studies/Literature%20history%20%20criticism/Literary%20studies%20general/Berlin%20A%20Literary%20Guide%20for%20Travellers?menuitem={A315BD7D-5CA1-476C-9749-F72084E24E4C}>
, £16.99)
 