
Bernard Tomic’s on-court commitment has come under renewed scrutiny after the 
Australian played match point holding his racquet backwards in defeat to Fabio 
Fognini at the Madrid Open.

Tomic, down 0-40 as Italian Fognini sought to serve out the match at 6-2, 5-4, 
held his racquet by the head with the handle pointing forward and barely moved 
as his opponent fired an ace past him to seal the win.

News of the stunt triggered a storm of criticism in his home country and on 
social media from tennis pundits.
Ben Rothenberg (@BenRothenberg) 
Do ATP players still want wins, or… #choochoo 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/choochoo?src=hash> RT @ProdigyRep 
<https://twitter.com/ProdigyRep>: Bernard Tomic ‘attempts’ to return with his 
handle…pic.twitter.com/QZgWIjA8a3 <https://t.co/QZgWIjA8a3>
 <https://twitter.com/BenRothenberg/status/727512462283685893> May 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BenRothenberg/status/727512462283685893> 
World No22 Tomic was nicknamed “Tomic the Tank Engine” after accusations he 
“tanked” – or failed to try his best – in a loss to Andy Roddick at the 2012 US 
Open.

The 23-year-old also holds the record for the quickest loss at a Masters-level 
tournament on the ATP Tour after being smashed 6-0, 6-1 in 28 minutes by Finn 
Jarkko Nieminen in Miami in 2014.

Tomic came under fire in the leadup to the Australian Open for retiring during 
his Sydney International quarter-final after telling the chair umpire his mind 
was on the year’s first grand slam. He later claimed to have suffered food 
poisoning.

French Tennis Federation raided amid alleged corruption and ticket trafficking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/03/french-tennis-federation-searched-alleged-corruption-ticket-trafficking-jean-gachassin-french-open>
Tomic created further controversy during a Davis Cup match against the United 
States in Melbourne in March when he publicly criticised team-mate Nick Kyrgios 
for withdrawing from the tie with illness.

Earlier, Kyrgios, won through to the second round in Madrid following a 
hard-fought 7-6 (9-7), 6-4 win over Argentina’s Guido Pella. The world No21 hit 
16 aces against the player ranked 50th in the world and will now face old foe 
Stan Wawrinka for a place in the third round on Wednesday.

The world No4 and French Open champion was given a bye into the second round 
and the last two meetings between the pair have resulted in retirements.

Kyrgios called time during the ATP event in Dubai in February with Wawrinka 
doing likewise in the controversial clash between the pair in Canada last year. 
That match resulted in a fine and 28-day suspended suspension for the 
Australian following comments he made to the Swiss during the match.
 