
Bernard Tomic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> and Nick 
Kyrgios have been put on notice by Australia’s Olympic team boss, who says they 
need to improve their behaviour if they want to represent their country in Rio. 
Chef de mission Kitty Chiller described Tomic’s behaviour at a tournament in 
Madrid this week as “appalling”, after he deliberately gave up a match point 
and said he didn’t care because he has career earnings of $10m.

Chiller says it goes against the values of the Australian Olympic team. “Every 
athlete is under the microscope now,” Chiller said on Saturday following the 
Australian Olympic Committee’s AGM. “There’s a few athletes that are on watch 
and those two names are among them.”

'It's not right': Tomic not committed to tennis, says Novak Djokovic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/06/its-not-right-tomic-not-commited-to-tennis-says-novak-djokovic>
Tomic held the racquet by the strings and did not offer a shot when down match 
point to Fabio Fognini in Madrid and then asked a journalist who queried the 
move, “Would you care if you were 23 and worth over $10m?”

Chiller was not impressed. “I think it was appalling behaviour. It goes 
against every ... value that all the Olympians live by, it goes against 
everything that we’ve been trying to build in this team,” she said. “I would 
not want to see any of our Olympic team members behave in that way.”

She also said the AOC had been watching the ongoing behaviour of Kyrgios, who 
has regularly abused umpires, opponents and spectators.Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Australia has until late June to 
nominate its team for Rio, with world No21 Kyrgios and No22 Tomic the country’s 
highest-ranked players and best chance for a medal.

But Chiller stressed TA can only nominate players of “good standing” within 
their sport, while the AOC has the final say. “It’s their responsibility to 
determine whether it’s appropriate to nominate them,” she said. “If any athlete 
from any sport is nominated, we look at everything ... including behaviour, 
including the disrepute clause.”

“We have the ability to take that into consideration whether we proceed to 
select the nomination or not.”

Tomic’s recent behaviour does not augur well for the Queenslander’s Olympic 
aspirations. “Based on the last 48 hours, all I can comment on is that is not 
behaviour that I would want any team member in a team that I’m responsible for 
to exhibit,” Chiller said. She said she has had several conversations with 
Tennis Australia chief executive Craig Tiley and president Steve Healy, while 
the AOC’s selection committee met in Sydney on Friday to discuss the behaviour.
 