
Bernard Tomic’s foul-mouthed spray at a US Open heckler has drawn the heaviest 
sanction of the tournament to date.

Tomic has been fined $US10,000 ($A13,300) for telling the fan – among other 
things – to “suck my balls” during his first-round loss to Bosnian Damir 
Dzumhur on Tuesday.

Sam Stosur crashes out of US Open with loss to doubles partner Zhang Shuai
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/02/sam-stosur-crashes-out-of-us-open-with-loss-to-doubles-partner-zhang-shuai>
Tomic’s camp insist the player was severely provoked, but ITF officials deemed 
the Australian’s expletive-laden rant as unsportsmanlike conduct.

The punishment is more than triple that of any of the other 15 fines issued 
over the first four days of the Open in New York.

But it is not the biggest fine at a grand slam in 2016.

Brit Heather Watson was slapped with a $US12,000 ($A16,000) fine for jamming 
her racquet into London’s hallowed grass courts during a second-round loss at 
Wimbledon.

Like Tomic, world No1 Serena Williams had to fork out $US10,000, her fine came 
for destroying her racquet at the All England Club, the same amount as Viktor 
Troicki was fined for branding Italian official Damiano Torella as “horrible” 
and “the worst umpire in the world” at Wimbledon.

Tomic, whose team said he grew tired of his taunter calling him a “pussy” and 
making sledges about his girlfriend, will try to put the incident behind him to 
focus on Davis Cup.

In addition to his image and bank account taking more hits in New York, the 
23-year-old could also lose his place in the world’s top 20 after the Open.

He admits he needs some time out after an otherwise productive northern summer 
before heading to Sydney for Australia’s Davis Cup playoff with Slovakia from 
September 16-18.

“I’m just tired lately, last month, two, especially after Wimbledon,” Tomic 
said.

“I went to Washington straightaway. Was playing pretty okay. Then Toronto. Was 
flying a lot.

“It’s tough. Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis>, you have to be 
really fit and stuff. I’m one of those guys if I’m 100 per cent and fit and 
ready for the tournament, I play very good tennis.

“But now I think definitely I’ll go back to Davis Cup. I always play Davis 
Cup. I’m there 100 per cent.

“It’s a little bit further away – we have maybe two weeks. Maybe I’ll relax 
now a little bit.”



 