
One of the chief pleasures of Paul Bright's Confessions of a Justified Sinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/20/paul-brights-confessions-sinner-review>
 was the slowly dawning realisation that all was not as it seemed. As a 
reviewer, it seemed churlish to give away the game, but not to do so would have 
risked missing the point. (Spoiler alert: there are plans for an autumn 2014 
tour, so you may wish to stop reading now.)

You arrived at Glasgow's Tramway – and, more recently, Edinburgh's Summerhall 
– to see what was advertised as a co-production betweenStewart Laing's Untitled 
Projects <http://www.untitledprojects.co.uk> and the National Theatre of 
Scotland. Before the performance, you lingered in an exhibition about the 
run-up to Glasgow's stint as European City of Culture, in 1990. The display 
cabinets, posters and TV clips focused on Paul Bright, a maverick figure who, 
so it seemed, lurked on the performance art fringes.

Bright had been preoccupied with James Hogg's seminal 1824 novel The Private 
Memoirs and Confessions of a Justified Sinner 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/justified-classic-the-private-memoirs-and-confessions-of-a-justified-sinner-1-1083999>
, in which an unreliable narrator named Robert Wringhim is egged on by the 
devil-like Gil-Martin into a life of murderous crime and religious zealotry. 
Bright returned to this material in a series of six experimental adaptations in 
locations ranging from a Celtic pub, where he provoked sectarian uproar, to the 
summit of Arthur's Seat, the setting for a pivotal scene in the book. But just 
as his cult reputation was building, Bright disappeared from public view, never 
to be heard of until his death in 2010.

This was the story picked up by actor George Anton when we took our seats. In 
an illustrated lecture, he recalled his time acting in Bright's productions and 
introduced video interviews with others who had worked with him. Real-life 
theatremakers Tim Crouch,Annie Griffin 
<http://www.curtisbrown.co.uk/annie-griffin/> and Katie Mitchell all testified 
to his wayward genius.

What we were actually watching, of course, was a brilliant adaptation of 
Hogg's novel. Laing and playwright Pamela Carter had taken the book's defining 
qualities – structural innovation, use of found text, air of unreliability and 
vision of a fatally divided personality – and applied them to a contemporary 
setting. Before the end of the show, people who had claimed they could vaguely 
remember Bright were pulled up sharp. It was all a hoax. But unlike many 
hoaxes, this one had a purpose: it left us with lingering doubts about the 
nature of memory, the power of narrative and the borderline between the real 
and the imagined.

• Read about the other No 10 pick: Wet House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/dec/18/best-theatre-2013-wet-house>

• Read more from the Best theatre of 2013 series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/series/best-theatre-of-2013>
 