
FOOD

Mystery meals, and Cuban sandwich quest: Foodforthoughtmiami.com 
<http://www.foodforthoughtmiami.com/>
 Food For Thought 
Just what every time-pressed, food-loving traveller needs in a new city, Food 
For Thought Miami <http://http://www.foodforthoughtmiami.com/> is a mine of 
information on south Florida restaurants, with hundreds of places anonymously 
reviewed by a blogger known only as Frodnesor. It is clearly presented, so you 
can find exactly what you need in under a minute. If you're on a short trip, 
head straight for theWhere to eat in Miami 
<http://www.foodforthoughtmiami.com/p/list-where-to-eat-in-miami.html> list, 
which is a round-up of the author's favourites, while the regularly updated 
Where should I eat now? section provides more quick-fix inspiration (in the 
lefthand corner). There's also a handyevents calender 
<http://www.foodforthoughtmiami.com/p/calendar.html>, which could be useful for 
sociable travellers. Alternatively, more adventurous eaters could go a step 
further and sign up to be a guinea pig at one of the intriguing Cobaya dinners, 
which Frodnesor helps organise, and which involves signing up to try mystery 
meals in mystery locations.

Useful post: Where to find the best Cuban sandwiches in Miami  
<http://www.foodforthoughtmiami.com/2010/02/best-cuban-sandwiches-in-miami.html>

Miami without the beef: meatlessmiami.com <http://www.meatlessmiami.com/>
 Meatless Miami 
When Lauren Reskin, known as Lolo, isn't running her independent music shop, 
Sweat Records <http://sweatrecordsmiami.com>, in the Little Haiti 
neighbourhood, she's on a mission to create a meat-free guide to Miami. Rather 
than limiting the coverage to restaurants, cafes and bars that are 100% 
vegetarian, she often prefers to flag up places that are veggie-friendly or 
vegan-friendly – especially as she often dines with her omnivore boyfriend. 
Readers are encouraged to submit their reviews and there is awishlist 
<http://www.meatlessmiami.com/p/tbr.html> of talked-about places that Lolo 
still wants to get to. The downside, however, is the complete lack of images.

Useful post: The top picks <http://www.meatlessmiami.com/p/picks.html> page 
not only tells you where to go, but also what to order. Try the pan-seared 
seitan withchimichurri sauce at Mi Vida Cafe <http://mividacafe.net/>, a vegan, 
Argentinian-run joint (yes, really) on Biscayne Boulevard.

For the love of food: thechowfather.com <http://www.thechowfather.com/>
 The Chowfather 
Reviews here are by an author who claims to be neither a critic, nor a 
photographer, "just a food lover". As a result you find succinct descriptions 
and an array of simple Instagram snapshots that get the mouth watering. This 
anonymous writer is also involved in Cobaya's "underground" dinners (see Food 
For Thought Miami above), but it's shame this blog is harder to navigate and 
you really have to dig around to find the most valuable entries, such as this 
one onthe city's top meatballs 
<http://www.thechowfather.com/2013_02_01_archive.html>.

Useful post: 20 of South Florida's best burgers 
<http://www.thechowfather.com/2012/08/best-burgers-miami.html>, accompanied by 
a picture of a suicidal Ronald McDonald.

ART AND MUSIC

Beyond the beach: beachedmiami.com <http://www.beachedmiami.com/>
 Beached Miami 
Despite the name, there is very little about beaches on this site. Launched in 
2010 to subvert the old Miami stereotypes (sun, sea, hedonism and retirement), 
it focuses on what it describes as the "nascent phenomenon called Miami 
culture". The city has experienced an artistic boom in recent years and this a 
platform for those driving the trends, with interviews from musicians, authors 
and film-makers, as well as information for any visitors seeking inspiration 
(see this piece onwalking tours of Little Haiti 
<http://www.beachedmiami.com/2013/02/20/little-haiti-sunday-stroll/>). The team 
organises events; makes occasionalpodcasts 
<http://www.beachedmiami.com/category/podcast/>; and runs an ambitious side 
project,Sketchy Miami <http://sketchymiami.com/>, which aims to draw everyone 
in the city (800 down, five million or so to go…)

There's more music and creative culture, with a Florida spin, on brasky.org. 
<http://brasky.org/>

Useful post: Check out the handy gig guide 
<http://www.beachedmiami.com/music-guide/#041013>, and for insight into city 
life, don't miss this writer's post on "seven things I wish I knew before 
moving to Miami 
<http://www.beachedmiami.com/2013/02/04/seven-things-i-wish-i-knew-before-moving-to-miami/>
".

'Ultimate music source': Crossfade <http://blogs.miaminewtimes.com/crossfade/>
 Crossfade 
Modestly billing itself as "Miami's ultimate source for music and nightlife 
coverage", Crossfade is hosted by the Miami New Times, the city's 
long-established free sheet. As such, it tends to pull in some interesting 
names for interviews (such as visiting musiciansBomba Estereo 
<http://blogs.miaminewtimes.com/crossfade/2013/04/bomba_estereo_interview_transatlantic_festival_2013_miami.php>
 andBajofondo 
<http://blogs.miaminewtimes.com/crossfade/2013/04/bajofondo_interview_transatlantic_festival_2013_miami.php>
), but more important for visitors is the up-the-minute knowledge of the 
extensive troup of contributors. When weekend comes, they will confidently 
inform you of thebest South Beach parties 
<http://blogs.miaminewtimes.com/crossfade/2013/04/six_best_club_parties_south_beach_april_2013.php>
 orthe best music-related things to do for under $10 
<http://blogs.miaminewtimes.com/crossfade/2013/03/best_things_to_do_miami_march_29_2013.php>
.

Useful post: This is technically hosted on the Miami New Times and not the 
blog, but still worth checking out:a list of newsletters 
<http://www.miaminewtimes.com/samples/readers/?source_id=8|55|1380> to 
subscribe to via text or email, offering such benefits as VIP club passes and 
happy-hour alerts.

Heading to the theatre: southfloridatheatrescene.com 
<http://www.southfloridatheatrescene.com/>
 South Florida Theatre Scene 
If you want to catch a show in South Florida, this is the place to come. The 
site is packed with reviews, listings and general insight. Check out the great "
off-stage conversations 
<http://www.southfloridatheatrescene.com/2013/04/off-stage-conversations.html>" 
series, in which Andie Arthur of the South Florida Theatre League shares 
stories and blog posts related to local and international theatrical.

Useful post: All happenings are helpfully collated on a Google-hosted calender 
<http://www.southfloridatheatrescene.com/p/south-florida-theatre-calendar-links.html>
, which readers can subscribe to.

Living for the city: miamialive.com <http://miamialive.com/>
 Miami Alive 
So many blogs overlook the importance of good visual impact, but not this one. 
Miami Alive is good-looking and hard-living – with a focus on the multinational 
aspect of the city, which is why you'll find a column namedPa q lo Sepa 
<http://miamialive.com/category/the-columns/paqlosepa/> (Spanish slang for 
FYI). It was started by Brazil-born Melanie Gapany, who also co-foundedSmile 
for Camera <http://www.smileforcamera.com/>, a nightlife and music guide that 
spans the whole of the eastern US.

Useful post: Check out the regular "something for the weekend 
<http://miamialive.com/weekend-options-03-15-03-17/>" round-ups.

MIAMI LIFE

City in the raw: boywritesmiami.com <http://boywritesmiami.com/>
 Boy Writes Miami 
The author of this blog has also published book called Stop Being A F***ing 
Idiot, which should give you a indication of the tone to expect from this guide 
to Miami life. It's a love-it-or-hate-it, funny-or-irritating-as-hell kind of 
vibe. A typicalrestaurant review 
<http://boywritesmiami.com/2013/01/texas-de-brazil/> goes like this: "Buffets 
are the most goddamn American things since electric guitars and indigenous 
genocide. Sure, it's a French word, but so is entrepreneur, as in, 'Look at 
that entrepreneur.' And so is découpage, as in, 'What the fuck is découpage?'" 
There's a disclaimer at the top – "Gratuitious vulgarity included" – and if you 
don't like it, click "clean version" on the main menu bar.

Useful post: The "review" of Passion nightclub 
<http://boywritesmiami.com/2011/01/passion-nightclub/> will probably have you 
steering widely clear of the Miami's velvet-rope nightclubs and their painfully 
strict door policies.

Freewheeling: thefreehand.com <http://www.thefreehand.com/blog/>
 The Freehand blog 
The Freehand Hotel is an on-the-pulse "design hostel" that opened at the end 
of 2012. It also runs its own blog. There are few promotional posts ("meet our 
crew" <http://thefreehand.com/blog/meet-the-crew-jett/> etc ), but there's also 
plenty of really useful stuff for visitors staying elsewhere, including a 
series of neighbourhood guides, fromMiami Design District 
<http://thefreehand.com/blog/miami-neighborhoods-miami-design-district/> to 
Little Havana <http://thefreehand.com/blog/miami-neighborhoods-little-havana/>.

Useful post: the "five bus trips in under an hour 
<http://thefreehand.com/blog/travel-tips-5-miami-bus-trips-under-an-hour/>" 
entry is unusual and great for budget-conscious travellers.

OUTDOORS

Miami Bike Scene: themiamibikescene.com <http://www.themiamibikescene.com/>
 Miami Bike Scene 
Miami is a car-orientated city and its roads are often scary places to be on a 
bike, but, as in many places across the world, cycle culture is catching on 
fast. The city now has its own public bike system,Decobike 
<http://www.decobike.com/>, and runs Bike Miami 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Bike-Miami/27928783603> events, where major 
streets are temporarily closed to cars. The Miami Bike Scene keeps resident and 
visiting cyclists up to date with two-wheeled happenings. They also run a pub 
crawl by bike. (Is that a good idea? Anyone wobbling too much has to get public 
transport home, apparently.) Also championing biking in Florida:Palm Beach 
Cycle Chic <http://www.palmbeachcyclechic.blogspot.co.uk/>.

Useful post: the events page <> lists everything from bike polo meets to group 
rides with picnic stops, plus Critical Mass dates.
 