
A major part of LA’s appeal is its variety. Within a day you can go from a 
snow-covered mountain to a beach. The people are so diverse; everyone comes 
here from somewhere else, looking for some kind of fulfilment, which makes it 
feel like a giant airport.

Before I arrived I envisaged the LA of Raymond Chandler: the sun-bleached 
streets, the dark romanticism. But what I found was a sprawling city with so 
many people and cars. I came here as a journalist, on the crime beat. You get 
sent to corners most people don’t see.

Hit the Pacific Coast highway, then get on Sunset Boulevard and take it east 
all the way to downtown. It’s one of the few roads that goes all the way 
through the city. You’ll see every geographic and social stratum. Sunset 
Boulevard runs past the great mansions of Beverly Hills and on to the barrios 
of east LA; you’ll see it all and don’t even have to take a turn … though the 
traffic’s going to kill you.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F27%2Flos-angeles-michael-connelly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F23%2F1414086355370%2Fffedc0fb-f644-48ba-bd63-d3ed8fd3746a-2060x1354.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best-selling%20crime%20novelist%20Michael%20Connelly%20on%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F27%2Flos-angeles-michael-connelly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best-selling%20crime%20novelist%20Michael%20Connelly%20on%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F27%2Flos-angeles-michael-connelly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F23%2F1414086355370%2Fffedc0fb-f644-48ba-bd63-d3ed8fd3746a-2060x1354.jpeg>
 Driving the length of Sunset Boulevard is a must for visitors to LA. 
Photograph: Alamy 
I’ve done research for my most recent novels by taking the subway to 
neighbourhoods I want to explore – from east LA to Hollywood and beyond. It’s a 
fledgling system but a great way to see a different culture. At times, you 
might even think you’re in another country. There’s a subway station by 
Hollywood & Vine, and that area has its own personality, as has the plaza 
around the beautiful and wonderful Union station.

It’s wrong to assume that LA is a concrete jungle. One of the surprising 
things is all the green space. I like Griffith Park, which is huge, and the 
Santa Monica mountains, which run along the spine of the city.

If I could only show someone one place, I’d take them to a promontory above 
the Hollywood reservoir and Mulholland Dam to see the city sprawled in front of 
them. The daytime view can be crystal clear, or come and see it at night, with 
the city lights shining. It can even be beautiful when it’s smoggy, because the 
smog these days is white, not the yellow-brown haze it was 20 years ago.

If you’re an avid collector of crime fiction and thrillers, you should visit 
Mystery Pier <http://www.mysterypierbooks.com/> on Sunset Boulevard. You can 
find obscure collectables, mystery and genre books here.

A lot of restaurants I go to end up in the books I write. I send the 
characters to them. My favourite place to eat in Hollywood isChi Spacca 
<http://www.chispacca.com/contact.cfm> on Melrose Avenue. It’s the place to go 
for great heavy food such as porterhouse steaks, lamb shoulder chops and 
roasted chicken.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F27%2Flos-angeles-michael-connelly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F23%2F1414086602453%2F36ce9dac-dbbb-4a3d-847d-a04620926b5f-2060x1302.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best-selling%20crime%20novelist%20Michael%20Connelly%20on%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F27%2Flos-angeles-michael-connelly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best-selling%20crime%20novelist%20Michael%20Connelly%20on%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Foct%2F27%2Flos-angeles-michael-connelly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F23%2F1414086602453%2F36ce9dac-dbbb-4a3d-847d-a04620926b5f-2060x1302.jpeg>
 Musso & Frank’s, in Hollywood, is a historic restaurant – Charlie Chaplin was 
a regular. Photograph: Alamy 
If you want a really good drink go to the bar at The Musso & Frank Grill 
<http://mussoandfrank.com/contact/> for a martini. It’s on Hollywood Boulevard, 
where it has been for nearly 100 years, and some of the waiters look like 
they’ve been there the whole time. It’s not big – 10 stools at the most. You’ll 
be sitting where Charlie Chaplin sat – it has history.

Mariachi Plaza is a cool place that not many people know about. It’s where 
mariachi musicians who are waiting to be hired at bars and for parties 
congregate. There can be 40 or 50 guys in Mariachi outfits, some duelling music 
back and forth. Look beyond them and you can see the towers of Downtown, so you 
know you’re in LA, but you just have to check yourself. To top it off there’s a 
cool little bookstore there calledLibros Schmibros <http://librosschmibros.org/>
.

I share my character Harry Bosch’s love of music. I gave Harry my father’s 
taste in music: jazz. I had listened to some as a kid but had to get 
reacquainted with it. Now I love it. My two favourite venues to listen to it 
are theCatalina Bar & Grill <http://www.catalinajazzclub.com/> in Hollywood, 
not far from where I live, and, downtown, a place calledThe Blue Whale 
<http://bluewhalemusic.com>. Both are pretty small but they get good acts. Even 
smaller is theBaked Potato <http://www.thebakedpotato.com> on Cahuenga 
Boulevard.

• Michael Connelly’s latest Harry Bosch thriller, The Burning Room (Orion, 
£19.99), is out on 6 November. To order a copy for £16.99 including UK p&p, 
visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/burning-room.html>
 