
BHP Billiton <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhpbilliton>, the world’s 
biggest miner, has reported a record loss of $6.4bn (£4.9bn) following a fatal 
dam disaster in Brazil, a slump in the price of commodities, and a bet on 
fracking in the US.

Miners are struggling due to a sharp fall in commodity prices, sparked by 
concerns that a slowdown in theChinese economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/chinese-economy> could leave a surplus of 
raw materials.

Andrew Mackenzie, chief executive of the London-listed company, said the last 
12 months have been challenging and that commodity prices are likely to remain 
volatile, even if long-term demand remained robust.

The miner swung to the net loss in the year to the end of June after making a 
profit of $1.9bn a year earlier. It is the company’s first annual loss and the 
first time it has not increase its dividend since Australia’s BHP and the 
Anglo-Dutch company Billiton merged in 2001.

The loss was driven by $7.7bn of writedowns and charges including $4.9bn for 
the reduced value of its US shale operations and$2.2bn for the collapse of the 
Samarco dam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/09/brazil-dam-burst-bhp-boss-to-inspect-disaster-zone-with-dozens-still-missing>
, which killed 19 people, polluted a river valley and devastated communities in 
Brazil’s Minas Gerais state in November.

“All of us at BHP Billiton remain deeply saddened by the Samarco tragedy,” 
Mackenzie said. “The company is fully committed to the framework agreement and 
its programs to remediate and compensate for the impacts of the Samarco dam 
failure. Good progress is being made on community resettlement, community 
health and environment restoration.”

BHP said the Samarco iron ore mine, owned jointly with Brazil’s Vale, will not 
get approval to reopen this year after the dam’s failure spilled billions of 
gallons of mining waste into a valley causing death and homelessness.


The company was forced to write down the value of its shale assets because of 
the tumble in the price of crude oil to less than $50 a barrel. BHP diversified 
into the oil and gas business in 2012 with an investment in US shale assets. 
Mackenzie said the company will hold on to the assets because investors liked 
its range of businesses.

“The last 12 months have been challenging for both BHP Billiton and the 
resources industry,” Mackenzie, a Scot who took charge of the company in 2013, 
said.

“Nevertheless, our results demonstrate the resilience of our portfolio and the 
diverse ways in which we can create value for shareholders despite low 
commodity prices.

“While commodity prices are expected to remain low and volatile in the short 
to medium term, we are confident in the long-term outlook for our commodities, 
particularly oil and copper.”

Mackenzie said the industry was starting to recover after the price of key 
commodities such as iron ore and coal hit 25-year lows in January.

The BHP boss said there is “some sense that prices have stopped falling as 
opposed to being in freefall” and the company could start the year with “real 
momentum”.

He added: “Steadily, the end of the supply creation on the back of the China 
boom is coming to an end, product by product, and that’s putting more of a 
floor under price than perhaps perceptibly existed maybe a year ago.”

Despite the record loss, shares in BHP rose 1.7% to £10.60 on the back of 
Mackenzie’s confidence.

Jordan Hiscott, chief trader at online trading platform Ayondo Markets, said: 
“Despite the monumental loss the perception is that the worst is over in terms 
of impairment charges and write-downs. It’s also pertinent that BHP still has a 
yield and pays a dividend, given the extreme low interest rate environment in 
which we currently find ourselves.”


The commodity rout forced BHP Billiton to scrap its policy of not cutting 
dividendsby slashing the half-year payout in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/22/bhp-billiton-reports-half-year-loss-4bn>
. It cut the annual dividend by 76% to 30 cents a share, in line with a new 
policy of linking payments to profits.

Nicholas Hyett, analyst at stockbroker Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “With 
dividends now a function of profits, bottom line growth will be key to future 
shareholder returns. For now that is being supported by a ruthless cost cutting 
campaign, but there’s only so far that can go.

“With capital expenditure falling rapidly, the group seems to be pinning its 
hopes on a recovery in commodity prices to boost earnings in the medium term.”
 