
The US vice-president, Joe Biden, has said it is “absolutely mindless” for 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> not to have 
confidence in the intelligence community, as the heads of the US agencies 
prepared to present their findings on Russian election interference to the 
president-elect.

The unprecedented dispute between Trump and the intelligence services he will 
soon control broke into the open at a congressional hearing on Thursday as the 
head of US intelligence publicly defended his analysts, who he said “stand more 
resolutely” than ever behind their conclusion of “Russian interference in our 
electoral process”.

Trump to name ex-senator Dan Coats as director of national intelligence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/dan-coats-trump-national-intelligence-director>
Biden said it would be legitimate to question intelligence and ask for more 
detail or disagree but “dangerous” to publicly criticise the agencies and claim 
to know more than them.

“For a president not to have confidence in, not to be prepared to listen to, 
the myriad intelligence agencies, from defence intelligence to the CIA, is 
absolutely mindless,” he saidin an interview 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/updates/grow-donald-time-adult-biden-says-pbs-newshour-interview/>
 with PBS.

“The idea that you may know more than the intelligence community knows – it’s 
like saying I know more about physics than my professor. I didn’t read the 
book, I just know I know more.”

James Clapper <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/james-clapper>, the 
departing director of national intelligence, and the heads of the CIA, NSA and 
FBI will brief Trump on Russian election interference in Trump Tower on Friday.

It is likely to be a highly charged meeting. Ahead of it on Friday, Trump told 
the New York Times in a telephone interview that the focus on Russia amounted 
to a “political witch-hunt”. He said China had “relatively recently, hacked 20 
million government names 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/04/us-government-massive-data-breach-employee-records-security-clearances>
 ... how come nobody even talks about that? This is a political witch hunt.”

The president-elect has publicly derided the agencies on the issue, and this 
week cited adenial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/republicans-break-donald-trump-tweet-julian-assange-dnc-hacks>
 by Julian Assange of WikiLeaks that his source for Democratic party emails 
released during the election was the Russian government or “a state party”.


Trump restated his doubts in a series of tweets on Thursday evening suggesting 
theFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> investigation was flawed.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
The Democratic National Committee would not allow the FBI to study or see its 
computer info after it was supposedly hacked byRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>......
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817166353266262016> January 6, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817166353266262016> Donald J. 
Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
So how and why are they so sure about hacking if they never even requested an 
examination of the computer servers? What is going on?
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817168818539757568> January 6, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817168818539757568> 
The report Trump will be briefed on was presented to Barack Obama earlier in 
the week. US intelligence officials told theWashington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/us-intercepts-capture-senior-russian-officials-celebrating-trump-win/2017/01/05/d7099406-d355-11e6-9cb0-54ab630851e8_story.html>
 andNBC 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/top-russians-celebrated-when-trump-won-intel-report-says-source-n703741>
 that the classified document, said to be more than 50 pages long, says 
intercepted communications revealed Russian intelligence officials celebrating 
Trump’s win.

An unclassified version of the report will be published early next week, 
prepared by theNSA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nsa>, CIA and FBI and 
providing additional information for the intelligence agencies’ conclusion that 
Russia deliberately hacked the Democratic National Committee to aid Trump in 
the 2016 presidential election.

The CIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> has also identified the 
Russian officials who fed the Democratic party emails to WikiLeaks through the 
use of third parties, Reuters reported, which allowed Assange to say the 
Russian government or state agencies were not the source.

Clapper told the Senate armed services committee in a hearing on Thursday into 
foreign cyber-threats that US intelligence analysts “stand more resolutely” 
than ever behind their conclusion of “Russian interference in our electoral 
process”. He said there was a “difference between scepticism and disparagement”.

Clapper and Adm Michael Rogers, the director of the NSA, expressed concerns 
about intelligence analysts’ morale after Trump’s perceived disparagement of 
their work, with Rogers suggesting some may quit.

Clapper said Russia “has clearly assumed an even more aggressive cyber 
posture”, and described the assault on the 2016 election as “multifaceted”.

“Hacking was only one part of it,” he said. “It also entailed classical 
propaganda, disinformation and fake news.”

Next week’s report will ascribe what Clapper called “more than one motive” to 
the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, for the electoral interference.


Clapper, who has in the past signalled his discomfort with public intelligence 
testimony – and who has apologised forprevious false statements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/29/james-clapper-condemns-snowden-senate-testimony>
 to the Senate on the scope of domestic NSA surveillance – said he intended to 
“push the envelope as much as I can on the unclassified version” of the report 
“because I think the public should know as much of this as possible”.

“They did not change any vote tallies or anything of that sort,” Clapper said 
of the Russians. He demurred from considering their intrusion an “act of war” 
while under questioning from the committee chairman, John McCain, saying that 
would be a “very heavy policy call” not an intelligence judgment, particularly 
since the US also penetrates foreign digital networks.

Trump’s confidence in WikiLeaks has shocked and angered intelligence analysts, 
who consider Assange at the least a hostile actor, and at most a tool of Putin.


On Thursday morning, Trump denied he was “in agreement” with Assange, 
tweeting: “I simply state what he states, it is for the people to make up their 
own minds as to the truth.”

He claimed the media “lies to make it look like I am against ‘intelligence’ 
when in fact I am a big fan”.

The Trump transition team has sought to weaken the impact of the intelligence 
findings on Russia meddling in the election by highlighting the US intelligence 
community’s failures over Iraq prior to the 2003 invasion. Clapper claimed that 
US intelligence collection and analysis had vastly improved since then.


“We do make mistakes, but we try to learn from them and make changes,” he 
said, insisting that the contrast between US intelligence then and now was “the 
difference of night and day”.

Amid the background of distrust is a plan Trump is reportedly considering to 
reorganise the US intelligence apparatus. According to the Wall Street Journal, 
whichfirst reported the proposal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/lawmakers-officials-frown-on-donald-trumps-dismissal-of-u-s-intelligence-1483554450>
, Trump is considering diminishing the role of the director of national 
intelligence and returning the CIA directorship, under Trump’s pick, Mike 
Pompeo, to its prime role within the intelligence community. Trump’s incoming 
press secretary Sean Spicer called the report “100% false”.

Since Trump’s election, some career US intelligence officials have told the 
Guardian theyfear retaliation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/national-security-shift-us-policy-trump-presidency>
 for their assessment of Russian electoral interference. A leading figure 
behind the reported reorganisation is said to be Trump’s national security 
adviser, Mike Flynn, the former Defense Intelligence Agency chief whom Clapper 
fired in 2014. Clapper,who resigned in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/james-clapper-resigns-director-national-intelligence>
 and will leave his post when Trump is inaugurated, said the current 
intelligence leadership had not been consulted on the plan.
 