
Biden scolds Trump for dismissal of agencies

Joe Biden said it was “mindless” for Donald Trump to dismiss intelligence 
agencies, as the feud between the incoming president and the agencies 
continues. Speaking on PBS NewsHour on Thursday, the outgoing vice-president 
said it was “dangerous” to publicly criticize the agencies and claim to know 
more than they did. “It’s like saying I know more about physics than my 
professor. ‘I didn’t read the book, I just know I know more,’” Biden said. 
Trump has been locked in a standoff with the country’s intelligence agencies 
over the veracity of reports that the Russian government interfered with the US 
election. The president-elect will be meeting with intelligence agencies on 
Friday for a briefing on the issue in what will probably be a highly charged 
encounter. James Clapper, the departing director of national intelligence, told 
a congressional hearing on Thursday that his analysts “stand more resolutely” 
than ever by their conclusion on Russian interference, while the 
president-elect continued toair his suspicions 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817166353266262016?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 on Twitter. Meanwhile, in Syria,Russian troops have drawn down their forces. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/russia-aircraft-carrier-mediterranean-syria-admiral-kuznetsov>

Joe Biden attacks Trump for ‘mindless’ dismissal of agencies’ intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/joe-biden-attacks-trump-for-mindless-dismissal-of-agencies-intelligence>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Biden%20to%20Trump%3A%20%E2%80%98Grow%20up%2C%20Donald.%20Time%20to%20be%20an%20adult%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Biden%20to%20Trump%3A%20%E2%80%98Grow%20up%2C%20Donald.%20Time%20to%20be%20an%20adult%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video&media=>
Biden to Trump: ‘Grow up, Donald. Time to be an adult’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/06/joe-biden-donald-trump-grow-up-adult-judy-woodruff-video>
Toyota’s polite response to Trump

The Japanese carmaker Toyota responded to Trump’s criticism on Friday with a 
polite message stating how much it invests in the US. Trumpthreatened 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817071792711942145> the 
manufacturer with a “big border tax” if it didn’t build cars in the US, sending 
its stocks down 3%. Toyota cited the $21.9bn it invests in the US and pointed 
to 10 US manufacturing sites in its statement aimed at Trump. “Toyota looks 
forward to collaborating with the Trump administration to serve in the best 
interests of consumers and the automotive industry,” the statement said. 
Japanese politicians also weighed into the dispute. “Japanese automakers are 
making significant contributions in terms of jobs in the United States,” said 
Hiroshige Seko, the economy, trade and industry minister. Japanese firms employ 
more than 800,000 people in the US and contributed $78bn to US exports in 2014, 
according to the US embassy in Tokyo. In other employment-related news,we’re 
liveblogging the last jobs report of Obama’s presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2017/jan/06/markets-await-last-us-jobs-data-of-the-obama-era-business-live>
.

We contribute billions to US economy, Toyota politely tells Trump
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/06/we-contribute-billions-to-us-economy-toyota-politely-tells-donald-trump>

Facebook quiet on brutal live video

Facebook has yet to respond to mounting questions on why a brutal video aired 
on Facebook Live, which has garnered national attention, was not removed. The 
video shows four people in Chicago – who have been arrested – torturing a man 
with mental health issues, cutting his scalp with a knife while saying: “Fuck 
Donald Trump!” and “fuck white people!” Facebook would not comment on whether 
anybody had reported the video and how long it took to take the video down. A 
spokeswoman said Facebook did not allow people to glorify crimes or violence. 
Facebook’s policy for taking content down from its site is opaque and has been 
subject of much debate. Four suspects in the incident have been charged with 
hate crimes, kidnapping, battery and burglary.

Facebook refuses to explain why live torture video wasn’t removed sooner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/facebook-live-video-chicago-attack-explanation>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffacebook-live-stream-man-attacked-chicago-police-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20charged%20with%20hate%20crimes%20over%20Facebook%20Live%20attack%2C%20say%20police%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffacebook-live-stream-man-attacked-chicago-police-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20charged%20with%20hate%20crimes%20over%20Facebook%20Live%20attack%2C%20say%20police%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Ffacebook-live-stream-man-attacked-chicago-police-video&media=>
Four charged with hate crimes over Facebook Live attack, say police – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/05/facebook-live-stream-man-attacked-chicago-police-video>
More ‘bathroom bills’ in six states

Despite the backlash North Carolina received nationally, other conservative 
states are now working to introduce their own bathroom bills. Six other states 
– seemingly buoyed by the failed attempt to repeal North Carolina’s bill – have 
introduced or pre-filed bills restricting access to facilities based for their 
2017 legislative sessions, according to the National Conference of State 
Legislatures: Alabama, Kentucky, Missouri, South Carolina, Virginia and 
Washington. The topic has become a favorite among Christian conservative 
lawmakers.

Despite furor in North Carolina, six states plan ‘bathroom bills’ of their own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/bathroom-bills-planned-north-carolina-texas-lgbt-transgender>

Republican doubts over Obamacare repeal

While the Republican party appears to be united in its mission to “repeal and 
replace” Obamacare, cracks are beginning to show already as some GOP lawmakers 
raise concern. Senator Rand Paul for instance voted against Wednesday’s measure 
that was the first step in repealing Obamacare, as he was not convinced by the 
current proposal. Republican senators Lamar Alexander and Susan Collins voted 
in favor of the bill but were also keen to ensure there was a plan to replace 
it.

The Republicans who are not totally enthusiastic about repealing Obamacare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/obamacare-repeal-republicans-us-healthcare>

Canadian executive helps Syrian refugees

Jim Estill, a mild-mannered CEO, has spent C$1.5m to bring 200 Syrian refugees 
to Canada. In 2015, Estill began working out how he could help with the refugee 
crisis through a 35-year-old program that allows private citizens to sponsor 
refugee resettlement. He estimated it would cost C$30,000 to support a family 
of five in Guelph and he could support 50 families. Forty-seven families have 
come so far and another 11 are expected in the coming months. Now a whole 
organization has formed around them in Guelph.

The Canadian who spent C$1.5m to rescue more than 200 Syrian refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/jim-estill-syrian-refugees-canada-guelph-ontario>

Teaching Jeff Sessions Voting Rights Act history

When Democratic senator Dick Durbin met Trump’s controversial pick for 
attorney general on Wednesday, he gave him a copy of Carol Anderson’s book 
White Rage. Writing for the Guardian, Anderson says she hopes Sessions reads 
the book to learn the history of the Voting Rights Act in this country, as she 
details how he has opposed efforts to prevent voter suppression during his time 
in the Senate.

Jeff Sessions now has my book ‘White Rage’. Will he read it? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/jeff-sessions-white-rage-book-carol-anderson>

Picks for the NFL playoffs

As the Guardian’s regular season Pick Six contest has ended, the Pick the 
Playoffs can begin. Make your predictions below the line.

NFL playoff predictions: Russell Wilson to lead Seahawks to victory over Lions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/06/nlf-playoff-predictions-russell-wilson-seahawks-lions>

In case you missed it...

About $20m was seized from under a mattress in the Massachusetts home of a man 
arrested by police in a money-laundering bust. The man was associated with a 
pyramid scheme to sell voice-over-internet telephone services.

Millions under a mattress: US agents find $20m in cash after fraud raid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/millions-mattress-us-agents-20m-cash-after-raid>
 