
Yael Farber’s remarkable production of Lorraine Hansberry’s Les Blancs 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/les-blancs> finishes its run at the 
National Theatre on Thursday. You should try to catch it. It’s a galvanising 
evening conjuring a colonised Africa on the brink of revolution, which 
celebrates its cultural wealth and ancient traditions. One of the significant 
elements is the music and sound – as Susannah Clappquite rightly observed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/03/les-blancs-review-national-theatre-lorraine-hansberry>
, you leave with your ears ringing.

Rain is sizzling bacon, cars are lions roaring: the art of sound in movies | 
Jordan Kisner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/22/rain-is-sizzling-bacon-cars-lions-roaring-art-of-sound-in-movies>
Just as set and lighting design have seen a revolution in recent years, 
making, as Matt Truemanhas suggested 
<http://www.whatsonstage.com/london-theatre/news/matt-trueman-set-design-loonies-artists_39102.html>
, British theatre an altogether more interesting place, sound design has come 
on by leaps and bounds too. Increasingly, it doesn’t just enhance a production 
but is crucial to its success.

Think of Max Pappenheim’s sound design for Katie Mitchell’s Ophelias Zimmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/18/ophelias-zimmer-review-katie-mitchell-hamlet-royal-court>
 at the Royal Court. The crunch of feet on gravel and sounds from the Danish 
court heightened the sense of Ophelia drowning in silence in her cell-like 
room, but also provided the audience with the information necessary to 
understand Ophelia’s unfolding story as reflected back throughShakespeare’s 
original play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/may/23/ophelia-minor-characters-shakespeare>
. It was both functional and beautiful.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftheatre-sound-design%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec9c6e1e5e138579fdfb30e8a0ecd968878d8be8%2F0_637_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20audio%20dynamite%3A%20how%20theatre%20is%20moving%20at%20the%20speed%20of%20sound&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftheatre-sound-design%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20audio%20dynamite%3A%20how%20theatre%20is%20moving%20at%20the%20speed%20of%20sound&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftheatre-sound-design%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec9c6e1e5e138579fdfb30e8a0ecd968878d8be8%2F0_637_5023_3014%2F5023.jpg>
 Drowning in silence ... Jenny Konig in Ophelias Zimmer. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
Mitchell has always 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2006/dec/04/wavessetsahighwatermarkfo>
 been at the forefront of multimedia collaboration where every element 
contributes to the final production, but she is not alone. Long gone are the 
days when sound was treated as something that should make as unobtrusive a 
contribution as possible. Of course sound effects can still be laughable: 
earlier this year I sawa Richard III 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/11/richard-iii-review-woe-for-england-and-shakespeare-too>
 where the death of the Duke of Clarence in a butt of Malmsey wine sounded more 
as if he was being executed by a flushing toilet.

Great sound design is much more than just sound effects. It’s about texture 
too. In Simon Evans’s revival of Tracey Letts’sBug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/mar/30/bug-review-edgy-drama-of-lost-souls-cant-scratch-the-itch>
, Edward Lewis’s music and sound design added immeasurably to the rising 
tension; in Polly Findlay’sAs You Like It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/08/as-you-like-it-polly-findlay-review-national-theatre>
 – the best revival of that play for years – Carolyn Downing’s sound combined 
with Orlando Gough’s musical compositions to set the emotional temperature of 
the Forest of Arden as much as Shakespeare’s script.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftheatre-sound-design%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e4f13dacdd4aa16b0acf84118b057d66d9cbcd6%2F0_286_4347_2609%2F4347.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20audio%20dynamite%3A%20how%20theatre%20is%20moving%20at%20the%20speed%20of%20sound&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftheatre-sound-design%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20audio%20dynamite%3A%20how%20theatre%20is%20moving%20at%20the%20speed%20of%20sound&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftheatre-sound-design%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e4f13dacdd4aa16b0acf84118b057d66d9cbcd6%2F0_286_4347_2609%2F4347.jpg>
 Surround sound... Simon McBurney in The Encounter. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
Then there was John Tiffany’s Let the Right One In 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/08/let-right-one-in-review-apollo-theatre>
, where Gareth Fry’s sound made your heart batter its way out of your chest. At 
theNew Vic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/22/stafforshire-hoard-theatre-festival-new-vic-newcastle-under-lyme>
 in Newcastle-under-Lyme last year sound and Foley work were the motor of 
Theresa Heskins’s fine staging ofDracula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/16/dracula-new-vic-newcastle-under-lyme-review>
. Seldom has a key rasping in a lock been as scary or symbolic.

Part of this is about a shift in theatre that sees the creation of a show as a 
much morecollaborative process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/apr/21/carmen-disruption-almeida-reshapes-what-theatre-is>
 and the script as an idea for a performance rather than something fixed in 
stone. It’s not just more democratic, it gives space for greater creativity. 
It’s also fuelled by the increasing availability of audio technologies that 
allows directors to put sound at the heart of the creative process, whether its 
David Rosenberg and Ben and Max Ringham’s audio appWiretapper 
<http://www.wiretapper.co.uk/>, or the binaural sound in Simon McBurney’s The 
Encounter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/09/the-encounter-edinburgh-festival-review-simon-mcburney>
.

These experiments remind us that we don’t just go to see theatre, but hear it 
too – do share your best and worst experiences of sound design and effects in 
the theatre below.
 