
I wake to the sun’s first rays and my senses are instantly piqued by the 
lapping of nearby waves and the smell of salt and woodsmoke. I wriggle out of 
my bivvy bag, scatter the stones of last night’s campfire and, after a 
stove-cooked breakfast, pack my micro-shelter away. Once the last of my bags is 
fixed back on to my bike, I saddle up and spin away from this idyllic spot on 
the Cornish coast, an isolated sandy cove I came across mid-ride. It became my 
free room with a priceless view last night – and my own private beach this 
morning. I’d love to linger, but the trail beckons.

I reached this remote stretch of headland entirely under my own steam, 
carrying everything on my bike in special waterproof soft bags.Bikepacking 
<http://www.bikepacking.com/> – an exhilarating fusion of off-road riding and 
minimalist wild camping – is fast becoming a popular way to explore the 
outdoors. The physical excursion and simple pleasure of sleeping wild offer the 
perfect antidote to the stresses of modern life and a refreshing recalibration 
of the senses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15fc72f26211536483133cedba46f5b39679f8c7%2F0_38_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bikepacking%3A%20the%20perfect%20autumn%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bikepacking%3A%20the%20perfect%20autumn%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15fc72f26211536483133cedba46f5b39679f8c7%2F0_38_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Deep roaming … bikepacking in the Cairngorms. Photograph: Mike Howarth 
Unlike cycle touring, for off-road bikepacking you don’t need to follow a 
ribbon of tarmac. Instead, you can roam deep into the wild – along flowing 
forest singletrack or moorland bridlepaths, climbing rugged mountain trails or 
dropping down steep, rocky gullies to wooded valley floors. Wild camping along 
the way allows you to strike out further along ancient trackways, and to turn 
each ride into an adventure. A bike is a uniquely liberating machine and – when 
coupled with a lightweight tarp, tent or hammock – opens up vast tracts of our 
landscape, allowing you to cover much greater distances than on foot.

It isn’t always a blissful experience, mind you. I’ve tumbled over my 
handlebars while heading down steep scree slopes, had to walk for hours with a 
snapped bike frame, and been butted by ill-tempered mountain goats. Bikepacking 
takes you out of your comfort zone and right into the heart of the wonderfully 
unpredictable British wilderness – and that’s exactly why it’s so enjoyable. 
Just remember your mobile and first aid kit, and let someone know your 
whereabouts.

Celebrating 50 years of mountain bothies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/sep/30/mountain-bothies-walking-holidays-scotland-wales-cumbria>
To enjoy camping with a mountain bike, you do need to get minimalist. Not 
being laden down with heavy panniers means your bike will handle more 
predictably on technical terrain, while a micro-shelter brings you closer to 
the elements than a traditional tent. You really don’t need much equipment, and 
what little you do need is inexpensive and can often be improvised.

Scotland and much of Dartmoor 
<http://www.dartmoor.gov.uk/visiting/vi-enjoyingdartmoor/camping> are 
unfettered bycamping restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2010/jul/09/illegal-wild-camping>, and the 
high hills of Snowdonia and the Lake District often allow mountain camping for 
one night. Some coastal areas and waterways also enjoy historic camping rights, 
though it’s best to ask permission if you can, and leave no trace of your stay. 
Given, too, the countless camping barns, hostels andbothies scattered across 
Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/sep/30/mountain-bothies-walking-holidays-scotland-wales-cumbria>
, you can go as wild as you like.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35b4558d8c4b226573cb00601618336628e744c4%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bikepacking%3A%20the%20perfect%20autumn%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bikepacking%3A%20the%20perfect%20autumn%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35b4558d8c4b226573cb00601618336628e744c4%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Firm trails, cooler temperatures and no midges … Laurence McJannet enjoys the 
autumnal pleasures of bikepacking in a Wiltshire wood. Photograph: Robin Leck 
Bothies in particular make for memorable mountain bike adventures. Although 
traditionally found in the Scottish highlands and islands, there are a dozen of 
these simple huts in Wales and northern England too. The Mountain Bothies 
Association has restored almost 100 and turned them into destinations in their 
own right – for those with an adventurous spirit. They have few or no 
facilities, often just a fireplace and simple sleeping platforms, and you don’t 
book them or pay for using them, so it’s first come, first served. It’s in the 
nature of most bothy users to happily share, though: I’ve never been left to 
camp outside a crowded one (and more often than not you’ll find them empty).

The joys of illegal wild camping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2010/jul/09/illegal-wild-camping> 
Autumn is the perfect time to visit these once-derelict dwellings: not only is 
there more chance of finding one unoccupied, you’ll enjoy a warm fire and a nip 
from your hip flask all the more as the windows steam up from the chill evening 
air. In fact, autumn is a great time to embark on any bikepacking adventure: 
cooler temperatures, quieter trails and the end of midge season all help. Not 
only will the tracks be firm after (hopefully) being baked all summer, when you 
set off early in the morning you’ll have a hushed wild landscape all to 
yourself, and the entire day to watch it gleaming russet and gold.

• Bikepacking: Mountain Bike Adventures on the Wild Trails of Britain, by 
Laurence McJannet, is published by Wild Things (£16.99)

Beware of the hairy cow … three great autumn trips

Gower Peninsula, Wales (Easy) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac0cb967543ca6fc7a3892940b65794ac1dfca84%2F234_0_3209_1926%2F3209.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bikepacking%3A%20the%20perfect%20autumn%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bikepacking%3A%20the%20perfect%20autumn%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac0cb967543ca6fc7a3892940b65794ac1dfca84%2F234_0_3209_1926%2F3209.jpg>
 Your room for the night … the Gower. Photograph: Andrew Bennett 
For those new to bikepacking, this peninsula route offers spectacular 
panoramic views throughout; plenty of sandy coves for a wild coastal camp; and 
mostly wide, undulating trails, with the gradual climb to Cefn Bryn’s whaleback 
ridge the only real exception. From Swansea, downland paths and clifftop trails 
keep the sea constantly in view. Your loop west can last as long as you like, 
all the way to Worm’s Head and the picturesque Rhossili bay if your legs allow. 
Oxwich and West Cliff are great places for seaside refreshments. The route 
gives you a taste for technical singletrack riding without overwhelming you, 
but it will whet your appetite for further off-road adventure.

Isle of Mull, Scotland (Medium) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe86033804c3a18a8f8bdce909b653ebecaec13d9%2F991_677_3442_2065%2F3442.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bikepacking%3A%20the%20perfect%20autumn%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bikepacking%3A%20the%20perfect%20autumn%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe86033804c3a18a8f8bdce909b653ebecaec13d9%2F991_677_3442_2065%2F3442.jpg>
 Wild forgotten trails … Mull 
This beautiful corner of the western isles harbours my favourite bothy, 
Tomsleibhe, deep in the heart of Glenforsa estate. Take a ferry to Tobermory, 
the island’s colourful capital, and a wild, forgotten trail leads you past the 
rugged coastline at Ardmore and the wooded banks of Loch Frisa in the midst of 
Salen Forest to the rough estate road that unfurls along the banks of the Forsa 
to the bothy. Beneath the shadow of Beinn Talaidh and 7km from the nearest 
dwelling, Tomsleibhe is a truly remote place to spend the night, but all the 
more beautiful for it. With two fireplaces, it offers welcome respite from the 
Scottish autumn chill. Amid the evening silence you may glimpse a golden eagle, 
as I did, or spot a minke whale off the Sound of Mull to complete your 
experience in this otherworldly idyll.

Dartmoor, England (Difficult) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cf928572e91f3f221b228afe789d85ec0166e10%2F0_69_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bikepacking%3A%20the%20perfect%20autumn%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bikepacking%3A%20the%20perfect%20autumn%20adventure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fbikepacking-adventures-in-wild-britain-off-road-touring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cf928572e91f3f221b228afe789d85ec0166e10%2F0_69_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Great for a bivvy … Dartmoor. Photograph: Jon Boyes/Getty/Canopy 
The one place outside Scotland where it is legal to wild camp. You’ll be 
spoilt for choice as to where to bivvy for the night. There’s a testing trail 
around the moor’s northeast edge from Chagford Common to Dunsford. Over 
desolate Headland Warren, the path winds past cairns and tors, skirting 
temptingly past civilisation at Moretonhampstead before heading to the River 
Bovey’s sheltered banks. If you can tear yourself away from the cracking pub at 
Dunsford, the trail heads south over some wonderfully rocky singletrack at 
Lustleigh before you tackle the foreboding sounding Grimspound climb to 
complete a 40km loop. A challenging ride, but immensely satisfying.LM
 