
Even through Beijing’s nicotine-tinged smog you can make out the 
multi-coloured frames, gliding through the pea soup towards a greener future.


In recent months an unmissable fleet of fluorescent orange, canary yellow and 
ocean blue bicycles has hit the streets of urbanChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> as part of a hi-tech bike-sharing 
boom that entrepreneurs hope will make them rich while simultaneously 
transforming the country’s traffic-clogged cities.

“We want to solve problems by getting bikes back on to the streets of our 
cities,” said Li Zekun, the 25-year-old marketing director of Ofo, one of the 
startups spearheading this 21st-century transport revolution.

From Shanghai to Sichuan province, bike-sharing schemes are being rolled out 
on an unprecedented scale in an effort to slash congestion and air pollution by 
putting a country once known as the“Kingdom of Bicycles” 
<http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=120811453> back on two 
wheels.

Ofo, so named because of the word’s resemblance to a bicycle, has put about 
250,000 of its bright yellow bikes to work since late 2015, of which around 
40,000-50,000 are in the capital, according to Li.

 A Chinese woman rides one of Ofo’s yellow bikes in Beijing. Photograph: Wu 
Hong/EPA 
The Peking University biology graduate said his company, which was founded by 
five students looking to improve transport options on university campuses, had 
attracted about 3 million users in cities such as Beijing, Shanghai, Xiamen and 
Guangzhou. Its bicycles make about 1.5m trips each day between them.

“For short journeys, bikes are the best form of transport,” Li enthused at 
Ofo’s headquarters in the Internet Finance Centre, a 26-floor building in 
western Beijing. “You never know when a bus might come. It might not be easy to 
find a taxi. Walking might take you too long and tire you out.”

Other startups, such as Mobike 
<https://www.techinasia.com/china-bike-sharing-startup-funding> and Bluegogo 
<http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2016-11/24/content_27480361.htm>, are 
seeking to get in on the act, depositing truckloads of bicycles on sidewalks 
and street corners across China.

Li Gang, Bluegogo’s 28-year-old chief executive, said he believed bike sharing 
would bring “mental joy” to millions of Chinese citizens as well as boosting 
their health and fitness levels.

It was his mission “to enable everyone to enjoy the happiness of bike riding”, 
he said.

“I predict that by next year millions of people will be riding bikes in 
Beijing every day,” said the entrepreneur, whose firm has 50,000 bikes spread 
across three cities – Chengdu, Guangzhou and Shenzhen – and plans to expand to 
a new city every fortnight.

“More people will choose this healthy way to get around so the number of cars 
on the roads will decrease dramatically and this will really help the climate 
and the environment,” he said.
 Bluegogo bicycles in the company office in Shenzhen. Photograph: Reuters 
In the years following Mao Zedong’s 1949 communist takeover, bikes ruled 
supreme in China andthe Flying Pigeon 
<http://www.bicycling.com/rides/adventure-guide/flight-pigeon> – the eastern 
equivalent of theRaleigh Roadster 
<http://www.sheldonbrown.com/retroraleighs/roadster.html> – became one of the 
country’s most recognisable symbols.

But two-wheeled travel began to go out of fashion as China became more open to 
the world, ushering in decades of economic boom and a high demand for cars.


In 1980, almost 63% of commuters cycled to work, the Beijing Morning Post 
reported last year <http://www.bj.xinhuanet.com/fw/2015-09/23/c_1116648188.htm>
, citing government data. But by 2000 that number had plummeted to 38% and 
today it stands at less than 12%.


Car use, meanwhile, has rocketed. In 2010 China overtook the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jan/08/china-us-car-sales-overtakes> 
to become the world’s largest car market, with 13.5m vehicles sold in just 12 
months. This year, manufacturers expect to sellalmost 23m passenger cars 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/china-car-sales-growth-slows-further-1452587244>. 

That jump from two to four wheels has been music to the ears of international 
car manufacturers, but it has resulted ingridlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/aug/24/china-60-mile-motorway-tailback> 
and contributed toa pollution crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/17/beijing-smog-pollution-red-alert-declared-in-china-capital-and-21-other-cities>
 experts blame for hundreds of thousands of premature deaths every year.

According to state media 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-11/02/c_135801190.htm>, Beijing has 
5.65m registered vehicles which annually pump 500,000 tonnes of pollutants into 
the atmosphere. And with China now waging a high-profile “war on pollution”, 
cities hope a return to the era of the bicycle can help them clean up at least 
some of the smog. Transport officials in Beijing are aiming to get 18% of 
commuters riding to work by 2020.

Public bike-sharing schemes, of which there are more than 500 
<http://www.earth-policy.org/plan_b_updates/2013/update112> around the world, 
have existed in China for about a decade 
<http://qz.com/255054/the-world-leader-in-bike-sharing-is-china/> but the scale 
on which these private initiatives are being rolled out is unprecedented.

Reports in the Chinese media suggest hundreds of thousands of shared bikes 
have been put into action. That compares with 11,500 operating in the British 
capital, according to Transport for London.

The other factor making China’s bike-sharing boom stand out is the technology.

While those sharing bikes in cities such as London must pick them up and park 
them at docking stations, tracking technology means Chinese users can collect 
and park their bikes wherever they please.

Mobike’s orange-wheeled bikes have a GPS system that allows users to locate 
them using a map on the company’s smartphone app.

 A rank of Mobikes in Beijing. Photograph: Tom Phillips for the Guardian 
Users of Ofo’s yellow bikes, which cost about 10p to use, unlock them using a 
combination code sent through its app, and the company keeps tabs on its bikes 
by monitoring the location of the users’ smartphones.

“It is very convenient,” said Li, who claims an Ofo bike can be ready to ride 
in about 10 seconds.


Chinese investors, including the tech giants Didi Chuxing and Tencent, are 
throwing their weight behind the bike-sharing startups,pumping tens of millions 
of pounds into their operations 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-30/uber-s-bruising-battle-in-china-is-being-refought-with-bicycles>
 since the autumn.

A recent story 
<http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/opinion/2016-12/14/content_27661914.htm> about 
the budding industry in the China Daily warned of “grave maintenance and 
management challenges” and the existence of unscrupulous users who damaged or 
disappeared with the bikes. Recent weeks have seen reports of stolen bicycles, 
which are worth up to 3,000 yuan (£350),being sold online 
<http://english.cri.cn/12394/2016/12/19/2743s947733.htm>. 


But the China Daily urged commuters and city officials to embrace the attempt 
to “reinvigorate the nation’s love affair with the bike”.


Li said his company believed so strongly in a global cycling renaissance that 
it planned to export its bike-sharing revolution to London, Singapore and Los 
Angeles.

“In the future, we hope people all over the world will be using Ofo’s app to 
unlock its bikes, anywhere and at anytime,” he said.

Additional reporting by Christy Yao
 