
The women were mothers and teenagers, waitresses and aspiring actresses. They 
had chance encounters with Bill Cosby and long-term friendships.But they all 
tell a similar story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/31/bill-cosby-sexual-abuse-claims-57-women-dates-public-accusations>
: of how Cosby, at the height of his fame, incapacitated them with laced drinks 
or mystery pills and then sexually assaulted them.

The Bill Cosby sexual abuse claims – 57 women and the dates they went public
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/31/bill-cosby-sexual-abuse-claims-57-women-dates-public-accusations>
Now, the battle begins over whether they can tell those stories in court. 

Prosecutors in Montgomery County, where the legendary entertainer is on trial 
for three felony counts of aggravated indecent assault, will argue on Tuesday 
for a judge to allow 13 of Cosby’s accusers to testify. The 13 women, none of 
whose accusationshave resulted in criminal charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/bill-cosby-trial-sexual-assault-charges-pennsylvania-temple>
, accuse Cosby of crimes ranging from inappropriate touching to rape, in 
incidents dating all the way back to the 1960s.

Judge Steven O’Neill’s decision, which will follow two days of legal argument, 
could wind up being one of the most influential in the entire case. Without 
forensic evidence, witnesses, or a timely police report to present, prosecutors 
may struggle to convict Cosby. The current prosecutor’s predecessor, Bruce 
Castor, has expressed skepticism that a jury would find Cosby guilty unless 
other several other accusers testified to a pattern of behavior.

The criminal case unfolding in Norristown, Pennsylvania, arises from 
accusations made by Andrea Constand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/bill-cosby-sexual-assault-court-hearing-andrea-constand>
, a former Temple University employee and a onetime mentee of Cosby’s, that he 
drugged and digitally penetrated her at his home in 2004.

Constand’s accusations are bolstered by damaging remarks that Cosby himself 
made during civil litigation. But prosecutors are eager to summon the power of 
the accusations against Cosby made in the media to the courtroom.


Although more than 50 women have accused Cosby of crimes ranging from 
inappropriate touching to rape, the statute of limitations for most of those 
allegations has expired. The case in Montgomery County,Pennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania>, therefore, is likely to be 
the only instance of criminal prosecution – and the only opportunity many of 
Cosby’s accusers have to confront him in court.


Normally, prosecutors are barred from presenting testimony about prior bad 
acts committed by a criminal defendant, on the basis that such evidence can 
prejudice the jury. But Pennsylvania is one of several states that permits such 
testimony if it speaks to a criminal pattern.


Several patterns emerge when reading the accounts of the 13 women willing to 
testify that Cosby violated them sexually. The women are mostly young and all 
of them claim that Cosby incapacitated them with spiked drinks, unidentified 
pills or pills he presented as “headache cures”.

Some of the women had fleeting encounters with Cosby – as cocktail waitresses 
or flight attendants. But several said they considered Cosby a friend or 
mentor. A masseuse who claims Cosby drugged and raped her said he first made an 
effort to “ingratiate himself with her family”. A waitress who accuses Cosby of 
drugging a glass of wine he gave her said Cosby doted on and mentored her young 
son. She claims Cosby invited her to attend one of his performances and used 
the limousine ride to the theater to drug and assault her.

In earlier hearings and court filings, attorneys for Cosby hinted that they 
would put up a bruising fight. One documentrevealed 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/news/20161211_Cosby_case_D_A__wants_to_call_13_women.html>
 that Cosby’s defense team had already begun to look for unflattering details 
about his accusers – such as one woman’s connection to drug smugglers. Cosby’s 
attorneys have also argued that the age of some of the allegations make them 
impossible to disprove, because Cosby would be hard-pressed to recall details 
and several of the accusers could not name a date, time or place where the 
assault allegedly occurred.

“We are left with reports that were prepared by their detectives just 
recently,”said 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/news/20161211_Cosby_case_D_A__wants_to_call_13_women.html>
 Brian McMonagle, one of Cosby’s attorneys, at a recent hearing. Their 
accusations, he said, amount to “sometime, somewhere, someplace Bill Cosby did 
something to me”.

The women are anonymous in the court filings, but 10 of them have told their 
stories in detail under their full names in the media.

Prosecutors interviewed dozens of accusers who do not appear on their list of 
13 potential witnesses, other Cosby accuserstold the Philadelphia Inquirer 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/news/20161211_Cosby_case_D_A__wants_to_call_13_women.html>
. They seemed to rule out women whose stories were not highly similar to 
Constand’s.

Constand is a former employee of Temple University, where Cosby studied for 
several years in his youth and still holds an honorary bachelor’s degree. In 
January 2005, she reported to police that Cosby, whom she considered a mentor, 
gave her drugs at his Pennsylvania home and fondled her while she drifted in 
and out of consciousness. The incident took place in 2004, she claims.

Castor, who was Montgomery County’s top prosecutor at the time, declined to 
bring charges, and Cosby quietly settled Constand’s claims in civil court in 
2006.

Bill Cosby's eyesight is too poor to identify accusers, defense lawyers say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/bill-cosby-sexual-assault-case-eyesight>
Then, in 2015, the Associated Press published excerpts of Cosby’s deposition 
<http://www.bigstory.ap.org/article/b3d729e27f844841a2045053cb054c22/cosby-faces-preliminary-hearing-week-sex-charge>
 in that civil case. In the deposition, he admitted to obtaining quaaludes to 
give to women for the purpose of obtaining sex. He also acknowledged giving 
Constand three unspecified pills before their sexual encounter. The new top 
prosecutor, Kevin Steele, the district attorney, announced charges just before 
the statute of limitations expired. 

The deposition could be a key piece of evidence against Cosby when the case 
goes to trial.

Also potentially damaging is a recording of a decade-old phone call between 
Cosby and Constand’s mother, Gianna. In a previous hearing, Cosby’s defense and 
the prosecutors sparred over whether Cosby knew the call was recorded, or was 
misled.

In his 2005 deposition, Cosby said he apologized to Gianna during that phone 
call for having sexual contact with her daughter. “I’m apologizing because I’m 
thinking this is a dirty old man with a young girl,” Cosby said in the 
deposition. Cosby maintains that his sexual encounter with Constand was 
consensual.

Cosby’s trial is scheduled to begin on 5 June 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/bill-cosby-trial-date-sexual-assault-charges>
.
 