
The notorious Fung Wah bus service is finally gone for good.


The $15 coach from New York’s Chinatown to Boston was taken off the roads in 
2013 for the rather conclusive-sounding reason that it was an “imminent hazard 
<https://cbsnewyork.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/fung-wah-ih-order.pdf>” whose 
bosses’ “irresponsible actions substantially increase the likelihood of serious 
injury or death 
<http://gothamist.com/2013/03/29/feds_shutter_fung_wah_for_good_say.php>”. 

The company had no effective maintenance programme for their buses, the US 
Department of Transportationfound 
<https://cbsnewyork.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/fung-wah-ih-order.pdf>; 
inspection records had been fraudulently filled out; and drivers were 
improperly vetted for qualifications and use of drugs or alcohol.

Later that year, after hiring safety consultants and selling off 10 of its 
oldest buses 
<http://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2013/09/26/fung-wah-lucky-star-may-road-again-soon/QXlZjaxRxKqKMBKTgOmKAK/story.html>
, the bus service – founded in 1996 – was given permission to put the pedal to 
the metal again.

But now DNAinfo reports 
<http://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20150715/chinatown/fung-wah-owner-slams-brakes-on-buses-return-city-officials-say>
 that owner Pei Lin Liang has told the New York City council that “he wasn’t 
able to continue the business”, according to Paul Leonard, a spokesman for city 
councilwoman Margaret Chin, who had been helping Liang with his application.

A $30 return ticket from New York to Boston struck me as too good to be true 
when I considered taking that trip a few years ago, so I nervously scanned 
through the pages ofYelp <http://www.yelp.com/biz/fung-wah-bus-new-york> to 
read some reviews left by customers.

One said rival Chinese bus companies had attacked Fung Wah’s buses. Another 
said that the police once approached the bus at a rest stop and the driver ran 
off into the woods, never to be seen again. One woman said she got left behind 
at the rest stop.

Checking again in the wake of this week’s news, the claims made by Yelp users 
seem, if anything, even more alarming.

“Last Friday was the coup-de-grace,” wrote Howard G from Newark in 2010. “The 
bus caught on fire. There was absolute panic, and the driver was the first one 
off ... The fire department showed up along with the police. Their response: 
another Fung-Wah barbecue.”

“I sat next to a heroin addict going through withdrawal,” recalled Grant H 
from Brooklyn in 2008. “He was scratching, standing, mumbling, jittering, 
pounding his fists, undoing his pants while I was clinging to the far edge of 
the seat.”

“The scary part was the ride back from Boston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/boston> at 1 or 2am,” reports Brittyn L 
from Hillsboro, Oregon, in 2013. “I was lifted out of my seat and knocked heads 
with my friend on several occasions (not on purpose). They were going so fast 
that the bumps on the road were so extreme that my butt was off the seat by at 
least three inches!”

Michelle V from Richmond Hill, New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>, made a suggestion: “If you’d 
like to arrive at your destination alive, maybe Amtrak or Greyhound would be a 
better choice. It’s a few more bucks, but at least you’ll get to Boston, ya 
know, NOT DEAD!”

“Fung Wah, more like Fung AHHH!!” added Julia D from Long Island City. 

But many reviewers take Fung Wah’s side, sometimes passionately so, making the 
argument that you get what you pay for, even praising the breakneck speed of 
the buses as well as the convenience of the tickets.

“It’s just so easy to hate on Fung Wah, isn’t it?” writes Sue K from Seattle. 
But “in the end, nothing beats the price and convenience”. She adds reasonably: 
“If you really fear for your life – just leave during daylight hours.”

Davin L from Chicago takes the same attitude. “Yeah, maybe it’s sketchy. Yeah, 
maybe you were sitting next to a dead crack whore. Yeah, maybe you waited at 
the rest stop 30 minutes too long because the guy who was supposed to pick up 
the ‘care package’ from the driver was late trying to duck the cops. But for 15 
bucks, look at what you get.”

Kat H from Brooklyn provides a list of tips for the potential Fung Wah 
passenger, which begins sternly – “This ain’t no disco. Nor is it the Ritz. 
This is a four-and-a-half-to-five-hour bus ride to Boston for $15” – and then 
digresses slightly: “The first time I took the Fung Wah, I only brought a copy 
of Tropic of Cancer along for the ride. A long, hot bus ride (sans snacks) is 
not the time to find out that Henry Miller is a whore-loving bore.”

So anyway, I got the Fung Wah. No wheels came off 
<http://www.thebostonchannel.com/news/10662200/detail.html>, it didn’t roll 
over, it didn’t crash into any other Fung Wah buses coming the other way.

The worst thing that happened was there was no air-con during the journey back 
in the stifling July heat. Which is ironic, given that the name Fung Wah means 
“magnificent wind”.

Rows of passengers lay as silent and still as possible, barely allowing 
themselves to breathe, too crushed by the heat to even move, empty bottles of 
water describing desultory circles on the ground by their feet.

There was one other problem, too: no one could open the bathroom door. 

As the bus tore on through the night towards Manhattan and things reached 
crisis point, an unpromising would-be saviour tottered up the aisle, mumbling: 
“I’m MacGyver, MacGruber ... Coming through ... Folks, MacGyver’s here ... Give 
it up for MacGyver.”

He opened the door first time.

It wasn’t the Ritz. But for $15, what did I expect? It was the Fung Wah. And 
we may never see its like again.
 