
Tunisian farmers have warned that thousands of tonnes of oranges might have to 
be destroyed if more buyers cannot be found for the country’s bumper harvest.

According to Mohamed Ali Jandoubi, who heads the Groupement Interprofessionel 
des Fruits (GIF), an association of citrus fruit growers, farmers have 
harvested 550,000 tonnes of oranges so far this year.


The Guardian view on the Arab spring: it could happen again | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/02/the-guardian-view-on-the-arab-spring-it-could-happen-again>
“Over the past five years we reached a ceiling of 400,000 tonnes. This year 
we’ve harvested 550,000 tonnes. It’s huge,” said Jandoubi.

Half of the crop could be destroyed if not enough buyers were found, the 
Tunisian Union of Agriculture and Fishery recently warned, with only 10% of the 
harvest expected to be exported.

Jandoubi said the bumper harvest was due primarily to prevailing dry weather 
conditions and “physiological conditions” that meant the orange blossoms and 
the fruit held on to the trees.

About 12,000 families work in the orange industry, Jandoubi said, warning the 
record harvest would not spell good news if there were no buyers.

France favours the so-called Maltese orange specific to Tunisia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tunisia>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbittersweet-harvest-as-tunisian-orange-farmers-swamped-by-record-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F576e29253104ea940afb1df0d4616fca7661cb1e%2F0_223_5000_2999%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bittersweet%20harvest%20as%20Tunisian%20orange%20farmers%20swamped%20by%20record%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbittersweet-harvest-as-tunisian-orange-farmers-swamped-by-record-crop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bittersweet%20harvest%20as%20Tunisian%20orange%20farmers%20swamped%20by%20record%20crop&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbittersweet-harvest-as-tunisian-orange-farmers-swamped-by-record-crop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F576e29253104ea940afb1df0d4616fca7661cb1e%2F0_223_5000_2999%2F5000.jpg>
 A Tunisian worker collects oranges at a farm in Menzel Bou Zelfa. Photograph: 
Fethi Belaid/AFP/Getty Images 
Orange growers hope to tap more into the French market to increase sales, and 
are hoping to promote Tunisia’s oranges during the Paris agriculture salon, 
which takes place from 25 February to 5 March.

Russia could be another market for Tunisian oranges, although they could face 
tough competition with fruit from Egypt and Turkey.

Meanwhile, orange farmers have urged the authorities to help them develop 
their industry and find alternative uses for oranges, such as in juices and 
cosmetics.

Tunisia’s economy, of which agriculture is a key sector, has been affected by 
social unrest since the 2011 Arab spring and by a string ofjihadist-claimed 
attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/tunisia-urges-uk-tourists-to-return-after-90-drop-in-visitors>
, including on its vital tourism industry.

Last year, strong exports including dates and olive oil helped Tunisia’s 
economy “avoid the worst”, the finance ministry has said.

In 2015-16, the North African country exported a record 110,000 tonnes of 
dates, a 10% increase on the previous year, and a rare boost for the economy.

2015 was also a record year for Tunisia, which became the world’s number one 
exporter of olive oil.


 