
Now that the UK is leaving the EU, the Daily Mail needs to find somebody else 
to blame for the state of the nation – and it looks as if the aid industry will 
be high on the hit list, with a recent string of articles attackingaid 
contractors 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3997782/Exposed-foreign-aid-giant-conned-MPs-fake-glowing-testimonials-overseas-work-snaffle-329million-taxpayer-s-cash.html>
,cash transfers 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4082734/Queue-UK-s-1bn-foreign-aid-cashpoint-Just-thought-couldn-t-worse-cash-doled-envelopes-ATM-cards-loaded-money.html?ito=social-facebook>
, andCEO salaries 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4078904/The-fattest-charity-fat-cat-Foreign-aid-boss-MILLIONS-1-5billion-handed-charity-British-taxpayers.html>
.

The Mail’s articles try to be hard-hitting, but those hits are strictly 
below-the-belt. This might be because the Mail seems confused about what it 
wants. One week they’re attacking waste and corruption, the next they’re 
attacking cash transfer schemes – despite the fact that repeated evaluations of 
cash transfers find them to be less wasteful and corrupt than other forms of 
aid.

The salaries of the chief executives of charities are one of their favourite 
targets. The Mail calls this corruption, but they’re wrong – it’s capitalism. 
Those high CEO pay packets that the public, including myself, find so 
distasteful are not evidence that the aid industry is corrupt. Instead they’re 
evidence that the charity sector is keeping up with the latest developments in 
capitalism.

Overseas aid functions as a pressure valve for the consciences of those who 
benefited from capitalism

High salaries in the private sector are justified on the basis that 
profit-making companies need to pay handsomely to attract the best staff. If 
you accept that argument, then presumably you believe that the same thing 
applies to non-profit organisations; and if you give your money to those 
organisations, then surely you want the best possible staff delivering their 
programmes?

Apparently not. One column last year described the Mail’s platonic ideal of 
charity bosses 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3463094/STEPHEN-GLOVER-no-longer-charities-bosses-home-fat-cat-salaries.html>
 as “low-paid idealists who spend their lives working for one or two charities 
… [who should] be paid less than their counterparts in the private sector”. The 
Mail wants it both ways: charities should be managed effectively, but they 
shouldn’t hire people who know how to manage effectively.

There’s no evidence that CEO pay has any impact 
<http://fortune.com/2016/07/25/ceo-pay-total-shareholder-return/> on company 
performance, which reveals the true problem. Sky-high salaries for fat cat 
charity chiefs is not a problem of aid at all – it’s a problem of capitalism. 
Specifically, it’s a problem of neoliberalism, which taught us that markets are 
the most efficient mechanism for solving any kind of problem.

Neoliberalism defined the global economy for 30 years, and although the 
2007–08 financial crisis dealt it a fatal blow, it still defines the parameters 
of political discussion in many countries. In order to play in the markets of 
public attention and funding, the reasoning goes, the charity sector needs to 
act more like the private sector – which means making charities more like 
corporations.

Another one of the right’s criticisms of UK aid is that consultants take 
billions from foreign aid budget 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/consultants-take-billions-from-foreign-aid-budget-hw7b6bk3f>
. This is true, but it’s precisely because successive governments decided that 
a better use of taxpayers’ money was to cut the public sector and outsource its 
functions to the private sector. Charity money – and overseas aid in particular 
– goes where capitalism needs it to go.

Humanitarians need to do less to do more | Mukesh Kapila
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2017/jan/12/humanitarians-need-to-do-less-to-do-more>
And why not? People usually forget that modern charity is a function of 
capitalism. That’s why people in the UK think of charity primarily in terms of 
giving money: the charity sector we have today, and particularly overseas 
assistance, only became possible once people had accumulated enough excess 
capital to be able to put it somewhere.

Overseas aid then functions as a pressure valve for the consciences of those 
who benefited from capitalism, redistributing tiny amounts of capital in order 
to avoid the much larger redistribution that would be needed if justice rather 
than compassion were the priority. This was particularly true during the Cold 
War, when aid was specifically used to exert soft power.

Aid is in crisis at the moment partly because these factors have fallen away. 
There is less incentive for redistribution: people in rich countries aren’t so 
rich any more, while many people in poor countries are much less poor. Once the 
Cold War was won, aid was no longer needed to demonstrate the superiority of 
liberal democracy, leaving aid budgets an easy target for rightwing pressure.

Nowhere is the failure of the traditional mode of aid clearer than in the 
European refugee crisis. Aid budgets are redirected toprop up EU members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/26/watchdog-censures-eu-countries-spending-foreign-aid-on-asylum-costs-concord-aidwatch-report>
 that – after years of austerity – are unable to cope with mass migration 
across the Mediterranean, or are used tosupport more authoritarian governments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/migration-summit-refugees-sudan-eritrea>
 to prevent refugees from ever making that trip.

As the populist turn of 2016 continues, the charity sector will probably 
follow these trends. Nobody can predict what the end result will look like – 
but sadly it’s likely to be more in line with the Mail’s parochial perspective 
on the world.

Paul Currion is a humanitarian consultant. Follow @paulcurrion 
<https://twitter.com/paulcurrion> on Twitter.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#Dev2030 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Dev2030&src=typd>.
 