
Few places are so striking they inspire a TV show. Many series are shot on 
location; some even construct their plots to take in lots of landmarks. But, 
The Prisoner aside, they seldom exist because of the area itself.

Treme (pronounced Tremay) is different. The new venture from David Simon, 
creator ofThe Wire <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire> (beginning in the 
UK on Sky in April), is a deep-rooted ensemble drama, a bluesy, boozy tribute 
to the remarkable district of New Orleans that gives it its name – part hoot, 
part clarion call. The show charts and fuels the regeneration effort, lifting 
Treme from the slump it succumbed to in the 1960s – when the Interstate was 
slapped over its centre – and fell back into after Hurricane Katrina in 2005. 
That the show is set just six months after the disaster is evidence of how slow 
the real-life clear-up has been.

Treme <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/treme> is a small 
neighbourhood, nine blocks wide and 16 deep, cheek-by-jowl with the 
tourist-tastic French Quarter. The oldest black district in the US, it dates 
from 1812, when it was home to Creole people (of mixed French, Spanish and 
African heritage) and free people of colour. The architecture reflects this 
diversity: antebellum mansions stretch up Esplanade Avenue, oak trees buckling 
the pavement between them, while the cross-streets are a jumble of 18th-century 
cottages and multicoloured chalets.
 A live band in Treme. Photograph: Alamy 
The size of the properties – often just one storey, on stilts – lends a sense 
of light and space rare in inner cities. Some buildings, however, are still 
just a frontage, the skeletal rooms under reconstruction behind, and the scars 
of Katrina can be seen everywhere. Spray-painted codes on exterior walls, 
originally to indicate to rescuers whether there were still residents within, 
are now both a badge of solidarity, and proof that this is still a relatively 
poor district.

Treme is best experienced by day and on foot – travel light. You may be able 
to stay at one of handful of new cheap boutique hotels. I spent a happy 
Saturday wandering round alone, hassled only by a couple of Jehovah's Witnesses.

Begin at St Louis No 1, a short hop from the French Quarter, and one of the 
oldest of New Orleans's numerous cemeteries. Dennis Hopper shot the LSD 
prostitute rape scene in Easy Rider here (without permission from the – 
understandably miffed – authorities), and 19th-centuryvoodoo queen Marie Laveau 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marie_Laveau> is buried within.
 Backstreet Cultural Museum. Photograph: Alamy 
You can read about her over the road at Basin Street station (
basinststation.com <http://www.basinststation.com>), an art deco railway 
terminus converted into offices, visitor centre and small museum. Further along 
the street,Louis Armstrong Park 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louis_Armstrong_Park> is often shut for 
reconstruction, but well worth a tour for its statues and to seeCongo Square 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Congo_Square>, a hub for dancing and drumming in 
the 19th century. From there, head up Ursuline Avenue to theBackstreet Cultural 
Museum <http://www.backstreetmuseum.org/>, a ramshackle, lo-fi tribute to Treme 
life, with one room displaying Native American Mardi Gras costumes and another 
full of curiously moving homemade tributes to dead musicians.

Opposite is St Augustine's (staugustinecatholicchurch-neworleans. org 
<http://www.staugustinecatholicchurch-neworleans.org/>) serving the oldest 
African-American Catholic parish in the US. Built in 1842, it's vast, but with 
the perfect proportions of a dolls' house, iced-white pilasters reaching up to 
its eaves. In front, a rusting crucifix made of chains and shackles lies on its 
side, anchor-style. This is the Tomb of the Unknown Slave, erected in 2004. A 
bronze plaque commemorates "the nameless, faceless, turfless Africans ... who 
either met with fatal treachery, and were therefore buried quickly and 
secretly, or were buried hastily and at random because of yellow fever and 
other plagues".

Walk on up Governor Nicholls Street and, if you're hungry, turn right to Lil 
Dizzy's, a laid-back diner, much used in the TV show, for fried catfish and 
grits. Double back a block to theNew Orleans African-American Museum (
thenoaam.org <http://www.thenoaam.org>) for its old Creole artefacts and local 
modern art. Three storeys high, it has a beautiful annex in the garden. Now 
you're at the intersection of Treme's two major roads:Bayou Road, the oldest in 
the city, andInterstate 10, which provides a de facto roof to Claiborne Avenue. 
At night it's a bit of a meeting spot, as customers from watering holes on 
Basin Street –Chez Fabulous, Bertha's Lounge, Jo-Ros cafe and BJ's Seafood and 
Daiquiri Shop – spill out to soak up the roar. Imagine the Hammersmith flyover, 
but hot, jazzy and smothered in street art.

The upper grid of Treme doesn't have so many official attractions, but the 
atmosphere is better, and the houses astonishing – this one in hot pink, that 
one covered in parrots, bearing a proud sign that its restoration is funded by 
the people of Qatar. Round the corner on Dumaine Street is a pristine Banksy of 
a little girl standing on a stool, looking at a rat.

Best yet, carry on up Orleans Avenue and at 2301 you'll find Dooky Chase (
dookychaserestaurant.com <http://www.dookychaserestaurant.com>), the soul food 
restaurant Barack Obama ate at on his four-hour trip to the city in 2008. (Ray 
Charles namechecks it in Early in the Morning.) Next year is its 70th 
anniversary, and the 70th year of rustling up gumbo for head chef Leah, 87. 
(Her first words to the future president were: "You're too frail, baby – I have 
to fatten you up.")

If that's not open, head to Willie Mae's Scotch House at 2401 Saint Ann 
Street, less smart but no less of a institution, with a similarly venerable 
chef (94-year-oldWillie Mae Seaton 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2006/may/28/foodanddrink.features4>, 
though she retired from full-time service in 2005).
 Ernie K-Doe's Mother-In-Law Lounge. Photograph: Alamy 
If you're still going, and it's Wednesday, head back towards Louis Armstrong 
Park and theCandle Light Lounge at 925 North Robertson, where you'll find the 
Treme Brass Band. Failing that,Ernie K Doe's Mother-In-Law Lounge (
k-doe.com/lounge.shtml <http://www.k-doe.com/lounge.shtml>) at 1500 North 
Claiborne Avenue is open seven days a week, despite the death of its soul 
singer founder in 2001 (he's sadly best known in Britain as the composer of 
Here Come the Girls, from the Boots ad). It keeps erratic hours, and customers 
are frequently invited to pour their own drinks and bring their own crawfish 
from the shack across the street. A museum showcases Ernie's hits, with a 
life-size waxwork of the man himself. It's unique, almost halluncinatory, yet 
if one thing captures the soul of Treme as perfectly as Simon's show, it's this 
place.

• Flights to New Orleans cost from around £438 return from Heathrow through 
kayak.com <http://www.kayak.com>. The House on Bayou Road (2275 Bayou Road; +1 
504 945 0992,houseonbayouroad.com <http://www.houseonbayouroad.com/>; doubles 
from $135 B&B) is a former plantation house dating from the 18th century. 
Artist Edgar Degas stayed at 2306 Esplanade Ave in the 1870s – it is now Degas 
House (+1 504 821 5009,degashouse.com <http://www.degashouse.com/>; doubles 
from $149 B&B)
 