
Bolton's caretaker manager, Chris Evans, has issued a rallying call ahead of 
the FA Cup tie againstLincoln <https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> at 
the Reebok Stadium tomorrow.

Evans and the head coach, Steve Wigley, have taken temporary charge following 
Gary Megson's sacking in midweek. Megson departed at odds with a section of the 
fans and with the club in the relegation zone, but Evans insists there is not 
much that needs fixing.

"I want to look forward â€“ it is time to create unity," he said. "It is a time 
of change, a transitional period. Everyone has been placed in a position where 
we have to act in the best interests of the club.

"The interests of Bolton must prevail at all times. Players, staff, supporters 
and media need to unify so we can take the club forward. I look back to the 
reaction of the supporters at the start of the 2007-08 season with two or three 
thousand fans travelling to games.

"We created a 12th man. That team of 12 helped get us over the finishing line 
and beat the drop. The overwhelming message is for a united front. If we get 
that anything is possible. There are areas we still need to work on. It is a 
work in progress. We have a long way to go in the season."

The former head of the Wolves Academy, Evans, and Wigley find themselves in 
charge with the transfer window opening. A list of potential signings has been 
drawn up, although Evans admitted: "I would imagine things will have to be put 
on the back burner. But it would be good if we could freshen certain areas.

"Along with Gary [Megson] and chief scout Colin Harvey we developed a 
comprehensive domestic and European recruitment network. We have targets in all 
areas but equally we have to be prudent and respectful of the fact that a new 
manager will be coming in. He will have his own ideas."

Wigley will pick the team against the lowly League Two side and could be 
tempted to make changes with a trip to Arsenal looming on Wednesday. The 
midfielder Gavin McCann is pushing for a place in the starting line-up after 
recovering from an ankle injury.

Evans will make sure complacency does not set in against a side managed by the 
former Celtic, Blackburn and Norwich striker Chris Sutton.

"The FA Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> is held dear to all 
football people," said Evans. "It is not any different here. We will be 
professional in our approach and give Lincoln all the respect they deserve.

"It is our intention to go quietly about our business to make sure there is as 
little disruption as possible. We will be well prepared so we give ourselves 
every opportunity to make progress in the cup."
 