
“Half-meritocracy and half crap-shoot, Las Vegas is [...] the only city in 
America where the odds against you are all posted in plain sight, literally and 
metaphorically,”wrote Maile Chapman 
<http://ahttp//www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/25/reading-american-cities-books-about-las-vegas>
 last week. Do read her blogpost about the essential Vegas literature – from
Fear and Loathing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/dec/16/politics.huntersthompson> to 
recent fiction 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/we-are-called-to-rise-256790.html> about the 
struggles of life in the city beyond the Strip – but are there ever enough 
books in a list? Our readers had plenty more to contribute, and here are their 
picks.

1. Super Casino: Inside the “New” Las Vegas 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Super_Casino.html?id=LsNaEpQrt74C&redir_esc=y>
 by Pete Earley (2001)

Journalist and author Pete Earley wrote this book which mixes 
<http://www.publishersweekly.com/978-0-553-09502-9> the history of the city’s 
gambling business and character sketches and vignettes of life. In the words of 
the author:

I wanted to discover what draws people there so I went “inside” the Luxor, a 
billion dollar, pyramid-shaped casino on the Strip. I tell the story through 
the eyes of the people who I met — a workaholic casino boss, a seasoned 
blackjack whiz, a showgirl — even a teenage hooker who dreams of someday 
becoming a casino dealer.

understruck <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4294671> recommended it: 
“It delves into the history and current mechanics.”

2. Vegas: A Memoir of a Dark Season by John Gregory Dunne 
<http://www.abebooks.com/servlet/SearchResults?an=john+gregory+dunne&sts=t&tn=vegas&clickid=wdDSLTRacURISqL2VtTSBTBsUkXxNFUJkS%3AH1c0&cm_mmc=aff-_-ir-_-10078-_-77416&afn_sr=impact&ref=imprad>
 (1974)

This long-out-of-print novel was the first from Dunne, aka Mr Joan Didion. 
According to a review in Kirkus: “In the middle of his thirty-seventh year and 
first nervous breakdown, reading obits of college pals in the alumni rag, the 
husband-author manque of Joan Didion rents an apartment in the town that’s 
always open. In between sleeping and TV quiz shows he gets to know some of the 
occasionally wealthy but always degenerate desperate citizens: comic Jackie 
Kasey, who gets $10,000 a week but drives himself crazy with lack of fame and 
status games like “taking steam” with Frankie or Sammy or Cosby; Artha the 
hooker who turned 1203 tricks with 1076 johns in five years, including 54 
“multiples,” 24 S and 1 M; and Buster Mano, the private dick, who traces 
straying conventioneering hubbies and hustles gambling debts.” Sounds more than 
promising.

A “wonderful novel” according to ID5882060 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1709107>, despite its low sales and 
almost unknown status. This Esquire magazine piece dubbed it“the best Las Vegas 
book you’ve never read” 
<http://www.esquire.com/entertainment/a22740/vegas-book-john-gregory-dunne/>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fbooks-about-las-vegas-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435671781655%2Fe002d38a-fd5a-4077-bcd7-64c5bb4d96f4-664x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20about%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20readers'%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fbooks-about-las-vegas-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20about%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20readers%27%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fbooks-about-las-vegas-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435671781655%2Fe002d38a-fd5a-4077-bcd7-64c5bb4d96f4-664x1020.jpeg>
3. The Stand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/03/rereading-stephen-king-the-stand>
 by Stephen King (1978)

The master of horror’s The Stand – published first in 1978 and re-published in 
1990 as an “uncut edition”, at 1,100 pages – is a giant post-apocalyptic novel 
that is considered one of his most important works by fans and critics.James 
Smythe <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/james-smythe> wrote in the 
Guardian: “While I knew I loved King before that holiday [where he read it], 
afterwards I’d have followed him to hell and back. It’s because of The Stand 
that I’ve read all his work, and that I embarked on this series; it’s because 
of The Stand that I’m a writer at all.” “For me, the writing of Stephen King 
starts and ends with The Stand,” wrote 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/richardthomas/essential-stephen-king#.xu8MRoJ8v> 
author Richard Thomas on Buzzfeed.

“Nothing in The Stand is an accident. As much as it’s a novel about the battle 
between good and evil, it’s also a novel about fate. These people – the 
American contingent of the 0.6% of the world’s population who survived Captain 
Trips – manage to meet up in Las Vegas, called from all around by dreams. Did 
they choose to find each other, or was it chosen for them?” continued Smythe. 
The novel was recommended by readerCoronationChicken 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12201101>. 


In quotes from the book:


Who gets to be bexst-liked in any community? Who is the most trusted? Why, the 
man who does the dirty job, of course, and does it with a smile. The man who 
does the job you couldn’t bring yourself to do.

Dreams are the psyche’s way of taking a good dump every now and then. And that 
people who dream – or don’t dream in a way they can often remember when they 
wake up – are mentally constipated in some way.

4. Fools Die (1978) and Inside Las Vegas (1977) by Mario Puzo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/mario-puzo>

The author of The Godfather wrote two books set in this city: the novel Fools 
Die, recommended bybanjodsp <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12044296>, 
and the non-fiction Inside Las Vegas, a “world-weary account of the place” 
according toFace56 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2910461>. These are 
also examples of an author from elswehere (New York in this case, of course) 
settling in the city for a while and translating the experience into fiction 
and memoir. Apparently, Puzo himselfwas a “degenerate gambler” 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/mario-puzo/inside-las-vegas/> – but 
he believed Las Vegas was an honest, clean city.

In quotes from the book:

Let us be separated by wars and pestilence, death, madness but not by the 
passing of time. – Fools Die

The fact of the matter is that I wanted to hold a grudge in some funny kind of 
way. Against everybody. –Fools Die

It can be argued that man’s instinct to gamble is the only reason he is still 
not a monkey up in the trees. – InsideLas Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/las-vegas>

With the perverse logic of a degenerate gambler he figured God was testing his 
faith. – Inside Las Vegas

5. In Nevada: The Land, the People, God, and Chance 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/In_Nevada.html?id=EWJ6AAAAMAAJ&source=kp_cover&redir_esc=y>
 by David Thomson (1999)

Even though this history book covers the whole state, it “centres very much on 
the neon heart of the action,” said readerleroyhunter 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2094972>. Flm critic David Thomson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidthomson>’s study of the American West 
promises to be “part contemplation of an America both austere and flamboyant, 
part love letter to the Old West, part idiosyncratic travel guide” and to 
enlighten readers on why “Nevada is the place where Samuel Clemens became Mark 
Twain, Frank Sinatra became chairman of the board, divorce became an industry 
and gambling an institution...” Thomson also uses his huge knowledge of film 
and Hollywood to show how movies likeThe Godfather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-godfather>, Goodfellas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/goodfellas>, Casino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/84063/casino> and The Misfits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/11/the-misfits-film-review-marilyn-monroe-clark-gable>
 “have shaped and played upon our preconceptions about Nevada and Las Vegas”,
said a New York Times review 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1999/10/12/books/books-of-the-times-flitting-through-a-realm-of-dice-and-tumbleweed.html>
.

In quotes from the book:

Nevada is on the edge, on the wire, off to one side, in the empty quarter, or 
even in the rest of the country’s head as an idea, a possibility, an 
alternative. It is an experiment, or a kind of theater ... for America has used 
Nevada as a testing ground, and not just for weapons and their destructiveness 
but also for new social ideas, and their explosiveness. What happens if you 
allow divorce, prostitution, gambling? Can there be community and purpose if 
you encourage things deep in human nature yet supposedly alien to order and 
togetherness?

6. Ab 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/About_a_Mountain.html?id=eQkZ-VMgQaIC&redir_esc=y>
out a Mountain 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/About_a_Mountain.html?id=eQkZ-VMgQaIC&redir_esc=y>
 by John D’Agata (2010)

This unique book is a lyric essay about the proposed Yucca Mountain nuclear 
waste repository, an area for storage of spent nuclear fuel (from the entire 
United States) about 100 miles away from Las Vegas (in the plans of the 
government since the 80s). When D’Agata helped his mother move to Las Vegas in 
the summer 2002, the US Congress was going ahead with the plans, and the writer 
and essayist stayed to look into the history of it all (as well as investigate 
the mysterious suicide of a boy who jumped off a hotel-casino). The format of 
the book has also been called “a reporter’s notebook that reads like poetry” by
NPR <http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=124361803>. D’Agata 
has “an encyclopedic understanding of the form’s intricate artistry”, according 
tothe New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/28/books/review/Bock-t.html>. It was 
“wholeheartedly recommended” byCe_Santiago 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12741347>. 

7. The Goldfinch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/30/donna-tart-year-of-the-goldfinch>
 by Donna Tartt (2013)

Donna Tartt’s bestselling and Pulitzer Prize-winning novel is partly set in 
Las Vegas (as well as in Amsterdam and New York City) – and the city’s presence 
in the story is very powerful, as our readers explained.

I thought the section of The Goldfinch set in Vegas was very strong, the sort 
of banality and frustration of trying to live a normal life in its suburbs 
rather than “blah blah Sin City”... –benzedrine 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1479302> 

The portrayal of Las Vegas brought [the book] to a sort of life (as far as 
that word can be used) – the vast desert background, the huge sky and the 
semi-deserted housing estate, the boys pilfering from shops for food ... It 
came across as a parched, sterile, hating environment, rife with low-life. Boys 
growing up here, while parents gambled and stole, didn’t stand a chance of 
taking the right path. –JHawkinson 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10234235>

Definitely The Goldfinch – incredibly evocative of the sand blasted emptiness 
of the suburbs. –DeputyPeck <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14784934>

In quotes from the book:

Well, is true. I did know. Because if possible to paint fakes that look like 
that? Las Vegas would be the most beautiful city in the history of earth!

What mattered most, as I came to realize, was who’d lived in Vegas the 
longest, which was why the knock-down Mexican beauties and itinerant 
construction heirs sat alone at lunch while the bland, middling children of 
local realtors and car dealers were the cheerleaders and class presidents, the 
unchallenged elite of the school.



 vegas Photograph: Guardian 
8. Leaving Las Vegas 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=PTYpfjdmwnUC&redir_esc=y> by John O’Brien 
(1990)

A scorching novel of alcohol, love, self-destruction and suicide, it was later 
adapted into an Oscar-winningfilm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/60948/leaving-las-vegas>, starring 
Nicholas Cage. ReaderDeputyPeck 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14784934> “thought it was 
heart-wrenchingly sad; no Las Vegas winners in that book.”

In quotes from the book: 


Casinos … know that chips are a wonderful, pretty tool, and possess none of 
the stigma of dollars. Dollars translate too easily into hours or houses or 
cars or sex or food or everything, and so losing a dollar is a much more 
tangible experience than parting with a chip, an object that looks more like a 
midway consolation token than a medium of exchange.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fbooks-about-las-vegas-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435672373820%2Fcea316c6-7f1d-4534-869c-dbc7c2448bc2-652x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20about%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20readers'%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fbooks-about-las-vegas-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20about%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20readers%27%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fbooks-about-las-vegas-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F30%2F1435672373820%2Fcea316c6-7f1d-4534-869c-dbc7c2448bc2-652x1020.jpeg>
 American Tabloid (1995), the first book in the trilogy. 
9. The Underworld USA Trilogy by James Ellroy

Las Vegas is “just up the road from Los Angeles” – in relative, American terms 
– as readermydaray <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15052193> pointed 
out, so it was only inevitable for the quintessential LA crime writer to base 
some of his stories in Sin City. This trilogy, formed by the novels American 
Tabloid, The Cold Six Thousand and Blood’s a Rover, tells a saga of corruption 
in the late 50s and early 60s and includes real history – John F Kennedy and 
Martin Luther King’s assassinations and the Vietnam War among other defining 
events – and spans across the country. Las Vegas has a strong presence as the 
Mafia’s stronghold. It was also recommended bykelso77 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2882045> and DJKM 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1898026>.

A very Ellroy-esque quote from The Cold Six Thousand

Pete pulled the blinds. Wayne hit the lights. There:

Sink water – dark pink – carving knives afloat. Baked beans and fruit flies on 
mold. Hair in a colander. Dots on the floor. Dots by the fridge.

Pete opened it. Pete smelled it. They saw it:

The severed legs. The diced hips. Mom’s head in the vegetable bin.

Extra notes

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Reader ID6489058 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4539995> offered a 
handy chronological reading list:

 * The Biggest Game In Town 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Biggest_Game_in_Town.html?id=rds9awWUs_YC&redir_esc=y>
 for the Las Vegas of 30 years ago.

 * The Odds: One Season, Three Gamblers, and the Death of Their Las Vegas 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Odds.html?id=DSr9AgAAQBAJ&redir_esc=y>
 for the Las Vegas of 20 years ago.

 * The Professor, The Banker, and the Suicide King: Inside the Richest Poker 
Game of All Time 
<http://www.hachettebookgroup.com/titles/michael-craig/the-professor-the-banker-and-the-suicide-king/9780446539630/>
 for the Las Vegas of 10 years ago.

 * Ship It Holla Ballas: How a Bunch of 19-Year-Old College Dropouts Used the 
Internet to Become Poker’s Loudest, Craziest, and Richest Crew 
<http://www.npr.org/2013/01/26/170183173/ship-those-virtual-chips-the-rise-and-fall-of-online-pokers-youngest-crew>
 for the Las Vegas of now.
 