
Brendan King’s biography, Beryl Bainbridge: Love by All Sorts of Means, is all 
about his former employer. Bainbridge was a popular fixture in literary 
circles, and several reviewers had met and were fond of her. In theLondon 
Evening Standard,Valerie Grove 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/books/beryl-bainbridge-love-by-all-sorts-of-means-by-brendan-king-review-a3340466.html>
 recalled: “Everyone who knew her loved Beryl, party-goer and befriender of 
misfits. But Brendan King, her amanuensis for 23 years, got closer than most, 
and he has written a first rate biography.” In theFinancial Times, Suzi Feay 
<https://www.ft.com/content/9fae5dae-7039-11e6-a0c9-1365ce54b926> remembered 
that Bainbridge was “wickedly amusing” at dinner parties in the noughties, but 
found too much detail in King’s book about Bainbridge’s complicated love life 
and not enough about her “stiletto-sharp” fiction. “To be fair to King, 
Bainbridge herself closely equated love, sex and writing … Yet it’s hard not to 
feel that the messy detail detracts from her artistry rather than embellishes 
it.” A similar complaint came fromBen Lawrence in the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/books/what-to-read/beryl-bainbridge-was-nice-as-well-as-naughty--and-a-brilliant-no/>
: “Had King allowed room for Bainbridge’s essential niceness, as well as 
examining her literary talent with greater rigour, his biography might not have 
grabbed so many headlines, but you can’t help thinking that it would have been 
closer to the truth.”

It was mostly left to male reviewers of Donal Ryan’s All We Shall Know to 
speculate that its two female characters seem to be convincing. Several of them 
admired the novel’s opening lines: “Martin Toppy is the son of a famous 
traveller and the father of my unborn child. He’s 17. I’m 33. I was his 
teacher.” “As set-up scenarios go, this could hardly be bettered,” wrote Bert 
Wright in the Sunday Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/a-sisterly-show-of-strength-2xsk7xtdl>, who 
admired Ryan’s “mastery of formal architecture, of voice, character, and tone”. 
TheDaily Mail’s John Harding 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/books/article-3792026/LITERARY-FICTION.html> 
predicted prizes for this “convincing portrayal of life lived at the edgy 
margins”, though theObserver’s Kevin Curran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/28/all-we-shall-know-donal-ryan-review-traveller-community>
 thought it “a missed opportunity for an underrepresented community 
[Travellers] to be portrayed in such a negative, cliched way”. However,Roy 
Foster in the Irish Times 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/culture/books/all-we-shall-know-review-no-flash-in-the-pan-1.2793923>
 was impressed, calling the novel “short, brilliantly colloquial, lyrical, 
sometimes brutal”.

It was women in the main who reviewed Emma Donoghue’s The Wonder, which was 
inspired by stories of 19th-century fasting girls in rural Ireland, in this 
case 11-year-old Anna. Inevitably, it was compared to her most famous novel. 
“Donoghue’s great skill is in trapping the reader ... in that sordid little 
cottage,” wroteSarah Perry in the Financial Times 
<https://www.ft.com/content/77f0cbda-7b5b-11e6-ae24-f193b105145e>. “The 
minutely described interior, and its claustrophobic effect, recallRoom ... 
there is again that sensation of being trapped within the pages, alongside the 
suffering child.” “Obsession and bigotry are powerful forces,” wroteElizabeth 
Buchan in the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/books/article-3792063/HISTORICAL-FICTION.html>
, “and [Donoghue] is ruthless in her exposé of religious delusion, family lies 
and abuse. The depiction of a child in extremis is almost unbearable, but this 
shocking and gripping story is beautifully written.”The Sunday Times’s Lucy 
Atkins 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/books-the-wonder-by-emma-donoghue-022pq25ws> 
was frustrated by other characters’ failure to question Anna, but found the 
prose “stirring and tender, her period setting alive”. In theNew York Times, 
Stephen King 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/02/books/review/stephen-king-emma-donoghue-the-wonder.html?_r=0>
, obviously a fan, calledThe Wonder “an old-school page turner” and “impossible 
to put down”, and Donoghue’s prose “as sturdy and serviceable as a good pair of 
brogans, but never nondescript. There are occasional flashes of lyricism ... 
but Donoghue’s main purpose here is story, story, story, and God bless her for 
it.”
 