
Some things can only happen in San Francisco. Few cities combine the magnetism 
of “start-up” entrepreneurship with being the perfect place for outsiders and 
seekers – and the literature set in the city reflects the creativity, 
convulsions and freedom that have shaped it. Whether you’re looking for a 
reading list to prepare, or accompany, a visit to San Francisco, or you’re 
simply in the mood to be driven to it through literature, look no further. Last 
week, San Francisco writer Anisse Gross took us through the fascinating 
literary history of the city where people emigrated to pursue not the American 
dream, butthe dream of the west, “the limits of self‐expression and identity” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/feb/26/reading-american-cities-books-about-san-francisco>
. Do check her blog, with essential recommendations ranging from the Beats to 
Tales of the City – and here is what Guardian readers had to add. If your 
favourite is missing, please let us know in the comments.

1. The Golden Gate by Vikram Seth (1986)


Seth’s novel is written in verse – specifically, in a type of sonnet called the
Onegin stanza <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Onegin_stanza>, invented by Pushkin 
for Eugene Onegin – and it tells the life stories of a group of yuppies in 
1980s San Francisco. Marriages, divorces, existential crises, friendships, 
corporate jobs, self-reinventions, family – the stuff of life, ultimately – 
intertwine in related, all explored in a beautifully unusual form as the 
narration follows protagonist John Brown.

Seth was a graduate student at Stanford University when, while researching for 
his dissertation, he came across Pushkin’s classic novel in verse, and realised 
that this was the form he wanted to use for his“tales of California” 
<http://bombmagazine.org/article/1377/>. This non-traditional novel did, 
according tosupersplurk <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14548775>, “an 
excellent job in bringing the city and the mood of San Francisco in the 1980s 
to life”. It was also recommended byconedison 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10021252> and by Roopa Ganguli 
<https://twitter.com/roogang67/status/571029508456914945>. 

A sample San Francisco <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> 
verse:


John notes the late September showers

Have tinged the blond hills round the bay

With a new green. He notes the flowers

In their pre-winter bloom. The way

That, when he was a child, the mystery

Of San Francisco’s restless spark,

It strikes him now as, through the park,

Wrested from old dunes by the westward

Thrust of the greenbelt to the slow

Pacific swell, his footsteps go.

But it is late. The birds fly nestward

Towards the sunset, and the arc

Of darkness drifts across the park.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fbooks-about-san-francisco-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425559539084%2F0f2ca433-aad6-46ac-94f4-50064cf69418-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20about%20San%20Francisco%3A%20readers'%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fbooks-about-san-francisco-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20about%20San%20Francisco%3A%20readers%27%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fbooks-about-san-francisco-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425559539084%2F0f2ca433-aad6-46ac-94f4-50064cf69418-680x1020.jpeg>
2. The Mayor of Castro Street by Randy Shilts (1982)

“Still the go-to source for the story of Harvey Milk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/dec/06/harvey-milk>, but also an 
essential book about the city’s changing politics during the era [the 1970s], 
and one of the best political biographies of its decade,” saidMrsBitch 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13505801>. Milk was a politician and 
gay rights activist who became the first openly gay man to be elected to public 
office in California. He was dramatically assassinated almost a year later, in 
1978. He is still a symbol for the emergence of gay power in America, and his 
life has been the subject of numerous books,films 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/milk> and documentaries 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0088275/>. 

In quotes from the book:


I have never considered myself a candidate. I have always considered myself 
part of a movement, part of a candidacy. I considered the movement the 
candidate.


Without hope, not only gays, but the blacks, the seniors, the handicapped, the 
us’es, the us’es will give up. And if you help elect to the central committee 
and other offices, more gay people, that gives a green light to all who feel 
disenfranchised, a green light to move forward. It means hope to a nation that 
has given up, because if a gay person makes it, the doors are open to everyone.

3. Homeboy by Seth Morgan (1990)

New York-born Seth Morgan based his debut novel, Homeboy, on experiences from 
his own life, including a prison stint and his discovery of the drug culture in 
San Francisco. The book gained praise upon its publication: theNew York Times 
called it 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1990/10/19/obituaries/seth-morgan-41-dies-in-crash-his-novel-homeboy-won-praise.html>
 a “savagely comic and often brilliant’’ look at “the teeming San Francisco 
nether world of junkies, pimps, drag queens and hookers,” and dubbed Morgan “a 
Joycean Hell’s Angel.”

Morgan, who was the fiance of Janis Joplin at the time of her death in 1970, 
was imprisoned from 1977 to 1980 for armed robbery, and worked as a barker for 
striptease clubs in San Francisco before and after that. He said of writing 
Homeboy: “On my last legs, I hied down to New Orleans to quietly drink myself 
to death, and nearly did, but something awoke in me and I wrote a book 
instead.” He died on a motorcycle accident in 1990, shortly after its 
publication, and having signed a deal for a second book which was to be set in 
the Louisiana city. He was 41.

“He certainly lived the life he wrote about,” said peninsularguy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/feb/26/reading-american-cities-books-about-san-francisco#comment-48130674>
, “including being a barker for San Francisco strip clubs. Quite apart from the 
San Francisco connections, a great read on its own terms.” It was also 
recommended byDJMC <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3360679> and Paul 
Moran <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14137239>.


In quotes from the book:

Okay fella, I’ve gone all day and haven’t thought of you once … then it just 
comes over me like a chill … remember the little things, like your voice so 
tough but pudding underneath and the way the tip of your tongue sticks out when 
you concentrate on things like tying a shoe or jacking a shot …


I seen that wanting to love, struggling for it, is more real than just loving. 
It’s deeper, stronger, more honest. The other’s too easy and cheap. For cheap, 
easy people … Our kind has to suffer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fbooks-about-san-francisco-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425575633633%2F4dae19b3-4d3e-44ce-8d7e-872cf0ab9c93-664x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20about%20San%20Francisco%3A%20readers'%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fbooks-about-san-francisco-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20about%20San%20Francisco%3A%20readers%27%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F07%2Fbooks-about-san-francisco-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F5%2F1425575633633%2F4dae19b3-4d3e-44ce-8d7e-872cf0ab9c93-664x1020.jpeg>
4. Telegraph Avenue by Michael Chabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/sep/05/telegraph-avenue-michael-chabon-review>
 (2012)

San Francisco can’t be understood without the context of the entire Bay Area, 
and there’s a whole different urban universe on the other side of the bay, as
dancer123 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1744137> reminded us:

Mostly focused on Berkeley and Oakland, the East Bay gets less attention. Jack 
London andGertrude Stein <https://www.theguardian.com/books/gertrude-stein> are 
natives, as well asCredence Clearwater Revival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/26/john-fogerty-creedence-clearwater-revival>
 (although they’re actually from El Cerrito – a suburb of Berkeley). Stein 
referred to Oakland: “There is no there there.” People have been ignoring it 
ever since. It’s now attracting newcomers, as hipsters arepriced out of San 
Francisco by Googlebus millionaires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/25/google-bus-protest-swells-to-revolt-san-francisco>
 – a west coast Brooklyn perhaps.

A good introduction to the Oakland/Berkeley border is Michael Chabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/michael-chabon>’s recent Telegraph Avenue, 
with which “you get something of each” – the title references an avenue that 
runs through both cities. This is a multi-generational comic novel set in the 
mid-2000s and with interests as disparate as discussing Tarantino characters 
and challenging America’s attitudes to race.

In quotes from the book:

Most of all, he was tired of being a holdout, a sole survivor, the last 
coconut hanging on the last palm tree on the last little atoll in the path of 
the great wave of late-modern capitalism, waiting to be hammered flat.

All the anger that Gwen had been feeling, not just today or over the past nine 
months but all her life – feeding on to it like a sun, using it to power her 
engines, to fund her stake in the American dream – struck her for the first 
time as a liability. As purely tragic. There was no way to partake of it 
without handing it on down the generations.

5. John Barleycorn by Jack London (1913)

John Barleycorn, Jack London’s most autobiographical book, was a fictional 
dissection of his alcoholism and a reflection upon how society enabled 
drinking. In the novel, the title of which was inspired bya British folk song 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_NNgLqz89Z8>, London professed his love for 
alcohol, but he also wrote it as a tract against the dangers of addiction (he 
was highly influenced by the suffragettes he had met in New York). One of 
America’s most famous authors at the time, London’s book would be used in 
campaigns for prohibition. It was recommended byDJMC 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3360679>.

In quotes from the book: 


There are, broadly speaking, two types of drinkers. There is the man whom we 
all know, stupid, unimaginative, whose brain is bitten numbly by numb maggots; 
who walks generously with wide-spread, tentative legs, falls frequently in the 
gutter, and who sees, in the extremity of his ecstasy, blue mice and pink 
elephants. He is the type that gives rise to the jokes in the funny papers.

This strength John Barleycorn gives is not fictitious strength. It is real 
strength … But it is manufactured out of the sources of strength, and it must 
ultimately be paid for, and with interest.

See also his San Francisco stories <https://jacklondonsf.wordpress.com/>. 

6. Whores for Gloria by William T. Vollmann (1991)


A fascinating insight into San Francisco’s famously shady Tenderloin district, 
Whores for Gloria is a novel about a Vietnam veteran who becomes an alcoholic 
and devotes all his resources to search for a prostitute he once loved and who 
may or may not be imaginary. The New York Timessaid of it 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1992/02/16/books/the-girl-of-his-dreams.html>: “The 
strength of Mr. Vollmann’s novel, its poetry, its humanity, lies in the 
portraits of the prostitutes, transvestites and pimps who people the sidewalks 
of the Tenderloin district. And what a gallery of rogues it is.” It was 
recommended byCarlRusso <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12905662>. 

In quotes from the book:

Sunglasses make the world quieter and safer, as if you are viewing things 
behind smoked windows fronting your skull-house: you are inside and the world 
is outside, and the world cannot see into you; mirror sunglasses double the 
armor.

For we all must build our worlds around us, bravely or dreamily, as long as we 
can we shelter ourselves from the rain, walling ourselves in gorgeously.

7. San Francisco Noir: The City in Film Noir from 1940 to the Present by 
Nathaniel Rich (2005)

We couldn’t miss a book about the city’s huge role in film history. It has 
been used as a location for endless films and, according topeninsularguy 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2006796>, the book is an “absolute 
delight from start to finish. Quite staggering to realise the number of (key) 
noirs set in San Francisco, from The Maltese Falcon to Point Blank via Vertigo, 
and full of obscure detail like the wardrobe connection between Vertigo and 
Basic Instinct”. If you’re in the lookout for hundreds of film trivia, this is 
for you.

See also Footsteps in the Fog 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Footsteps-Fog-Alfred-Hitchcocks-Francisco/dp/1891661272>
, specifically about Hitchcock’s use of the city and Bay Area locations for his 
films.


8. All Over Coffee by Paul Madonna (2007)

In 2004, artist and writer Paul Madonna started publishing All Over Coffee 
<http://www.paulmadonna.com/all_over_coffee/>, a mix of comics, poetry and art, 
in the San Francisco Chronicle. The “strip”, as he called it – a comic strip 
without the comic – depicts the city and its inhabitants in an original, 
thoughtful way, and has all been compiled into a book. In the words ofDave 
Eggers <http://www.citylights.com/book/?GCOI=87286100720820>, “the architecture 
of residential San Francisco is about detail, wilful eccentricity, an almost 
rococo approach to line, and a steadfast devotion to art for its own sake, 
beauty as its own reward. Paul Madonna’s work gives itself fully to all of 
these notions, and to the city as a whole, and in doing so reminds us why, 
block by block and view by view, this is one of the most beautiful cities in 
the world.” Recommended byhureharehure 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2120981>. 
 Virtual Light, the first book in the trilogy. 
9. The Bridge trilogy by William Gibson 


This trilogy by acclaimed science-fiction writer William Gibson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/williamgibson> is comprised by Virtual Light 
(1993), Idoru (1996), and All Tomorrow’s Parties (1999). In a (then) future 
year 2006, the series starts with an earthquake in California, which would 
divide the state into two, and it explores the advancement of cyberspace 
technology and nanotechnology. The title references the Bay Bridge, which in 
the story is abandoned and becomes an improvised place of shelter. It’s also 
set in Tokyo.

It was recommended by Cheryl Morgan 
<https://twitter.com/CherylMorgan/status/571008975338147840>.


In quotes from the books:

They sat around accessing media all day and talking about it, and nothing ever 
seemed to get done.—All Tomorrow’s Parties

You could buy a burrito there, a lottery ticket, batteries, tests for various 
diseases. You could do voice-mail, e-mail, send faxes. It had occurred to Laney 
that this was probably the only store for miles that sold anything that anyone 
ever really needed; the others all sold things that he couldn’t even imagine 
wanting.—Idoru

10. Infinite City: A San Francisco Atlas by Rebecca Solnit (2010)

A “sublime” book, according to aerialmeg 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3909472>, Infinite City is “a 
collaborative atlas of San Francisco, including essays and maps ranging from
Monarch butterflies 
<http://www.fastcodesign.com/multisite_files/codesign/InfiniteCitySolnitMonarchscloseup.jpg>
 toHitchcock’s films 
<http://www.mohawkconnects.com/feltandwire/2011/03/15/infinite-city-mapping-my-memories/>
 to blues clubs, and makes a terrific guide map to the city’s possibilities”, 
in the words of writerAnisse Gross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/feb/26/reading-american-cities-books-about-san-francisco>
.
 One of the maps from Infinite City ... “Third Street Phantom Coast depicts 
how the city’s waterfront has expanded streams, shell middens and 19th century 
landmarks. Photograph: Rebecca Solnit 
Extra notes

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Joan Didion’s essay collection Slouching Towards Bethelem 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Slouching_Towards_Bethlehem.html?id=_pgrUFe9Fh8C>
 features two essays about the city – with pearls like this:

I went to San Francisco because I had not been able to work in some months, 
had been paralyzed by the conviction that writing was an irrelevant act, that 
the world as I had understood it no longer existed. If I was to work again at 
all, it would be necessary for me to come to terms with disorder.

Did we miss your favourite? Please add it in the comments. Next up: Los 
Angeles.
 