
It may be the Live Music Capital of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/sep/04/reading-american-cities-books-about-austin>
, but as the local writer and editor Michael Barrett showed us last week, 
alongside Austin’s world-renowned music festivals there is a vibrant literary 
culture.Check out his piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/sep/04/reading-american-cities-books-about-austin>
 for a fascinating exploration of the running themes in the city’s literature, 
including politics, crime and explorations of the tech boom, hipsterism and 
creativity.

Guided by readers like Sanl <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4317496>, 
whose time living in Austin included “having a beer with Johnny Cash on a lazy 
Tuesday”, we’ve assembled some of the best books with the city at their heart. 
Take a look at our selection and let us know what we’ve missed. Add them in the 
comments below and we’ll update this reading list.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Freading-austin-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441882698515%2F427bf322-1032-4937-9b45-85f32a14f4f4-1280x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20about%20Austin%3A%20readers'%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Freading-austin-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20about%20Austin%3A%20readers%27%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Freading-austin-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441882698515%2F427bf322-1032-4937-9b45-85f32a14f4f4-1280x2040.jpeg>
1. James Hynes’s novels 


Novelist James Hynes, Michigan-born and Austin resident, has written several 
novels that are about Austin, even if he doesn’t always identify it as such. 
According todancer123 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1744137>:

Austin is fully disclosed as the setting for Next 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/04/books/review/Messud-t.html> (2010), which is 
a satiric thriller about a terrorist attack on a glass-towered Congress Street 
high-rise.Publish and Perish 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/97/08/03/reviews/970803.03schinet.html> (1998) 
is a collection of three novellas, much of which takes place in an Austin-like 
academia. This one combines satire and spookiness. I haven’t readKings of 
Infinite Space <http://us.macmillan.com/kingsofinfinitespace/jameshynes> 
(2005), but it also sounds like an Austin setting about a drop-out from 
academia working in a soulless and mindless state government bureaucracy – sort 
of a civil serviceOffice Space <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0151804/>.

The novel Next is “a plotless, desultory novel about a commitment-phobic man 
walking along the hot streets of Austin as he waits for a job interview,” 
according to areview in the Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2010/03/23/AR2010032303617.html>
 – it “shouldn’t work at all, let alone succeed as it does.”

Austin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> books writer Michael 
Schaub also recommended it, via Twitter:
Michael Schaub (@michaelschaub) 
For what it's worth, my favorite book about Austin, and one of my favorite 
novels ever: "Next" by@jameshynes <https://twitter.com/jameshynes>.
 <https://twitter.com/michaelschaub/status/639870383424843776> September 4, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/michaelschaub/status/639870383424843776> 
From Next:

No, it’s a jet, coming out from behind the tower, climbing from Austin’s 
airport over the city so steeply and slowly it looks as if it’s winching itself 
into the sky ... And though Kevin’s pulse has slowed, the still surprising and 
indelible conjunction of two formerly unrelated compound nouns – airplane, 
skyscraper – makes his stomach drop. What’s worse is that he can’t even hear 
the jet yet, and its silence as it crawls glittering against the bleached sky 
makes the sight even creepier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Freading-austin-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441882793392%2F27d319eb-fe15-42ca-9028-82a9ce9236d1-678x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20about%20Austin%3A%20readers'%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Freading-austin-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20about%20Austin%3A%20readers%27%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Freading-austin-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441882793392%2F27d319eb-fe15-42ca-9028-82a9ce9236d1-678x1020.jpeg>
2. Famous Writers I Have Known 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/19/books/review/famous-writers-i-have-known-by-james-magnuson.html>
 by James Magnuson (2014)

Bruce Hunt <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15317973> says:

Well, you’ve got to include the novel Famous Writers I Have Known. Jim is the 
longtime director of theMichener Center for Writers 
<http://www.utexas.edu/academic/mcw/> [one of the most prestigious writing 
programs in the US], and in “Famous Writers” he gives a wonderfully funny 
picture of both the Center (thinly disguised) and literary Austin (even more 
thinly disguised). Great stuff. HisWindfall 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/106082/windfall-by-james-magnuson/> is 
very good, too.

From Famous Writers I Have Known:

Sometimes writing a sentence can be harder than serving one.

3. Small Steps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/feb/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview21>
 by Louis Sachar (2006)

Small Steps is a sort-of sequel to Sachar’s much-praised novel Holes 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280828/>, which picks 
up the story after the escape from the Texas juvenile correctional facility 
featured on the first book. ForRichardDDN 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12414157>:

Small Steps is a great and underrated YA novel set in Austin. It points out 
that there is West and East Austin divided by a railway, colour and poverty.

Writing in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/feb/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview21>
, Josh Lacey praised its “funny dialogue, fast-moving story, emotive scenes, 
[and] interesting central character,” even if he considered it not as brilliant 
as the excellent book that preceded it.

From Small Steps: 

There was something special about being in a strange place, all alone in a 
mass of people even if you had just screwed up your life, or perhaps especially 
if you had just screwed up your life.

I may have ruined my life, but at least I got to eat some really good Chinese 
food.

4. Invisible in Austin: Life and Labor in an American City 
<http://www.othersidesofaustin.com> by Javier Auyero (2015)

Reader Pamela Neumann <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11304476> 
recommended this study of working-class lives:

The book seeks to draw attention to the ways that racial, economic, and gender 
inequality affects the daily lives of ordinary people living on the margins of 
our city, but whose contributions are central to maintaining Austin’s image as 
a hip, creative city.

The book, edited by University of Texas sociology professor Javier Auyero, 
follows the lives of 11 Austinites in working-class and poor environments. The 
website for the project provides supplementaryphoto stories for each chapter 
<http://www.othersidesofaustin.com/chapters/> of the book. 

5. Under the Same Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/06/under-same-stars-lott-review> by 
Tim Lott (2012)

mal4mac <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1861392> recommended:

Under the Same Stars is a superb road novel in which two brothers go in search 
of their estranged father. Starting out in New Orleans, they take in Austin en 
route, and several other American cities.

For Alex Clark, writing in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/apr/06/under-same-stars-lott-review>: 

[Lott’s] real talent lies in a willingness to allow emotional rawness and 
confusion to remain unfinessed, the loose ends to stay frayed. “I can’t find a 
story that fits,” says [protagonist] Sal plaintively, trying to explain his 
psychological frailty to his irrepressibly cheerful brother. Not everything in
Under the Same Stars does fit; its characters may have nudged their lives 
forwards, but the past remains a painful, mysterious hinterland. It might be an 
uncomfortable read, but its raggedness is perhaps its greatest strength.

Extras: bookshops, literary journals and libraries

“God, we’re spoiled for choice here,” celebrated Austin reader Amy Gentry 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10941556>. She offered a mini-guide of 
great local shoutouts, which we’ve compiled below, together with those 
recommended by Michael Barrett:

Independent bookshops

 * Malvern Books <http://malvernbooks.com/>: “Fills a generous-sized room with 
indie-only presses,” said Gentry. Barrett said: “a relatively new bookstore, 
has made a big splash in the poetry world and has become a favorite venue of 
many local writers who want to share their work to a supportive and well-read 
crowd.” 
 * Bookwoman <http://www.ebookwoman.com/>: “One of the last remaining feminist 
bookstores in North America,” Gentry adds, “and it boasts an expertly curated 
selection.” 
 * Monkeywrench Books <http://www.monkeywrenchbooks.org/>: radical bookstore 
 * Farewell Books <http://www.farewellbookstore.com/>: bookshop and gallery 
specialising in art, comics, indie 
 * Resistencia Bookstore <http://www.resistenciabooks.com/>: neighbourhood 
centre for aspiring writers, specialising in indigenous, Native American, 
Latino African American, queer, feminist, and children’s bilingual literature. 
 * South Congress Books <http://southcongressbooks.com/>: store specialising 
in classic and vintage books 
Local publishers (including presses, literary journals, comics, and zines)


 * Kirkus Reviews <https://www.kirkusreviews.com/> 
 * A Strange Object <http://www.astrangeobject.com/aso/> 
 * American Short Fiction <http://americanshortfiction.org/> 
 * Austin Zine Fest <http://austinzinefest.com/> 
 * Bat City Review <http://www.batcityreview.org/> 
 * Host Publications <http://www.hostpublications.com/index.html> 
 * fields <http://www.fieldsmagazine.com/> 
 * The Austin Review <http://theaustinreview.org/> 
 * Write Bloody Publishing <http://writebloody.com/> 
 * Book People <http://www.bookpeople.com/> 
Libraries

Sign up to our Bookmarks email
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
 * Austin Public Library <http://www.austinlibrary.org/site/PageServer>: 
Austin has an extensive network of more than 20 libraries, supported 
financially by the Austin Public Library Friends Foundation, which also hosts 
up-and-coming authors from around the world at itsNew Fiction Confab 
<http://www.austinlibrary.org/site/PageServer?pagename=New_Fiction_Confab>, and 
runs the popularMayor’s Book Club 
<http://www.austinlibrary.org/site/PageServer?pagename=Mayors_Book_Club>, 
explains Barrett.

 * UT campus’s Harry Ransom Center <http://www.hrc.utexas.edu/>: this library 
“houses 36 million literary manuscripts, 1 million rare books, 5 million 
photographs, and more than 100,000 works of art — including a Gutenberg Bible,” 
says Barrett. See agallery of some of its literary treasures here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2015/jul/03/harry-ransom-center-literary-treasures-in-pictures>
.

Do you know of any great books set in or about Austin? Let us know in the 
comments and we’ll update the list

 