
The Tennesee Williams New Orleans literary festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/26/tennessee-williams-festival-madness-flesh>
 is over for another year, but we’re still in a New Orleans state of mind – and 
we will be indefinitely, with such a great list to keep us reading. As the 
famous writer and playwright himselfsaid 
<http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/629164-america-has-only-three-cities-new-york-san-francisco-and>
: “America only has three cities: New York, San Francisco and New Orleans. 
Everywhere else is just Cleveland.” While we’re not sure what other important 
cities might want to say about this, in terms of literature the Big Easy is 
certainly up there. AfterSusan Larson took us through her essential books about 
the city 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/books/booksblog/2015/mar/26/reading-american-cities-books-about-new-orleans>
 – from Streetcar to A Confederacy of Dunces – we turned to our readers to 
complete the list. Here are some of their recommendations. If your favourite is 
missing, do add it in the comments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fbooks-about-new-orleans-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427973527255%2F4ae34867-2b39-44f8-8e5c-7a9f1e4cd165-1272x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20about%20New%20Orleans%3A%20readers'%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fbooks-about-new-orleans-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20about%20New%20Orleans%3A%20readers%27%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fbooks-about-new-orleans-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427973527255%2F4ae34867-2b39-44f8-8e5c-7a9f1e4cd165-1272x2040.jpeg>
1. The Awakening <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/index.php/awakening-20.html> 
by Kate Chopin (1899)

“Madame Bovary cajun style,” said Guillaume d’Hautacam 
<https://twitter.com/GdHautacam/status/581150847893028864> on Twitter. This 
turn-of-the-century novel about a woman’s emotional and sexual awakening caused 
anger and was out of print for decades, after coming out in a world that wasn’t 
ready for a book that portrayed “women as real people rather than foils for a 
masculine disposition”,wrote Barbara Kingsolver in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/15/the-awakening-kate-chopin-barbara-kingsolver>
. This feminist book about female passion didn’t resurface significantly until 
women in the 1960s began to read and discuss it. A fascinating story in itself. 
It was also recommended byDrowned Librarian 
<https://twitter.com/drowndlibrarian/status/581184057448501249>.

In quotes from the book:

The city atmosphere certainly has improved her. Some way she doesn’t seem like 
the same woman.

The voice of the sea is seductive, never ceasing, whispering, clamoring, 
murmuring, inviting the soul to wander in abysses of solitude.

I would give up the unessential; I would give up my money, I would give up my 
life for my children; but I wouldn’t give myself. I can’t make it more clear; 
it’s only something I am beginning to comprehend, which is revealing itself to 
me.

2. Coming Through Slaughter 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/coming-through-slaughter.html> by Michael 
Ondaatje 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/17/my-hero-michael-ondaatje-teju-cole>
 (1976)

This book by novelist and poet Michael Ondaatje, who won the Booker prize for 
The English Patient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/mar/04/booker-club-english-patient-ondaatje>
, is an all-time favourite ofCzechGrecian 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2464016>’s, “brilliantly capturing New 
Orleans jazz in both the story and the structure and rhythm of the prose. 
Absolutely brilliant.” The book recounts the life of jazz musician Buddy 
Bolden, regarded asone of the inventors of jazz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jun/17/buddy-bolden-invents-jazz>, in 
the early 20th century and, with some of the rhythms of the music it depicts, 
Ondaatje mixes fiction and non-fiction, history and interviews, dramatic 
reconstruction and photography.

KaleHawley <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14099799> also praised it:


A brilliantly imagined early novel about Buddy Bolden and the early days of 
jazz inNew Orleans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-orleans>.

In quotes from the book:

It was a music that had so little wisdom you wanted to clean nearly every note 
he passed, passed it seemed along the way as if travelling in a car, passed 
before he even approached it and saw it properly. There was no control except 
the mood of his power … and it is for this reason it is good you never heard 
him play on recordings.

The right ending is an open door you can’t see too far out of. It can mean 
exactly the opposite of what you are thinking.

3. Lew Griffin series <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/long-legged-fly.html> 
by James Sallis

Best known for his 2005 novel Drive 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/drive-8.html>, adapted into a film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/drive> of the same name, James Sallis wrote a 
seven-book crime series centred around Lew Griffin, a bourbon-drinking 
detective who roams the bleak streets of the city trying to find missing people 
and, as the cliche goes, himself. “Subtle and oblique in content, [his stories] 
are meditations upon America rather than tales of policemen and thieves; this 
marks them out from much of the crime genre,” said Gart Cartwright of the 
series in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/nov/03/crimebooks>. slovenia46 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12842594> said:

James Sallis’s brilliant six-book Lew Griffin series is set in New Orleans 
(mostly) but it’s less the city and more the soul of a man. Best to read that 
series in order.

ID0686782 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1454422> added: “The Lew 
Griffin books were excellent – and very different from Drive, which most people 
probably know him for.”

In quotes from the books:

In the darkness things always go away from you. Memory holds you down while 
regret and sorrow kick hell out of you. The only help you’ll get is a few hard 
drinks and morning.
from The Long-Legged Fly

I was coming up on a cross street when a man wearing a filthy suit stepped out 
from around the corner of the building ahead and directly into my path. [...] A 
chill passed through me. Somehow, indefinably, I felt, felt with the kind of 
baffled, tacit understanding that we have in dreams , that I had just glimpsed 
one possible future self. ”
from Black Hornet
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fbooks-about-new-orleans-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427974380912%2Fbedad517-a9db-42a2-acf0-24d98cfd46ab-1327x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20about%20New%20Orleans%3A%20readers'%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fbooks-about-new-orleans-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20about%20New%20Orleans%3A%20readers%27%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fapr%2F02%2Fbooks-about-new-orleans-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F2%2F1427974380912%2Fbedad517-a9db-42a2-acf0-24d98cfd46ab-1327x2040.jpeg>
4. Twelve Bar Blues 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Twelve_Bar_Blues.html?id=I1ELIyKWxLoC> 
by Patrick Neate (2001)

PleasepleaseTrina <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2033355> 
recommended this novel: “Twelve Bar Blues covers the city past and present and 
the story itself is excellent.” And that story intertwines the lives of a young 
cornet player in early 20th-century New Orleans and of a retired prostitute in 
modern-day London. The novel won that year’s Whitbread award – now the Costa 
award – for best novel.

In quotes from the book:

His eyes were a curious mixture of innocent and knowing, like a naive 
character who’s just happened to see too much.

5. A Hall of Mirrors 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/A_Hall_of_Mirrors.html?id=BlEcFf_OfTYC> 
by Robert Stone (1964)

Robert Stone’s “brilliant debut”, recommended by miasmadude 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2851854>, used the city as the setting 
for an eclectic melange of the dark side of America that emerged in the 60s,
“something I shattered my youth against” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/14/robert-stone>. It won both the 
William Faulkner and Houghton Mifflin first novel awards. Stone had been 
literally registering New Orleans’s inhabitants as a census worker in 1960. 
With the spirit of the Vietnam war clearly in the background, its characters 
include a right-wing disc jockey and failed musician, civil rights activists, 
corrupt politicians and many more fishes out of water.

In quotes from the book:


The American Way is innocence. […] In all situations we must and shall display 
an innocence so vast and awesome that the entire world will be reduced by it. 
American innocence shall rise in mighty clouds of vapor to the scent of heaven 
and confound the nations!

6. A Walk On The Wild Side 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/walk-on-the-wild-side-3.html> by Nelson Algren 
(1956)


Nelson Algren’s novel tells the story of a country boy from Texas who moves to 
the Big Easy in search of a better life … Depicting the world of prostitutes, 
pimps and conmen, the book mocks the American Dream and, again, unfolds against 
the backdrop of the Vietnam period. Algren himselfsaid 
<http://us.macmillan.com/awalkonthewildside/nelsonalgren>: “The book asks why 
lost people sometimes develop into greater human beings than those who have 
never been lost in their whole lives. Why men who have suffered at the hands of 
other men are the natural believers in humanity, while those whose part has 
been simply to acquire, to take all and give nothing, are the most contemptuous 
of mankind.” It was also the initial inspiration for Lou Reed’s song. 
Recommended byLazz <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1475738>.

In quotes from the book:

Never play cards with a man called Doc. Never eat at a place called Mom’s. 
Never sleep with a woman whose troubles are worse than your own.

Without hesitation, Dove chose the nowhere road. For that was the only place, 
in his heart of hearts, that he really wanted to go.

“I don’t know what kind of great I’m bound to be,” Dove considered his 
prospects calmly, “all I know for certain is I’m born a world-shaker.”

7. Jitterbug Perfume <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/jitterbug-perfume.html> 
by Tom Robbins (1984)

This novel features four main storylines, set in eighth-century Bohemia and 
modern-day Paris, Seattle and, of course, New Orleans. One of writer Patrick 
Ness’stop “unsuitable” books for teenagers – that he nevertheless enjoyed in 
his teen years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2011/apr/08/patrick-ness-top-10-unsuitable-books-teenagers>
: “I was amazed to discover that fiction could be, of all things, playful. That 
it didn’t always need to be polite. That it could have runaway metaphors just 
for a laugh”. Recommended bySophia Jackson 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14687485>. 

In quotes from the book:

If New Orleans is not fully in the mainstream of culture, neither is it fully 
in the mainstream of time. Lacking a well-defined present, it lives somewhere 
between its past and its future, as if uncertain whether to advance or to 
retreat. Perhaps it is its perpetual ambivalence that is its secret charm.

Never underestimate how much assistance, how much satisfaction, how much 
comfort, how much soul and transcendence there might be in a well-made taco and 
a cold bottle of beer.

It is better to be small, colorful, sexy, careless, and peaceful, like the 
flowers, than large, conservative, repressed, fearful, and aggressive, like the 
thunder lizards; a lesson, by the way, that the Earth has yet to learn.


8. The World That Made New Orleans: From Spanish Silver to Congo Square 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_World_That_Made_New_Orleans.html?id=zCOhLy90jyYC&redir_esc=y>
 by Ned Sublette (2008)

Composer and musician Ned Sublette thoroughly explores New Orleans’s musical 
and cultural history and influences, focusing on the city’s first century of 
existence. It explores Cuba and St Domingue as crucial influences, and serves 
up lots of fascinating facts about matters including the beginnings of tango, 
the infamousgumbo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/feb/13/how-to-cook-perfect-gumbo>
 dish, and the origin of words like vaudeville and voodoo.delphio 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1410632> said:

Sublette’s book is required reading if you want to know the history of the 
city. But be prepared for difficult truths.

It was also recommended by Foxiix 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4486349> and leedsmusiclib 
<https://twitter.com/leedsmusiclib/status/581160869435961344>.

9. Nine Lives: Death and Life in New Orleans 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Nine_Lives.html?id=SwALlcXK_NwC&redir_esc=y>
 by Dan Baum (2009)

“An amazing book sharing stories of nine very different real life people from 
Nola,” according toVilove4 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/13677230>, 
Nine Lives was written by ex-New Yorker staff writer Dan Baum. He was one of 
the many journalists who covered the excruciating aftermath to Hurricane 
Katrina – but he actually stayed in the city when most of the reporters were 
gone. This book is more about the personal experiences of nine of the people he 
encountered than about the political (in)action that followed the devastating 
hurricane, which he amplycovered for the magazine 
<http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/dan-baum>. And it is an attempt to 
reimagine the swamp town and its unique character 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/22/books/review/Mallon-t.html?pagewanted=all> 
as it had been before Katrina.

rb2inGlasgow <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14701220> called it:

A brilliant piece of post-Katrina reportage that traces the city’s recent 
history through nine interwoven narratives ranging from a Mardi Gras Indian to 
a city cop, transsexual barkeep, and Carnival king.

In quotes from the book:

That was the point of Mardi Gras, was it not? To serve and honor all the 
people, to bring into hard lives a touch of royalty and grandeur … To put on a 
spectacle such as this, free of charge, was an honor. New Orleans was sick and 
wounded, but no other city in the world had a celebration quite like this. It 
was beautiful precisely because it was so frivolous.

In New Orleans, no matter how much money you had in the bank, you looked on 
poverty every day.

New Orleanians are notoriously late showing up, if they show up at all, 
because by and large they don’t keep calendars. Calendars are tools for 
managing the future, and in New Orleans the future doesn’t exist.

Life in New Orleans is all about making the present – this moment, right now – 
as pleasant as possible. So New Orleanians, by and large, aren’t tortured by 
the frenzy to achieve, acquire, and manage the unmanageable future.

10. Poppy Z Brite’s books

Poppy Z Brite “gets New Orleans,” said neighbourhooduk 
<https://twitter.com/neighbourhooduk/status/581153204668383233>. Adam Thomasson 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14609724> agreed: “Poppy Z Brite has 
written many great New Orleans books. He was known early on for his horror and 
fantasy books but he triumphs with his series of books, starting with Liquor, 
about a pair of chefs starting their own restaurant.” He’s talking about the
Liquor Series <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquor_(novel_series)>, of which 
the New York Times said 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/08/20/books/review/20brite.html>: “Brite’s gritty 
affection for the life of his kitchen hands – the feeders of New Orleans’s 
lavish belly – shines through. In the acknowledgments, Brite says he completed 
Soul Kitchen the night before Hurricane Katrina hit. The book is most eloquent 
as a postcard of New Orleans before the flood – of everyday life as it was 
before it didn’t exist anymore.”

In quotes from the books:

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Didn’t he have to admit, begrudgingly, that in some extra-perverse corner of 
his brain the idea of having to be out of town before sundown appealed to him? 
New Orleans had been the only constant thing in his life. But didn’t he get an 
itchy foot sometimes, didn’t he sometimes think about just throwing all his 
stuff in his car and going?

Of course he did. Everybody did, even normal people, the ones with triple 
mortgages and orthodontists’ bills and responsibilities to everything except 
what they really wanted.
from Drawing Blood

Did we miss your favourite? Do add it in the comments.
 