
A one-time dotcom boom town, home to companies like Starbucks, Amazon, 
Microsoft and plenty of start-ups — and also a leading city of the 
anti-globalisation movement,Seattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/seattle> is packed with entrepreneurial 
spirit, rain and contradictions. It seems to be a hard city to figure out – but 
books can help out.

Last week, our reader ID4993378 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1280965> confessed: “As an east coast 
transplant, I don’t fit in well in this odd city. ButWhere’d You Go Bernadette? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/29/whered-you-go-bernadette-review> 
hits so many great, laugh-out-loud buttons that it should not be missed. The 
picture of goats chomping through the blackberries on a Queen Anne slope, only 
to have the hill slide into someone else’s yard, is just delicious!” Maria 
Semple’s novel seems a straightforward Seattle book – but the city holds its 
surprises, as our readers proved. If you’re after the best travel companions 
for a visit, or just to know more about the city, here is a reading list from 
our readers’ suggestions – and do check Ryan Boudinot’sintroduction to the 
Pacific Northwest city’s literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/apr/09/reading-american-cities-books-about-seattle>
 from last week.

1. Snow Falling on Cedars 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/snow-falling-on-cedars.html> by David Guterson 
(1994)

GorillaPie <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1572554> praised the 
“Thinking man’s San Fran” vibe to the city, which he found to be “not nearly as 
dreary as the rest of the country seems to think, either”:

Finally made it to Seattle for the first time last autumn and, as I had long 
suspected, absolutely loved the place. Kind of town I could happily move to 
tomorrow. Surely you meant to include David Guterson in this list, though? I 
found the stories of Japanese-American civilians from the second world war 
period really moving (go to Bainbridge Island if you can) and Snow Falling On 
Cedars is a beautiful book.

This bestselling novel about the murder of a fisherman on a fictional island 
north of the city was also recommended bymikedow 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3887757>. 

Seattle in quotes from the book:


To deny that there was this dark side of life would be like pretending that 
the cold of winter was somehow only a temporary illusion, a way station on the 
way to the higher “reality” of long, warm, pleasant summers. But summer, it 
turned out, was no more real than the snow that melted in wintertime.

2. Waxwings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/aug/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview15>
 by Jonathan Raban (2003)

This novel follows the lives of two immigrants who end up in Seattle to follow 
their different American dreams at the turn of the millenium: a Hungarian-born 
English intellectual and a Chinese man who entered the country illegally.
disinterestedparty <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2619505> 
shared:

Waxwings captures the contemporary tech boomtown feel of the place in a 
desperate way that Where’d You Go Bernadette? can only name-droppingly grasp at

Also recommended by JoeLunchpail 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/50239248> and dancer123 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/50301572>, who said:

Waxwings contains more descriptive material about Seattle than does [his] 
Passage to Juneau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1999/nov/07/travel.travelbooks>. To a 
certain extent they cover the same marital problems but there are also subplots 
about the tech industry and immigration. And in spite of all these themes 
crowding into one book, there is a considerable narrative tension – bordering 
on a page-turner.

In quotes from the book:

Visitors from London and New York might think his affection for this city is a 
pose, but Tom was happy in Seattle, whose ambiguities suited him perfectly. It 
wasn’t all that big, but it wasn’t all that little, either. Though gratifyingly 
remote – the Pacific Northwest was something like America’s own Outer Hebrides 
– it was also central to the big world in ways that made London, at least, seem 
provincial, to borrow Scott-Rice’s tiresome word for Seattle.

Unlike most American cities that Tom knew, there was a ‘here’ here, where 
herring gulls were a traffic hazard and all streets led down to the water, 
where the older buildings pursued a guileless infatuation with the architecture 
of Ancient Rome, and ungovernable greenery – bramble, vine, salal – rose up 
defiantly from every crevice and scrap of waste ground, as if to strangle the 
city fathers’ vain Roman ambitions.

A rift in the speeding clouds revealed the young moon, hazy and tarnished 
above the wide blackness of the bay. At this hour, the streets of Seattle 
belonged to the poor, who trudged in ones and twos, hunched against the weather.

3. Long for this World by Michael Byers (2003)

Long for this World was Byers’s first novel, in which he told the story of a 
geneticist immersed in an ethical dilemma. Seattle nativeAlexa Sand 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11947938> praised the work of this 
author and academic:

As a Seattle native (who once thumbed a ride in the San Juan Islands with Tom 
Robbins), I want to add a name to the list of Seattle literary luminaries. 
Michael Byers, now based in Ann Arbor, is a writer deeply rooted in Seattle, 
where he was raised, a product of Seattle public schools and pre-tech-boom 
Capitol Hill. His luminous novelLong for this World 
<http://www.amazon.com/Long-This-World-A-Novel/dp/0618446486> captures 
something essential about the city and its transformation by the tech explosion 
of the 1990s. His earlier collection of short stories,The Coast of Good 
Intentions 
<http://www.amazon.com/Coast-Good-Intentions-Michael-Byers/dp/0395891701>, was 
a finalist for the PEN/Hemingway award. I may be biased (having grown up with 
him), but I think he is one of the hidden gems of contemporary American 
fiction, and a jewel in Seattle’s mossy literary crown.

In quotes from the book:

Six hours to fly to Seattle, and it was all, she had to keep reminding 
herself, the same country – Ronald Reagan was the president of that lake and 
that little circular set of fields and that butterfly highway exchange and all 
these clouds and all the mountains too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fbooks-about-seattle-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429191425096%2F57afa06c-8853-4d37-9232-f902e6adcce6-728x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20about%20Seattle%3A%20readers%E2%80%99%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fbooks-about-seattle-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20about%20Seattle%3A%20readers%E2%80%99%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fbooks-about-seattle-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429191425096%2F57afa06c-8853-4d37-9232-f902e6adcce6-728x1020.jpeg>
4. Truth Like the Sun 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Truth_Like_the_Sun.html?id=dxOMpxzxbU4C&redir_esc=y>
 by Jim Lynch (2012)

This political novel set in the Washingtonian city in the early 1960s, when it 
hosted theWorld’s Fair <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Century_21_Exposition> – 
and in 2001, right after the tech boom, tells the story of Roger Morgan, who 
has the vision to put Seattle on the map, and to keep it there: according to 
its review in the Independent, “Lynch captures the make do and mend mentality 
of the participants [of the fair], and what a seismic shift that summer created 
for the region. He is also particularly skilled at describing the precarious 
times in which Roger flourished. Things were smoking over in Cuba and the world 
was warming up to a Cold War.” Readerbanriona 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2368049> said:

Jim Lynch’s The Highest Tide 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/highest-tide.html> is set in Olympia [a town 
60 miles from Seattle] and is fantastic; I believe it did better in the UK than 
in the US but who cares. […] The cover art alone of Truth Like the Sun should 
put it onto the list.

In quotes from the book:

I too miss the quiet Seattle of yesteryear […] but we can’t keep this place in 
curls and a Buster Brown suit much longer.

‘Let the fair begin!’ Kennedy commands. The Space Needle carillon clangs 538 
bells, and two thousand ‘See you in Seattle’ balloons rise into the clearing 
sky. Then the freak show really begins.

The capital of the new world economy! And the locals swallowed all these 
national rankings and blather, even during this current dotcom hangover. ‘Just 
look!’ they told her, as if the views alone justified the hype. Seattle 
reminded her of men she’d known who’d been told too many times how handsome 
they were.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fbooks-about-seattle-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429192299350%2F94a5f564-6f6c-4de6-8701-637517c73b17-676x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Books%20about%20Seattle%3A%20readers%E2%80%99%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fbooks-about-seattle-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Books%20about%20Seattle%3A%20readers%E2%80%99%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F16%2Fbooks-about-seattle-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F16%2F1429192299350%2F94a5f564-6f6c-4de6-8701-637517c73b17-676x1020.jpeg>
5. Short Nights of the Shadow Catcher by Timothy Egan (2011)

This is a biography of Seattle-based photographer Edward S Curtis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_S._Curtis>, photographer of the American 
west and some of the most famous images of Native American peoples. Mr. Egan
covered the American west 
<http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/people/e/timothy_egan/index.html?8qa>
 for the New York Times, and he portrays Curtis asan intrepid visionary who 
sacrificed his family and personal life for 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/12/books/short-nights-of-the-shadow-catcher-by-timothy-egan.html>
his big idea. “An excellent read and a real addition to the Seattle 
discussion”, saidamester17 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2732171>. 

In quotes from the book:

I am beginning to believe that nothing is quite so uncertain as facts.

By 1900, the tribes owned less than 2 per cent of the land they once 
possessed. Entire languages had already disappeared – more than a loss of 
words, a loss of a way to look at the world.

6. Invisible Monsters by Chuck Palahniuk (1999)

Going back to the World Fair, but from a slightly different perspective, 
Palahniuk’s novel tells the story of a model who suffers an accident that 
leaves her disfigured, which will make her adopt different identities.
lewisdenson <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12174175> said:

In Invisible Monsters, the main characters travel to Seattle where they 
contemplate the 1962 World’s Fair and all the disappointments the future had to 
offer. They throw postcards from the Space Needle with messages to the future. 
It is heartbreaking and beautiful.

In quotes from the book:

The only way to find true happiness is to risk being completely cut open.

You can only hold a smile for so long, after that it’s just teeth.

7. Black Hole <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/nov/19/comics> by 
Charles Burns (2005) 

“I think the quintessential Seattle graphic novel has to be Charles Burns’s 
Black Hole, which captures a certain NW awkward/sexy/weird vibe really well,” 
saysGuybrarian <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3006438>. And if you 
want more Seattle graphic novels,MysticMutt 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11451039> and DJMC 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3360679> recommended “Hate 
<http://www.peterbagge.com/> comics by Peter Bagge, compiled in Buddy Does 
Seattle, followed by Buddy Does Jersey. Bagge lived in Seattle just as the 
Grunge scene was emerging and Hate made him something like the Generation X 
Robert Crumb.”

Extra notes


 * For the true go-to account of the city’s founding: Bill Speidel’s Sons of 
the Profits 
<http://www.amazon.com/Sons-Profits-Business-Business-1851-1901/dp/0914890069> 
– recommended bydisinterestedparty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2619505> 
 * For required reading for all new arrivals: Betty MacDonald’s The Egg and I 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Egg_and_I> –recommended by disinterestedparty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2619505>

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
 * For a novel about a British couple who move to the Pacific Northwest, “so 
ideal for the Guardian” according tobanriona 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2368049>, try Jill Dawson’s Trick of 
the Light <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Trick-Light-Jill-Dawson/dp/0340653833>. 
 * For a book with “everything from a dissident group living in the downtown 
Seattle library, the threat of climate change, a sinister timber company and 
total surreality”, try The Guild of Saint Cooper by Shya Scanlon, recommended by
Frances Chiem <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14753409>. 
 * For murder mysteries set in a feminist collective in 80s Seattle, try 
Barbara Wilson <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Bsjoholm>’s books, as 
recommended bybanriona <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2368049>. 
Is your favourite missing? Do add it in the comments. Next up: Portland.
 