
Friends told me that I would feel at home in Boston because of its strong 
European influence, and they were right. When I first arrived in the city 16 
years ago, from France, I discovered a place full of history and style, fell in 
love with it right away, and never left.

Boston is one of the oldest cities in the US. With its red-brick buildings, 
brownstones and those prestigious universities, the city's culture and 
architecture are reminiscent of those of an English town. The streets are 
narrow and compact, which makes it an excellent city to walk around. Follow, 
for example, the red line painted on the footpaths of the meanderingFreedom 
Trail <http://thefreedomtrail.org/>, which will lead you to 16 historical sites 
over the course of a few hours, encompassing two and a half centuries of the 
US's most significant past. In the city's North End you will walk by the 
17th-century colonial home of American patriotPaul Revere 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Revere>. Continue a little further on 
Tremont Street and you'll discover the equally historic cemetery,King's Chapel 
Burying Ground <http://www.cityofboston.gov/freedomtrail/kingschapel.asp>, 
beside King's Chapel, the oldest in the city.

Another enjoyable way to discover the area is on wheels. Hubway 
<http://www.thehubway.com/>, the city bike scheme, is similar to the Vélib' in 
Paris or the Boris bikes in London: riders can pick up and drop off a bike at 
different stations across the city (and also neighbouring towns).

Continue your visit with a stop at one of the city's museums, such as the 
recently renovatedInstitute of Contemporary Art <http://www.icaboston.org/>, or 
the statelyMuseum of Fine Arts <http://www.mfa.org/> in Fenway. And with its 
courtyard garden, new Renzo Piano-designed extension and outstanding private 
collection of art, theIsabella Stewart Gardner Museum 
<http://www.gardnermuseum.org/>correct "was designed as a work of art in 
totality".

The Charles river, which separates Boston from Cambridge, is a central feature 
of the city; it's flanked by paths on each side for the runners and cyclists 
who make use of them. Season permitting, you can even choose to go down the 
river itself – canoes and kayaks can be easily rented at several locations. If 
you happen to visit in October, go to theHead of the Charles Regatta 
<http://hocr.org/>, the world's largest rowing event: over the course of a 
weekend, nearly 300,000 spectators gather to cheer on the 9,000 competing 
rowers.
 Photograph: Alamy 
Since you will almost certainly cross the river to Cambridge, make a stop at 
Upstairs on the Square <http://upstairsonthesquare.com/> for lunch or dinner. 
This storied restaurant houses two dining rooms: an upscale, gilt-laden fantasy 
land on the third floor, where it offers a five- or seven-course tasting menu 
($72/$95); and in an equally flamboyant room on the second floor you can dine 
on lobster pizza for $19 or whole-milk ricotta homemade cavatelli with sweet 
pea and smoked ham for $14. During Sunday brunch, expect the arrival of the 
renownedHarvard Krokodiloes <http://www.kroks.com/>, a group of a cappella 
singers formed of tuxedo-clad undergraduates from the university.

When in Harvard Square, I always pay a visit to Formaggio Kitchen 
<https://www.formaggiokitchen.com/> to stock up on a selection of the best 
imported cheese and cured meats in town, including bresaola, jamón Ibérico and 
speck. Then it's to theHi-Rise Bread Company <http://hi-risebread.com/> for a 
baguette and a loaf of country bread.

Boston's location on the Atlantic coast means that, of course, the seafood is 
excellent. For delicious oysters, lobster, clam chowder and other seafood 
delicacies, I'd recommendIsland Creek Oyster Bar 
<http://islandcreekoysterbar.com/> in Kenmore Square. It has one of the best 
raw bars in town; the oysters are local to New England (Wellfleet and Chatham 
in Massachusetts, or from Rhode Island) and are sold by the piece for $3. It 
also serves a delicious halibut ceviche with cucumber, lime and coriander for 
$9, and a shellfish platter for four to share, for $80.

North End <http://www.northendboston.com/>, near the harbour, is the 
neighbourhood to visit for authentic Italian food. TryMike's Pastry shop 
<http://mikespastry.com/> for cannoli or tiramisu, before heading to 
DePasquale's Homemade Pasta Shoppe <http://homemade-pasta.com/> for freshly 
made pumpkin ravioli and orecchiette to take home.

For a completely different atmosphere, and a more elegant dining experience, 
I'd suggestClio <https://www.facebook.com/ClioRestaurant> or L'Espalier 
<http://lespalier.com/> near Newbury Street, one of the city's upscale shopping 
streets. Both impress with imaginative food. At L'Espalier, try the chilled 
Casco Bay lobster salad with cucumber gazpacho gelée, pickled grapes, almond 
and compressed cucumbers, or the sweet corn bisque with roasted new onion and 
popcorn powder – it's outstanding.

However, the restaurant I keep coming back to is Bergamot 
<http://www.bergamotrestaurant.com/> in Somerville, for its excellent service 
and seasonal ingredients. During the city'srestaurant week 
<http://www.restaurantweekboston.com/>, a choice of any appetizer, main and 
dessert can be had for $38. The charcuterie is house-made, and its salads and 
desserts stand out – as I'm French, I find the hazelnutclafoutis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clafoutis>, served with peaches, whipped ricotta, 
brown butter and peach sorbet, impossible to resist.
 Copley Square fountains. Photograph: Alamy 
During the summer, farmer's markets pop up in parts of town, selling fresh 
vegetables and fruit.Copley Square, in downtown Boston, hosts a market on 
Tuesdays and Fridays. On Sundays from May to October,SoWa Open Market 
<http://www.sowaopenmarket.com/>, in the South End, includes arts and crafts 
designers, a farmer's market, and a wide selection of food trucks.Stop for a 
lunch of kale salad, sweet corn and poblano fritters atMei Mei Street Kitchen 
<http://meimeiboston.com/>.

There are several beautiful parks in the city. Swan boats 
<http://swanboats.com/> are a highlight at Boston Common, near the historic 
Beacon Hill neighbourhood; while south of the city are theArnold Arboretum 
<http://arboretum.harvard.edu/> and Jamaica Pond <http://jamaicapond.com/>, 
which is good for a long walk, especially in spring and fall, with its cherry 
blossoms and changing leaf colours.

Finally, takea trip to the north shore beaches (Crane Beach 
<http://www.thetrustees.org/places-to-visit/northeast-ma/crane-beach-on-the-crane.html>
 orPlum Island <http://www.plum-island.com/>), or to Cape Cod and its islands – 
Martha's Vineyard and Nantucket. Go off-season, in spring or fall, and you 
might have the sandy beaches and parks to yourself.

Béatrice Peltre <http://www.beatricepeltre.com/>, food writer and stylist 
based in Boston. She blogs atLa Tartine Gourmande 
<http://www.latartinegourmande.com/>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 