
If you’re planning a trip to Boston and want to read up on it first, we’ve got 
it covered. Last week, we offered youa blog with a selection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/aug/06/reading-american-cities-boston-in-books>
 of great Boston reads, from Henry James to Margaret Atwood. And you had a 
great list of books to add. Interestingly, as readerIsabelle Leinster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13072920> pointed out, “there 
are many historical books which depict Boston as it was back then but I can’t 
think of one which accurately portrays Boston as it is today.”

“It’s strange that so many writers have managed to conjure up the essence of 
New York in books but not Boston. I think it’s because really Boston is rather 
provincial and not cosmopolitan in the way New York is,” pointed out our 
reader. But the following list would contest that.

Often called the most European city of the United States, the picturesque New 
England city is certainly known for its place in history and for its Irish 
heritage, but plenty of writers have also tried to depict its very recent past 
and present. Is your favourite Boston book not included below? Add it in the 
comment thread.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Fbooks-about-boston-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407854599051%2F36896f70-25ae-4f82-b8f3-8dc57255b4ab-1311x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boston%20in%20books%3A%20readers'%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Fbooks-about-boston-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boston%20in%20books%3A%20readers%27%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F13%2Fbooks-about-boston-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407854599051%2F36896f70-25ae-4f82-b8f3-8dc57255b4ab-1311x2040.jpeg>
1. The Given Day by Dennis Lehane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/31/given-day-dennis-lehane-chris-petit>
 (2008)

Dennis Lehane <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jan/24/dennis-lehane> 
immediately springs to mind when one thinks of fictional depictions of Boston – 
not least because of the film adaptations of his books: Gone Baby Gone, Moonlit 
Mile or Mystic River. But The Given Day, the story of post-first world war 
Boston featuring an Irish-American police patrolman, was recommended bybrokenbra
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1805060> and sbasar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4107606>. It’s a crime story 
but also a great portrayal of the city in the early 20th century, which 
includes a 1919 police strike, the rise of unions, race conflicts and economic 
instability.

Boston in quotes from the book:

The flyers also saturated the worst of the Boston slums, where one was most 
likely to find the core of the criminal element - the plug-uglies, the 
bullyboys, the knuckle-dusters, and, of course, the Gusties, the city’s most 
powerful and fuck-out-of-their-minds street gang, who headquartered in South 
Boston but spread their tentacles throughout the city at large.

Boston had to be the least safe city he’d ever come across in his life. The 
Athens of America ... he’d change the name to the Asylum of America.

2. The Friends of Eddie Coyle by George V. Higgins 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781409127628>
 (1970)


George V. Higgins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/nov/09/guardianobituaries1> was 
assistant US attorney in Boston when he wrote this, his debut novel about the 
Irish-American underworld. A “compelling view of the 70s in our city”, said 
commenterSteveHimmer <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4616199>, 
who also recommended Russell Greenan’s It Happened In Boston? (1968) for a 
distinct, but also great, novel from that period. It was also recommended by
John McMurtrie <https://twitter.com/McMurtrieSF/status/497056181656248320> and 
David Holmes <https://twitter.com/DavidNHolmes/status/496940561157591040> on 
Twitter as a book that offers a “very different, criminal, side of the city” – 
a sentence that probably refers to its no-nonsense, realistic and 
non-glamorised view of crime.

DuquedeLerma <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13612244> added 
another one of Higgins’s titles, Kennedy for the Defense (1980): “Boston 
lowlife (both the attorney and his clients), and a great example of Higgins’s 
way with dialogue – one might call it unrealistically and very enjoyably 
realistic.” Andringsend01 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11161656> corroborated: “Just 
about anything by Higgins, if you’re interested in Boston, and especially the 
way the Bostonians talk. I’m married to a Bostonian, and I can tell you Higgins 
was spot on. Where can I get a spuckie around here?”

In quotes from the book:

This life’s hard, but it’s harder if you’re stupid. 

3. Infinite Jest by David Foster Wallace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/12/my-hero-david-foster-wallace-by-colin-barrett>
 (1996)

David Foster Wallace’s enormous masterpiece about a nearish future is a partly 
satirical, partly tragic sort-of-science fiction novel about addiction, tennis, 
politics, family, entertainment and many other themes of contemporary America. 
A big part of the novel takes place in suburban Boston, more specifically in a 
tennis academy and a drug and alcohol recovery centre. “It may be a book of 
global significance, but (...) Infinite Jest is fundamentally a Boston novel; 
it is to Boston what Ulysses is to Dublin,”wrote American author and journalist 
Christopher Lydon 
<http://radioopensource.org/infinite-jest-david-foster-wallace/>. Recommended by
Heather Roche <https://twitter.com/heather_roche/status/496941557933957120>.

In quotes from the book:

The thing is it has to be the truth to really go over, here. It can’t be a 
calculated crowd-pleaser, and it has to be the truth unslanted, unfortified. 
And maximally unironic. An ironist in a Boston AA meeting is a witch in church. 
Irony-free zone. Same with sly disingenuous manipulative pseudo-sincerity.

Orin’s special conscious horror, besides heights and the early morning, is 
roaches. There’d been parts of metro Boston near the Bay he’d refused to go to, 
as a child. Roaches give him the howling fantods.

4. Another Bullshit Night in Suck City by Nick Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/apr/02/featuresreviews.guardianreview8> 
(2004)

Playwright and poet Nick Flynn’s first memoir Another Bullshit Night in Suck 
City describes his reuniom with his estrange father, an alcoholic who lived in 
a Boston homeless refuge in downtown Boston. The author grew up in a backstreet 
of Scituate, a fishing port 30 miles south of Boston. Recommended by
notassorryasiam <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2371764>. 

In quotes from the book:

Trinity Park lies directly across from the library, Trinity Church rising like 
a midieval thought amidst the glass and steel towers.

If not for the rats you could crawl beneath a bush. A bush. A bench. The 
alliterative universe. Rats too can pass through that needle’s eye to enter 
heaven. . . . This box held a refrigerator, the refrigerator is an apartment, a 
man is in the box. . . . Wake up on the grass, soaking wet. Dew is the piss of 
God. ‘Another bullshit night in suck city’, my father mutters.
 Promised Land (1976), one of the books in the series. 
5. Detective Spenser series by Robert B. Parker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/20/robert-b-parker-obituary>

The series of detective novels by Robert B. Parker dedicated to Spenser (no 
first name) are almost an encyclopaedia of the Boston metropolitan area, just 
as its author wasas Bostonian as it gets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/20/robert-b-parker-dies>. It ran 
from 1973 to 2011, and was then taken up by Ace Atkins. Perfect to get 
acquainted with the city, as well as to enjoy prime American crime fiction.
LookingLeft <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3015909> recommends 
it: “Try any one of the 40-odd books Robert B Parker wrote featuring his 
Private Detective, Spenser. The Boston location was practically a character of 
its own.” “The white guy/black guy banter gets old fast but the local colour is 
pretty good”, saysKathryn Gardiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12416660>.

In quotes from the book:

I took my .38 out and looked to see that there were bullets in all the proper 
places. I knew there would be, but it did no harm to be careful. And I’d seen 
Clint Eastwood do it once in the movies.

We split a bottle of Norman cider. Not everybody sells Norman cider by the 
bottle.

‘Has a European feel’ Susan said.

‘That sounds terrific’ I said. ‘Can I have one?’

Susan grinned at me. ‘How did you ever get to be so big without growing up?’ 
she said.

‘Iron self-control’ I said.

6. Make Way for Ducklings by Robert McCloskey 
<http://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/make-way-for-ducklings-robert-mccloskey/1100475585?ean=9780670451494>
 (1941)

Revealing a very different side of Boston, this delightful children’s picture 
book describes “how an urban environment can also nurture wildlife,” says
JEccleshare <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13612176>. It tells 
the story of a couple of mallards who raise a family on an island in the lagoon 
in theBoston Public Garden <http://friendsofthepublicgarden.org/>, a park in 
the city. AsActualGraunReader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10562490> points out, 
Bostonians have celebrated itin statue form 
<http://www.schon.com/public/ducklings-boston.php>.

In quotes from the book:

One day Mr. Mallard decided he’d like to take a trip to see what the rest of 
the river was like, further on. So off he set.

7. Strong Motion by Jonathan Franzen 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781841157498>
 (1992)

Jonathan Franzen’s second novel, published 18 years before his acclaimed 
Freedom, revolves around a series of small earthquakes – and a big one – north 
of Boston, artificially provoked by a giant chemical corporation. This provokes 
character Louis Holland to fight with his sister and mother over a 
grandmother’s inheritance, and to meet a Harvard seismologist, a weapons 
company and anti-abortion activists, among other urban American characters. 
Recommended bynotassorryasiam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2371764>.

In quotes from the book:

I find it a huge strain to be responsible for my tastes and be known and 
defined by them.

‘Yeah, well, we’re all grieving in our own way, obviously. It’s just I heard 
this crazy rumor about your having inherited twenty-two million dollars.’ He 
tried to meet her eyes, but she’d turned away, squeezing her thumbs, fists 
balled.

8. Run by Ann Patchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/aug/18/featuresreviews.guardianreview16>
 (2007)


This novel by the author of award-winning Bel Canto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/jul/14/fiction.reviews1> explores 
family relations, race identity and adoption. It revolves the character of 
Doyle, former mayor of Boston and widower of Bernadette, an Irish Catholic 
woman who wanted to adopt more kids after having had one natural son. The 
couple had taken two boys in from the same birth mother, but Bernadette died 
soon after, leaving Doyle to raise them on his own. A warm book, “overflowing 
with love and affection” said Patrick Ness in hisGuardian review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/aug/18/featuresreviews.guardianreview16>
. Recommended byTerri Windling 
<https://twitter.com/terriwindling/status/496955831267905536>.

In quotes from the book:

Maybe that was the definition of life everlasting: the belief that the next 
generation would carry your work forward.

9. The Bostonians by Henry James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/sep/06/classics.asbyatt> (1886)

Henry James’s witty novel about political, utopian and spiritualist movements 
in post-civil war America is a no brainer. It is, of course, a “very American 
tale” and gives and a chance to see an early James touching on politics, 
feminism, sexuality and idealism. The title doesn’t actually refer to 
Bostonians in general but two characters. But it is, of course, a very funny 
and eccentric depiction of the society of the north-eastern United States of 
the time – something that that bothered the people of Boston of the 1880s for 
its indecency. Picked bymarsgrover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3165914>. 

In quotes from the book:

She made him sit down; she assured him that her sister quite expected him, 
would feel as sorry as she could ever feel for anything – for she was a kind of 
fatalist, anyhow – if he didn’t stay to dinner. It was an immense pity –she 
herself was going out; in Boston you must jump at invitations.

She is very honest, is Olive Chancellor; she is full of rectitude. Nobody 
tells fibs in Boston; I don’t know what to make of them all.

There were people who wanted one to spend the winter in Boston; but she 
couldn’t stand that--she knew, at least, what she had not come back for. 
Perhaps she should take a house in Washington; did he ever hear of that little 
place?

10. The Last Hurrah by Edwin O’Connor 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Last-Hurrah-Edwin-OConnor/dp/0316626597> (1956)

And now on to the 1950s. The Last Hurrah, the best-remembered novel of 
Pulitzer Prize-winner Edwin O’Connor, which tells the story of a mayoral 
election in an unnamed East Coast city, assumed to be Boston. It is, of course, 
also remembered because of the famous film adaptation played by Spencer Tracy. 
Here’s our readerjrsd <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1665282>:

When I was living in Boston I was recommended The Last Hurrah, a novel by 
Edwin O’Connor – a good insight into local (tribal?) politics in the 1950s and 
earlier. Then there must be dozens of books about the RedSox and the old fans’ 
defeatist attitudes, allegedly typical of the New England character. The Curse 
of the Bambino by Dan Shaughnessy is as good as any.

Is your favourite missing? Add it in the comment thread below. Next up: 
Washington DC.
 