
The barman at Trillium Brewing <http://www.trilliumbrewing.com/> widens his 
eyes and puffs out his cheeks. If a look could answer the question of how 
dramatic the changes have been in Boston’s Fort Point district, then this is 
it. It’s an expression replicated by staff in the now-numerous coffee shops, 
restaurants, galleries, bars and venues in an area gaining a reputation as the 
new entertainment hub of one of America’s oldest cities.

Fort Point’s rise has come amid eight years of a skyline of cranes, new office 
blocks and warehouse conversions. There is consensus on the reasons behind the 
boom – accessibility, investment and a food scene driven by chefs and 
restaurateurs such as South-Boston localBarbara Lynch (Menton, Drink, and 
Sportello) <http://barbaralynch.com/>, Ming Tsai (Blue Dragon 
<http://www.ming.com/blue-dragon.htm>) and Jeremy Sewall (at ultra-hip oyster 
house,Row 34 <http://row34.com/>). Where you won’t find accord is over what the 
area is called: some say Fort Point, others, Seaport. There are those who want 
to call it the Innovation District because of its draw for creatives – centred 
around the civic space ofDistrict Hall <http://districthallboston.org/>. Just 
don’t call it The Waterfront; Boston had one of those before this zip got hip.

The district’s emergence is linked to the city’s much-delayed Big Dig public 
works project, which put a stretch of highway I-93 underground. This generated 
the urban parks ofRose Kennedy Greenway <http://www.rosekennedygreenway.org/> 
and made it easier for Bostonians to reach, and enjoy, this part of their city. 
According to a waiter on the restaurant-laden Congress Street: “This used to be 
where people parked their cars before they walked across the bridges to work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F20%2Fboston-fort-point-waterside-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F19%2F1411122484011%2F15062996571_83a89cef29_o-2060x1368.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boston%3A%20the%20reinvention%20of%20the%20Fort%20Point%2FSeaport%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F20%2Fboston-fort-point-waterside-city-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boston%3A%20the%20reinvention%20of%20the%20Fort%20Point%2FSeaport%20district&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F20%2Fboston-fort-point-waterside-city-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F19%2F1411122484011%2F15062996571_83a89cef29_o-2060x1368.jpeg>
 The Tea Party Museum and Fort Point Channel.Photograph: Sarah Nichols/flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/pocheco/15062996571/> 
The 2006 opening of the Institute of Contemporary Art 
<http://www.icaboston.org/> was an invitation to other organisations and a nod 
to the district’s creative heritage. On Summer Street, a sign reads “Welcome to 
Fort Point: New England’s largest and oldest artistic community”. And, although 
the new offices sound their own warning for that lower-rent spirit of 
creativity, galleries remain in the wharf buildings of A street and at Channel 
Center, among them theMade in Fort Point store 
<http://www.fortpointarts.org/shop/>.

In and around Summer and Congress streets are newer coffee shops, such as 
Barrington Coffee <http://www.barringtoncoffee.com/> and Flour Bakery 
<http://www.flourbakery.com/>, along with the Yadda Yadda Bakery and seafood 
shackThe Barking Crab <http://barkingcrab.com/> that were here well before the 
recent rise. Seaport Boulevard and Northern Avenue nod to the future with 
harbourside restaurants, walkways and green spaces close to construction sites.

Hubway <http://www.thehubway.com/home>, the city’s bike-sharing scheme, has 
Fort Point stations but exploring on foot is easy. A stroll from the beer-hall 
trappings ofHarpoon Brewery <http://www.harpoonbrewery.com/> to the Boston’s 
Children’s Museum <http://www.bostonchildrensmuseum.org/> at Fort Point Channel 
takes less than 30 minutes. Grab a bench outside the museum and it’s possible 
to catch a snapshot of Fort Point from across the water where the gleaming, 
sail-inspired windows of theInterContinental Boston 
<http://www.intercontinentalboston.com/> hotel reflect the boats moored 
alongside theBoston Tea Party museum <http://www.bostonteapartyship.com/>. Not 
revolutionary, perhaps, but a perfect blend of old and new.

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit BostonUSA.com 
<http://www.bostonusa.com/> and DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 