
It’s Christmas Day in Berlin in 1977. Seated at the table are David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> and the film-maker David 
Hemmings, along with various partners, children and add-ons like me. At a 
secluded restaurant in the Grunewald, the deep and dark urban forest that hugs 
the city’s western fringe, we eat and drink too much and Bowie gives me a copy 
of Fritz Lang’s biography, which one day will help me to write a book about 
Berlin.


In return, I gift him a retro Japanese “space jet” model made of tin. Just 
right for a wannabe alien. At the end of the happy evening, I follow him 
downstairs to the huge, ceramic lavatory where – as we stand before the urinals 
– we sing Buddy Holly songs together, or at least a line and a half from Little 
Richard’s Good Golly Miss Molly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98An%20extraordinary%2C%20alien%2C%20otherworldly%20creature%E2%80%99%3A%20David%20Bowie%201947-2016%20-%20video%20tribute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98An%20extraordinary%2C%20alien%2C%20otherworldly%20creature%E2%80%99%3A%20David%20Bowie%201947-2016%20-%20video%20tribute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute&media=>
‘An extraordinary, alien, otherworldly creature’: David Bowie 1947-2016 - video 
tribute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute>
When Bowie moved from Los Angeles to Berlin in late 1976, he’d been on the 
edge of physical and mental collapse. At first, he fell back on old habits, 
cruising around the divided city with flatmate Iggy Pop, drinking KöPi at Joe’s 
Beer House, stumbling into gutters and transvestite bars, clubbing at the 
Dschungel and the Unlimited. One night, Iggy sat in the passenger seat as Bowie 
rammed their dealer’s car again and again, for five crazed minutes. He then 
drove around their hotel’s underground car park, pushing 70mph, screaming above 
the screech of the tyres that he wanted to end it all by driving into a 
concrete wall. Until his car ran out of fuel and the two friends collapsed in 
hysterics.

To defeat his demons, Bowie needed space and stability. His estranged wife 
Angie no longer provided it. For much of the time, she kept their son Zowie 
(laterDuncan Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/film/duncan-jones>) away from 
him, in London or Switzerland. So his assistant Coco Schwab found him a modest, 
first floor apartment in an art nouveau building in the leafy Berlin area of 
Schöneberg.

Coco – the devoted, unsung heroine of Bowie’s career – had its walls painted 
white as a private gallery for his dark images. She ordered in blank canvases 
and tubes of oil paint. She readNietzsche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/13/stephen-moss-a-to-z-of-wagner-n-is-for-nietzsche-nibelungs-and-norns>
 beside him, beneath the fluorescent portrait he painted of Japanese author 
Yukio Mishima. Above all, she went with him to the Brücke Museum, to gaze at 
the works of Kirchner, Kollwitz and Heckel. The expressionists’ rough, bold 
strokes and melancholic mood captured a sense of the ephemeral, as well as 
Bowie’s imagination.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdavid-bowie-berlin-years-heroes-just-a-gigolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e5ec0d5761997605c592bec2806bf4769ae0fe5%2F0_0_5339_3555%2F5339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bowie%20in%20Berlin%3A%20'He%20drove%20round%20the%20car%20park%20at%2070mph%20screaming%20that%20he%20wanted%20to%20end%20it%20all'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdavid-bowie-berlin-years-heroes-just-a-gigolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bowie%20in%20Berlin%3A%20%27He%20drove%20round%20the%20car%20park%20at%2070mph%20screaming%20that%20he%20wanted%20to%20end%20it%20all%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdavid-bowie-berlin-years-heroes-just-a-gigolo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e5ec0d5761997605c592bec2806bf4769ae0fe5%2F0_0_5339_3555%2F5339.jpg>
 David Bowie in the studio at Hansa with Robert Fripp, left, and Brian Eno, 
right, in July 1977. Photograph: Christian Simonpietri/Sygma/Corbis 
In the capital of reinvention, and in Coco’s care, Bowie began to edge away 
from cocaine psychosis, finding his way out of his life of excess, remaking 
himself as an ordinary man. He dressed in baggy trousers and dowdy shirts, and 
enjoyed the Berliners’ disinterest in him. No one bothered him on the street, 
unlike in star-struck LA. One night on a whim, he climbed onto a cabaret stage 
to perform a few Frank Sinatra songs. The local audience shrugged and asked him 
to step down. They had come to see a different act. Away from the limelight, he 
composed, painted and, for the first time in years, “felt a joy of life and a 
great feeling of release and healing”, as he put it.

He realised his goal was not simply to find a new way of making music, but 
rather to reinvent – or to come back to – himself. He no longer needed to adopt 
characters to sing his songs. He found the courage to throw away the props, 
costumes and stage sets. By the summer of 1977, Bowie was on a creative high. 
With producerTony Visconti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/09/tony-visconti-marc-bolan-was-raw-talent-i-saw-genius>
 and friendBrian Eno <https://www.theguardian.com/music/brianeno>, he began to 
make a new album. Over long sessions in the studio, he ate almost nothing, 
sailing home to Hauptstraße with Eno at dawn, breaking a raw egg into his 
mouth, and sleeping a few hours before returning to the studio.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTgcc5V9Hu3g&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTgcc5V9Hu3g>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTgcc5V9Hu3g&media=>
One of the first songs recorded that summer had been an instrumental track 
until, alone at the piano, Bowie began to sketch out some lyrics, eventually 
making it the title track and calling it “Heroes”. Visconti rigged up three 
microphones with electronic “gates”. The first mic was 20cm from Bowie, the 
second 6m away, the third 15m away across the vast, dark hall. The gates were 
set to open when Bowie sang above a certain volume, forcing him to gradually 
lift his voice from a whisper to a shout, using the room’s natural echo.

As Visconti adjusted the levels, Bowie continued to write the lyrics, then 
asked to be left alone with his thoughts and the piano. Visconti slipped out 
and walked along Köthenerstraße to meet his lover. From the Hansa Sound Studio 
control room, Bowie saw them kiss, by the Wall.

Two hours later, the final lyric was recorded. “Heroes” became Berlin’s rock 
anthem, a droning, courageous wall of sound, fired with deep emotion, hammered 
by a clanging, metallic rhythm – produced in part by Visconti hitting a studio 
ashtray. Bowie called “Heroes”, and his three Berlin albums, his DNA. Time and 
again, it would be named one of pop’s greatest and most original singles.

Of course, there were moments of delicious madness both in Berlin and 
afterwards. At his 31st birthday party with Iggy and Eno, at the Lützower Lampe 
when the much-loved 60-year-old drag queen Viola was encouraged to sit on my 
knee and croon German love songs in my ear. Bowie went home with the only 
“real” girl in the place that night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdavid-bowie-berlin-years-heroes-just-a-gigolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F102cd55d2f0d2bfa4c39a2bb9c117056a0afa8f3%2F0_0_4096_2948%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bowie%20in%20Berlin%3A%20'He%20drove%20round%20the%20car%20park%20at%2070mph%20screaming%20that%20he%20wanted%20to%20end%20it%20all'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdavid-bowie-berlin-years-heroes-just-a-gigolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bowie%20in%20Berlin%3A%20%27He%20drove%20round%20the%20car%20park%20at%2070mph%20screaming%20that%20he%20wanted%20to%20end%20it%20all%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdavid-bowie-berlin-years-heroes-just-a-gigolo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F102cd55d2f0d2bfa4c39a2bb9c117056a0afa8f3%2F0_0_4096_2948%2F4096.jpg>
 David Bowie with assistant director Rory MacLean filming Just a Gigolo in 
1977. Photograph: Emilio Lari 
I had come to Berlin to work as the assistant director on Just a Gigolo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RnRyXbsbWGk>, a film starring Bowie and 
Marlene Dietrich. As the only native English-speakers on the picture, we 
(Bowie, Coco, Hemmings and I) naturally gravitated toward each other. We spent 
many evenings together in Bowie’s Hauptstraße apartment. He would play records 
and demo tapes for us and others, explaining how musicians and groups come 
together then break up in the pursuit of creative goals, likening the process 
to the Die Brücke expressionists; the Beatles and John Lennon; Roxy Music and 
Brian Eno; Der Blaue Reiter group andKandinsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/kandinsky>. He introduced me to 
Brecht, spoke of “quadrants and quantum leaps, creation and process” – and even 
discussed the pitfalls of Warner Brothers’ $15m offer for a Ziggy Stardust rock 
musical.

“I am a generalist!” he told me one day on the set, meaning he was a 
Renaissance man, skilled in different fields and mediums. “Then why are you 
most associated with rock’n’roll?” I asked. “It is only a front,” he laughed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdavid-bowie-berlin-years-heroes-just-a-gigolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fcca2974b93db71f1e3c66f0282ed148b7b56af%2F0_0_4950_3236%2F4950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bowie%20in%20Berlin%3A%20'He%20drove%20round%20the%20car%20park%20at%2070mph%20screaming%20that%20he%20wanted%20to%20end%20it%20all'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdavid-bowie-berlin-years-heroes-just-a-gigolo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bowie%20in%20Berlin%3A%20%27He%20drove%20round%20the%20car%20park%20at%2070mph%20screaming%20that%20he%20wanted%20to%20end%20it%20all%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fdavid-bowie-berlin-years-heroes-just-a-gigolo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fcca2974b93db71f1e3c66f0282ed148b7b56af%2F0_0_4950_3236%2F4950.jpg>
 On the Isolar II tour in 1978. Photograph: Richard E Aaron/Redferns 
Fast forward to Earls Court in London – the final venue of the European leg of 
the Isolar II tour. It’s June 1978 and 18,000 fans are whistling and wailing 
for the intermission to end. They clap their hands, stamp their feet and holler 
for Bowie to return. He has performed live for 1.5m people in 43 cities over 
the previous 14 weeks. Behind the stage, along a concrete corridor, their 
starman sits in silence, dressed in snakeskin drapecoat and huge baggy white 
trousers, watchingCoronation Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/coronation-street>. It’s his routine 
to catch an episode on video during the break: to let him get his breath, to 
occupy his mind but not engage it, to help him hold on to the stratospheric 
high from the concert’s first half.

In those few months in Berlin, Bowie made his journey from addiction to 
independence, from celebrity paranoia to radical, unmasked messenger who told 
us, all the fat-skinny people, all the nobody people, that we were beautiful, 
that we too could be ourselves.

 * Rory MacLean’s Berlin: Imagine a City is published by Weidenfeld and 
Nicolson
 