
Campaigners have promised to escalate protests at some of the UK’s biggest 
arts organisations afterBP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> announced 
a £7.5m renewal of sponsorship deals.


BP said it was continuing its sponsorship of the British Museum, the National 
Portrait Gallery, the Royal Opera House and theRoyal Shakespeare Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc> in new partnerships that would last 
five years.

The company’s sponsorship of the arts has proved controversial, with 
campaigners staging numerous protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/19/greenpeace-activists-scale-british-museum-to-protest-bp-sponsorship>
, objecting to the cultural promotion of an oil company. It was announced 
earlier this year that longstanding deals withTate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/11/bp-to-end-tate-sponsorship-climate-protests>
 andEdinburgh international festival would not be renewed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/06/bp-ends-34-year-edinburgh-international-festival-sponsorship>
.

But Thursday’s announcement means, for example, that BP’s 27-year sponsorship 
of the NPG’s hugely popular portrait award will continue for the next five 
years.

The Science Museum is free – so what is BP buying?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2016/may/20/the-science-museum-is-free-so-what-is-bp-buying>
Peter Mather, head of BP in the UK and Europe, said the company was proud to 
renew its partnerships. “Our industry is going through a period of rebalancing, 
but our commitment to the UK and to our partners is for the long term. Our 
continued support will enable these institutions to forward-plan engaging, 
educational and powerful exhibitions and performances that will be enjoyed by 
millions here in the UK and beyond.”

The news was condemned by campaigners, who have been staging peaceful, 
artistic protests against the sponsorship for several years.

Chris Garrard, a spokesperson for the campaign group BP or Not BP 
<http://bp-or-not-bp.org/>, which began stage-invading protests at the RSC in 
2012 and has held18 performance protests at the British Museum 
<http://bp-or-not-bp.org/news/british-museum-hit-by-projection-protest-ahead-of-bp-agm/>
, said: “This will be a hugely unpopular move and wildly out of touch with the 
mood across the cultural sector.

“At a time when the world needs to urgently shift away from fossil fuels, the 
idea that these institutions will still be promoting an oil company into the 
2020s is deeply irresponsible. As the devastating effects of climate change 
become ever more apparent, this decision will look more shortsighted with every 
passing day.”

Anna Galkina, of the campaign group Platform London 
<http://platformlondon.org/>, said protests would escalate as a result of the 
renewals. “BP is ripping off our cultural institutions – their sponsorship 
provides less than 0.5% of the British Museum’s budget. With this pocket 
change, BP buys legitimacy, access to invaluable advertising space, and masks 
its role in destroying indigenous lands, arming dictatorships and wrecking our 
climate.

“The museums help BP do that. That’s why art interventions and protests 
against BP will go on. The new deals will not last five years.”


Tate suffers blow in efforts to keep amount of BP funding secret
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/11/tate-suffers-blow-in-efforts-to-keep-amount-of-bp-funding-secret>
The arts organisations all released statements welcoming the new deals. 
Hartwig Fischer, director of the British Museum, said the organisation was 
grateful to the oil company. “BP has supported theBritish Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/british-museum> for the past 20 years, 
which has enabled the museum to host magnificent exhibitions and events with a 
great public benefit.”

Alex Beard, chief executive of the ROH, said: “BP has been and remains at the 
forefront of corporate investment in arts and culture in the UK, and it’s 
wonderful for theRoyal Opera House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/royal-opera-house> to have their 
commitment for a further five years.

“One of the benefits of such long-term support is that you can really build 
and develop a partnership, and to have the BP Big Screen programme consistently 
providing opportunities for people up and down the country to access 
world-class ballet and opera for free is fantastic.”

Catherine Mallyon, executive director of the RSC, said: “BP’s sponsorship of 
our £5 ticket scheme for 16- to 25-year-olds gives many young people the chance 
to see our work. The scheme is highly valued by our audiences and helps us 
establish lifetime enthusiasts for Shakespeare and live theatre. Since 2013, we 
have sold over 62,000 tickets thanks to BP’s support.”

BP profits plummet 44% as oil prices continue to fall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/bp-profits-plummet-44-as-oil-prices-continue-to-fall>
Nicholas Cullinan, director of the NPG, said: “We are extremely grateful for 
and proud of this ongoing partnership, for such longevity and loyalty is unique 
in corporate sponsorship. At a time when funding for public institutions is 
increasingly stretched, the support of the arts that BP provides is vital.”

BP said it was investing £7.5m in a range of projects with the four 
organisations over the next five years. This follows the £10m, five-year deals 
itannounced with Tate, the British Museum, the NPG and the ROH 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/dec/19/galleries-renew-bp-deal-protests>
 in 2011.

As well as protests, campaigners have gone to court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jan/26/tate-reveal-bp-sponsorship-150000-330000-platform-information-tribunal>
 to force Tate to release information on precisely how much money it has 
received from BP over the years. They have alsoobtained internal documents 
under the Freedom of Information Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/29/museums-ethics-investigation-influence-sponsor-bp-british-museum>
, which they claim show institutions bending to accommodate the demands of BP.

A spokesman for the Museums Association 
<http://www.museumsassociation.org/home> said its ethics committee had 
discussed the matter and would be publishing a statement soon. But he added 
that the association was there to provide advice and guidance on ethical issues 
and was not investigating any breach. “That suggests we have a quasi-legal 
system, which we don’t.”
 