
Britain’s top bosses were sent a warning on Thursday that they must rein in 
boardroom excess when shareholders voted overwhelmingly against huge pay deals 
at two of Britain’s biggest companies.

Almost 60% of shareholders voted against a £14m pay package for the chief 
executive ofBP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> in a year in which it 
reported record losses, cut thousands of jobs and froze its employees’ pay.

Just hours later, more than 50% of investors voted against pay deals at the 
medical equipment group Smith & Nephew, in a rare display of shareholders 
demonstrating their unwillingness to tolerate boardroom excess.

After scenes recalling the 2012 “shareholder spring” when several major 
companies faced rebellions over pay, the Institute of Directors said companies 
must respond to shareholders’ anger or risk discrediting the wider business 
community.

“British boards are now in the last chance saloon. If the will of shareholders 
in cases like this is ignored, it will only be a matter of time before the 
government introduces tougher regulations on executive pay,” said Simon Walker, 
the IoD’s director general.

Stefan Stern, the director of the High Pay Centre, said this year’s rebellions 
felt more substantial than the revolts of 2012. “We are reaching a point where 
the largest CEO packages represent a material issue for shareholders that is 
big enough to require serious consideration. We could be reaching a point where 
more shareholders will argue that it is too damaging to businesses’ own 
interests to allow top pay to rise this high,” he said.

The rebellions kickstarted the annual general meeting season during which most 
FTSE 100 companies will hold audiences with their shareholders, big and small. 
Investors said company bosses would be on their guard for further standoffs.

The 60% vote against the £14m payout to BP’s chief executive, Bob Dudley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bob-dudley>, was the second biggest 
rebellion of its kind at a large company, according to data compiled by the 
shareholder advisory group Manifest.

Some 59.29% opposed the remuneration report, a rebellion that has only ever 
been exceeded by one at Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) in 2009 at the height of 
the banking crisis, when 80.1% voted against, and surpassing the59% that voted 
against the £6.8m pay deal for Sir Martin Sorrell at his advertising company WPP
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/13/wpp-shareholders-vote-against-sorrell-pay>
 in 2012.

The results of the vote on BP pay were revealed by the company at its annual 
meeting in London and followed a barrage of criticism from shareholders who 
accused executives of living in a parallel universe of privilege.

The huge payout in cash, shares and pension contributions to Dudley and other 
board members came during a year when the companyran up its largest ever losses 
of $6.5bn due to a collapse in oil prices and huge fines for the Deepwater 
Horizon accident in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/02/bp-annual-loss-biggest-for-20-years-axes-thousands-of-jobs-deepwater>
.

At the ExCel conference centre in London organisations and an army of small 
shareholders stepped up to lambast the board in person for rewarding themselves 
so inappropriately – as well as to ask why it was continuing to invest heavily 
in fossil fuels after promising to take climate change into account in all its 
operations.

The Church of England pension board questioned “whether this level [of pay] is 
morally right” and went on to ask how much one individual executive needed to 
be incentivised to make him work.

One small shareholder, who introduced himself as Captain Hawker, said BP had 
stepped into a “PR nightmare” by handing out such largesse when the rest of the 
country was mired in austerity.

BP’s chairman, Carl-Henric Svanberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/carl-henric-svanberg-bp>, told the 
meeting that the board would listen to shareholders’ views while the chair of 
the company’s remuneration committee promised to review its executive pay 
structure.

“Let me be clear. We hear you. We will sit down with our largest shareholders 
to make sure we understand their concerns and return to seek your support for a 
renewed policy,” Svanberg said.

Some 59.29 % had opposed the remuneration report, a rebellion only exceeded by 
one at Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) at the height of the banking crisis, and 
surpassing the59% that voted against the £6.8m pay deal for Sir Martin Sorrell 
at his advertising company WPP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/13/wpp-shareholders-vote-against-sorrell-pay>
 in 2012.

Manifest compared it to other revolts including by 54% of Aviva shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/may/03/aviva-shareholder-rebellion-executive-pay>
 in 2012 and by57.1% of Royal Dutch Shell investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/may/19/shell-sharholders-pay-revolt> 
in 2009.


BP boss faces shareholders angry at £13.8m pay deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-boss-pay-rise-anger-agm> 
Ann Dowling, the chair of BP’s remuneration committee, attempted to answer the 
criticism and promised she would come back next year with a new formula for 
assessing pay.

She defended the general level of pay at BP, saying it was “somewhere in the 
middle” of what other companies of a similar nature paid. “We have to reward 
people appropriately to attract the talented employees who are important for 
the future health of the company,” she said.

But a number of politicians and commentators including Vince Cable, the former 
business secretary, and Barry Sheerman, the Labour MP for Huddersfield, 
believed Dudley, Dowling or others should lose their jobs over the fiasco.

After the meeting, Legal & General’s fund management arm – one of the biggest 
investors in the City – said it had voted against the pay deal. Ashley Hamilton 
Claxton, the corporate governance manager at Royal London Asset Management, 
said the board should now consider the views of shareholders.

Hopes, however, were low. Roger Lawson, the deputy chairman of ShareSoc, the 
group of small shareholders that opposed Dudley’s pay, said: “In my experience 
the concessions you get after a company loses a remuneration vote are not very 
large. They say: ‘We’ve listened to shareholders and changed this and that’ and 
hope they can squeak it through next year.”

At Smith & Nephew, investors were angered by a decision to allow a long-term 
incentive plan to pay out £2.1m to 60 senior executives even though the 
performance criteria had not been reached.

S&N said: “We recognise that the use of discretion is a matter where there is 
considerable divergence of opinion. In spite of the voting outcome, the board 
unanimously believe that in these particular circumstances the remuneration 
committee made the right decision in aligning executive reward to the 
shareholder experience.”



 