
Construction of 40 major dams in the Brazilian Amazon would destroy the heart 
of the world’s largest rainforest, severely affect indigenous people and is not 
economically justifiable, says Greenpeace in amajor new report 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/Global/brasil/documentos/2016/Greenpeace_Damning_The_Amazon-The_Risky_Business_Of_Hydropower_In_The_Amazon-2016.pdf>
.


The five large dams and 35 others planned for the Tapajós river and its 
tributaries south of Santarém have been promoted by the government and global 
engineering and energy companies as a solution to Brazil’s recession and severe 
electricity shortages.

The projects form part of Brazil’s plans to install 25GW of new hydropower 
capacity by 2024 and create a massive industrial waterway to allow soya and 
other crops to be exported more easily to Europe.
Biggest Trapajós river basin dam projects 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/tapajos/giv-125152x8yf0cdPWbE/>
But Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> questions 
the official forecasts of how much energy will be generated and says Brazil’s 
dash for hydropower on the Tapajós is a potentially disastrous ecological and 
economic mistake.

Aside from flooding hundreds of square miles of pristine forest, the dams will 
lead to uncontrolled economic exploitation, massive deforestation and 
colonisation of the wider Amazon basin with devastatingecological consequences 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2016/06/dams-threaten-future-of-amazonian-biodiversity-major-new-study-warns/>
, it says.

“There are other far less harmful ways to generate as much energy as the 
country needs, ways which can be brought into operation more quickly than 
hydropower. It is extremely doubtful whether hydropower is a reliable or 
cost-effective approach, making an energy future based on dams a potentially 
disastrous mistake,” says the report.

Greenpeace says it intends to work with the Munduruku indigenous people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/dec/22/amazon-munduruku-indians-brazil-tapajos>
 whose lands would be drowned by the 8,000-megawatt São Luiz do Tapajós (SLT) 
dam. If built, this would be the sixth-largest hydroelectric dam in the world. 
The dam would be 7.6km wide and flood hundreds of square kilometres of 
rainforest.

Plans for the dam are currently on hold after Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>’s environmental agency, Ibama, 
suspended the licensing process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/22/brazil-amazon-dam-project-suspended-indigenous-munduruku-sao-luiz-do-tapajos>
 over concerns about its impact on the indigenous community in the region.

Brazil Amazon dam project suspended over concerns for indigenous people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/22/brazil-amazon-dam-project-suspended-indigenous-munduruku-sao-luiz-do-tapajos>
“The Munduruku people have been fighting for the Brazilian government to 
formally recognise their land for many years. Greenpeace have sent activists to 
the Munduruku villages to assist in physically demarcating their land and 
installing solar power systems, as well as campaigning internationally in 
support of their cause,” says the report.


“This is an important battle not just for the Munduruku people, but for 
everyone around the world since we are talking about one of the biggest forests 
that still exist on the planet,” said Juarez, the Munduruku chief of the Sawré 
Muybu indigenous land.

The SLT dam is a top priority for the government because it aims to turn the 
huge Tapajós river into an industrial waterway and shipping hub with the goal 
of allowing soya beans produced in the Mato Grosso to be shipped to the 
Atlantic ocean and on to Europe and the US.

The Munduruku and three other indigenous groups in the Tapajós basin have 
questioned the legality of the dams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/dec/22/amazon-munduruku-indians-brazil-tapajos>
 and last yeardeclared the government incapable of conserving biodiversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/30/amazonian-tribes-demand-brazil-stop-hydroelectric-dams>
.

A joint manifesto claims that the government, which is embroiled in a major 
corruption scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/brazil-dilma-rousseff-plot-secret-phone-transcript-impeachment>
, builds dams with hastily prepared studies and dubious motives.

 “It does not seek to understand the consequences of the destruction of nature 
and our lives,” it says.

Greenpeace is calling for the Tapajós to be protected and demanding that 
companies refuse to play any part in the dams’ construction. Brazilian, US, 
European – including British – and Chinese engineering companies and banks have 
all prepared bids for the SLT dam.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbrazil-giant-hydropower-dams-risk-destroying-amazon-greenpeace-tapajos-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1486907efb489cf6ae0279792fd30ff05cd7f13e%2F0_167_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazil's%20giant%20dams%20risk%20destroying%20heart%20of%20the%20Amazon%2C%20says%20Greenpeace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbrazil-giant-hydropower-dams-risk-destroying-amazon-greenpeace-tapajos-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazil%27s%20giant%20dams%20risk%20destroying%20heart%20of%20the%20Amazon%2C%20says%20Greenpeace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbrazil-giant-hydropower-dams-risk-destroying-amazon-greenpeace-tapajos-river%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1486907efb489cf6ae0279792fd30ff05cd7f13e%2F0_167_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 A titi monkey (genus Callicebus) in Sawré Muybu, home to the indigenous 
Munduruku people. Photograph: Valdemir Cunha/Greenpeace 
“In recent years the government’s approach to the Amazon has become one of 
development at any cost and often with questionable justification,” says the 
Greenpeace report.


“It is time the Brazilian government admitted that clean Amazon hydropower is 
a dangerous myth that sows misery and destruction while failing to provide 
energy security. The economics of large dam schemes in remote tropical 
rainforests do not stack up,” it concludes.

If built, the dams on the Tapajós would flood an area the size of greater 
London, Paris and Amsterdam combined. The government’s own environmental impact 
study uncovered eight new species of mammal living in the area under threat, 
including a new monkey and five species of bat.

 