
Lionel Messi is set to take on Neymar at the MCG in a heavyweight clash between
Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> and Brazil with the 
South American giants reportedly to play next June in the Superclásico de las 
Americas.

The Victorian government is expected to announce the long-planned fixture in 
the coming weeks, according to News CorpAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>. The report says one of the 
teams will likely then play the Socceroos in a tune-up for Australia’s 
Confederations Cup campaign in Russia.

Cristiano Ronaldo wins Ballon d’Or for the fourth time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/cristiano-ronaldo-ballon-dor-fourth-lionel-messi>
Coach Ange Postecoglou is eager to get in a friendly match after the 8 June 
World Cup qualifier with Saudi Arabia at Adelaide Oval, and before the national 
team have to be in Russia on 15 June ahead of their first Confederations Cup 
game against Germany on 19 June.

The date of the clash between five-time World Cup winners Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> and two-time champions Argentina 
will depend on the MCG’s availability during the 2017 AFL season, with matches 
already scheduled for 10, 12 and 17 June.

Should it come off, it would pit Barcelona superstars Messi and Neymar against 
each other. But they wouldn’t be the only big names. Argentina also feature 
Manchester City pair Sergio Agüero and Pablo Zabaleta, Juventus star Gonzalo 
Higuaín and Barcelona’s Javier Mascherano, while Brazil could field Liverpool 
duo Philippe Coutinho and Roberto Firmino and Chelsea’s David Luiz.

The nations rarely play each other outside the World Cup qualification cycle 
but the Superclasico de las Americas offers a chance to fight for silverware. 
Created in 2011, the match-up is the successor of the Roca Cup played 
irregularly between 1914 and 1976, and originally featured two games played in 
a home-and-away format.

Brazil won the first series 2-0 on aggregate before Argentina got revenge in 
2012 via a penalty shootout. In 2014, the format was changed to a one-match 
play-off at a neutral venue, won 2-0 by Brazil in Beijing.

A spokesperson for the Victorian government declined to confirm the fixture 
was in the pipeline, saying: “The government has nothing to add to this 
morning’s speculation.”
 