
London’s lead in financial services technology risks being blunted by 
bureaucratic new migration rules, according to business leaders cited by the 
latestHouse of Lords report 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/eu-financial-affairs-subcommittee/>
 on leaving the European Union.

Peers conclude that the fast-growing sector is one of a number of 
world-beating industries at risk if London loses its status as aninternational 
melting pot for talent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/may/27/-sp-special-report-an-outsiders-guide-to-the-city-of-london>
, partly because Europeans may not be able to come to work in the UK so freely.

Some 60,000 EU nationals work in financial services jobs in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/25/brexit-qanda-burning-issues-for-uk-after-leaving-eu>
, and although the government has insisted that it does not wish to shut the 
door to highly skilled workers from abroad, City employers report that many are 
increasingly nervous since thereferendum to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/how-did-uk-end-up-voting-leave-european-union>
.

 “[We are] already finding less desire among bright eastern Europeans, Germans 
and French people to come and work in the UK,” warned Giles Andrews, chairman 
of startupZopa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2015/oct/10/ratesetter-funding-circle-zopa-interest-peer-p2p-lenders>
, which says half its workforce is from outside the UK.
As much as £50bn in yearly City revenues come from EU business 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-14T14:32:57/embed.html>
Another witness to the Lords EU committee estimated that nearly a third of the 
entrepreneurs behind UK startup companies in the sector were born overseas, a 
sign of an “inherently international” industry where access to talent was 
paramount.

“Obviously there is an entrepreneurial visa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/29/a-guide-to-the-governments-new-rules-for-international-students>
, but you have to have a huge amount of capital already in place behind you or 
prove that you are about to set up a business,” said Daniel Morgan ofInnovate 
Finance <http://new.innovatefinance.com/>. “Many of our founders came here just 
with an idea, and with a smaller labour pool, that talent will no longer 
gravitate here.”

The warning about London’s role as a magnet for talent is supported by a 
separate report released on Thursday by theBritish Council 
<http://www.britishcouncil.org>, which interviewed 40,000 young people in the 
G20 on their perceptions of Britain. It found 36% of those in EU countries said 
that Brexit had had a negative impact on the UK’s attractiveness.

Though higher proportions of those interviewed in non-EU countries remained 
favourably disposed, the council said the UK urgently needed “to address the 
more negative opinions [of] young people in Europe”. “Leaving the EU in a way 
that maintains relationships with the societies ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – and that strengthens these 
partnerships around the world – will be essential,” said chief executive Sir 
Ciarán Devane.

Other new research suggests that non-Europeans are also being put off by 
London’s growing isolation after the vote for Brexit. Asurvey of American 
executives 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-eu-usa-companies-idUKKBN14300A> by 
law firm Gowling WLG indicates almost 40% of them are considering moving their 
British office to the EU, and two-thirds of the 533 US companies surveyed say 
the Brexit referendum was already having an effect on investment choices.

But it is the latest in a series of reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords-brexit-reports> from the House of 
Lords EU committee published on Thursday that provides the starkest warnings 
yet about the risks of Brexit to the City of London. Asrevealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/urgent-brexit-deal-needed-to-avert-banking-job-losses-peers-to-warn>
 in the Guardian on Wednesday, it warns that many banks and other City firms 
are fast approaching a point of no return in moving jobs out of the UK, and 
urgently calls for government reassurance about a transition phase to avoid 
going over a “cliff edge”.

“We are concerned that, in the absence of clarity over the future 
relationship, firms may pre-empt uncertainty by relocating or restructuring, 
for instance by establishing subsidiaries or transferring staff, even though 
such changes may ultimately prove to be unnecessary,” warns the report by the 
financial services sub-committee. “This would not be in the interests of the 
industry or the UK.”
The UK is the foremost clearing market for euro-denominated derivatives 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-14T15:07:08/embed.html>
As expected, the report explores the consequence of City firms losing 
“passporting” rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/london-city-eu-passport-brexit>
 to sell their services to European customers, but also highlights the wider 
impact on employees and the City’s delicate web of interconnected specialisms.

“It is not a Lego set in which little pieces can be built up and put somewhere 
else,” said Alex Wilmot-Sitwell of Merrill Lynch. “The interconnectedness is 
very significant, and … we need to be assured that whatever happens from this 
point forward, the consequences and implications of any steps are understood.”

Several of the witnesses call for a transition phase of two to three years, on 
top of thetwo-year negotiation phase, which is expected to begin in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/brexit-plan-will-not-be-published-until-february-says-davis>
, and compared the risks of getting it wrong to moving “nuclear waste”.

“Migrating huge businesses from one jurisdiction to another requires an 
enormous amount of work,” said Wilmot-Sitwell. “That process is very dangerous; 
it is fraught with risks. The materials that are being moved are risky. You do 
not move nuclear waste in a race; you do it in a carefully coordinated and 
managed process.”

The report calls on the Treasury to act as a champion for the City during the 
Brexit negotiations, warning that political pressure from rival European 
centres could be used to disrupt a move from passporting to so-called 
“equivalence” rules.

Philip Hammond, the chancellor, has also insisted that he sees “no likelihood 
of our usingpowers to control migration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/25/philip-hammond-highly-skilled-eu-workers-brexit-immigration-controls>
 into the UK to prevent companies from bringing highly skilled, highly paid 
workers here”.

But witnesses to the Lords inquiry warned that this may not be enough for 
financial services firms, who want “to get the specialised labour that they 
need in a relatively efficient and smooth way”. Sir Charles Bean, of the London 
School of Economics, told the committee that the chief worry among employers is 
that “some heavy bureaucratic process is put in place that takes a very long 
time to operate and becomes very cumbersome”.
 