
One of the City’s most prized businesses – the way that financial products 
priced in euros are processed – will not be lost to the remaining members of the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> as a result of Brexit, 
according to the ratings agency Standard & Poor’s.

The costs associated with moving the clearing of complex financial instruments 
to another financial centre means London is likely to remain the home of the 
£460tn-a-year business, S&P said.

There have been warnings that as many as 100,000 City jobs would be axed if 
London lost its euro-clearing role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/100000-clearing-jobs-at-risk-from-brexit-vote-stock-exchange-chief>
, which rival European financial centres were eyeing up jealously even before 
the result of the 23 June referendum.

An estimated 70% of the transactions using the European single currency are 
processed in London by clearing houses, which step in between major banks and 
financial firms on big deals to guarantee transactions. TheEuropean Central Bank
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> has argued this 
business should be conducted in the eurozone.

Last year, however, the Treasury declared victory over the central bank after a
European court concluded the ECB did not have the right to make such a demand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/04/george-osborne-wins-clearing-house-ruling-against-ecb>
. The vote for Brexit, though, has reopened the debate about London’s role at 
the heart of a key part of the European financial sector’s machinery.

“The UK’s referendum vote to leave the EU reopens the possibility that the 
ECB, supported by other EU authorities, could try to require the clearing of 
euro-denominated contracts into the eurozone or more likely the EU,” S&P said.

There could be two ways to do this – reawaken the demands about where the 
business is located, or make changes to the regulations which govern the way 
standards are set for such operations.

“We believe the first route is likely to be complex, slow and uncertain; the 
second could be simpler. At this stage, however, we see neither of these 
options as likely. This is for several reasons, notably the massive extra 
burden of margin collateral that it could place on market participants,” S&P 
said.

Clearing houses require collateral to be used as a deposit when they are 
handling trades so extra demands for collateral would push up the cost of doing 
business from $83bn to $160bn at the London Clearing House, according to an 
estimate by financial data company ClarusFT cited by S&P.
 