
The UK saw $1.5tn (£1.2tn) wiped off its wealth during 2016 after the Brexit 
vote sentthe pound tumbling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/pound-continues-to-fall-against-dollar-and-euro-amid-hard-brexit-fears>
 and the stock market into reverse, according to a survey by Credit Suisse.

A fall in values at the top-end of the property market also contributed to 
about 400,000 Britons losing their status as dollar millionaires and one of the 
biggest drops in wealth among the major economies.

But the UK remained third for the number of ultra-high-net-worth individuals, 
who own more than £50m in assets, behind the US and China.

RBS chairman calls on Theresa May to draw up Brexit transitional plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/13/rbs-chairman-calls-on-theresa-may-brexit-transitional-plan-howard-davies-banks-uk>
Across the globe, the richest 1% own more wealth than the rest of the world 
put together,continuing the dominance seen in last year’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/13/half-world-wealth-in-hands-population-inequality-report>
. A recovering in the global stock markets in recent weeks is also likely to 
reverse some of the losses suffered by pension savers and wealthy individuals.

Oxfam said the huge gap between rich and poor was “undermining economies, 
destabilising societies and holding back the fight against poverty”.

It said a separate study by the investment bank showed the UK’s top 1% richest 
people continued to own 24% of the nation’s wealth.

The findings from the Credit Suisse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/creditsuisse> Research Institute’s 
seventh annual global wealth report that found the overall growth in global 
wealth remained flat in 2016, following a trend that emerged in 2013 and 
contrasting sharply with the double-digit growth rates witnessed before the 
global financial crisis of 2008.

Michael O’Sullivan, chief investment officer in Credit Suisse’s wealth 
management arm: “The impact of the Brexit vote is widely thought of in terms of 
GDP but the impact on household wealth bears watching.

“Since the Brexit vote, UK household wealth has fallen by $1.5tn. Wealth per 
adult has already dropped by $33,000 to $289,000 since the end of June. In 
fact, in US dollar terms, 406,000 people in the UK are no longer millionaires.”


The report found that total global wealth in 2016 edged up 1.4%, or $3.5tn, to 
$256tn in line with the increase in the world’s adult population. Accordingly, 
average wealth per adult of $52,800 remains in line with last year’s figures.

The number of millionaires globally increased by 155%, while the number of 
ultra-high-net-worth individuals has risen by 216%, making them by far the 
fastest-growing group of wealth holders.

More than 90% of the wealthiest people in the world live in developed nations, 
mostly the US, but the rise of millionaires and ultra-high-net-worth 
individuals (UHNWIs) in China meant there was a shift to emerging economies in 
recent years.

Credit Suisse said: “This century, no other segments of the wealth pyramid 
have developed as significantly as the millionaire and UHNWI segments. The 
number of millionaires is projected to reach 45.1 million by 2021, while the 
number of UHNWIs could reach 208,000, up from 141,000.”

The US hosted the highest number of UHNWIs with 56,000 followed by China with 
around 9,000, the UK in third place with 5,000.

Oxfam said it was clear from the survey that the wealthiest are holding their 
own while those on lower incomes are struggling.

Spokeswoman Sally Copley said: “The wealthiest one percent of the population - 
who own nearly a quarter of all the country’s wealth – continue to do well 
whilst so many people in Britain are just about managing to stay above the 
poverty line.

“Tomorrow’s autumn statement presents a real opportunity for the government to 
show how they are going to make the economy work for everyone and not just 
those at the very top,” she said.

• This article was amended on 22 November to clarify that the figure for the 
top 1% richest people owning 24% of the nation’s wealth came from a separate 
Credit Suisse report
 