
Up to 100,000 financial services jobs could be lost if Britain votes to leave 
theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, according to a report 
compiled for a lobbying group that will stir debate about the short-term impact 
of Brexit.

The report for TheCityUK by PricewaterhouseCoopers follows a warning from the 
accountancy firm in March that a British exit from the EU would cause aserious 
shock to the UK economy that could lead to 950,000 job losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/21/brexit-could-cost-100bn-and-nearly-1m-jobs-cbi-warns>
.

The latest report by PwC 
<https://www.thecityuk.com/assets/2016/Reports-PDF/Leaving-the-EU-Implications-for-the-UK-FS-sector.pdf>
 focuses on the financial services sector and estimates there would be between 
70,000 and 100,000 fewer jobs in 2020 as the sector declines by up to 9.5%, 
compared with their estimate of the number of jobs if Britain remained in the 
EU.

Chris Cummings, chief executive of TheCityUK, said: “Major firms from across 
the world come to London to access Europe’s single market, bringing with them 
jobs and investment. While Brexit may not be ruinous for the UK economy, it 
does risk damaging the UK-based financial services sector, particularly over 
the short term, delaying investment decisions and reducing activity. It also 
threatens the overall competitiveness of the UK as a place to do business.”

In the longer term, jobs would return to the City, according to PwC, once the 
initial shock starts to subside. By 2030, the extent of the jobs gap would fall 
to 30,000 while the loss in value to the economy would be an estimated £5bn.

Former Bank of England policymaker Andrew Sentance said the UK’s trading 
relationships with the EU and the rest of the world were at risk. “The UK could 
recover some of the loss by striking new trade agreements with our EU partners 
and other countries, though this is not guaranteed and would take some years to 
negotiate. In all the scenarios we have examined, the financial services 
industries will be less successful for at least a decade if the UK leaves the 
EU,” Sentance said.

Bank of England stages Brexit dress rehearsal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bank-of-england-brexit-dress-rehearsal>
But the Vote Leave campaign accused TheCityUK of burying the report’s 
prediction that financial services would still grow under a Brexit scenario – 
though not as quickly as if Britain remained in the EU. The report said after a 
vote to leave the EU the financial sector’s contribution to the economy would 
be 35%-38% larger by 2020 compared with growth of 41% if the UK stays in the EU.

A spokesman for Vote Leave said: “This is typical of the pro-EU campaign, who 
are trying to hide the fact that their own report admits that there will be 
more financial services jobs after we vote leave. This is a torpedo to the 
remain campaign’s constant scaremongering. The same establishment who said we 
would lose jobs if we didn’t join the euro are trying to create a misleading 
report over the referendum.”

PwC said the financial sector was more vulnerable to leaving the EU than the 
rest of the UK economy because Britain’s place as a financial hub relies partly 
on access to European markets. The financial sector is also closely linked to 
the health of the economy and responds sharply to slowing economic growth, it 
said.

Lucy Thomas, deputy director of the Stronger In campaign, said: “The financial 
services sector is a major UK employer with hundreds of thousands of jobs 
across the country in cities like Leeds, Birmingham, London and Edinburgh. A 
warning like this shows just how many jobs could be lost if we leave Europe and 
underlines the real risks to our economy and our prosperity of leavingEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. 

 