
Britain’s biggest banks are preparing to relocate out of the UK in the first 
few months of 2017 amid growing fears over the impending Brexit negotiations, 
while smaller banks are making plans to get out before Christmas.

Hard Brexit would put UK's skills and expertise advantage at risk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/oct/21/hard-brexit-risk-expertise-skills-research>
The dramatic claim is made in the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/22/brexit-threat-to-british-banks>
 by the chief executive of theBritish Bankers’ Association 
<https://www.bba.org.uk/>, Anthony Browne, who warns “the public and political 
debate at the moment is taking us in the wrong direction”.

A source close to the Brexit secretary, David Davis, said he and the 
chancellor,Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>
, had last week sought to offer reassurance that they were determined to secure 
the status of the City of London.

However, the government’s stated intention to take control of the freedom of 
movement into the UK is widely recognised among officials to be a hammer blow 
to any chance of retaining the present terms of trade for banks, particularly 
given the bellicose rhetoric of major politicians on the continent.

The so-called passporting rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/20/passporting-rights-brexit-uk-firms-fca-eu>
 for members of the single market allow UK-based banks to offer financial 
services to companies and individuals across the EU unimpeded, yet the French 
president, François Hollande, is among those who have insisted in recent weeks 
that hard Brexitwill mean “hard negotiation” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/uk-will-get-a-hard-brexit-if-may-pursues-tough-approach-hollande>
 and Britain will need to “pay the price” of leaving.

A hard Brexit would involve the UK leaving both the single market, a central 
pillar of which is freedom of movement, and the customs union, which could 
potentially reintroduce tariff and non-tariff restrictions on British imports 
and exports.

Browne warns that British and European politicians who appear to be pursuing 
“anti-trade” goals need to recognise that “putting up barriers to the trade in 
financial services across the Channel will make us all worse off”.

Browne, whose organisation has been in intense negotiations with the 
government, further warns the EU that banks based in the UK are currently 
lending £1.1tn, therefore “keeping the continent afloat financially”, and this 
arrangement is at risk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fleading-banks-set-to-pull-out-of-brexit-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cf8532b5647e3e03e74db5208bb6ce42f881a76%2F186_272_3552_2131%2F3552.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%3A%20leading%20banks%20set%20to%20pull%20out%20of%20UK%20early%20next%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fleading-banks-set-to-pull-out-of-brexit-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%3A%20leading%20banks%20set%20to%20pull%20out%20of%20UK%20early%20next%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fleading-banks-set-to-pull-out-of-brexit-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4cf8532b5647e3e03e74db5208bb6ce42f881a76%2F186_272_3552_2131%2F3552.jpg>
 Anthony Browne of the British Bankers’ Association says the whole of Europe 
will suffer if the UK chooses a hard Brexit. Photograph: Bloomberg 
Of Britain’s position, he writes that banking is the country’s biggest export 
industry by far and the current trajectory threatens not just tariff-free 
trade, but the legal right of banks to provide services.

“Most international banks now have project teams working out which operations 
they need to move to ensure they can continue serving customers, the date by 
which this must happen, and how best to do it,” he says.

“Their hands are quivering over the relocate button. Many smaller banks plan 
to start relocations before Christmas; bigger banks are expected to start in 
the first quarter of next year.”

Sources close to Davis dismissed speculation that he believed a solution would 
be for the City to strike an “equivalence” deal with the EU, under which the 
regulatory systems are recognised by both parties through a one-off agreement. 
Browne writes that some Brexiters have made such an argument, but such a deal 
would not be enough to stop banks deserting Britain.

“On this side of the Channel, some high-profile Brexiters have poured scorn on 
the idea that we need passporting at all and that other regimes such as ‘third 
country equivalence’ will do,” he says.

“But the EU’s equivalence regime is a poor shadow of passporting – it only 
covers a narrow range of services, can be withdrawn at virtually no notice, and 
will probably mean the UK will have to accept rules it has no influence over. 
For most banks, equivalence won’t prevent them from relocating their 
operations.”

It has been reported that Goldman Sachs is among those drawing up plans to 
transfer around 2,000 of its employees to a rival European city, should the UK 
lose its passporting rights.

The industry body TheCityUk <https://www.thecityuk.com/> has claimed that up 
to 70,000 financial jobs could be lost if Britain leaves the EU without a new, 
credible relationship in place for the City of London.

European banks warn against political 'intrusion'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/european-banks-warn-off-political-intrusion>
Browne says he understands the motivation of those who are seeking to take 
business from UK shores, but he condemns politicians who appear to be willing 
to break up the integrated financial market, which “makes it easier and cheaper 
for French farmers, German manufacturers and Italian fashion designers to 
secure funding”.

He writes: “It is understandable that other European cities want to attract 
jobs from London. Delegations from Frankfurt, Paris, Dublin and Madrid are all 
coming to the UK to pitch to bankers. I am pro-competition, and long may they 
try to make their labour market and fiscal policy more attractive to 
international investors.

“That is not the problem. The problem comes when national governments try to 
use the EU exit negotiations to build walls across the Channel to split 
Europe’s integrated financial market in two, in order to force jobs from 
London.”

The scale of the task facing the UK in striking a good Brexit deal with the EU 
has been put in stark relief by the apparent collapse of the proposed EU-Canada 
trade pact.

On Saturday, there were frantic diplomatic efforts to salvage a deal after 
Canada’s international trade minister, Chrystia Freeland,walked out of talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/21/chrystia-freeland-frustrated-failure-eu-canada-trade-deal-video>
. She described the situation as “impossible” on Friday and cast doubt on the 
bloc’s ability to operate effectively after the proposals were blocked by a 
regional administration in Belgium.

The parliament in Wallonia is holding up the deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/eu-canada-free-trade-deal-delayed-belgium-ceta>
, although the region’s leader, Paul Magnette, suggested the standoff could be 
resolved within days. It has concerns the deal will undermine labour, 
environment and consumer standards, and allow multinationals to crush local 
firms.
 