
This is the year when our politicians and the so-called “people” – all 28% of 
the population who voted to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> – will reap what they have sown. 
Unfortunately, unless sense prevails, the rest of us will also suffer the 
product of their wild oats.

The absurdity, indeed perils, of Brexit become more obvious by the month. 
Business is nervous; so is the City, which constitutes far more hundreds of 
thousands of employees than the small, avaricious band of bankers who made 
their notorious contribution to the financial crisis.

It would be good if the majority of members of parliament could recall and act 
upon Edmund Burke’s 1774 address to the electors of Bristol: they should summon 
up the courage to act as representatives, not delegates of constituencies where 
they fear the threat from the xenophobic forces conjured up by the likes of 
Nigel Farage (who shamelessly continues to draw a handsome salary from an EU 
institution he affects to abhor).

They should capitalise on the increasing signs of nervousness and potential 
panic among the leading Brexiters. For the diehard Liam Fox to decide that 
perhaps, after all, we should remain in the customs union was rather 
interesting.

The personal attacks by parliamentary Brexiters on our ambassador to the 
European Union, Sir Ivan Rogers, were indicative of panic in the victorious 
ranks. The occasion wasthe leaking of advice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/eu-politicians-believe-trade-deal-could-take-decade-no-10-is-warned>
 given to Theresa May, in which Rogers suggested trade renegotiations with the 
EU could last 10 years.

This revelation provoked an unpleasant ad hominem attack on a distinguished 
civil servant who, in the best traditions of Whitehall, “tells it like it is” 
to the occupant of No 10, whether that be David Cameron or Theresa May.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftheresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20addresses%20'divisive'%20Brexit%20in%20new%20year%20message%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftheresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20addresses%20%27divisive%27%20Brexit%20in%20new%20year%20message%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftheresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video&media=>
Theresa May addresses ‘divisive’ Brexit in new year message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2017/jan/01/theresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video>
The plain, hard fact of the matter, which the Brexiters refuse to grasp, is 
that the other 27 members of the EU were desperate for us to vote to Remain, 
but were never going to roll over to the Brexiters’ proposals for a swift offer 
to this country to “have its cake and eat it”.

Here we come to an interesting historical development. Rogers, while now 
occupying a vitally important post at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, is 
himself essentially a Treasury man. And the Treasury, unlike the Foreign 
Office, has traditionally been suspicious of the European Union.

But Rogers knows which side this country’s bread is buttered, and neither our 
diplomatic nor economic interest is likely to be served by Brexit. In which 
context, I was especially struck by the way a former Treasury official, who in 
days gone by was persistently vitriolic in his comments on the EU, recently 
contacted me to ask whether the nation had lost its senses.

The problem at the moment is that the damage caused by the referendum is on a 
slow-burning fuse. There are time lags in these matters: the impact on prices 
and real earnings from the collapse of the pound will become more evident as 
the year progresses. As it becomes clear that the Brexiters who have captured 
the prime minister do not have a convincing strategy, plans for major firms to 
relocate their investments to continental Europe will gradually be implemented.

Meanwhile I have also been struck by the number of people who have contacted 
me to express astonishment at theBoxing Day intervention of Mervyn King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/mervyn-king-britain-should-be-more-upbeat-about-brexit>
, Mark Carney’s predecessor as governor of the Bank of England.

Lord King has come out as a Brexiter, which is not very helpful to his 
successor, who can sense a prospective train crash and was quite right to warn 
about the impact on the pound of a Leave vote – and who, with the help of his 
colleagues at the Bank, has been doing his best to keep the show on the road 
since.

But King has long been a Eurosceptic – not just about the eurozone, on which 
issue I share his concerns, but also about the European Union itself. 
Personally, I think Brexiters such as King underestimate the damage not only to 
our trade from Brexit, but also the extent of the sacrifice of our potential 
contribution to the future of the EU in a troubled world. However, I note even 
King concedes that Brexit will not be a bed of roses.

He was, of course, speaking to the BBC’s Today programme, which ever since the 
beginning of the referendum campaign seems to have gone out of its way to give 
prominence to Monsieur Farage and his ilk.

They were at it again last week, with the shameless Michael Gove heavily 
revising his castigation of “experts”, seemingly narrowing the field of the 
accused to the category of economic forecasters.

Well, forecasters do their best. But economists probably regret the way that 
their noble trade has been associated too much in the public mind with 
forecasting, as opposed to fundamental economic analysis.

Anyway, while wishing readers as happy a new year as events allow, I should 
like to end with this wonderful quote from Jan Kamieniecki in a letter to the
Financial Times: “I suspect that what Michael Gove meant to say was that the 
people in this country have had enough of exports.”
 