
Brexit could harm the UK’s wildlife and farming, according to a cross-party 
committee of MPs, with key protections left as ineffective “zombie legislation” 
and farmers facing a “triple jeopardy” of lost subsidies, export tariffs and 
increased competition.


A new report from the environmental audit select committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/environmental-audit-committee/>
 warns that many of the rules governing food production and the environment in 
the UK come from EU law and that weakening of these rules would damage the 
countryside and reduce the viability of farms, food security and safety.

The MPs said that for the government to meet its manifesto commitment to “be 
the first generation to leave the environment in a better state than it found 
it”, ministers must commit to passing a new Environmental Protection Act before 
it triggers article 50 and starts the formal process of leaving the EU.

The MPs said it was concerning that the environment secretary, Andrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/18/concerns-mount-over-andrea-leadsoms-suitability-for-environment-role>
, gave no reassurance that farmers would receive subsidies after 2020. But the 
report also recommended that if a new subsidy regime was put in place, it 
should focus less on direct income support to farmers andmore on delivering 
public goods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/04/national-trust-calls-for-complete-reform-of-british-farm-subsidies>
, such as preventing flooding, tackling climate change and boosting wildlife.

Attenborough urges UK to use Brexit to improve wildlife protections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/attenborough-urges-uk-to-use-brexit-to-improve-wildlife-protections>
“Changes from Brexit could put our countryside, farming and wildlife at risk,” 
saidMary Creagh <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mary-creagh>, chair of the 
environmental audit committee (EAC). “Protections for Britain’s wildlife and 
special places currently guaranteed under European law could end up as ‘zombie 
legislation’, even with thegreat repeal bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/theresa-may-great-repeal-bill-eu-british-law>
.”

Creagh said food, animal welfare and environmental standards had to be 
maintained as the UK seeks new trade deals with other countries. “The 
government must not trade away these key protections [and] it should also give 
clarity over any future farm subsidies.”

There are about 800 pieces of EU environmental legislation, covering wildlife 
and habitats, water quality, farming, food and fisheries. The government’s 
great repeal bill intends to transpose all those rules into UK law, but Leadsom 
told the EAC that about a third would be difficult to transpose.

The EAC said that, without pre-emptive action, these rules would end up as 
“zombie legislation”, with no body to enforce them, no updates and easily 
eroded by ministers via parliamentary statutory instruments, which receive 
minimal scrutiny from MPs.

The EU’s common agricultural policy provides £3.5bn a year in subsidies to UK 
farmers, making up more than half of their income, and the MPs said Brexit 
posed a “triple jeopardy” for farmers. Firstly the loss of subsidies would 
threaten the viability of some farms. Secondly, new export tariffs would cut 
farm incomes and, thirdly, new trading relationships could lead to competition 
with nations with lower animal welfare, food safety and environmental standards.

If the UK chooses not to be part of the EU single market, Tim Breitmeyer of 
the Country, Land and Business Association told the EAC that lamb exports to 
Europe would face tariffs of 30% and that beef export tariffs could be above 
50%.

UK's out vote is a 'red alert' for the environment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2016/jun/24/uks-out-vote-is-a-red-alert-for-the-environment>
Even if the UK remained in the single market, the MPs said crucial EU 
directives such as those protecting habitats, birds and beaches, would have to 
be replaced as they are excluded from that agreement. “The government should 
safeguard protections for Britain’s wildlife and special places in a new 
Environmental Protection Act,” said Creagh.

A government spokeswoman said: “The UK has a long history of wildlife and 
environmental protection and we are committed to safeguarding and improving 
these, securing the best deal for Britain as we leave the EU.”

Vicki Hird, from Sustain, an alliance for better food and farming, said: “MPs 
have correctly identified a huge risk to the UK farming system and environment 
from Brexit and new trade agreements. Without environmental safeguards in 
place, [this] would mean major damage to the natural environment – the soils, 
pollinators and water – on which farming and everyone depends.”

Sam Hall, at the liberal conservative thinktank Bright Blue, said: “Brexit is 
an opportunity to improve the UK’s environment. The MPs rightly suggest new 
legislation could be needed to guarantee existing protections post-Brexit. But 
a new bill could go further and increase the level of ambition for the natural 
environment”, for example with tougher pollution controls.


Sam Lowe, at Friends of the Earth, said any changes to environmental 
protection must be subject to full parliamentary scrutiny and not made via 
statutory instruments: “No one voted to ‘take back control’ for the UK 
parliament, only to hand it straight over to a minister, brandishing a red pen, 
with the power to delete vital nature protections on a whim.”

 