
My father, Brian Priestman, who has died aged 87, was a conductor with a 
worldwide reputation. Having started his career in Britain, he went on to work 
with orchestras across the US, and had a highly successful tenure with the 
Denver Symphony Orchestra in the 1970s. He was also a brilliant teacher who 
inspired generations of musicians through his work in youth orchestras and 
universities inCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>, South Africa 
and the US.

Brian was born in Bournville, Birmingham, to Margaret, who worked as a 
physiotherapist, and Miles, the registrar of stock holdings for Cadbury 
Brothers. He attended Sidcot school in Somerset, followed by the University of 
Birmingham, and completed his education at theConservatoire Royal de Bruxelles 
<http://www.conservatoire.be>, where he studied music and discovered 
conducting. In 1946, he briefly interrupted his education to serve with the 
Friends' Ambulance Unit, working with war-wounded children in France, and 
developed a lifelong love of the country.

Returning to Britain, Priestman founded the Orchestra da Camera 
<http://www.orchestradacamera.co.uk/> in 1957, going on to work as music 
director at the Royal Shakespeare Company (1960-63), where he composed, 
arranged and performed music in productions featuringJohn Gielgud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/may/22/news.obituaries> and Judi Dench, 
among others.

Following a Broadway RSC performance of The Hollow Crown (1963), he was 
offered the post of music director at theEdmonton Symphony Orchestra 
<http://edmontonsymphony.com> in Alberta. This was the first of several 
orchestras he directed in North America, including the Baltimore Symphony 
Orchestra and the Florida Philharmonic, but it was his time at the Denver 
Symphony Orchestra (1970-78) that was his most successful. There, he performed 
with a host of musical greats includingMstislav Rostropovich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/apr/27/russia.world>, Itzhak Perlman, 
Luciano Pavarotti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/sep/06/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
and Benny Goodman.

During this time he met my mother, Ford McClave, an artist and photographer, 
whom he married in 1972; they divorced in 1980, but remained lifelong friends. 
I spent the first few years of my life travelling between Denver and New 
Zealand, where my father was working with theNew Zealand Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.nzso.co.nz> (1973-76). He took the orchestra on its first 
international tour with Kiri Te Kanawa.

Music education was an abiding interest and he was director of the National 
Youth Orchestra of Canada during the late 60s. In the 80s he worked at the 
University of Cape Town, and was principal conductor of the Cape Town Symphony 
Orchestra (now the Cape Philharmonic Orchestra). His final post before retiring 
to his beloved France was that of artist-in-residence at the University of 
Kansas.

His work both on and off the podium was characterised by an encyclopedic 
knowledge of the arts, a gregarious personality and sharp wit, which proved 
hugely popular with both performers and audience alike.

Brian is survived by me and his grandchildren, Louis and Eleanor.
 