
Britain’s fund managers have written to the top 350 public companies telling 
them to publish how much their chief executives make compared with the average 
employee and to justify the amounts paid out each year.

The Investment Association, which represents £5.7tn in funds, said it had 
toughened up its guidelines for companies because of growing unease about the 
sums earned by chief executives.Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has promised to rein in 
runaway pay for bosses that she says has left ordinary workers behind.

In its letter to remuneration committee chairmen, the association warned that 
the current political and economic climate meant pay would receive a lot of 
attention at next year’s annual general meetings.

Nobel economics prize winners' work unlocks issues around executive pay | 
Larry Elliott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/nobel-economics-prize-winners-work-unlocks-issues-around-executive-pay>
The association called on companies to publish the ratio of chief executive 
pay to that of the median employee and also between the chief executive and the 
executive team to help shareholders judge whether the payments were fair. It 
also told companies to explain properly why the amount paid to the chief 
executive was justified each year instead of referring to pay schemes set down 
beforehand.

The more demanding guidelines follow a heated series of AGMs that featured 
defeats and bruising protests over pay at some of Britain’s biggest companies.
BP shareholders voted against the £14m award for Bob Dudley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
, the oil company’s chief executive, for a year in which it reported record 
losses, cut thousands of jobs and froze employees’ pay.

There were also heavy votes against pay at WPP, where Sir Martin Sorrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-martin-sorrell> received more than £70m, 
and at other companies such as Weir and Smith & Nephew. At next year’s AGMs, 
shareholders will cast binding votes on pay reports that every three years set 
out how bosses will be paid.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsir-martin-sorrells-70m-pay-package-reward-for-performance-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Martin%20Sorrell's%20%C2%A370m%20pay%20package%20'reward%20for%20performance'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsir-martin-sorrells-70m-pay-package-reward-for-performance-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Martin%20Sorrell%27s%20%C2%A370m%20pay%20package%20%27reward%20for%20performance%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fsir-martin-sorrells-70m-pay-package-reward-for-performance-video&media=>
Sir Martin Sorrell’s £70m pay package ‘reward for performance’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2016/apr/19/sir-martin-sorrells-70m-pay-package-reward-for-performance-video>
The leaders of Britain’s public companies earned an average £5.5m each last 
year – a 10% increase – and typically earn 129 times more than their employees, 
according to the High Pay Centre thinktank. No FTSE 100 company yet publishes 
the chief executive-to-employee pay ratio.

Andrew Ninian, the association’s director of corporate governance, said: 
“Issues surrounding executive pay are a growing concern for investors, 
politicians and society as a whole. The Investment Association and its members 
felt that it was vital to rebuild trust and update our principles to ensure 
that we are not only acting as responsible stewards for our clients but also 
show that we are aligned with the current climate.”

The association made changes to its guidelines to reflect the recommendations 
of a working group that reported in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/executive-pay-city-report-stops-short-of-backing-binding-shareholder-votes>
. Like the group of City grandees, the association stopped short of calling for 
binding annual votes on pay,as proposed by Theresa May in her attack on 
corporate excess when campaigning for the Tory leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/25/theresa-may-reform-capitalism-philip-green-bhs-scandal>
.

Ninian said changes to the association’s principles were separate from 
proposals for binding votes, which are the subject of political discussion. He 
said investors would wait to see the government’s proposals before taking a 
position on binding pay votes.

He said overly complex pay plans had helped fuel big rises because investors 
had trouble understanding them. The association told companies to simplify pay 
structures and to publish the terms alongside the resulting pay figures so 
shareholders could see how they worked.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fchief-executive-pay-investment-association-warns-britain-top-350-public-companies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F225a4a209551624dccad55ca3b3087496d8b806e%2F0_126_4312_2588%2F4312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain's%20fund%20managers%20warn%20top%20companies%20over%20chief%20executive%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fchief-executive-pay-investment-association-warns-britain-top-350-public-companies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%27s%20fund%20managers%20warn%20top%20companies%20over%20chief%20executive%20pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fchief-executive-pay-investment-association-warns-britain-top-350-public-companies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F225a4a209551624dccad55ca3b3087496d8b806e%2F0_126_4312_2588%2F4312.jpg>
 Tony Pidgley, founder and chairman of Berkeley Homes, was paid £21.5m in 2015. 
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
The association also asked companies to consider alternatives to long-term 
incentive plans that have paid out huge sums to some chief executives. WPP has 
said it is drawing up a new pay plan for Sorrell after the previous one gave 
him one of the biggest paydays in UK corporate history. In another example of 
big payouts under existing schemes,Berkeley Homes paid founder and chairman 
Tony Pidgley £21.5m last year thanks to share options granted in 2009. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/berkeley-group-boss-tony-pidgley-gets-215m-pay-packet>

Ninian said: “The increasing complexity of remuneration structures has been 
the driving force behind these issues. It is vital that companies have the 
opportunity to choose the right structure for their business and this must be 
done in close partnership with their shareholders.”

Shareholders are under pressure to take a tough line with companies over pay. 
The Institute of Directors, an employers’ lobby group,has said soaring pay at 
the top threatens to undermine capitalism and could bring unwanted government 
interference if companies do not put their own houses in order 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/corporate-governance-tesco-ranked-lowest-of-ftse-100-firms>
.

Ninian said: “We look forward to working with the government as it puts 
together its own corporate governance agenda.”

• This article was amended on 1 November 2016. There was a vote against 
boardroom pay at Smith & Nephew, not Smiths Group, as previously reported.
 