
If there is an evident dividend from the Rio Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>, it shines on the faces of 
those who chose to go and they might yet profit further from the most uplifting 
experience of their careers at this US Open.

That is how Kyle Edmund <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kyle-edmund> views 
it before his first-round match on Tuesday against the Frenchman Richard 
Gasquet, who missed the Games in Brazil with a back injury.

“When I found out that I was in on my ranking after people pulled out, I was 
over the moon,” Edmund said. “I see the Olympics as really the pinnacle of 
sport. I really enjoyed it, being inside the village, meeting other athletes. 
We were across the hall from the golfers, who were staying [in the same 
apartment block]. We chatted to the boxing people, the rugby people. Throughout 
the year you’re surrounded just by the tennis players, so it was nice to meet 
Justin Rose and Danny Willett, because they’re two major champions.

Andy Murray beats Juan Martín del Potro to win second Olympic gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/andy-murray-beats-juan-martin-del-potro-rio-2016>
“When you’re away from the courts, at the village, that’s where you really 
felt the Olympic atmosphere. And the opening ceremony was something I was 
pleased I did. I wasn’t going to go to it but then I thought I’d regret it.”

Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray>, who carried the 
flag for the Great Britain team, cashed in on the spirit there with a second 
gold and said later: “I need to try and keep that [momentum] going and the US 
Open is always the next big goal.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fandy-murray-honoured-to-be-team-gbs-flagbearer-at-olympics-opening-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Murray%20'honoured'%20to%20be%20Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%20flagbearer%20at%20Olympics%20opening%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fandy-murray-honoured-to-be-team-gbs-flagbearer-at-olympics-opening-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Murray%20%27honoured%27%20to%20be%20Team%20GB%E2%80%99s%20flagbearer%20at%20Olympics%20opening%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F04%2Fandy-murray-honoured-to-be-team-gbs-flagbearer-at-olympics-opening-video&media=>
Andy Murray ‘honoured’ to be Team GB’s flagbearer at Olympics opening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/04/andy-murray-honoured-to-be-team-gbs-flagbearer-at-olympics-opening-video>
He will be as tired as anyone at the last major championship of the season, 
probably more so than many, given he has played in all three finals and reaches 
the concluding weekend of nearly every tournament in which he plays.

They are all suffering a little, though, as Edmund pointed out: “It’s the same 
for everybody. The tennis year is a long year. It feels longer because the back 
end of last year stretched out with the Davis Cup final.”

Heather Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson>, who dipped 
out in the Olympic singles and doubles with Johanna Konta, had a last-minute 
reprieve in the mixed doubles with Murray, a memory that will stay with her. “I 
had my bags packed [watching Murray in the singles] and was going to leave for 
the airport in 15 minutes, then a team dropped out. I had no idea until 30 
minutes before we went on court. It was so close. It was a tough situation. I 
didn’t even see Andy until we walked on court.”

The former British No1, who plays the Dutch qualifier Richèl Hogenkamp on 
Tuesday, said: “I loved it, glad I went to the opening ceremony.”

Konta became genuinely animated recalling her Olympic experience. “Justin 
[Rose] said to me: ‘You’ve been having such a good year,’ and I thought: “My 
God, he knows who I am!’ I had a couple of those moments, surprised that people 
know the sport I play to begin with. I was definitely one of the more social 
ones. We were sitting with the boxers, the rugby players, with the hockey 
players. I’m glad I did. I wanted to understand boxing better. We had the 
British School set up for us. Team GB were so well kitted, we looked so good. I 
thought we were the best put together. It made me very proud. I hadn’t been in 
a uniform for a long time.”

For Murray and his brother Jamie, Dominic Inglot, Konta, Edmund and Watson 
there was never any question of joining the dissenters. For Dan Evans it was 
slightly different. He could have gone as a late replacement but chose not to, 
as he explained while preparing for his opener against Rajeev Ram on Tuesday.

Did he regret not going? “Not one bit,” he said, without hesitation. “I don’t 
think I could have won more than one match there, or two matches, so it was a 
pointless exercise for me. I like playing for my country but, if I’d done the 
Olympics and then was around 140 in the rankings next year, I would have been 
kicking myself. That was the only reason. I just needed to play matches.

“I pulled out of Team Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> in 
this country as well to play the tournaments. It was a good chance to make some 
points and I did in the end. The Olympics is obviously an amazing spectacle but 
it was one of them I just had to watch on TV. I watched some of Andy’s matches, 
some of the other events, but not massively.”
 