
For over 200 years, modern civilisation has been built on fossil fuels; now 
climate science says we mustphase out fossil fuel pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/16/argument-divesting-fossil-fuels-overwhelming-climate-change>
 in just a few decades. That’s a colossal challenge – especially if we are to 
keep anything resembling current lifestyles while also ending the poverty that 
blights the lives of more than 1 billion fellow human beings.

We are already seeing a significant shift in thinking. The Rockefeller 
Foundation is divesting from coal and tar sands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/22/rockefeller-heirs-divest-fossil-fuels-climate-change>
. Oxford University isconsidering similar action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/16/oxford-university-defers-fossil-fuel-divestment-decision>
. And the Bank of England is analysing the impact on financial systems offossil 
fuel investments becoming “stranded assets” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/03/bank-of-england-warns-of-financial-risk-from-fossil-fuel-investments>
 – in other words worthless – if the world gets its act together on climate 
change.

I want this year’s UN climate change negotiations to be the seminal moment 
when humanity faces up to these challenges. That’s why I’m strongly backing the 
Guardian’s campaign to raise the profile of the divestment debate prior to 
climate change negotiations in Paris in December. My own party has been clear: 
we want to seeBritain’s unabated use of coal ending by 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/01/lib-dems-ban-unabated-coal-power>
.

The world has been preparing for Paris for four years – as it did not for 
Copenhagen’s failed summit in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/dec/18/copenhagen-deal>. That 
won’t guarantee success but it meansParis is our best chance  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/01/guardian-view-paris-2015-last-best-chance-emissions-cut>
of getting that elusive global climate deal.

I’m proud to have led the brokering of the ambitious 2030 climate package in 
the European Unionto cut greenhouse gases by at least 40% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/24/eu-leaders-agree-to-cut-greenhouse-gas-emissions-by-40-by-2030>
, which puts the EU ahead of the global pack in terms of commitments. Yet I’m 
all too aware of the remaining political hurdles, whether it’s supporting 
Barack Obama in his climate leadership working with the Chinese and Indian 
governments to promote a new “green growth” development model or taking on the 
massive vested interests linked to fossil fuels.

In order to make Paris a success, politicians must lead – and, frankly, put 
the hours in. Deals of this significance do not come easily.

Liberal Democrats have now adopted my proposal for five green laws, for our 
general election manifesto’s front page. These include a zero-carbon Britain 
bill to raise the UK’s own 2050 climate change targets and give the UK’s green 
investment bank borrowing powers.

We won’t rescue humanity from self-destruction without a dramatic change in 
how we invest for our future energy needs. While recent years have brought 
massive capital flows into clean energy, fossil fuel investments remain huge. 
Many long-term insurance and pension liabilities are offset by fossil fuel 
assets. Yet groups as diverse as the InternationalEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Agency, the UN’s 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and Carbon Tracker Initiative tell us 
that such investments look increasingly risky – because much of the known 
fossil fuel reserves must stay in the ground, to keep warming under the 
two-degree limit scientists tell us we must stick to.

The Bank of England is not the only central bank looking at this. Brazil and 
South Africa are among those quietly analysing the fear that investors could in 
the future be left with stranded fossil fuel assets, potentially leading to ` 
bankruptcies and even a repeat of the 2008 banking crash.

This is not to say that they are arguing we can, or should, suddenly turn 
off fossil fuel production or investment. Too many commentators fail to 
distinguish between different fossil fuels, and fail to take account of what I 
call the time dimension.

The immediate fossil fuel challenge is to get out of coal. Analysts reckon 82% 
of global coal reserves must be left unburned. With China set to reach peak 
coal production more quickly than expected, coal investments look especially 
risky. Even carbon capture usage and storage won’t save many coal investments.

Ed Davey backs divestment from 'very risky' coal assets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/17/ed-davey-backs-fossil-fuel-divestment-very-risky-coal>
Oil and gas are different. While we already have alternative ways of producing 
electricity –renewables and nuclear – technologies for replacing oil in 
transport and gas in heating are less developed. Replacing some 50 power 
stations in the UK is a different proposition from replacing nearly 30m cars 
and more than 20m gas boilers.

The UK’s carbon plan sets out ways in which we can meet our Climate Change Act 
targets. It shows we can safely use oil and gas for a few decades more, as long 
as low-carbon heat and transport technologies such as heat pumps and electric 
vehicles gradually roll out. The near-term challenge is securing our oil and 
gas supplies, particularly from the North Sea, so that we can avoid becoming 
more dependent on imports from less reliable countries, be they Middle Eastern 
states or Russia.

But we must shift away from fossil fuel investments into clean energy over the 
next two decades. Government policy here and abroad must facilitate that with 
strong regulations – particularly on transparency and disclosure, with new 
reporting requirements on firms and financial institutions about their fossil 
fuel assets.

Don’t underestimate how powerful this would be. When global fund managers 
react to fuller information about the carbon risks they are holding using 
normal hedging techniques, modest adjustments of investors’ portfolios will 
release several trillion dollars into the low-carbon economy.

If London and New York can agree this year on new regulations requiring such 
disclosures, ideally with Brussels and Tokyo too, that would be a historic step 
forward in global climate change policy. And it might help persuade the rest of 
the world that the developed, richer nations were really serious about helping 
the emerging and developing world to grow, but in a low-carbon way. An 
ambitious global treaty in Paris would then look so much easier to achieve.
 