
The maker of the Brompton fold-up bike is hoping the launch of an electric 
model this year will kickstart growth after a 40% fall in annual profits.

Underlying profits at Brompton Bicycle slumped to £1.3m in the year to 31 
March 2016, after costs rose by £1.8m. The London-based business has invested 
heavily indeveloping an electric bike with Formula One group Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/30/brompton-hopes-electric-bikes-power-international-growth>
, renting a new factory and investing in a New York office.

However, sales rose 3.4% to £28.4m as it sold 2% more bikes, recovering from a 
4% fall in 2015.

Will Butler-Adams, the chief executive, said growth had been lower than 
expected amid a global slump in bicycle sales, partly prompted by the rise of 
electric bikes in northern Europe. Issues with smog in Singapore, changing 
trends in the US and economic difficulties in South Korea had also dampened 
demand. Sales in the UK remained steady.

Brompton, which moved to new premises in west London in 2015, aims to produce 
100,000 bikes a year by 2020. The company has invested £2.5m in the facility 
and expects to spend £2m on developing its electric bike.

Brompton hopes electric bicycles can power international growth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/30/brompton-hopes-electric-bikes-power-international-growth>
Butler-Adams said: “We are a little company going through growing pains. There 
are periods in manufacturing where you have got to take a big risk. We went to 
shareholders before we took them on this rollercoaster … they knew it was 
coming.”

Despite the profits squeeze, the company paid a £485,656 dividend to its 
shareholders, who include members of the Sainsbury supermarket family, founder 
Andrew Ritchie and Luke Johnson, the Pizza Express entrepreneur who bought a 5% 
stake in Brompton in 2015.

Ritchie, who developed the Brompton bike in 1975 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/27/how-we-made-the-brompton-folding-bicycle>
, holds a 20% stake in the company and remains its biggest shareholder, despite 
stepping down from the board last year amid a dispute with Butler-Adams over 
the pace of expansion.

Butler-Adams said Brompton was now past its “killer year” and expected to see 
improved profits and sales in 2017 through increased efficiency at its new 
factory. Sales in the UK have also strengthened after a tough 2015.

He said he hoped the launch of the electric bike at the end of 2017 would 
kickstart sales, especially in northern Europe. In Germany, the electric bike 
market has ballooned from about €20m (£17m) 12 years ago to €1.2bn. “We don’t 
have an electric bike and so we are missing out on that,” Butler-Adams said.

The bike has taken four years to develop, but Butler-Adams said it was 
“monstrously unique” because the folding model had to be light, compact and 
simple.

Brompton goes electric! The folding bike rolls into the future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2015/aug/18/brompton-folding-bicycle-pass-notes>
He said he expected the UK’s exit from the EU to be positive for the company. 
Brompton, which sells nearly 80% of its bikes overseas, has reduced its prices 
by 7% outside the UK, exploiting the fall in the pound’s value against the euro 
and the dollar.

Butler-Adams said concerns about relations with Europe were “completely 
irrelevant” when compared with the scale of opportunity in the US and China.

“[The debate over trade negotiations with Europe] is mostly gubbins for our 
business,” he said.
 