
Name: The Brompton.

Age: 40 <http://www.brompton.com/About-Us/History>.

Appearance: Mangled kid’s bike, left on a verge as a cautionary installation.

What is it really, though? A folding bike.

You mean it’s supposed to look like that? Yes, but only when folded up. 
Unfolded, it looks like a practice unicycle: high-seated, small-wheeled, odd.

Ah yes, like the ones they use for that giant clown parade that wobbles 
through central London every weekday morning, rain or shine.Those are 
commuters, and the Brompton - invented byAndrew Ritchie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/apr/27/how-we-made-the-brompton-folding-bicycle>
 in his London flat in 1975 and named after the adjacentBrompton Oratory 
<http://www.brompton.com/About-Us/History> – is their chariot.

Brompton Bicycle gears up for growth with bigger factory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/17/brompton-bicycle-factory-expansion>
And what of it? Brompton has just announced plans to move to a new factory in 
Greenford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/17/brompton-bicycle-factory-expansion>
, west London, double the size of its old one.

Why? Surely everybody who wanted one of their funny little bikes has got one 
by now.Not so. They’re particularly popular in Japan 
<https://bromptonjunction.com/store/kobe/> – up to 80% of Bromptons are 
exported, and the company hopes to increase production to 100,000 bikes a year 
by 2021. There are even plans to develop anelectric Brompton 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/road-and-rail-transport/11808866/Electric-bikes-hit-streets-to-take-the-sweat-out-of-cycling-to-work.html>
.

A folding motorbike? Not exactly. It’s a so-called “pedelec 
<http://www.gopedelec.eu/cms/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=86&Itemid=58>
” design, whereby some of the person-power applied to the pedals is stored by a 
battery and released when assistance is needed on inclines. It’s more 
efficient, and you don’t arrive at work perspiring.

You also get less exercise. The Brompton isn’t really aimed at the fitness 
enthusiast. It’s for ordinary city-dwellers who are trying to get to work.

And don’t care how they look doing it. They care how they look when they get 
there.Brompton chief executive Will Butler-Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/17/brompton-bicycles-the-unfolding-saga-of-a-two-wheeled-success-story>
 vows to “get rid of the sweat and Lycra” associated with commuting by bicycle.

They do have a certain quirky utilitarian charm. How much will one of these 
everyman commuting machines set me back?About £900.

I could buy a proper bike for that! But then you wouldn’t be able to lug it 
around with you all day like a really heavy briefcase.

I’ll cope. Fine.

Do say: “Another example of great British design, admired across the globe.”

Don’t say: “And when it’s folded up like this, you can throw it right into the 
middle of the canal.”
 