
In a season with eight new opera productions, including two world premieres, 
four Royal Ballet world premieres and two major restagings of 20th century 
works, perhaps the most notable first will be one which sees the Royal Opera 
House itself reimagined as a promming venue. For the opening production of the 
2015-16 season, Gluck’s Orphée et Eurydice, the orchestra will leave their 
subterranean home and the pit will be raised and opened up for 100 standing 
tickets, available for students at £10, for each of the eight performances. The 
orchestra and conductor –John Eliot Gardiner 
<http://www.monteverdi.co.uk/about/gardiner> and his period ensemble the 
English Baroque Soloists <http://www.monteverdi.co.uk/about/ebs> – will instead 
be on the Opera House stage with the singers and dancers, in a production that 
will be directed and choreographed by Hofesh Shechter, making his operatic 
directorial debut with theFrench version of Gluck’s opera 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orfeo_ed_Euridice#Gluck.27s_1774_Paris_Opera_version>
.

Following Monterverdi’s Orfeo at the Roundhouse earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/14/orfeo-monteverdi-review-roundhouse-royal-opera-house>
, the Orpheus theme continues as a major programming strand. Alongside the 
Gluck, the 2015/16 season will featurebaroque rarity Orfeo by Luigi Rossi 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orfeo_%28Rossi%29> in a new translation at the 
Sam Wanamaker Playhouse 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/theatre/whats-on/sam-wanamaker-playhouse> 
conducted byChristian Curnyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/23/christian-curnyn-opera-conductor-too-hot-to-handel>
 and directed by Keith Warner and, in the Linbury Studio theatre,Little Bulb 
Theatre and Battersea Arts Centre’s devised co-production of Orpheus 
<http://www.littlebulbtheatre.com/orpheus.html>, featuring the music of 
legendary guitaristDjango Reinhardt 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQhTpgicdx4>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Froyal-opera-house-royal-ballet-2015-16-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429116467283%2F132c96dc-f0ac-439e-b6cf-4dff13fcef12-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bryn%20Terfel%2C%20Sarah%20Kane%20and%20the%20chance%20to%20prom%3A%20the%20Royal%20Opera%20House%E2%80%99s%202015-16%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Froyal-opera-house-royal-ballet-2015-16-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bryn%20Terfel%2C%20Sarah%20Kane%20and%20the%20chance%20to%20prom%3A%20the%20Royal%20Opera%20House%E2%80%99s%202015-16%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Froyal-opera-house-royal-ballet-2015-16-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429116467283%2F132c96dc-f0ac-439e-b6cf-4dff13fcef12-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Karita Mattila as Ariadne in Ariadne Auf Naxos, Royal Opera House, June 2014. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
In 2016, the Linbury closes for a two-year rebuilding project, a refurbishment 
that head of opera Kasper Holten promised will improve on its dry acoustic and 
better the live experience for audiences and performers. The temporary closure 
brings partnerships with the Barbican and Lyric Hammersmith theatres. The 
latter will host the world premieres of works by two young UK composers –Mark 
Simpson <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mark_Simpson_%28clarinetist%29>’s 
Pleasure (a ROH co-commission) andPhilip Venables <http://philipvenables.com/>
’s 4.48 Psychosis, based on Sarah Kane’s harrowing 1999 play, a “75-minute 
suicide note” as the Guardian’s Michael Billington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2000/jun/30/theatre.artsfeatures> put it, 
and at the Barbican, a revival of Gerard Barry’sacclaimed The Importance of 
Being Earnest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/16/importance-of-being-earnest-review>
 that will then tour to New York.

Announcing the season, chief executive Alex Beard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/charlottehigginsblog/2013/mar/19/alex-beard-opera-house>
 spoke of the venue’s “commitment to the new and to working with the 
best-quality artists today, both established and upcoming”. A commitment 
underlined by four new works, all by in-house choreographers, that are part of 
the Royal Ballet’s new season.Liam Scarlett 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/people/liam-scarlett> will create a full-length 
narrative piece based on Mary Shelley’s Gothic novel Frankenstein,Christopher 
Wheeldon <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/christopherwheeldon> and Wayne 
McGregor <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/wayne-mcgregor> will create new 
one-act ballets, and principal guest artistCarlos Acosta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/acosta> celebrates 17 years with the company 
with a new production of Carmen, set to Bizet’s score in an arrangement by 
Martin Yates. McGregor’s Nyx sets an orchestral work byEsa-Pekka Salonen 
<http://www.esapekkasalonen.com/>, who will also conduct; Wheeldon will work to 
a commissioned score byMark-Anthony Turnage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mark-anthony-turnage>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Froyal-opera-house-royal-ballet-2015-16-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429114547895%2F38d340d5-8a3f-4eda-aab4-96b8f310896d-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bryn%20Terfel%2C%20Sarah%20Kane%20and%20the%20chance%20to%20prom%3A%20the%20Royal%20Opera%20House%E2%80%99s%202015-16%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Froyal-opera-house-royal-ballet-2015-16-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bryn%20Terfel%2C%20Sarah%20Kane%20and%20the%20chance%20to%20prom%3A%20the%20Royal%20Opera%20House%E2%80%99s%202015-16%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Froyal-opera-house-royal-ballet-2015-16-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429114547895%2F38d340d5-8a3f-4eda-aab4-96b8f310896d-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Dietrich Henschel as Oedipe and Ilse Eerens as Antigone in Enescu’s Oedipe. 
Photograph: La Monnaie/De Munt 
Music director Antonio Pappano <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/antonio-pappano> 
introduced a “thrilling lineup of names” who will grace the opera stage. 
Notable role debuts include Bryn Terfel as Boris Gudunov, Joyce DiDonato as 
Charlotte in Werther, and Diana Damrau as Lucia di Lammermoor in a new 
production that Katie Mitchell directs. Placido Domingo returns to sing 
Nabucco, further star wattage comes in the form of Jonas Kaufmann as Don José 
in what will be the final outing for Francesca Zambello’s colourful production 
of Carmen, Angela Gheorghiu as Tosca, andKarita Mattila reprising the title 
role in Strauss’s Ariadne auf Naxos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/26/ariadne-auf-naxos-review-karita-mattila-roh-strauss-pappano>
. Pappano himself will conduct two new productions, one revival and a symphonic 
concert, visiting conductors include Welsh National Opera’sLothar Koenigs 
<http://www.wno.org.uk/cast-creative/lothar-koenigs> – making his Royal Opera 
debut,Gianandrea Noseda <http://www.gianandreanoseda.com/home.aspx>, Semyon 
Bychkov <http://www.semyonbychkov.com/>, and, helming the RO’s first ever 
production of Chabrier’s 19th centuryopéra bouffe L’Étoile 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1xaESmh5n6g>, Mark Elder. 

Returning directors include Richard Jones and Graham Vick, while Mariame 
Clément <http://mariameclement.com/en/home.html> and Spanish company La Fura 
dels Baus <http://www.lafura.com/en/> make their main stage debuts, with 
L’Étoile andEnescu’s Oedipe 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C5%92dipe_%28opera%29>, respectively. Holten 
also revealed a tantalising glimpse of 2018’s highlights –man of the moment Ivo 
van Hove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/12/view-from-the-bridge-scoops-three-olivier-awards>
 will take on Janáček’s Káťa Kabanová, while another Janáček – the RO’s 
first-ever production of From the House of the Dead - will be part of 2019’s 
lineup.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Froyal-opera-house-royal-ballet-2015-16-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429114462183%2F9c2e37d3-deb2-41bd-9aad-8919e56908f2-2060x1456.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bryn%20Terfel%2C%20Sarah%20Kane%20and%20the%20chance%20to%20prom%3A%20the%20Royal%20Opera%20House%E2%80%99s%202015-16%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Froyal-opera-house-royal-ballet-2015-16-season%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bryn%20Terfel%2C%20Sarah%20Kane%20and%20the%20chance%20to%20prom%3A%20the%20Royal%20Opera%20House%E2%80%99s%202015-16%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Froyal-opera-house-royal-ballet-2015-16-season%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F15%2F1429114462183%2F9c2e37d3-deb2-41bd-9aad-8919e56908f2-2060x1456.jpeg>
 Placido Domingo in Nabucco. Photograph: Catherine Ashmore/Royal Opera 
House/ArenaPAL 
The Shakespeare 400 celebrations <http://shakespeare400.org/> that are a key 
part of many cultural institutions’ 2016 programming, will be marked only by 
the 50th anniversary revival ofKenneth MacMillan’s Romeo and Juliet 
<http://www.kennethmacmillan.com/ballets/all-works/1960-1966/romeo-and-juliet.html>
, and two operatic versions of Macbeth, both in autumn 2015. The Royal Opera 
takePhyllida Lloyd’s Macbeth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/jun/15/artsfeatures.classicalmusicandopera>
 (and Kasper Holten’s Don Giovanni) on a tour to Japan; in the UK, Glyndebourne 
Touring Opera will bringa new studio opera by Luke Styles 
<http://www.glyndebourne.com/tickets-and-whats-on/events/2015/festival-2015-extras/>
 to the Linbury, that also takes Shakespeare’s tragedy as its subject.

The 2013-14 season saw 97% occupancy across main-stage productions and a 54% 
increase in cinema ticket sales. Christopher Wheeldon’sAlice in Wonderland 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/alices-adventures-in-wonderland-by-christopher-wheeldon>
 was the most successful relay to date, with a UK audience of 70,000 and 
128,000 internationally. Next season, 12 productions – six operas and six 
ballets – will be broadcast live from the Royal Opera Houses to cinemas in 40 
countries, in a venture that Beard said very roughly saw them now “just above 
break-even point”. Live-streaming on theROH YouTube channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/RoyalOperaHouse> continues to be developed: next 
month’s new production of Król Roger by Szymanowski will be broadcast live 
online on 16 May. Last season, 45% of tickets were priced at £50 or less. The 
new season promises 150,000 tickets priced at under £20, and 50% of tickets 
across the season will be less than £56.

• Booking for the autumn season opens on 14 July <http://www.roh.org.uk/>.
 