
When I think of Christmas markets I imagine glasses of steaming mulled wine, 
colourful woolly hats and wooden toys. I don’t think of roosters’ testicles 
floating in a red tomato broth. Why would I when my experience of Hungary 
stretches as far asthe Gay Hussar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/02/gay-hussar-goulash-co-operative-save-soho-restaurant>
 in Soho, with its wild cherry soup and fish dumplings.

But Hungary is, of course, a landlocked, carnivorous country and, at this time 
of year, a cold one. Goulash served in a huge, hollowed-out bread roll, pigs’ 
knuckles with potato dumplings and sauerkraut, or fresh flat bread lathered in 
garlic sauce, sour cream and grated cheese is precisely the sort of heartening 
fare that is required for nippy alfresco shopping.

Goulash is served in a huge, hollowed-out bread roll

There are 12 food and drink stalls in the middle of the centrally located 
Vörösmarty Square 
<http://visitbudapest.travel/guide/budapest-attractions/vorosmarty-square/>, 
flanked by 28 craft stalls selling artisanal products and crafts. Budapest may 
be a thriving city with pop-up cafes, craft beer bars and vintage stores, but 
the Christmas market, now in its 18th year, is resolutely traditional. There’s 
a craft-making crèche at weekends, where children aged 10+ can be left and, on 
Sundays at 4pm, a ceremonial lighting of an advent candle, followed by marzipan 
candies with Santa on the stage.

There’s also ice skating by the illuminated St Stephen’s Basilica 
<http://visitbudapest.travel/guide/budapest-attractions/st-stephens-basilica/> 
nearby, whose smaller Christmas market opens this weekend and features a laser 
show on its neoclassical facade.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbudapest-hungary-christmas-markets-cakes-cocktails-hot-springs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18f82390761aa3fbfeccf2fd15261ea00b38877a%2F0_933_3733_4667%2F3733.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Budapest's%20Christmas%20markets%3A%20winter%20made%20cosy%20and%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbudapest-hungary-christmas-markets-cakes-cocktails-hot-springs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Budapest%27s%20Christmas%20markets%3A%20winter%20made%20cosy%20and%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbudapest-hungary-christmas-markets-cakes-cocktails-hot-springs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18f82390761aa3fbfeccf2fd15261ea00b38877a%2F0_933_3733_4667%2F3733.jpg>
 Gingerbread woman: smile at the vendor and he might give you a free sample. 
Photograph: Doug Pearson/Getty Images/AWL Images RM 
The wide choice of winter warmers on sale includes raspberry schnapps punch 
and apple cider. Restored by a blackcurrant rum punch – a wine-based winter 
tipple that is a sweeter alternative to the mulled wine on sale – I browsed 
stalls that look winter-wonderland cheesy, but hid some real gems. Among the 
riches I discovered tiny music boxes, hand-printed stationery, felt hats, 
handmade jewellery that you might actually wear, casserole dishes for roast 
goose or fresh bread, sour-cherry white chocolate and pink bubblegum marzipan. 
This was properChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
fare.

I was charmed by a ceramic Santa smoking a pipe, out of which real smoke blew, 
by the garlands made out of dried orange, paprika, cinnamon sticks and bay 
leaves, and the hand-painted tree decorations in simple cream and gold. But it 
was the gingerbread stall that did for my cynical heart. Seen one gingerbread 
house in Ikea, seen them all, I thought. I spotted the gingerbread foxes, frogs 
and hedgehogs, and the stallholder, in top hat and fur coat, passed me one on a 
giant fake hand. “For you,” he beamed. The child in me cheered. “Take it!” and 
I did.

Since cakes and pastries are a timeless Hungarian tradition, I was tempted by 
a piece of flódni, the traditional Jewish-Hungarian plum and poppy seed cake, 
washed down with a hot beer with sour cherry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbudapest-hungary-christmas-markets-cakes-cocktails-hot-springs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9943853a7767bff99f74d8a113d31b8a4830ca3%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Budapest's%20Christmas%20markets%3A%20winter%20made%20cosy%20and%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbudapest-hungary-christmas-markets-cakes-cocktails-hot-springs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Budapest%27s%20Christmas%20markets%3A%20winter%20made%20cosy%20and%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbudapest-hungary-christmas-markets-cakes-cocktails-hot-springs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9943853a7767bff99f74d8a113d31b8a4830ca3%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Cafe society: the Gerbeaud, home of apricot sauce and vanilla foam. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Next, I nipped into the famous Cafe Gerbeaud <http://www.gerbeaud.hu/>, which 
opened on the north side of Vörösmarty Square in 1858, lured by its raspberry 
and salted caramel tower of macaroons and its signature Gerbeaud coffee – a 
stratified glory of apricot sauce, apricot liqueur, hot chocolate and vanilla 
foam.

I then did (unintentional) penance in the Széchenyi thermal baths 
<http://www.szechenyibath.hu/>. Everyone raves about Budapest’s natural hot 
springs, which have been used since the Roman times. So, at 7pm, I jumped on 
the efficient city metro to this Baroque palace of a medicinal watering hole.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbudapest-hungary-christmas-markets-cakes-cocktails-hot-springs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4dcd578c8a7d17ffd1c8bd7842d4cfe831b23abd%2F0_192_3634_4539%2F3634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Budapest's%20Christmas%20markets%3A%20winter%20made%20cosy%20and%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbudapest-hungary-christmas-markets-cakes-cocktails-hot-springs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Budapest%27s%20Christmas%20markets%3A%20winter%20made%20cosy%20and%20cool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbudapest-hungary-christmas-markets-cakes-cocktails-hot-springs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4dcd578c8a7d17ffd1c8bd7842d4cfe831b23abd%2F0_192_3634_4539%2F3634.jpg>
 Chess players at the famous hot springs: sadly on this occasion not really hot 
enough. Photograph: Alamy 
I hadn’t packed a swimsuit so I had to hire one, which was a bad start. I 
ventured outside, barefoot and virtually naked into -5C. Into the steaming, hot 
pool I hurried. But it was lukewarm. To say it took the glow off my Christmas 
shopping would be polite. I managed little more than 10 minutes, then sought 
refuge in theMúzeum restaurant <http://www.muzeumkavehaz.hu/?page=kezdolap> in 
central Pest, round the corner from theHungarian National Museum  
<http://hnm.hu/en>and my boutique hotel – the arty, upcycled Brody House 
<http://brodyhouse.com/>, set in a grand old late-19th century palatial 
residence.

The pool was lukewarm. I managed little more than 10 minutes

From the outside, the Múzeum restaurant promised faded grandeur and goose 
liver. I went in, expecting a gloomy dining experience, but instead, I was 
greeted by the sound of a cocktail pianist playing Dean Martin on a baby grand 
piano.

The traditional dishes (roasted pike, catfish, goose leg) served beneath a 
painted, domed ceiling perfectly captured the spirit of old Hungary. But my 
vegetarian main course of stuffed peppers with vegetables and bulgur wheat, 
creamed zucchini and ribbon pasta with porcini, showed how the trend for 
“modern Hungarian”, a cuisine mixing old and new, has really taken hold.

I was surprised to find seven different offerings of brunch at the Kempinski 
Hotel <https://www.kempinski.com/en/budapest/hotel-corvinus/welcome/>, the 
city’s first luxury hotel, only to discover that it is a culinary trend in this 
new foodie destination – though roosters’ testicles are optional.

Essentials
Budapest Christmas market is open every day. The craft stalls are open until 
29 December and the food stalls until 1 January (budapestinfo.hu 
<http://budapestinfo.hu/>). Budapest Basilica Christmas market runs to 2 
January. Rooms at Kempinski Cornivus Hotel cost from £99 per night (
kempinski.com <https://www.kempinski.com/en/budapest/hotel-corvinus/>); and at 
Brody House from £59 per night (brodyhouse.com). BA flies from London to 
Budapest, from £88 return (ba.com 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/home/public/en_gb>)

 * This article was amended on 1 December 2016 to correct the location of the 
Muzeum restaurant.
 