
Designed by prestigious architects using the best materials, the Buffalo State 
Asylum was, when it opened in 1880, a mark of the city’s commercial stature and 
progressive attitudes. But times changed and the sandstone colossus was 
abandoned in the 1970s. Now an ambitious plan will restore and transform the 
site, renamed theRichardson Olmsted Complex <http://www.richardson-olmsted.com/>
 after the lead architects, into an 88-room hotel, the Buffalo Architecture 
Centre and a conference space.

Chicago’s new high line is ‘more than an elevated park’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/apr/25/chicago-walkway-bloomingdale-trail-elevated-high-line>
When it opens in 2016, the complex will again be a symbol of progress. 
Executive director Monica Pellegrino Faix says: “Our reuse weaves together the 
past and the present: just as with Buffalo’s renewal, we are redeveloping 
incrementally and sensitively.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fbuffalo-new-york-state-regeneration-arts-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432290703110%2F5209e27f-bd8f-4a98-8b41-27da27ff1313-2060x1310.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Buffalo%20stance%3A%20New%20York%20state%E2%80%99s%20forgotten%20city%20is%20coming%20in%20from%20the%20cold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fbuffalo-new-york-state-regeneration-arts-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Buffalo%20stance%3A%20New%20York%20state%E2%80%99s%20forgotten%20city%20is%20coming%20in%20from%20the%20cold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F23%2Fbuffalo-new-york-state-regeneration-arts-restaurants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432290703110%2F5209e27f-bd8f-4a98-8b41-27da27ff1313-2060x1310.jpeg>
 The Richardson Olmsted Complex, in a former asylum and one of Buffalo’s iconic 
buildings. Photograph: Joseph M. Cascio 
Buffalo, on the Canadian border in the north of New York state, was the US’s 
eighth-largest city in 1900, but became a rust-belt wreck as industry declined. 
Billions are now being invested in hi-tech industries and waterfront parks. 
College grads and artists are drawn by cheap housing and a burgeoning cultural 
scene, and developers are respectfully repurposing the city’s rich 
architectural heritage.

Eating out in New York City – by Instagram
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/apr/12/instagram-new-york-restaurants-bars-cafes>
Buffalo’s late-19th- and early-20th-century buildings are a masterclass in 
architectural history. The architecture of celebrated Frank Lloyd Wright lives 
on in several of the city’s buildings, including the restoredMartin House 
Complex <http://www.darwinmartinhouse.org/>. And at the Pierce-Arrow Museum 
<http://www.pierce-arrow.com/>, an unrealised design by Wright for a whimsical 
petrol station was built last summer.
 The Hotel@The Lafayette 
In downtown Buffalo, the Hotel@The Lafayette 
<http://buffalobrewerydistrict.com/lafayette/> kickstarted the boutique trend 
in 2012 by revamping a 1904 hotel designed by America’s first female architect, 
Louise Blanchard Bethune. Nearby, the 67-roomCurtiss Hotel 
<http://www.curtisshotel.com/> will open this summer in a historic terracotta 
office block.

Restaurateurs are also taking advantage of the historic buildings. Oshun 
<http://www.oshunseafood.com/> is a seafood and oyster bar in the art deco 
former Waldorf Astoria. And in the Horsefeathers Building, a former furniture 
warehouse,Martin Cooks <http://www.martincooks.com/> has built a loyal 
following for its brunch and tasting menus.Buffalo Proper 
<http://www.buffaloproper.com/>, which has been a big hit since it opened in a 
beautiful old building last August, serves tweaked comfort food and cocktails.
 Buffalo Proper for cocktails and comfort food. 
Sharing a former engine factory, Resurgence Brewing 
<http://www.resurgencebrewing.com/> and the Body of Trade & Commerce Gallery 
<http://www.btandcgallery.com/> have enlivened an industrial stretch of Niagara 
Street. Gallery director Anna Kaplan says: “Gorgeous living and studio spaces, 
paired with affordable living costs, have led to a truly vibrant, creative 
community.”

On 18 July, the City of Night <http://www.cityofnightbuffalo.com/> art 
festival will see industrial grain silos hosting exhibitions, performances and 
an art fair. But the arts scene buzzes all year round:Helium Comedy Club 
<http://www.heliumcomedy.com/> and Buffalo Ironworks 
<http://buffaloironworks.com/> in the Cobblestone district attract rising 
comedians and bands, and theBabeville  <http://www.babevillebuffalo.com/>music 
and arts complex, created by local musician Ani DiFranco, is a former Methodist 
church now home to a record label, an intimate basement club and a music venue 
that has hosted such luminaries as St Vincent and Modest Mouse. In Buffalo, the 
future’s never far from the past.
 