
In 2017 Britain is expected to see the biggest rise in tourist spending in 
four years and a surge in visitor numbers, partly thanks to the slump in the 
value of the pound since the Brexit vote.

Overseas visitors are expected to spend £24.1bn next year, up 8% on 2016, 
according to VisitBritain, the government-backed national tourism agency.

Just over 38.1 million tourists are expected to enter the UK, up 4%, drawn by 
celebrations such as the 20th anniversary of the publication of the firstHarry 
Potter <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> book and the 200th year 
since the death of Jane Austen, as well as the potential to snap up luxury 
bargains.

“These figures not only underpin a longer-term pattern of growth for inbound 
tourism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/tourism-booms-in-uk-after-post-referendum-fall-in-pound>
, one of our fastest growing export industries, but also demonstrate its 
growing importance as a key driver for economic growth and jobs.

 “With our hotels, shops and attractions all offering excellent value for 
overseas visitors right now, it’s a great time to come to Britain,” said 
VisitBritain’s chief executive, Sally Balcombe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbumper-year-ahead-for-british-tourism-in-2017-thanks-to-pound-slump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9181320f67f4d5843d5e8ea10393b78134a07403%2F0_252_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bumper%20year%20ahead%20for%20British%20tourism%20thanks%20to%20pound%20slump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbumper-year-ahead-for-british-tourism-in-2017-thanks-to-pound-slump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bumper%20year%20ahead%20for%20British%20tourism%20thanks%20to%20pound%20slump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fbumper-year-ahead-for-british-tourism-in-2017-thanks-to-pound-slump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9181320f67f4d5843d5e8ea10393b78134a07403%2F0_252_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 The Lake District, where hotels are reporting double-digit growth in 
international bookings Photograph: Peter Robinson/Alamy 
While tourist spending will be boosted by a 2.7% rise in inflation next year, 
the group said the 10%-plus fall in the value of the pound against the euro and 
the dollar since the EU referendum in June meant tourists’ budgets would now 
stretch further.

The currency depreciation triggered by the result of the June referendum has 
left sterling hovering at its lowest level against the dollar for more than 30 
years.

Hotels, restaurants and some retailers have already been enjoying a boost from 
the increased tourist spending since the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/tourist-spending-uk-surges-following-pounds-brexit-slump>
. Tax free spending by visitors from outside the EU soared 41% in October and 
November, according to retail tourism group Global Blue, as spending by Chinese 
tourists, who make up a quarter of non-European visitors, rose 63% while 
Americans spent 88% more.

Gordon Clark, managing director of Global Blue, said: “Overall we expect total 
UK international tax free spend for 2016 to finish on double digit growth, due 
to the visitor and spend surge in the second half of the year.”

The Ritz said it had enjoyed a 12.5% rise in room reservations in December 
compared with last year. That was partly thanks to its restaurant being awarded 
its first Michelin star but also part of a 9% rise in visitors to the 
Piccadilly and St James’s areas of central London compared with December last 
year.

Independent hotel group Best Western Great Britain has also said that bookings 
from the US and China increased after the Brexit vote with hotels in Edinburgh 
and the Lake District all reporting double digit growth in the number of 
international bookings in early July.

 