
Burberry <https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> has put the 
brakes on plans for a new factory in Leeds, as it considers the impact of the 
UK’s decision to exit the EU, according to the luxury brand’s chairman.

Speaking at Burberry’s annual shareholder meeting in Park Lane, London, John 
Peace said the company was reviewing the delivery time for the designs of its 
planned £50m manufacturing and weaving facility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/03/burberry-invest-50m-new-trenchcoat-factory-leeds>
, as it looked at the “economic consequences of what has happened”.

He said the factory was still going ahead but the speed of investment might be 
slowed depending how “events unfold in the next few weeks”. Burberry had 
planned to move all 800 manufacturing staff currently based in two separate 
sites in Castleford and Keighley to Leeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/13/hands-behind-the-heritage-inside-the-burberry-factory>
 by 2018. Work on the new facility, named Project Artisan, is due to start next 
year.

Christopher Bailey, Burberry’s chief creative and chief executive officer, 
told shareholders at the meeting that the project was currently “on track” and 
remained a very important part of the group’s strategy.

But Bailey’s position is now changing. Earlier this week, Burberry said Bailey 
would next year relinquish his title of chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/burberrys-christopher-bailey-new-ceo-celine-marco-gobbetti>
 toMarco Gobbetti, currently the boss of French minimalist brand Céline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/marco-gobbetti-the-man-tasked-with-putting-burberry-back-in-fashion>
. The Yorkshireman will work alongside his now colleague retaining his role as 
chief creative officer and adding the title of president.

At the annual meeting, Peace defended the group’s decision to appointment a 
chief executive two years after he added the job to Bailey’s creative role.

Burberry's Christopher Bailey makes way for new CEO
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/burberrys-christopher-bailey-new-ceo-celine-marco-gobbetti>
Bailey and Gobbetti will be on similar pay deals and will run the business 
together in a similar arrangement to the set-up Bailey enjoyed with former 
Burberry chief executive Angela Ahrendts who left to go to Apple in 2014.


Peace suggested he had handed a joint role to Bailey when Ahrendts left to 
ensure the designer did not walk away too – a move shareholders would not have 
forgiven. “Shareholders recognise how important Christopher is to Burberry and 
have huge regard for what he has done over the years. It was very important 
that we retained Christopher for the future,” he said.

Peace said Bailey had been an “amazing CEO”, achieving record earnings and had 
reacted quickly to “dramatic headwinds affecting the luxury sector” led by a 
slowdown in spending by Chinese tourists.

But he said Bailey now needed to focus on the things he was best at including 
creative design, online communication and marketing. Bailey will not take a pay 
cut as Peace said he had not been handed a rise in salary when he took on the 
chief executive role.
 