
Burberry <https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> has announced a 
3% fall in underlying sales as problems in Hong Kong and mainland Europe offset 
growth in the UK.

Christopher Bailey, the luxury British brand’s chief creative officer and 
chief executive, who is due tostep aside from the latter role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/burberrys-christopher-bailey-new-ceo-celine-marco-gobbetti>
 next year, said Burberry continued to face a “challenging external 
environment”, but insisted that he had “real confidence for the future”.

The company announced retail sales of £423m in the three months to 30 June, 
the same level as the previous year at constant exchange rates. Sales dipped by 
3% once new store openings were excluded.

Marco Gobbetti: the man tasked with putting Burberry back in fashion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/marco-gobbetti-the-man-tasked-with-putting-burberry-back-in-fashion>
Bailey warned that Burberry’s outlook for wholesale sales in fashion and 
beauty, particularly in the US, where department stores have been cutting back 
on orders, was more cautious. Global wholesale sales are expected to be down by 
10% in the six months to the end of September, the first half of Burberry’s 
financial year.

However, Bailey said initiatives to improve retail productivity, cut costs and 
focus on bestselling products meant that he was confident of delivering 
full-year profits in line with expectations. Burberry has begun consultations on
job cuts announced in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/18/burberry-cut-jobs-product-range-save-100m-a-year-profit-fall>
, but he would not give details on the number of staff involved.

Shares in the company shot up by more than 5% in morning trading on hopes that 
the company’s overseas earnings would be boosted by therelatively higher value 
of the dollar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/06/brexit-pound-plunges-to-30-year-lows-as-eu-fears-bite-into-global-markets-again>
 and the euro versus the pound, following the Brexit vote. Burberry said 
profits would benefit by £90m from changes to exchange rates, compared with a 
£50m benefit predicted in May.

The promise that a £150m share buyback would commence also lifted the share 
price.

Burberry said sales in Hong Kong continued to fall by double-digit 
percentages, as a result oftravel restrictions that were imposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/12/beijing-to-limit-hong-kong-visits-by-mainland-chinese>
 on Chinese nationals after democracy demonstrations last year. However, 
excluding Hong Kong, sales across Asia rose.

The brand enjoyed a rise of about 5% in sales at established stores in the UK, 
which account for more than one-third of European sales, as newly introduced 
products such as a designer rucksack, ponchos and cashmere trenchcoats sold 
well.

Sales in mainland Europe suffered, particularly in France and Italy, as a 
result of double-digit declines in sales to luxury-loving tourists. European 
trade was affected by cautiousness in the aftermath of the Paris attacks and 
the Chinese economic slowdown, which has held back overseas tourism and 
spending.
 