
Burberry <https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> reaped the 
benefits of a weak pound in the run-up to Christmas as foreign shoppers flocked 
to the UK to stock up on the brand’s luxury goods.

Sales in the UK surged by 40% in the final three months of 2016, boosted by 
strong demand for Burberry’s Buckle Tote bag, military jackets and knitwear 
ranges. Wallets personalised with initials were also big sellers, the company 
said.

Foreign shoppers are able to make their money go further following the sharp 
fall in the pound since the Brexit vote in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/hard-brexit-fears-hit-pound-and-stocks-ahead-of-theresa-mays-speech>
 and Burberry said shoppers travelled from all regions of the world. Sales of 
the brand’s goods to domestic customers also rose, despite the company’s 
decision to increase prices in the UK in November.


Related: UK Christmas retail: the winners and losers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/uk-christmas-retail-winners-losers>

The retailer’s Christmas campaign included a short film celebrating a 
fictionalised history of its founder, Thomas Burberry, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/01/sienna-miller-domhnall-gleeson-burberry-christmas-ad-dominic-west-lily-james>
 featuring British stars including Sienna Miller.


Commenting on the company’s performance, Christopher Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/burberrys-christopher-bailey-new-ceo-celine-marco-gobbetti>
, its chief executive and chief creative officer, said: “With a record number 
of views of our festive film and strong demand for new products in our 
collections, this third quarter improvement reflects early progress from our 
plans to drive Burberry’s performance for the long term. We continue to take 
action to position the business for growth over time and our plans to enhance 
efficiency are on track.”

Revenue over the three months rose 4% on an underlying basis, when stripping 
out the impact of currency fluctuations, to £735m. Like-for-like sales across 
all regions rose 3%.

Burberry <https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> said sales fell 
in the US and were weak in continental Europe but it did not provide specific 
figures. Business picked up in France compared with the second quarter.

The retailer, known for its trenchcoats, achieved low single-digit growth in 
Asia Pacific, with improvement in mainland China and Hong Kong.

George Salmon, analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Growth has returned in 
the Asia-Pacific region itself, and plenty of customers are jumping on planes 
to the UK to take advantage of the extra buying power sterling’s weakness gives 
them. All in all, there are plenty of encouraging signs for the group just now.”

Burberry said there was no change in the outlook for revenue, and it expected 
full-year profits to be in line with expectations. Shares rose by 2%.

The company, which makes most of its sales abroad, said exchange rates would 
flatter its 2017 profits by more than £100m. About 12% of Burberry’s revenues 
are generated in the UK.


Bailey is to take on the new role of president and chief creative officer in 
July and will hand over the day-to-day running of the business to luxury goods 
veteran Marco Gobbetti.
 