
Burberry <https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> is losing a key 
member of its management team after John Smith, chief operating officer, 
announced plans to step down next year.

Smith, who said he was leaving to pursue new interests, is understood to be 
seeking a chief executive post after seven years at the fashion retailer. He 
will work out his 12-month notice period.

“With the company’s future strategies now in place, I am ready to embark on a 
new challenge. Having been the CEO of a fast-growing international business in 
the past, I am exploring a number of exciting new leadership opportunities in 
that arena,” said Smith who was chief executive of BBC Worldwide from 2004 to 
2012.

Smith’s exit comes as Burberry faces pressure to bolster its senior management 
team with retail and digital expertise amid poor trading figures. Investors 
have raised concerns that Christopher Bailey, the chief executive and chief 
creative officer, is struggling to cope with hisjoint role, which he moved into 
after the departure of former chief executive Angela Ahrendts in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/16/christopher-bailey-angela-ahrendts-burberry-ceo>
.

The company, famous for its trenchcoats, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/13/hands-behind-the-heritage-inside-the-burberry-factory>
 admitted profit was likely to come in towards the bottom of market forecasts 
in the year to March 2017, amid investment in staff training and IT and a sharp 
slowdown in China, the retailer’s biggest market.

Announcing Burberry’s annual results in May, Bailey acknowledged that the 
company needed to bring in more expertise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/18/burberry-cut-jobs-product-range-save-100m-a-year-profit-fall>
 to help improve performance. He would not comment directly on rumours that he 
was seeking a right-hand man or woman, but said: “We acknowledge that there’s a 
lot going on in the company and there’s great change … We have identified 
skills we need to beef up in the organisation.”

Smith’s departure is likely to raise concerns about a further loss of 
top-level management expertise. It is understood that Burberry is considering 
whether to replace him or rejig its management structure as part of its 
existing plan to support Bailey.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fburberry-chief-operating-officer-resigns-john-smith-digital-retail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F348ba9dd98d89aef8057405260812ceb5de09cbe%2F0_114_3425_2055%2F3425.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burberry%20chief%20operating%20officer%20resigns%20after%20seven%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fburberry-chief-operating-officer-resigns-john-smith-digital-retail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burberry%20chief%20operating%20officer%20resigns%20after%20seven%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjun%2F10%2Fburberry-chief-operating-officer-resigns-john-smith-digital-retail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F348ba9dd98d89aef8057405260812ceb5de09cbe%2F0_114_3425_2055%2F3425.jpg>
 A worker creates Burberry’s signature check. Photograph: Adolfo Crespo/Burberry
One source said: “There’s time. No one is not coming into work on Monday. Any 
transition will be managed carefully.”

Luca Solca, a luxury goods analyst at Exane BNP Paribas, said the departure of 
Smith cleared the way for a potential restructure at Burberry that could bring 
in a digital and retail boss in a role similar to the one Ahrendts holds at 
Apple.

“Burberry needs to go through senior management adjustments, as the 
organisation based on Chris having a dual role does not seem ideal and results 
are under pressure. John Smith retiring opens the opportunity for further 
changes in senior responsibilities,” said Solca.

The company and Smith said his departure was not linked to any plans to hire a 
new retail boss.

Bailey said: “John has made a significant contribution to Burberry over the 
last seven years. I have personally valued and enjoyed John’s partnership and I 
would like to thank John for everything he has brought to Burberry.”


The chairman, Sir John Peace, added: “We would like to thank John for his 
contribution to Burberry over the last seven years, first as a non-executive 
director and latterly as chief operating officer, and, in particular, for his 
success in driving digital growth and optimising the potential of our beauty 
and travel businesses.”
 