
With crispy skin of an obviously artificial hue, the KFC Double Down was 
initially launched as an April Fool’s prank in 2010. But the allure of the 
sandwich, a piece of fried chicken topped with melted cheese and special sauce 
slapped between two pieces of fried chicken (in the place of a bun), proved so 
ineluctable, the valence of absurdity was dissolved. The Double Down quickly 
became a legitimate meal-choice for millions of consumers. Over 10m were sold 
in the US in its first month alone, and after being taken off the menu in late 
2010, itreturned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/21/kfc-double-down-relaunch-videohttp://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/21/kfc-double-down-relaunch-video>
 to the market in 2014.

If that storyline sounds familiar – a joke candidate mutated into a nightmare 
reality – it isn’t just because of the US election cycle. Across the world, as 
food has transitioned from fuel into spectacle and its production from 
individuals to profit-driven corporations, we have edged toward the extremes of 
what we can be convinced we want to eat. Good taste was once a virtue. Now it 
is a sign of weakness.

Good taste was once a virtue. Now it is a sign of weakness

The names of recent popular shock foods read like an cadavre exquis of 
foodstuff. Besides the Double Down, one can engorge on Taco Bell’sNacho Cheese 
Doritos Taco Loco Supreme 
<http://www.ocregister.com/articles/taco-356978-bell-doritos.html>, a taco 
whose burrito shell has been replaced with molded Doritos; Jack in the Box’sBig 
Waffle Stack 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/06/12/big-waffle-stack-jack-in-the-box_n_3430018.html>
, being two eggs, bacon, ham and cheese twixt a pair of waffles; and Pizza 
Hut’s infamous hot-dog crust pizza 
<http://www.orlandoweekly.com/Blogs/archives/2015/06/25/pizza-huts-new-hot-dog-pizza-is-a-deathtrap>
. A New York pizzeria just debuted a pizza insidea box made of pizza 
<http://pix11.com/2016/04/28/brooklyn-pizzeria-creates-pizza-served-in-box-made-of-pizza/>
. And just last week, Burger King rolled out theMac n’ Cheetos 
<http://www.theverge.com/tldr/2016/6/22/12005782/burger-king-mac-and-cheetos-mozzarella-sticks>
, deep fried sticks of cheese and macaroni enrobed in a Cheeto-flavoured crust.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fburger-king-mac-n-cheetos-us-innovation-shock-foods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aa141c8cba55fbed25d5b6f27aa896c4591d631%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burger%20King%E2%80%99s%20Mac%20n'%20Cheetos%3A%20a%20logical%20step%20in%20America's%20quest%20for%20innovation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fburger-king-mac-n-cheetos-us-innovation-shock-foods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burger%20King%E2%80%99s%20Mac%20n%27%20Cheetos%3A%20a%20logical%20step%20in%20America%27s%20quest%20for%20innovation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fburger-king-mac-n-cheetos-us-innovation-shock-foods%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2aa141c8cba55fbed25d5b6f27aa896c4591d631%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Taco Bell’s Doritos Locos tacos. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty 
Images 
But it isn’t just this orgiastic edible entanglement of trademarks that makes 
these sort of shock foods notable. It’s the athletic and imaginative positions 
they assume. Adjacency is too demure. Cheetos cannot be servedbeside macaroni, 
or Doritosnext to tacos. One must actually be inside the other. The chicken is 
inside the chicken. The filling inside the chip. The noodle is inside the dust. 
What is Burger King’s Mac-and-Cheetos if not a modern-day Karma Sutra of stunt 
food?

Though this trend is most pronounced in America, it is not confined to her 
shores. In 2014,Burger King <https://www.theguardian.com/business/burger-king> 
Japan unveiled a massively popular black Kuro Burger, whose bun was made black 
with bamboo charcoal and squid ink. This was in addition to its Aka Samurai 
Burger, with a bun and cheese tinted red with tomato powder. In 2012, Pizza Hut 
launched its hot dog pizza in the UK. But there is no denying that this 
particular genre of shock and awe food is at its root American.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fburger-king-mac-n-cheetos-us-innovation-shock-foods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd9b5987181f6f9f9d1acee074facab0d8d93707%2F0_134_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burger%20King%E2%80%99s%20Mac%20n'%20Cheetos%3A%20a%20logical%20step%20in%20America's%20quest%20for%20innovation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fburger-king-mac-n-cheetos-us-innovation-shock-foods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burger%20King%E2%80%99s%20Mac%20n%27%20Cheetos%3A%20a%20logical%20step%20in%20America%27s%20quest%20for%20innovation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F26%2Fburger-king-mac-n-cheetos-us-innovation-shock-foods%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd9b5987181f6f9f9d1acee074facab0d8d93707%2F0_134_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Burger King’s black burgers have black buns and cheese smoked with bamboo 
charcoal and black sauce made of squid ink. Photograph: Keith Tsuji/Getty Images
There is something affecting, tragic and impressive about our obsession with 
maximizing every element. Once, bread was the neutral container for a 
cheeseburger, a tortilla adequate coverage for its insides and pizza crust the 
suitable platform for a pizza. But such is the American genius for innovation, 
those areas were soon deemed unacceptably underutilized. No longer content to 
play support roles, they became profit-centers, rich with unexplored 
opportunity. This shouldn’t come as a surprise. This is what America has always 
done. After all, wasn’t it only a matter of time after colonization, the 
privatization of public utilities, the outsourcing of war to contractors, the 
dawn of the gig economy, that we came to see a roll not as an integral part of 
a sandwich but an unexploited opportunity for more protein and profit?

Part of what drives this race toward ever stranger more over-the-top offerings 
is, perhaps unsurprisingly, money. As theWashington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/02/25/where-shake-shack-has-mcdonalds-and-most-other-fast-food-chains-beat/>
 noted, as traditional fast food chains compete with fast-casual restaurants 
like Chipotle and Panera, they have one of two options. Either they can strive 
to be healthier or they can double down on the calorific extravagance. 
McDonald’s, which recently debuted an all-organic burger, chose the path of 
restraint: Burger King and KFC chose the path of abandon. There can be no 
quibbling that as a marketing strategy, spectacularizing food works 
spectacularly. Taco Bell sold over $1bn worth of Dorito Loco Tacos. The Double 
Down generated more than $50m in sales for KFC. Burger King’s latest gimmick 
has already generated millions in earned media and probably in sales as well.

But the real draw isn’t just P&L. After all, if stunt foods didn’t work so 
well, there wouldn’t be so many of them. The fault, rather, is not to be found 
in the drive-through but in our drive to find meaning and that is nothing new. 
Though we are now wading into unchartered territory in terms of execution, our 
giddy attraction to the extremes has long been with us.

Until now, we had challenged ourselves with volume and capacity. Who can 
forget John Candy in The Great Outdoors, who was given the task of downing a 
96oz steak in the hopes of a free meal? Today, that steak would be wrapped, 
maybe, in a Dorito-dusted waffle and deep-fried but generally, one still gins 
up a life purpose by any means necessary. Sisyphus had his rock. Candy had his 
cow. And we, well, we have a tube of macaroni-and-cheese fried with a bright 
orange Cheeto crust.
 