
The Burnley striker Andre Gray has been given a four-match ban for comments 
made on social media. The 25-year-old had beencharged by the Football 
Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/andre-gray-charged-misconduct-homophobic-tweets>
 for bringing the game into disrepute over homophobic posts he made on Twitter 
in 2012.

Following an Independent Regulatory Commission hearing on Thursday, Gray was 
also fined £25,000, warned as to his future conduct and ordered to attend an FA 
education course.

Gray’s ban is immediate, meaning he will miss Burnley’s Premier League game at 
home to Watford on Monday evening followed by fixtures with Arsenal, 
Southampton and Everton.

The tweets, which also contained offensive terms, were posted when Gray was 
playing for non-league Hinckley United.

They came to light on 20 August, the day he scored his first top-flight goal 
as he helped Burnley – who he joined from Brentford in 2015 – to a2-0 win over 
Liverpool at Turf Moor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/burnley-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
.

Andre Gray’s sorry tweeting case far from straightforward | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/27/andre-grey-tweeting-burnley-homophobia-sexism-race>
An FA statement read: “Burnley forward Andre Gray has been suspended for four 
matches commencing with immediate effect for misconduct in respect of social 
media comments. It was alleged that six postings on his Twitter account were 
abusive and/or insulting and/or improper and/or brought the game into disrepute 
contrary to Rule E3(1).

“It was further alleged that these breaches of Rule E3(1) included a reference 
to sexual orientation and/or gender and/or colour and/or race contrary to Rule 
E3(2). The player admitted to three of the breaches, and denied the remaining 
three were in breach of FA Rules.

“Following an Independent Regulatory Commission hearing yesterday, the 
remaining three breaches were found proven. The player was also fined £25,000, 
warned as to his future conduct and ordered to attend an FA education course.”

Burnley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> have accepted the ban 
and said in a statement that Gray “regrets the posts” and apologises for them.

The statement read: “Burnley Football Club and Gray accept the Independent 
Regulatory Commission’s decision, which relate to historical posts made before 
Andre joined the club in August 2015.

“Gray himself regrets the posts and has pledged, in an apology, to continue to 
improve, both as a person and role model to others. We believe this charge, 
regarding historical social media posts, should now also serve as a warning to 
all professional footballers, and participants in the wider sporting field.”
 