
Burnley were outplayed for much of this game yet still managed to leapfrog 
Middlesbrough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> in the table 
and become the first of the two promoted sides to reach 20 points thanks to a 
stunning late decider from Andre Gray.

For 80 minutes the game looked to have nil-nil written through it; after 
spending over an hour cancelling each other out in trying conditions both sides 
appeared ready to settle for a draw by the timeBurnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> managed to open up their 
opponents with a smartly executed bit of route one attacking. Middlesbrough had 
spent the previous 20 minutes looking marginally more likely to score, yet they 
were caught cold as Tom Heaton sent a free-kick up the middle, Sam Vokes won 
the header to nudge the ball forward and Gray struck with a perfectly executed 
right-foot volley for his first goal since August..

Leicester’s gloom darkens after Romelu Lukaku seals win for Everton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/leicester-city-everton-premier-league-match-report>
It had to be perfectly executed too, for Víctor Valdés had the shot covered 
until the ball squirmed out of his grasp at the last moment and crept across 
the line behind him. The only goal of an unmemorable game will therefore go 
down as a goalkeeping mistake, a gift from the visiting defence, yet Gray 
deserves a huge amount of credit for the venom and accuracy he packed into his 
shot. He could hardly have struck it any better, and after getting down low to 
reach the shot at the foot of his left-hand post, Valdés must have been as 
surprised as everyone else by the power Gray had been able to summon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fburnley-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7891fdae058272ed56d8e9c76d52edb0b668a8e7%2F120_0_2841_1705%2F2841.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Burnley%E2%80%99s%20Andre%20Gray%20fires%20lucky%20late%20winner%20against%20Middlesbrough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fburnley-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Burnley%E2%80%99s%20Andre%20Gray%20fires%20lucky%20late%20winner%20against%20Middlesbrough&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fburnley-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7891fdae058272ed56d8e9c76d52edb0b668a8e7%2F120_0_2841_1705%2F2841.jpg>
 Burnley’s Andre Gray scores the only goal of the match with 10 minutes 
remaining. Photograph: Craig Brough/Reuters 
Both sides had chances in an untidy and fractious first half, though there was 
little actual football to rewar d supporters for braving a chilly Lancashire 
afternoon. Mostly that was due to a stiff breeze blowing the length of the 
pitch that made control difficult, though there was also a touch of needle 
between two teams who came up from the Championship together last season. 
Middlesbrough could have taken an early lead when Cristhian Stuani stole behind 
the Burnley defence to reach Antonio Barragán’s long ball over the top, but 
after getting himself into a good shooting position the forward missed the 
target with only Tom Heaton to beat.

Burnley took a while to hit their stride, with Boro’s neat, short-passing game 
helping them gain dominance in midfield, but gradually they pushed forward and 
managed to create a couple of scoring opportunities. Valdés had to scramble an 
Ashley Barnes shot around the foot of his post, Dean Marney had an appeal for a 
penalty turned down when Calum Chambers appeared to handle, though the closest 
the game came to a goal before the interval was a George Boyd shot from a 
free-kick on the edge of the area that Valdés appeared to misjudge in the air 
before pushing away. Boyd was Burnley’s liveliest attacker, beating Fábio da 
Silva twice in the move that led to the penalty shout, when Marney also 
appeared to be impeded in the act of shooting.

West Ham’s Andy Carroll twists the knife into Bob Bradley and Swansea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/swansea-city-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
The second half opened with Craig Pawson managing to spot a Marney handball, 
conceding a free-kick on the edge of the area for illegally blacking a Marten 
de Roon shot, yet though Gastón Ramírez took an age to line up his shot all he 
came up with in the end was the gentlest of prods straight at Heaton. The 
Burnley goalkeeper had to work harder a couple of minutes later to keep out a 
Stuani header as Boro suddenly upped the tempo, with Stephen Ward perhaps the 
luckiest of 11 players cautioned in the game not to see red for a scything 
challenge on Barragán.

Gray joined him in the book shortly afterwards as Burnley began to find 
themselves pushed back into their own half, though when Vokes joined the fray 
for the final quarter the home forwards were able to have the last word. Boro 
must have left the field feeling mugged, but even they would have to 
acknowledge it was a heist of the highest class. Not that Aitor Karanka was 
feeling particularly generous about the manner in which the match was settled. 
“We knew they would play long balls, we’ve been working on stopping them all 
week in training,” the Boro manager said. “It is frustrating to lose in that 
way when we did a lot of good things. We’ve lost from one ball in a match we 
had under control.”

Sean Dyche did not see it quite that way, though the Burnley manager agreed it 
had been a close contest. “It was one of those games where you just want a 
chance to come your way, and Andre is the ideal player to have on hand when 
that happens,” he said. “He took his one chance very well. The ball dropped out 
of the sky and he’s not overthought it, he’s hit it instinctively with power 
and pace.”
 