
About an hour north of San Francisco, Sonoma valley is Sonoma County’s most 
concentrated wine-growing area with more than 100 wineries and a stunning range 
of varietals. With five American Viticultural Areas (AVAs) stretching across 20 
miles of diverse soils and microclimates, it means it is possible to sip a dry 
rosé at a picnic table near the winemaker’s home, taste a zinfandel while 
seated next to the vats in a production warehouse, sample chardonnay from 
barrels in an ageing cave, or compare library pinots during a private tasting. 
While Sonoma and the villages of Glen Ellen and Kenwood are sophisticated when 
it comes to wine and food, they still exude small-town warmth and hospitality. 
And that’s not just the wine talking: in 2013 Sonoma wasvoted among the 
friendliest cities in the US <http://www.sonomacity.org/default.aspx?PageId=553>
.

TASTING ROOMS AND WINERIES

Roche Family Winery
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432034247611%2F13f8cb2f-27a2-409c-a8a9-93f688d6f050-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432034247611%2F13f8cb2f-27a2-409c-a8a9-93f688d6f050-1020x612.jpeg>
Start your explorations at Sonoma’s tree-shaded plaza. Franciscan friars 
established a mission here in 1823, planting grapes for communion wine. Today, 
more than 20 tasting rooms are among the plaza’s historic brick and adobe 
buildings, pouring varietals and styles produced in Sonoma valley, Sonoma 
County and beyond. At the Roche Family Winery you can people-watch from the 
patio while enjoying a tasting flight or a glass. The specialities are 
award-winning chardonnays aged in French and American oak, plus a 90-point 
chardonnay fermented in stainless steel that just might convert ABC (anything 
but chardonnay) drinkers.
• Tasting $5, 122 West Spain Street, Sonoma, +1 707 935 7115, rochewinery.com 
<http://www.rochewinery.com//index.cfm>. Open Mon-Sat 11am-7pm, Sun 11am-6pm

Buena Vista Winery
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432034621909%2Fc54b8807-472e-4ebf-9f63-f0ef6e429b40-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432034621909%2Fc54b8807-472e-4ebf-9f63-f0ef6e429b40-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Rick Gerharter/Getty Images/Lonely Planet Images 
To experience the diversity of the valley’s AVAs, leave behind the comforts of 
the plaza and head for the hills to meet winemaking families. California’s wine 
industry began in 1857, when “Count” Agoston Haraszthy, a Hungarian, launched 
Buena Vista Winery. Today it is part of the Boisset wine empire, but its vibe 
is warm and welcoming, and every detail reflects Jean-Charles Boisset’s 
enthusiasm for the winery’s colourful history. The tasting room pours several 
varietals and a red blend (The Count) inspired by Haraszthy but the best way to 
soak up the old-California atmosphere is to order one of the winery’s picnic 
hampers ($75, including wine tasting) and relax around the cobblestone 
courtyard. History buffs can drive or hike to neighbouringBartholomew Park 
Winery <http://www.bartpark.com/>, once part of Haraszthy’s estate, to learn 
more about the flamboyant count – including the devastating phylloxera virus 
that ended his winemaking career … and the alligator that ended him.
• Tasting $15-$40, tours from $25, 18000 Old Winery Road, Sonoma, +1 707 963 
6900,buenavistawinery.com <http://www.buenavistawinery.com/>. Open daily 
10am-5pm

Gundlach Bundschu Winery

Rooted in the past yet fun and free-spirited, Gundlach Bundschu Winery is on a 
300-acre farm a couple of miles from Sonoma Plaza. “Gunbun” is California’s 
oldest continuously owned family winery, producing in small lots, including an 
annual reserve selection – usually a Bordeaux-style red – that makes reviewers 
swoon. Jacob Gundlach planted his first vines here – rootstock from the old 
country – in 1858. Five generations later, Jeff Bundschu has introduced new 
vines and new traditions, including theHuichica music festival 
<http://huichica.com/> held on the farm’s grassy hillside each June. Sitting 
here on a summer evening, sipping a chilled gewurztraminer and listening to 
some of the best indie bands outside of Coachella is a quintessential 
California experience. Gunbun’s main tasting room is open year-round; on summer 
weekends, you can reserve a courtyard tasting overlooking the pond and 
vineyards.
• Tasting $10-$50, tours from $30, 2000 Denmark Street, Sonoma, +1 707 938 
5277,gunbun.com <http://www.gunbun.com/>. Open daily 11am-4.30pm (June-October 
till 5.30pm)

Benziger Family Winery
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432034754385%2F489311d6-2ae8-42ff-9744-c636b086f2cb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432034754385%2F489311d6-2ae8-42ff-9744-c636b086f2cb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Six miles north of Sonoma, the village of Glen Ellen was once home to author 
Jack London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/19/100-best-novels-call-of-the-wild-jack-london>
, who coined the area’s nickname: the Valley of the Moon. In the early 1900s 
London experimented with sustainable agriculture on his ranch, now preserved as 
a50-acre state park <http://jacklondonpark.com/>. Next door, the Benziger 
Family Winery has furthered London’s ideals – following biodynamic principles 
to grow grapes on their farm below Sonoma Mountain. The tasting room pours a 
refreshing sauvignon blanc and an excellent pinot, but the stars are the rich 
red blends crafted from estate-grown grapes. The farm, which recently won a 
green medal for environmental stewardship, is lush and inviting, with sheep, 
Highlander cattle and an “insect nursery” where natural pestkillers are raised. 
Tours are popular, so make reservations well in advance or have a plan B, such 
as visiting the Benzigers’ chic sister winery,Imagery Estate 
<http://www.imagerywinery.com/>, known for crafting award-winning wines from 
rarely grown grapes such as barbera, lagrein and teroldego.
• Tasting $15-$40, tours from $25, 1883 London Ranch Road, Glen Ellen, +1 707 
935 3000,benziger.com <http://www.benziger.com/>. Open daily 10am-5pm

Kunde Family Winery
 Photograph: Timm Eubanks 
As Highway 12 heads north toward Kenwood, it enters some of Sonoma valley’s 
most heart-tugging scenery. Vineyards sprawl across foothills and ridges, with 
the highest peaks dedicated to parklands. Stretching two miles along the 
highway is the Kunde family’s 1,850-acre estate, where fourth- and fifth 
generations continue tending vines. From the varying terrain, soils and 
microclimates, 19 varietals are grown for a broad portfolio of estate wines. 
This landscape begs exploration, and six times yearly, you can hike the 
vineyards with a Kunde neighbour or family member. Billed as “moderately 
strenuous” due to an uphill stretch, the four-mile hike is more of a meander, 
with frequent stops for generous tastes in situ. There will be a chance to sip 
luscious Century Vines zinfandel while standing next to the thick, twisted 
trunks of hundred-year-old grapevines and see filming locations for Bottle 
Shock (which starred Alan Rickman as sommelier Steven Spurrier). Daily van 
tours take guests to a hilltop tasting area under a bower of oaks, with views 
down the valley – all the way to the bay. Picnickers are welcome in the gardens 
outside the main tasting room, and free cave tours are usually available, too.
• Tasting $10-$25, tours from $30, 9825 Sonoma Highway, Kenwood, +1 707 833 
5501,kunde.com <http://www.kunde.com/>. Open daily 10.30am-5pm

WHERE TO STAY

Landmark Vineyards, Kenwood
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432035569117%2Ffa2ae434-9f26-48ea-b514-af337afeb336-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432035569117%2Ffa2ae434-9f26-48ea-b514-af337afeb336-1020x612.jpeg>
In Kenwood, 11 miles north of Sonoma Plaza, Landmark Vineyards hosts guests in 
a cottage or suite overlooking the vines, with the Mayacamas range as a 
backdrop. The guest suite is unabashedly romantic, with a king-size bed, 
fireplace, patio, in-room breakfast and a complimentary bottle of Landmark’s 
Overlook chardonnay. Though this idyllic location is far from the bustle, 
you’ll find three mountainside parks and more than a dozen wineries, 
restaurants, and tasting rooms practically on your doorstep.
• Guest suite from $275, cottage from $300, 101 Adobe Canyon Road, Kenwood, +1 
707 833 0053,landmarkwine.com <http://landmarkwine.com/>

The Swiss Hotel

Expect to spend $200 and up a night for a room near Sonoma Plaza, where you 
can stroll between tasting rooms or along the town’s bike path. If you’re 
looking for a bargain, visit midweek when rooms are discounted, or November to 
January, when rates fall by as much as 50%. The Swiss Hotel has five rooms, all 
with access to the balcony overlooking the plaza. The hotel was built around 
1850 and used as a private residence by General Vallejo’s brother – it’s only 
steps away from the adobe barracks that housed Mexican, then US troops (now a 
state park). Rooms are simple but spacious and tidy, with Victorian-inspired 
decor. If you’re a light sleeper, keep in mind that the open-air bar/restaurant 
downstairs is lively on summer weekends.
• Doubles from $110, 18 West Spain Street, Sonoma, +1 707 938 2884, 
swisshotelsonoma.com <http://www.swisshotelsonoma.com/>

Sonoma Chalet

Room prices tend to decrease as distance from the plaza increases. Only five 
minutes away, Sonoma Chalet offers four guestrooms and three cottages, some 
with fireplaces or private porches. Two of the guest rooms share a bath and 
parlour, and can be rented together as a suite. The emphasis here is on 
comfort: fluffy quilts, Oriental carpets, clawfoot baths and a shady garden 
deck with a hot tub. Pastoral and quiet, this former farmhouse is near the 
152-acreMontini Preserve 
<http://www.sonomaopenspace.org/Content/?p=10066/preview.html>, where hiking 
trails climb to give bird’s-eye views. Stray further, and there are motel 
chains 20-40 minutes away in Petaluma or Santa Rosa. And, 15 miles north, there 
is camping atSugarloaf Ridge state park <http://www.parks.ca.gov/?page_id=481> 
($35 a night,reserveamerica.com 
<http://www.reserveamerica.com/facilityDetails.do?contractCode=CA&parkId=120092>
).
• Rooms and cottages $140-$225 B&B, 18935 Fifth Street West, Sonoma, +1 707 
938 3129,sonomachalet.com <http://www.sonomachalet.com/>

WHERE TO EAT

The Girl and the Fig
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432035211372%2Fecd8da7b-d3fd-425b-b465-d3c7388fb39b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432035211372%2Fecd8da7b-d3fd-425b-b465-d3c7388fb39b-1020x612.jpeg>
Restaurants around Sonoma’s downtown plaza are famous for their relaxed 
ambience and excellent wine selections. At the forefront of Sonoma’s local food 
movement is Sondra Bernstein, owner of The Girl & the Fig, who has won 
accolades for her extensive wine list and creative seasonal menus: Provençal 
cuisine with California flair. The patio is a convivial spot for sitting with 
friends and trading bites of locally produced cheeses and delectable appetisers 
(from $10). Mains start at $20 and plats du jour are $38 for three courses. If 
you can’t land a reservation or walk in, there is a second location in Glen 
Ellen, as well as Suite D, Bernstein’s crowd-sourced pop-up (open most summer 
weekends) in a warehouse, east of downtown.
• Open Mon-Thur 11.30am-10pm, Fri-Sat till 11pm, Sunday brunch 10am-3pm, 110 
West Spain Street, Sonoma, +1 707 938 3634,thegirldandthefig.com 
<http://www.thegirlandthefig.com/>

Park 121 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432035289193%2Fd2f166f6-ac96-40e1-b067-17ce1ab3c9b2-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%3A%20Sonoma%20valley%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F20%2Fcalifornia-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F19%2F1432035289193%2Fd2f166f6-ac96-40e1-b067-17ce1ab3c9b2-1020x612.jpeg>
Chowhounds on the road in search of local flavour should be prepared to brake 
for delis, farm stands and roadside cafes. Park 121, a few miles south of 
Sonoma in Cornerstone Gardens, makes a fine choice for lunch or a cup of Blue 
Bottle coffee while exploring Carneros wineries. The modern farmhouse decor 
features a blackboard map showing where ingredients are sourced from. During 
summer, when organic produce stand The Patch’s beefsteak tomatoes are in 
season, Park 121 serves a classic BLT ($10) and the empanada ($12) is great for 
a winery picnic. Take a stroll around Cornerstone’s shops and 
architect-designed gardens, as well as the three tasting rooms that are on site 
– proving that you’re never far from liquid sunshine in Sonoma valley.
• Open daily 10am-5pm, 23584 Arnold Drive (Highway 121), Sonoma, +1 707 938 
8579,park121.com <http://www.park121.com/>

Kathleen Bryant, author of Western National Parks’ Lodges Cookbook 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Western-National-Parks-Lodges-Cookbook/dp/0873589009>, 
lives in California’s wine country
 