
Take the scenic Pacific Coast highway through California and turn inland 
roughly halfway between San Francisco and Los Angeles. Paso Robles, 20 miles up 
state route 46, is in the heart of California’s Central Coast wine region. 
Paso, as locals know it, is in San Luis Obispo county, where the Salinas river 
runs out of the Santa Lucia mountains. The city of Paso Robles has a quaint 
downtown surrounded by 20 square miles of coastal mountain terrain.

Although wine-making in the region dates back two centuries to when 
missionaries first began growing grapes, it’s only recently that the Paso 
Robles American Viticultural Area (AVA, a federally recognised wine 
classification) has become a region to watch. In the past decade the numbers of 
producers and acres under vine have doubled, and now the Paso Robles AVA is the 
fastest-growing wine region in the US, with over 200 boutique and family-owned 
wineries producing zinfandel, cabernet sauvignon and other varietals from 
Spain, Italy, Bordeaux and the Rhone.

The terrain offers plenty for the eye: flat river valley floodplains give way 
to sweeping slopes dotted with homesteads, farms and wineries, with most 
vineyards sitting on rolling hillsides between 500 and 1,000 feet above sea 
level. One of Paso’s charms is its as-yet-undiscovered feel: on-property 
tasting rooms are cosy and nowhere near as packed as those in Napa valley, and 
are more often than not manned by the vintners themselves. And Paso’s charming 
historic downtown has great new places to eat and drink without the crowds – or 
the higher price point – of its more famous northern counterpart.

WINEMAKERS TO VISIT

Bianchi
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434472900205%2F0d04312d-c83f-4762-9af2-d872c401f2dd-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434472900205%2F0d04312d-c83f-4762-9af2-d872c401f2dd-1020x612.jpeg>
In September 2014, Bianchi’s zinfandel beat stiff competition to be crowned 
California Zinfandel Champion. Of the 93 wines entered, only four won double 
gold; Bianchi’s was one,the other three were from Sonoma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/20/california-sonoma-valley-wine-route-top-10-guide>
, a wine region neighbouring Napa. Known for estate-grown and hand-crafted 
wines, the Bianchi family’s wine producing heritage dates from 1974, when 
Joseph Bianchi and his son Glenn set up shop on the banks of the San Joaquin 
river, eight miles from downtown Paso. Winemaker Tom Lane attributes the 
brand’s recent success to the 2011 zinfandel’s subtle layers, something he 
strives to achieve in every vintage through experimentation with fruit from 
different vineyards, changing harvest times, new yeast strains, and 
fermentation and aging regimes in spicy barrel types. A glass-walled tasting 
room overlooks flat fields of vines that begin to sweep upwards to the rear of 
the property and, inside, a fireplace and warm earth tones create a welcoming 
setting for winter tastings. Outside, a patio borders a lake teeming with koi 
carp gliding beneath miniature sailboats.
• 3380 Branch Road, Paso Robles, +1 805 226 9922, bianchiwine.com 
<http://www.bianchiwine.com/>. Tasting room open daily 10am-5pm, $5pp for a 
tasting of five wines of your choice

Justin Wine

In 2000, Isosceles, vintner Justin Baldwin’s local interpretation of a big 
Bordeaux, was named one of the top 10 wines in the world by Wine Spectator 
magazine. Baldwin now has 25 vintages under his belt and Isosceles – a blend of 
cabernet sauvignon, cabernet franc and merlot – remains the winery’s flagship 
and best-seller. Its other labels are delicious, too, particularly the big bold 
reds made using old world methods, such as harvesting by hand and small 
barrel-ageing in French oak. Sixteen miles from downtown Paso, its tasting room 
and restaurant have panoramic views of vineyards that undulate with the rolling 
hills. There’s also a three-room inn, where stays (from $375 a night for two) 
include a complimentary tasting experience: choose from a “deconstruction” or 
vertical tasting of different vintages of Isosceles, or a library tasting 
hosted in the Chateau, Justin Baldwin’s former home.
• 11680 Chimney Rock Road, Paso Robles, +1 805 238 6932, justinwine.com 
<http://justinwine.com/>. Tasting room open daily 10am-4.30pm, tastings $15, no 
reservation necessary; tours 10am and 2.30pm daily, $20pp, reservations required

Halter Ranch
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473050112%2Fd5686b52-6a7a-4be6-acc7-e2e0946c9a19-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473050112%2Fd5686b52-6a7a-4be6-acc7-e2e0946c9a19-1020x612.jpeg>
In the Westside Adelaida District, 12 miles west of downtown Paso, Halter 
Ranch produces only estate-grown, sustainably farmed Bordeaux and Rhône wines. 
You can swing by the tasting room for a tipple and a picnic without prior 
announcement but the three-hour excursion tour ($45pp) by Land Rover is worth 
calling ahead for. On the tour, guests cruise through all 281 acres of 
vineyards, descending from lofty Lion’s Ridge – with vistas of sloping 
patchwork blocks dotted with copses nearly 2,000 feet above sea level – to a 
tasting beneath the spreading branches of the Ancestor Tree, one of the largest 
live coastal oaks on record and the name of the winery’s Bordeaux-style 
flagship wine. The 2011 Ancestor reserve – a blend of cabernet sauvignon, 
malbec and petit verdot – scooped four-star gold in the Orange County Wine 
Competition and a gold in the San Francisco International Wine Competition in 
2014. Consider picking up a bottle of the 2012 Ancestor ($55) to add to your 
collection.
• 8910 Adelaida Road, Paso Robles, +1 805 226 9455, halterranch.com 
<http://www.halterranch.com/>. Tasting room open daily 11am-5pm, $10 for 
four/five wines; fee waived with bottle purchase

Red Soles
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473098499%2F58467518-4fa5-4e94-88bc-9d81d3090460-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473098499%2F58467518-4fa5-4e94-88bc-9d81d3090460-2060x1236.jpeg>
At Red Soles, six miles from downtown Paso, romance abounds. Lacking 
equipment, Randy and Cheryl Phillips crushed their first barrel of grapes with 
their own feet in 2004; that first stomping of petite sirah and zinfandel 
grapes later became the couple’s first vintage, called Kick-Off. Every wine in 
their portfolio is estate-grown over 200 acres of vineyards – half are east of 
Paso Robles and the other half are at the Templeton Gap winery – but only a 
small proportion of the grapes they grow become Red Soles wine; the rest are 
sold to large wineries. Randy and Cheryl also run the Hacienda-style, 
terracotta-coloured tasting room. Stop by to sample the nutty, chocolatey 2012 
Estate Syrah ($40), produced in the Côte Rôtie-style with 10% viognier crushed 
and fermented with syrah, or bring a picnic and grab a bottle to enjoy on the 
vine- and oak -ringed lawn.
• 3230 Oakdale Road, Paso Robles, + 1 805 226 9898, redsoleswinery.com 
<http://www.redsoleswinery.com/>. Tasting rooms open daily 11am-5pm, $10pp for 
tasting of six wines plus a brandy; fees waived with a bottle purchase

Villa San Juliette
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473134762%2F8f604dbe-34da-49fd-b651-f10bcf9387b7-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473134762%2F8f604dbe-34da-49fd-b651-f10bcf9387b7-1020x612.jpeg>
Nigel Lythgoe, producer of Pop Idol, American Idol and So You Think You Can 
Dance, bought Villa San Juliette, 12 miles from downtown Paso, after falling in 
love with the region. Lythgoe and partner Ken Warwick both keep apartments in 
the chateau building and are known for offering good (read large) pours at the 
tasting room when in town. Guided tours of the 168-acre property take place 
daily; alternatively you can opt for a private wine and cheese pairing or a 
picnic lunch of artisanal pizza, crab cakes and charcuterie on the patio 
overlooking the vineyard and pond. Romantique ($60) – a rich composition of 
2010 malbec, petit verdot and cabernet sauvignon – delivers its own raspberry, 
currant and mocha-nuanced music. If you’re feeling competitive, you may want to 
take up the So You Think You Can Taste Challenge: four wines, poured blind 
($15pp).
• 6385 Cross Canyons Road, San Miguel, +1 805 467 0014, villasanjuliette.com 
<http://www.villasanjuliette.com/>. Open Mon, Thurs-Sun 11am-5pm, Tues-Wed by 
appointment only

WHERE TO EAT

Thomas Hill Organics
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473188226%2Fe16b8782-efaa-4fff-afdc-8fb12a90e7ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473188226%2Fe16b8782-efaa-4fff-afdc-8fb12a90e7ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Originally conceived by owner Debbie Thomas as an organic Community Supported 
Agriculture (CSA) showcase of local produce, Thomas Hill Organics has evolved 
over time into a relaxed, elegant restaurant. A high-ceilinged dining room, 
anchored by an L-shaped bar and a brick wall lined with hundred of bottles, 
leads to a breezy outdoor patio with a not-so-subliminal message – “WINE” – on 
the wall in letters several feet high. Local ranchers, bakers and growers 
provide chef Christopher Manning with quality organic produce for his creative 
farm-to-table cuisine: his pan-seared scallops with celeriac, linguiça sausage, 
purslane and baby beets ($31) are delicious with a glass of Bianchi’s sparkling.
• 1313 Park Street, Paso Robles +1 805 226 5888, thomashillorganics.com 
<http://www.thomashillorganics.com/>. Open Mon-Thurs 11am-3pm and 5pm-9pm, 
Fri-Sat 11am-3pm and 5pm-10pm, Sun 10am-3pm and 5pm-9pm

La Cosecha bar and restaurant

Spanish for “harvest”, this is chef Santos MacDonal’s second outlet: his other 
isIl Cortile <http://www.ilcortile.com/>, also in downtown Paso. MacDonal and 
his brother Jorge, both alumni ofGiorgio in Malibu 
<http://www.giorgio-baldi.com/>, reign supreme in the kitchen, serving dishes 
inspired by Spanish and South American cuisine with an emphasis on herbs and 
spices that speak of their Honduran roots. Local gourmets gather in the long, 
narrow cosy space after work to enjoy Paso wines complimented by selections 
from Spain, Argentina and Chile; they linger late into the evening for dishes 
such as octopus salad with rocket, cannellini beans and chimichurri sauce 
($12), and grilled pork chop with pear honey glaze and local vegetables ($27), 
from the easy-to-navigate, pairing-orientated menu.
• 835 12th Street, Suite A, Paso Robles, +1 805 237 0019, lacosechabr.com 
<http://www.lacosechabr.com/>. Open Sun, Tues-Thurs 11am-10pm, Fri-Sat 
11am-11pm, closed Mondays

Artisan

What started as a childhood dream for food brothers Mike and Chris Kobayashi 
(at the time aged 14 and 11 respectively) has now, luckily for Paso locals, 
been realised. Artisan is very much a family affair: while Mike runs the 
restaurant, Chris – a graduate of the culinary academies in San Francisco and 
Napa, and formerly of the Clift Hotel and Brix restaurants – runs the open 
kitchen and his wife Shandi runs the organic farm a few miles away in 
Templeton. The huge, street-facing windows are more often than not packed with 
locals enjoying a glass of zinfandel and yet another warm Paso evening. Inside 
the elegant, contemporary dining room, hungry patrons indulge in meatballs with 
ricotta gnocchi ($14) and garlic and wild boar tenderloin with fennel risotto, 
feta, roasted apple andmostarda pickle ($33) complimented by a carefully 
selected, Central Coast-focused wine list.
• 843 12th Street, Paso Robles, +1 805 237 8084, artisanpasorobles.com 
<http://artisanpasorobles.com/>. Open Mon-Thurs 11.30am-9pm, Fri 11.30am-10pm, 
Sat 10am-10pm, Sun 10am-9pm

WHERE TO STAY

Bike Lane Inn
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473357228%2F7b1e7f1a-6a04-4f32-bef0-5851aced2836-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473357228%2F7b1e7f1a-6a04-4f32-bef0-5851aced2836-1020x612.jpeg>
In Templeton, this guesthouse-cum-homestay with two bedrooms is a cosy launch 
pad for cycling or driving tours.Owners Elaine and Scott McElmury opened their 
home of 13 years to travellers in 2011 and still live on the property. The 
Syrah room has a queen bed, private bathroom and opens onto a vine-enveloped 
patio; the Merlot room has a pillow-topped queen mattress with a private 
bathroom. A patio with loungers overlooking the family-owned Templeton feed 
mill is a great place to mingle with other guests; on cooler evenings , games 
and a stone fireplace make the guest lounge a great place to relax. At 
weekends, Elaine serves a breakfast of fresh fruit, eggs, bacon, ham or sausage 
and toast or pancakes and also offers complimentary glasses of cabernet from 
the privateJohn Alan winery <http://www.johnalanwinery.com/>, nearby. The 
McElmurys also have two bikes for guests’ use.
• Doubles from $90 B&B, open weekends in autumn/winter and during the week on 
request in the summer. 749 Gough Avenue, Templeton, +1 805 434 0409, 
bikelaneinn.com <http://www.bikelaneinn.com/>

Paso Robles Inn
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473403710%2F532af9c0-942b-41a2-8ef9-0f0dff2bb18e-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%E2%80%99s%20Paso%20Robles%20wine%20route%3A%20top%2010%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F17%2Fcalifornia-paso-robles-wine-route-top-10-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F16%2F1434473403710%2F532af9c0-942b-41a2-8ef9-0f0dff2bb18e-1020x612.jpeg>
The rooms at this downtown hotel encircle a heated pool, gardens and a koi 
carp-filled pond. The area is known for its natural mineral springs and if you 
follow your nose to the nearby Paso Robles Hot Springs, you’ll reap the 
rejuvenating benefits celebrated by Native Americans and missionaries in times 
gone by. Alternatively, opt for a deluxe mineral spa room and you’ll find a spa 
tub, rich in sulphur compounds and trace minerals, on your private patio. All 
rooms have a kitchenette, and in-room spa services, such as citrus body scrubs 
and hot stone massages are available. There’s also a steak house and lounge 
restaurant on site.
• Doubles from $130. 1103 Spring Street, Paso Robles, +1 805 238 2660, 
pasoroblesinn.com <http://www.pasoroblesinn.com/>
 