
Although I'm based near Philadelphia, I often endure the cross-country plane 
ride to the west coast to cover the California wine scene. If I had a few days 
and dollars to spend driving fromSeattle to San Francisco, I would take in as 
much of the rugged scenery as possible along the coast on Route 101, where 
there are multiple sites for spotting whales and sea lions. I'd then head 
inland toHealdsburg, to start tasting wine (of course). Sonoma lacks neighbour 
Napa Valley's gloss and cachet, but stands toe-to-toe in history and wine 
quality. If my wallet was fat, it'd be into the hills for the culinary lunch 
tour atChalk Hill Winery <http://www.chalkhill.com> which has executive chef 
Didier Ageorges' incredible French-inspired food, and equally incredible valley 
views.

For something out of the ordinary, I'd take a side trip to Sebastopol to grab 
glasses of pinot noir rosé at the funky tasting room of rock star Les Claypool's
Claypool Cellars <http://claypoolcellars.com/>. Les recently brought on board 
celebrated young winemaker Ross Cobb, who is a veteran of the local wine scene 
and is also crafting vibrant, complex Sonoma coast wines under his own label - 
I'd recommend the Cobb Emmaline Vineyard pinot noir. The small, colourful 
Claypool Cellars tasting room is the antithesis of anything resembling wine 
snobbery. It's crafted from a bright-red 1850s Southern Pacific railcar, which 
they have dubbed theFancy Booze Caboose 
<http://claypoolcellars.com/tasting-room/>, and inside it is equal parts 
offbeat rock memorabilia, antique model train collection, and fine wine 
dispensary. The Claypools live nearby, and are some of the most down-to-earth 
rockers that you will ever meet (a good match for the laid-back vibe of the 
Russian river valley area that supplies their grapes).
 Fancy Booze Caboose, Claypool Cellars, Sebastopol 
There's no question that dinner would be at Sondra Bernstein's The Girl and 
The Fig <http://www.thegirlandthefig.com/> in downtown Sonoma, where the walls 
are adorned with interesting art byJulie Higgins 
<http://www.artistjuliehiggins.com/html/main.asp>. The fresh food prepared 
there by John Toulze might just be the best in the entire Sonoma area – try the 
fig and arugula salad. Then it'd be treating the missus (OK and myself) to an 
evening at theHealdsburg Inn and Spa <http://www.healdsburginn.com> before 
hitting the road again to San Fran.

That's the kind of whistlestop tour that would put me into enough of a zen 
state to deal with the rest of the drive south to the "big little-city".

Joe Roberts writes the Wined Down 
<http://m.playboy.com/playground/view/id/2172/title/wined-down-4-wine-traditions-that-need-to-die>
 column for Playboy.com and blogs at1winedude.com <http://www.1winedude.com/>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 