
Zuhura Wangara lives just outside Nairobi and, on a good day, spends at least 
five hours commuting. She uses a combination of buses and between four and six 
matatus – publicly operated shared minibus taxis – to get from her home in 
Kiambu to her workplace at the city’s southern limits.

“After work the same routine applies. I leave work around 5pm. I get to town, 
walk to our bus terminal, and get another ride home,” she says. “I get home 
from 8pm onwards depending on traffic and the hours we have to wait.”

It is a problem faced by millions in the Kenyan capital, where 3 million 
people and 400,000 vehicles are moving around the city every day. Wangara has 
given up hope that her journey will ever become easier.

Counting the cost 

South African company WhereIsMyTransport, however, is working on a solution. 
The tech company has already built a platform providing formal transport 
information for South African cities like Johannesburg, Tshwane, Cape Town and 
Durban, as well as Cairo’s Metro.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbig-data-africa-cities-commuters-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2b6920db0c5ac904ef48013143a33a29446553c%2F0_133_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20big%20data%20offer%20hope%20for%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20exasperated%20commuters%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbig-data-africa-cities-commuters-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20big%20data%20offer%20hope%20for%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20exasperated%20commuters%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbig-data-africa-cities-commuters-transport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2b6920db0c5ac904ef48013143a33a29446553c%2F0_133_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Cape Town’s lowest earners can spend almost half of their monthly income on 
transport. Photograph: WhereIsMyTransport 
It is branching into informally-run transit methods, starting with Nairobi’s 
matatus. The goal is to provide the data for the development of solutions to 
ease commuter pain. Co-founders Devin de Vries and Chris King met as students 
at the University of Cape Town, and spent many days waiting forlornly for 
university shuttles.

Such pain is shared across the board. The City of Cape Town’s transport 
authority found those in the lower income segment can spend up to 46% of their 
income on transport each month.

“Many riders have no access to information about transport except personal 
knowledge or those around them, and they can spend hours waiting around, 
missing connections, and be late to work,” De Vries said.

“We realised that there needed to be a single, centralised solution for 
transport data, and this was the missing piece that would enable many other 
services and products to succeed.”

The company works with operators and local authorities to capture data. Where 
there are no operators, as with informally-run minibus taxis, it collects its 
own data or uses partners.

The platform contains a multi-modal journey planner and fare estimator that 
allows users to plan the speediest and most cost-efficient journey to work, 
meaning app developers and service providers have all they need to roll out 
effective transport solutions.

WhereIsMyTransport is working on partnerships with local authorities. A major 
corporation has already contracted with the City of Johannesburg to create a 
public transport app using its data.

While in cities like London, the transport authority releases open data feeds 
on transport to developers, this data often does not exist in emerging cities.

Working with local government

Finding the right partners within local government can be a challenge, given 
the problems of dealing with large bureaucracies and an often ingrained lack of 
understanding of how tech works.

Yet De Vries said city officials are usually invested in providing better 
information and experience to their citizens. This view is echoed by Justin 
Coetzee, whose Cape Town-based company GoMetro uses data analytics and 
in-vehicle tech to connect different transport types into one app. GoMetro, the 
official app of South Africa’s railways, is used by 120,000 people monthly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbig-data-africa-cities-commuters-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1bdba7928831be0702d6cbb7e496d75ec99451c%2F131_0_1808_1086%2F1808.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20big%20data%20offer%20hope%20for%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20exasperated%20commuters%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbig-data-africa-cities-commuters-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20big%20data%20offer%20hope%20for%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20exasperated%20commuters%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fbig-data-africa-cities-commuters-transport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1bdba7928831be0702d6cbb7e496d75ec99451c%2F131_0_1808_1086%2F1808.png>
 The Ma3Route app enables commuters to share real-time information online via 
short messages and pictures. Photograph: Ma3Route 
“It has been essential to work with customers who are visionary and who want 
to change the way things are traditionally done,” Coetzee said.

These clients are organisations like the University of Pretoria, the Gauteng 
Department of Transport, and local municipalities such as Mbombela and 
eThekwini.

Dr Bonolo Mathibela, a research scientist at IBM’s South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> lab, says the beauty of tech 
transportation solutions is that information can be crowdsourced and harnessed 
without too much input from authorities.

Mathibela says authorities can benefit simply by properly utilising the data 
already at their fingertips.

“Tech can really change the way transport works. In terms of the provision of 
information we are seeing great progress,” she said.

All of which will be music to the ears of commuters like Wangara. Meanwhile, 
back in Nairobi, Ma3Route is providing a web, mobile app and SMS platform 
designed to enable travellers to share real-time information online via short 
messages and pictures.

“The community of users share useful details on road conditions and events 
happening on the roads as they’re travelling, providing valuable information 
and insights,” said Stephane Eboko, chief revenue officer at Ma3Route, which 
now has more than 500,000 active users.

“Our vision is that all people should be empowered with information and 
connections to make smart decisions impacting their city’s evolution.”

With this new technology coming to the fore, the hope is that transport will 
run more smoothly and smartly, making life for commuters like Wangara that 
little bit easier.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 