
There is something new about the Kibera skyline. Jostling for space with 
low-lying electricity cables and television antennas, six-inch silver pipes run 
twenty feet above the ground. The pipes, snaking above mud and tin houses, are 
all connected to a water tank in one of Africa’s largest slums to deliver safe 
and clean water to thousands of residents.

The African water companies serving the poorest and staying afloat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/04/urban-africa-water-companies-poorest-profit>
Kibera is made up of 13 villages crammed into 2.5 square kilometres and has an 
estimated population of 250,000 people <http://www.kibera.org.uk/facts-info/>. 
Here, almost every family survives on less than $1 a day and getting access to 
basic amenities is not easy. The shanties do not have running water and, for 
years, supply has been controlled by cartels.

In response, local NGO Shining Hope For Communities (Shofco) 
<http://www.shofco.org/> started building what it calls Africa’s first aerial 
water piping system earlier in September.

“The idea of an aerial water piping system was conceptualised as a way around 
the complicated and costly logistical hurdle of distributing water across East 
Africa’s largest informal settlement,” says Albanous Gituru, the manager for 
Shofco’s Kibera programme.

Two thirds of the world’s population will live in cities by 2030 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/40b530ac84ab4931874e1f7efb4f1a22/un-report-2030-two-thirds-world-will-live-cities>
, the UN predicts.

“The resulting social instability, risk to critical infrastructure, potential 
water crises and the potential for the devastating spread of diseases are a 
reality,” says Gituru. “Kibera and other informal settlements in Nairobi are 
not an exception.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Faerial-water-cartel-slum-kenya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b43d24ec59ee6b070a8ada7bb6d07dfa9940a5f%2F0_58_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Africa's%20first%20aerial%20water%20network%20beat%20the%20cartels'%20sky%20high%20prices%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Faerial-water-cartel-slum-kenya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Africa%27s%20first%20aerial%20water%20network%20beat%20the%20cartels%27%20sky%20high%20prices%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Foct%2F06%2Faerial-water-cartel-slum-kenya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b43d24ec59ee6b070a8ada7bb6d07dfa9940a5f%2F0_58_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Kibera is made up of 13 villages crammed into 2.5 square kilometres and has an 
estimated population of around 250,000 people. Photograph: Roberto 
Schmidt/AFP/Getty Images 
Founded in 2004 by Kennedy Odede, who was raised in Kibera, Shofco aims to 
combat the hardships found in slums by establishing initiatives that uplift the 
community.

Its main goal is to ensure that no Kibera resident has to walk for more than 
eight minutes to access a water point. It has done this by setting up a 100,000 
litre water tower in the northern part of Kibera with an overhead piping system 
which connects to various water kiosks.

Eight ideas to fund access to water and toilets for all by 2030
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/19/eight-ideas-to-fund-access-to-water-and-toilets-for-all-by-2030>
The best locations for these kiosks are determined by the community and 
Shofco, by itself or with the help of other partners, sets up the 
infrastructure. This might include drilling a borehole, from which the water is 
pumped into a treatment centre within the slum, then into overhead tanks. From 
the tanks the water is then piped, by gravity, to the various water points 
within the slum.

If an area is not suitable to drill a borehole, Shofco pipes the water 
straight from the main lines of the capital’s official water company –Nairobi 
City Water and Sewerage Company <https://nairobiwater.co.ke/index.php/en/> – 
into their treatment plants, then the overhead tanks, and away to the water 
points. After the initial set-up, communities living around the kiosks are left 
to run and manage them.

“Because Kibera is so crowded, underground piping would have provided many 
logistical issues, such as finding the space to lay the pipes, as well as 
dealing with issues of underground seepage,” says Kenneth Owalo, a community 
health worker who works in the slum.


It would take someone really special to try and cut off a section of pipe 
hanging almost ​20 feet above ground
Albanous Gituru 
For a long time, the growing demand for water services in urban informal 
settlements has been met by ruthless cartels who make a killing from disrupting 
the existing water supply and selling water off at very high rates. And as 
their access to the supply had been cut off, many slum residents have been 
forced to rely on these private vendors for their daily water needs. Currently, 
water in slum areas Nairobi costs up to 50 times more than in the city’s most 
affluent areas.


It is hoped, however, that the overhead piping will help to reduce the risk of 
vandalism. “It would take someone really special to try and cut off a section 
of pipe hanging almost 20 feet above ground,” says Gituru. “And if he does, he 
will be spotted from quite a distance.”

Gituru says their pipes are yet to be vandalised or illegally tapped.

Shofco aims to scale up the provision of water to 84,000 people in Kibera by 
partnering with Kenya’s biggest telecommunications company, Safaricom, to build 
an additional 10 water kiosks within the slum. The organisation also plans to 
expand into Mathare and Mukuru, two other informal settlements in Kenya’s 
capital.

The ATMs bringing cheap, safe water to Nairobi's slums
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/16/atms-cheap-safe-water-nairobis-slums>
Next year, Kenya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya> will hold a 
national elections for all elective positions. In Kibera, the provision of 
affordable, reliable and clean water is cited in the manifestos of many 
politicians seeking to represent the various parts of the slum. Shofco 
officials say that they have been approached by local politicians who think 
they are foraying onto their turf.

“The politicians see that we have done what they were elected to do, and in 
such a short time. They have sent emissaries to us to try and find out whether 
we have any political ambitions.” says Gituru. “But the residents know and 
understand that we only have their interests at heart. We are not interested in 
politics.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 