
Jelena Dokic, the 18-year-old who relinquished her Australian loyalty and 
reasserted her Yugoslav identity, is at last building on the promise she showed 
last year in reaching the Wimbledon semi-finals.

She beat the former world No1 Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario to reach only the second 
tour semi-final of her career in Hamburg last week, and here yesterday was 
close to beating the Australian Open championJennifer Capriati 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jennifer-capriati> in the German Open .

She was twice a break up in the final set and was also near to being able to 
serve for victory before losing 7-5, 3-6, 6-4 in a second-round match notable 
for the weight of shot on both sides of the net.

Dokic's capacity to trade blows with one the world's hardest hitters was as 
notable a development in her game as the resilience which seems to be improving 
since she settled her domicile and her identity.

Capriati, who believes she has a chance of toppling Martina Hingis from the 
world's top spot, must rate Dokic because afterwards she declined to 
acknowledge the Florida-based teenager as a potential rival. "It's not only the 
tennis which matters," the fourth seed reckoned. "It's everything, such as how 
you develop physically and mentally. The tennis can be good but I don't now if 
she is strong enough mentally."

Certainly Capriati has worked wonders on herself psychologically, and she next 
plays the No14 seed Sandrine Testud.

Another Hingis chaser, Venus Williams, who could move to within 200 ranking 
points of the pinnacle if she adds this week's title to last week's, reappeared 
with a tape on the troublesome left knee which had finished Hamburg unprotected.

There was also a curious flurry of double faults towards the end of her 6-3, 
6-3 victory over Karina Habsudova, although the Wimbledon champion felt 
sufficiently unhampered to perform the splits on the baseline like a giraffe at 
a waterhole and come up smiling.
 