
New York is a famously expensive city, where finding a hotel for under $200 a 
night can be a struggle. There are so few options for those on a serious 
budget, travellers could be forgiven for being tempted to sleep rough in 
Central Park.

10 of the best ways to enjoy New York … on a budget
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/28/10-best-ways-to-enjoy-new-york-on-a-budget>
But a new and unusual type of affordable accommodation – costing from just £23 
a night – could be a useful option for adventurous types who can live without 
necessities like space, electricity and running water.

A small fleet of adapted vans, plus a yellow New York taxi, are now available 
as holiday rentals throughAirbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb>
.

Parked around Queens’ gentrified Long Island City, the five furnished vehicles 
includeconversion vans with views of the Empire State Building 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/rooms/5104476> (£23-£26 a night), the retired cab 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/rooms/7035403> (£39), whose back seats have been 
swapped for “swanky” fittings, and the top-of the-rangefour-person campervan 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/rooms/4833172> (£78).

According to hotel industry analyst STR <https://www.str.com/>, the average 
daily rate for a New York hotel during May 2015 was £185. In Queens it was £95 
– still four times more than the cheapest van.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fnew-york-budget-acoomodation-taxi-car%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439995471959%2F04fc9240-a3bd-436a-b83d-850f4f159568-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Car%20crashing%3A%20new%20budget%20accommodation%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fnew-york-budget-acoomodation-taxi-car%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Car%20crashing%3A%20new%20budget%20accommodation%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fnew-york-budget-acoomodation-taxi-car%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439995471959%2F04fc9240-a3bd-436a-b83d-850f4f159568-1020x612.jpeg>
 Panorama … or van-a-rama? Take a nap in the back 
The vehicles are stationary (in compliance with the law) and come with 
mattresses, fans, blankets, blinds and lights, and though electricity and 
running water are conspicuously absent, the vehicles are close to public 
toilets and a YMCA (free trial passes are available) with showers.
 No longer on call … the retired cab. Photograph: Airbnb 
The vans are owned by standup comedian and ex-hotel concierge Jonathan Powley 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/users/show/3955733>, and since debuting earlier this 
year, they’ve each been solidly booked and have received largely positive 
feedback.

“The best part for me was being just 15 minutes from Manhattan,” says Alex 
Amato, 33, from Manchester, who stayed in the Van With A View for four nights 
with his girlfriend. “We’d absolutely recommend it. The van was no Ritz but, 
honestly, we only used it to sleep in. The point is to experience New York, not 
stay in your ‘room’.”

Alex reported no issues with safety or noise, and this moneyed, 
mostly-residential area of the city is known for a laid-back vibe.

But 23-year-old Jean Rivière, from France, and his Belgian wife, Marieke, 25, 
said they did feel nervous: “On our second night, we heard passersby standing 
outside, talking about there being people in the van.” (Jonathan has 
subsequently changed location.)

“Nevertheless, we enjoyed it, and had a far better time there compared with a 
more expensive Manhattan hostel one month later. Jonathan’s kindness moved us 
the most: he bought us welcome drinks, provided a tour and made us feel 
completely at home.”

Jonathan says he always tries to go the extra mile, by putting out flowers for 
guests and arranging deals with local cafes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fnew-york-budget-acoomodation-taxi-car%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439995558264%2F80afe508-6aa0-45b5-bf1c-8ba813323e5e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Car%20crashing%3A%20new%20budget%20accommodation%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fnew-york-budget-acoomodation-taxi-car%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Car%20crashing%3A%20new%20budget%20accommodation%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fnew-york-budget-acoomodation-taxi-car%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1439995558264%2F80afe508-6aa0-45b5-bf1c-8ba813323e5e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 View of Long Island City, the location for Jonathan’s vehicles 
“For me, it’s about exceeding guest expectations,” he explains. “Many people 
want adventure, an experience, and this truly provides that – and very 
affordably.” His next offering? “I’m finishing a 1980s high-top van with shag 
carpeting,” he reveals. “Then it’ll probably be an ice-cream truck, with free 
ice-cream.”

• Stationary Airbnb four-wheelers aren’t limited to New York. In Dalston, east 
London,an artist-converted VW truck <https://www.airbnb.co.uk/rooms/3516945>, 
complete with a kitchenette, Wi-Fi, heating and roof garden – but again no 
toilet – is available for £38 per night
 