Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKJLXbR_AB6Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKJLXbR_AB6Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKJLXbR_AB6Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
There are musical myths – and then there's Carlos Kleiber 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OWlQ7xhU1u4>. The conductor – voted last year 
by 100 members of his profession as the greatest of all time, ever, inBBC Music 
Magazine 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/pressoffice/bbcworldwide/worldwidestories/pressreleases/2011/03_march/carlos_kleiber.shtml>
 – was, even before his death in 2004, the embodiment of the enigmatic 
reclusive genius – the maestro who, asHerbert von Karajan 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hwZgaYrxtic> put it, would only conduct when 
his freezer was empty. A thumbnail of the Kleiber myths goes something like 
this: he was the "perfect conducting machine", inGunther Schuller's 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Compleat-Conductor-Gunther-Schuller/dp/0195126610/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1331207309&sr=8-1>
 words, who hardly ever conducted; he was a musical genius who knew the entire 
orchestral and operatic repertoire but only had a tiny selection of pieces he 
ever played in public; he was one of the funniest, most communicative musicians 
who ever lived, but never gave an interview; he was tormented by the ghost of 
his father, the great conductorErich Kleiber 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PiF5glYvfcw>; and he once gave a concert as 
long as his fee was a new Audi A8 with all the trimmings.

There are grains of truth in all of those (the Audi one is definitely true), 
but there's much, much more to Kleiber than the myth-making. At least there is 
now, thanks to Charles Barber's astonishing new book,Corresponding with Carlos: 
A Biography of Carlos Kleiber 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9780810881440/corresponding-with-carlos-a-biography-of-carlos-kleiber>
. Charles had a unique relationship with Kleiber. As a conducting student at 
Stanford University, with dazzling boldness and naivety, he wrote to Kleiber 
out of the blue and said he wanted to study with him. The key was Barber's use 
of humour and irony to attempt to elicit a response from Kleiber – it worked. 
Barber never formally became a student of Kleiber's (nobody ever did), but from 
1989 until the maestro's death, he corresponded with the supposedly unknowable 
Carlos, and as well as vivid account of Kleiber's life, Barber's book publishes 
pretty well the complete letters he received.

And they're a revelation. Kleiber proves as virtuosically funny and 
self-deprecating as he was incandescent on the podium. "The bottom line always 
seems to be: no one on earth can tell you anything accurate or intelligent 
about conductors, least of all musicians, critics, and … CONDUCTORS, including 
yours sincerely. Why? Because all and sundry don't have the faintest, 
including, again, me." The bulk of the exchange centres on the films of the 
great maestros of yesteryear that Barber was collating for his Conductors on 
Film collection, which he sent – 51 video tapes in all – to Kleiber. Carlos's 
responses are fascinating, his letters executing pirouettes of musical and 
literary meaning in nearly every sentence, and each disproving his own maxim 
that he can't say anything meaningful about his life's work. On how listening 
to Duke Ellington gave him the clue about how to conductBeethoven's Coriolan 
Overture <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XJigTHfXK4k>: "The Duke and I whipped 
a downbeat sans upbeat out of nowhere for the start and similar 'starts', 
making it sound like running into a wall at 60mph with a Rolls-Royce, OK?" On 
conducting from memory: "'Doing' a piece 'from memory' is something your Aunt 
Sally would have no trouble with. Knowing exactly what is (supposed to be) 
going on is something, I believe, only [Dimitri] Mitropoulos could honestly 
claim to. With the right band in a good, condescending mood, there'd be no 
audible difference between Sally and Dimitri, if Sally had digested the overall 
ductus." There's also real insight into his way of thinking about music's 
relationship with the world. He lovedEmily Dickinson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2002/oct/19/classicalmusicandopera.poetry>, 
and often quotes her poetry in the letters, saying he was the reincarnation of 
her dog,Carlo <http://www.emilydickinsonmuseum.org/carlo>, and (quixotically, 
but passionately) hatedAbraham Lincoln 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/We-Are-Lincoln-Men-Abraham/dp/0743254708/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1331207721&sr=8-1>
 – something Barber tries and fails to change his mind on.

Above all, Kleiber worked. Hard. The clue to the supposedly mystical power of 
Kleiber's conducting proves not so elusive after all: as Barber's book shows, 
he worked more fastidiously and more intensely when he did conduct than any 
other musician, studying the manuscript, where possible, of every piece he 
played, and listening to every performance he could gets his hands on.

Barber's book does more than any other I know to simultaneously reveal the 
truth behind the Kleiber myths and to illuminate the deeper mystery of how his 
recordings and films continue to have such atalismanic power 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yCaaPaQx5zg>. This is a brilliant summary of 
Kleiber's way of making music, I think: "When he heard a piece in his mind, he 
saw each phrase in all its iterations moving nearer to the originating code of 
conception – perhaps just a single note. His rehearsals operated the same way, 
always moving toward an infinite point of truth just over there, just past the 
visible horizon. And he worked in the opposite direction, simultaneously … When 
he beat the first bar of a great work, in his mind he was already in the last."

Still not a Kleiber convert? Then do as Charles says, and start by watching 
Kleiber conduct a Strauss waltz from one of the twoNew Year's Day concerts 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nIeT9nmJFsw> he conducted with the Vienna 
Philharmonic,Die Libelle <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dunn_2wAs0o>, which is 
a miniature masterclass in, well, virtually all you need to know about great 
conducting; about the poetic, alchemical connection between gesture and sound. 
And then watch his Beethoven symphonies,the Fourth and the Seventh 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8bCWltvBUvA>, with the Concertgebouw – and 
you'll never look back. For the serious Kleiberophile, YouTube has some truly 
amazing things:volodya2 <http://www.youtube.com/user/volodya2> has uploaded 
rare rehearsal footage of him conductingStrauss's Rosenkavalier 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U2evNiuMEEA> in Vienna in 1994, and Wagner's 
Tristan <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZnLyHp6KYZU> in Stuttgart in 1970; and 
the conductor who never gave an interview gives aninterview here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3qydEss4m20>! The only one he ever did do, 
admittedly, but there it is, in German, in all its five minutes of glory. Even 
better, here is the complete film of the terrifyingly powerful performance of
Verdi's Otello <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F0ikcZGM5aw> with Domingo at La 
Scala in 1976; and for good measure here's my personal favourite at the moment: 
his frighteningly movingBrahms's Second Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6aGjNvMUgM> with the Vienna Philharmonic. 
Barber talks about Kleiber as a perfectionist and an ecstatic. If the 
perfectionism was his curse – the impossibly high standards that he felt he 
never truly reached – it's the ecstasy that we're left with. As Barber says: "I 
glory in the fact that he was able to make his miracles at all. Lucky him. 
Lucky, lucky us."
 