
It’s an age-old question in parenting: how to get your children to eat more 
greens? Or indeed, any greens. Or justone pea will do … even if it’s swimming 
in ketchup.

With figures showing that one in 10 British pupils are obese when they start 
primary school and only one in five children eat vegetables every day, the 
issue of how to get kids to eat healthy continues to be fiercely debated. The 
answer, according to obesity campaigner Tam Fry 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-4123130/Bribery-works-paying-children-money-eat-greens-halt-obesity-crisis.html#ixzz4VuRSkR7t>
, is controversial: bribe them with cash. The spokesperson for theNational 
Obesity Forum <http://www.nationalobesityforum.org.uk> suggests that putting 
small amounts of money into a bank account in exchange for a child eating 
greens could be a solution to the obesity crisis.

It’s not the first time bribery – or, if you prefer, a reward system – has 
been touted as a way to combat obesity. In 2016, astudy published in the US 
journal Health Economics 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167629615001368> gave 8,000 
school children25 cents for eating healthily 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/07/15/the-case-for-bribing-your-kids/?utm_term=.c655a59cf4f9>
. The results showed the number of children eating at least one serving of 
fruit or veg doubled. However, psychologists argue that coercion of any kind - 
whether cash in an account or the classic warning to “finish your greens if you 
want ice cream” - can have longstanding negative effects on a child’s 
relationship with food. “As long as we make food ‘healthy’ or ‘good’ food an 
issue we are going to produce anxiety,” says psychotherapist Susie Orbach. “We 
should just eat well when we are hungry.”

For parents who blanch at the thought of exchanging cash for courgettes with 
their children, there’s the exposure method. The Tiny Tastes game isbased on 
University College London research 
<https://www.ucl.ac.uk/news/news-articles/0913/300913-tiny-tastes> that 
revealed that if children tasted a new vegetable at least 10 times, even the 
most reluctant would eat more of it. Launched in partnership with Weight 
Concern in 2013, the £5.99Tiny Tastes pack 
<http://www.weightconcern.org.uk/tinytastes> turns the introduction of 
vegetables into a “fun game” by offering a child a tiny piece of a chosen 
vegetable for 10 days in a row (minimum), with accompanying record charts, 
stickers, and colouring sheets.

In recent years the hidden vegetables industry, encouraging parents to sneak 
veg into meals, has flourished. In the US, companies such asOh Yes Foods 
<http://www.ohyesfoods.com>, which sells pizza loaded with 12 kinds of 
dehydrated, powdered fruit and veg, and Kidfresh, which promises “no more 
battles or headaches at mealtime with your little ones … we bring a fresh twist 
to vegetables: It is as if they were not there,” have sprung up. Entire 
cookbooks, including the likes ofThe Sneaky Chef by Missy Chase Lapine 
<https://www.thesneakychef.com>, are devoted to the pursuit of hiding veg. Even 
Jamie Oliver has a recipe for hidden vegetable pasta sauce.

Such subterfuge is either regarded as a clever, creative response to veg 
rejection or a violation of trust that can only backfire. Basically, if your 
child doesn’t know she is eating sprouts, she still doesn’t really like 
sprouts. Also, it makes sprouts look bad enough to require hiding. “Is broccoli 
really so terrible that it must be concealed from innocent minds?” asks food 
writer Bee Wilson. “A far cleverer thing would be to help children learn to 
become adults who choose vegetables consciously, of their own accord.” The 
question is, how on earth do we do that?
 