
Lord Wolfson’s default setting is caution. So, as shopkeepers across the land 
await the coming squeeze on consumers’ incomes, it is not a surprise to hear 
the chief executive of Nextdrifting closer to outright gloom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/next-shares-2017-inflation-pound-brexit>
.

The slowdown in spending on clothing and footwear, which he says started in 
November 2015, will continue this year. Next’s post-Christmas sale was a flop. 
Inflation is arriving and a weaker pound means prices will have to rise by up 
to 5%. Then there are cost pressures from the “national living wage”, business 
rates, the apprenticeship levy, etc. In short, conditions look rough. Next’s 
profits could fall anywhere between 2% and 14% in the next financial year, 
after a predicted decline of 3.6% in the current period.

Next shares slump after gloomy 2017 forecast and unfestive figures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/next-shares-2017-inflation-pound-brexit>
It would be silly to say the Next empire – expanded spectacularly over the 
past 20 years via the catalogue and online directory business – is crumbling. 
Next may be overreliant on consumer credit – and the clothes may be dowdier 
sincethe departure of the design guru Christos Angelides in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2014/jun/10/next-christos-angelides-abercrombie-replace>
 – but most of the pressures described by Wolfson apply to the majority of 
mass-market clothing retailers.

Pre-tax profits of £792m-ish this year will still mean Next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> makes substantially more profit 
than Marks & Spencer. The company also has less debt than M&S.

Yet there was a detail in Wednesday’s trading update that should alarm the 
Next fanclub. For the time being, Wolfson is giving up on share buy-backs and 
will hand surplus cash – expected to be £255m-£345m – to shareholders via 
special dividends next year.

At other companies, one might applaud the prudence. But Wolfson is the 
acknowledged maestro of the buy-back game. Next buys its shares when they are 
cheap according to a return-on-capital model Wolfson has refined over the 
years; and it refuses to buy when the formula says they are expensive, as when 
the price rose to £81 in late 2015.

The policy sounds like mere common sense, but the logic escapes too many 
companies who buy at any price whenever they have a few quid on hand. The 
relevant point now is that Next no longer stands at £81. AfterWednesday’s 14% 
tumble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/next-shares-2017-inflation-pound-brexit>
, it’s almost at £41. You’d expect Wolfson to be itching to grab a few at 
almost half the old share price. But he’s not. If Next is not buying its shares 
when it can afford to do so, it’s hard to see why others should rush in.

Nothing has been ruled out permanently, it should be said: the statement 
allowed the possibility of buy-backs if trading turns out to be better than 
expected. But the shift in policy – attributed to “the exceptional levels of 
uncertainty in the clothing sector” and the lack of visibility on “the approach 
the UK government will be taking to Brexit” – looks significant. Wolfson is 
saying he doesn’t know how bad things will turn out, or when conditions will 
improve for retailers. Be warned: his forecasting record is strong.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnext-lord-wolfson-buyback-policy-shift-alarm-pessimism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bb5aae07418ed475a85dfb8d5af88a3027c6ec4%2F0_66_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cause%20for%20alarm%20at%20Next%20as%20Wolfson's%20policy%20shift%20betrays%20his%20pessimism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnext-lord-wolfson-buyback-policy-shift-alarm-pessimism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cause%20for%20alarm%20at%20Next%20as%20Wolfson%27s%20policy%20shift%20betrays%20his%20pessimism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnext-lord-wolfson-buyback-policy-shift-alarm-pessimism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bb5aae07418ed475a85dfb8d5af88a3027c6ec4%2F0_66_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 Housebuilding was the main driver behind construction growth and grew at the 
fastest rate since last January. Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images
Word of caution over construction sector’s mini-revival

Still, the construction sector seems more cheerful. In December, it enjoyed 
the fastest growth in new orders in almost a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-construction-industry-growth-new-orders>
, according to the monthly Markit/CIPS survey. Housebuilding led the charge but 
the overall headline index has now been in positive territory for four months 
in a row. The post-referendum pessimism seems to have been overcome. As the 
survey from the manufacturing sector on Tuesday also suggested, a weaker 
sterling seems to have acted as a spur to activity.


Let’s not get carried away, however. There are reasons to treat these findings 
with care. First, the construction sector also reported the steepest rise in 
input costs since April 2011. Those inflationary breezes could yet spell 
trouble in the form of lower profit margins.

Second, the post-Brexit relief rally could turn around once negotiations in 
Brussels start in earnest. The building sector relies heavily on imported 
labour and will not welcome any talk of stiff curbs on immigration.

Third, it’s the service sector – about 75% of the economy – that drives 
broader confidence. News from that quarter arrives on Thursday but a slowdown 
in the overall economic growth in the UK is on the cards for this year, 
according to most forecasts. The construction sector, usually the most 
sensitive part of the economy, would be expected to react, even if the 
chancellor is throwing a few billion quid at new infrastructure and housing.

Fourth, the mini-revival for the construction sector requires context. On the 
Markit reading of 54.2 for December, the sector is roughly halfway between its 
post-referendum low (46) and its expansionary highs of 2014 (65). Improvement 
is very welcome, but you wouldn’t yet call it secure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnext-lord-wolfson-buyback-policy-shift-alarm-pessimism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe27d2225b13cd70253cd78f6e19476678ea2484b%2F0_50_2711_1627%2F2711.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cause%20for%20alarm%20at%20Next%20as%20Wolfson's%20policy%20shift%20betrays%20his%20pessimism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnext-lord-wolfson-buyback-policy-shift-alarm-pessimism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cause%20for%20alarm%20at%20Next%20as%20Wolfson%27s%20policy%20shift%20betrays%20his%20pessimism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnext-lord-wolfson-buyback-policy-shift-alarm-pessimism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe27d2225b13cd70253cd78f6e19476678ea2484b%2F0_50_2711_1627%2F2711.jpg>
 Rex Tillerson. Photograph: Mike Stone/Reuters 
Rex Tillerson’s leaving card

Rex Tillerson, departing boss of ExxonMobil, will receive $180m from the oil 
company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/rex-tillerson-exxon-mobil-retirement-package-secretary-state>
 if he is confirmed as Donald Trump’s secretary of state. The accelerated 
vesting of his stock options is designed to ensure he cuts his ties with 
ExxonMobil, we are told. Really? If someone had just paid you $180m, in 
addition to a decade of multimillion regular pay packages, could you say you 
felt not even a twinge of loyalty?




 