
The City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra this morning ends months of 
speculation and reveals who has been chosen to replace Andris Nelsons as Music 
Director.Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla 
<http://www.rbartists.at/en/dirigenten_dtl.php?id=775> will be the CBSO’s 12th 
chief conductor with effect from September 2016, for an initial three-year 
period.


In Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla it looks like the CBSO have got it exactly right again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/04/mirga-grazinyte-tyla-conductor-cbso-have-got-it-right-again>
The 29-year-old Lithuanian made her debut with the orchestra in July 2015 and 
so impressed musicians, management and audiences alike that she was asked to 
return in January to conduct a specially arranged concert.


Reviewing last month’s performance, Andrew Clements wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/12/cbso-grazinyte-tyla-review-symphony-hall-birmingham>
: “It was easy to understand why she has gone down so well … She communicated 
something wonderfully alive and detailed to the players, [this was] a 
performance with fresh, clear textures and an unswerving sense of shape.”


Gražinytė-Tyla is currently assistant conductor at the Los Angeles Philharmonic
 <http://www.laphil.com/philpedia/mirga-grazinyte-tyla>, where she was a 
Dudamel Fellow in 2012-13, and in July this year becomes the west coast 
orchestra’s associate conductor. She also holds the post of music director of 
theSalzburg Landestheater 
<http://www.salzburger-landestheater.at/en/ensemble/musikalische-leitung.html>, 
in which city she first came to international attention when, in 2012, she won 
the Salzburg festival young conductors award.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd1SFojSAJns&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd1SFojSAJns>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd1SFojSAJns&media=>
Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla discusses her approach to conducting 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d1SFojSAJns> 
Born in Vilnius, Lithuania, she studied in Leipzig, Bologna, Zurich and Graz. 
Among her conducting credits to date are guest appearances with the Gustav 
Mahler Youth Orchestra, the Beethoven Orchestra Bonn, the Danish National 
Symphony Orchestra, Berlin’s Komische Oper and the Kremerata Baltica. Her 2014 
debut with the LA Phil was picked by theNew Yorker’s Alex Ross as one of his 
top 10 performances of the year 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/cultural-comment/ten-notable-performances-recordings-2014>
, acclaiming her “vital and sinewy interpretation” of Mahler’s First.

Writing about a December 2015 concert under her baton, the Los Angeles Times’s 
Mark Swed declared 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/arts/la-et-cm-mirga-la-phil-review-20151212-column.html>
: “The orchestra played as if it were young again,” and as a guest conductor 
with the San Diego Symphony she generated electricity and excitement,wrote 
James Chute of the San Diego Union Tribune 
<http://www.sandiegouniontribune.com/news/2015/dec/05/san-diego-symphony-mirga-review/>
. “But the most remarkable thing about [her] is... her rare combination of 
excitement, focus, precision and intellect. Add to that her podium presence and 
the fluidity of her approach, and you have a rare talent.”

Not just a cute girl on a podium: how to get more women conducting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/10/how-to-get-more-women-conducting-morley-college-alice-farnham>
A committee of CBSO musicians, board members and management made the unanimous 
decision to invite Gražinytė-Tyla to be the orchestra’s music director. 
Nelsons, who stepped down in 2015, held the position for seven years. “My time 
with the orchestra will always be very special to me and I am sure Mirga will 
also be inspired by the wonderful musical family of the CBSO,” he said.

Chief executive Stephen Maddock said: “There was an instant chemistry between 
Mirga and our musicians, and the excitement in Symphony Hall at her concerts 
both on stage and in the audience was palpable … Mirga is thrilling audiences 
wherever she goes: we can’t wait to start making music with her.”

Moritz Pfister <https://cbso.co.uk/profile/moritz-pfister>, the orchestra’s 
principal second violin, agreed. “She’s a very popular choice – it will put a 
big smile on our faces. She’s very musical, and also extremely expressive. The 
two concerts we did with her were really exciting.

“She has a clear idea of what she wants, but at the same time she’s very 
receptive to what the orchestra has to offer and she reacts to that. She has a 
very natural authority – from the minute she came on stage she was convincing. 
It’s great news for us as an orchestra and for the arts generally in the 
Midlands. I don’t want to put too much weight on her shoulders, but I have a 
good feeling about this.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fcbso-appoints-mirga-grazinyte-tyla-music-director-birmingham-symphony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c220d3bb10fbcd0f239d119cf75b13c12840c5e%2F0_210_4729_2837%2F4729.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=CBSO%20appoints%2029-year-old%20Mirga%20Gra%C5%BEinyt%C4%97-Tyla%20as%20music%20director&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fcbso-appoints-mirga-grazinyte-tyla-music-director-birmingham-symphony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=CBSO%20appoints%2029-year-old%20Mirga%20Gra%C5%BEinyt%C4%97-Tyla%20as%20music%20director&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fcbso-appoints-mirga-grazinyte-tyla-music-director-birmingham-symphony%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c220d3bb10fbcd0f239d119cf75b13c12840c5e%2F0_210_4729_2837%2F4729.jpg>
 ‘Thrilling’ … there’s a sense of excitement at Birmingham Symphony Hall. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Full details of her opening season with the orchestra will be announced in 
April, but look certain to include opera andchoral projects 
<https://youtu.be/Y6BIJCEVuFo?t=1m32s> with the CBSO’s chorus director Simon 
Halsey as well as a wide range of orchestral repertoire from Mozart and Haydn 
to today’s living composers.

Gražinytė-Tyla said: “I felt so at ease working with the CBSO, and I can’t 
wait to get started. Every single musician in the orchestra is an artist with 
great individuality and sense of responsibility. They are driven to be one of 
the world’s leading orchestras and their shared spirit for teamwork helps them 
achieve this. I am also very excited about working with the CBSO family, 
including its brilliant choirs … and getting involved with its learning and 
participation programme.

“I believe we will be a great team, and look forward to making music together.”
 