
Brangelina might be over, but Tom Hanks’s un-showy union with Rita Wilson is 
still going strong after 28 years. The actor would seem to be the ideal fame 
deity to bless anyone’s nuptials, and so it proved for one couple having their 
post-wedding photos taken in Central Park last weekend. Hanks was jogging past 
andstopped to wish them all the best 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-37487360>; the photos soon went 
viral on Instagram.

Celebrity <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> 
wedding-crashing seems to have become more frequent of late. But would you want 
just any famous person to headline your big day? Here are some recent 
highlights – and lowlights – and how welcome their interventions might have 
been.

Serena Williams



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcelebrity-wedding-crashers-from-tom-hanks-to-taylor-swift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c9fc1cae8ea88b09c2207a2898e486f395699d2%2F0_0_970_943%2F970.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrity%20wedding-crashers%3A%20from%20Tom%20Hanks%20to%20Taylor%20Swift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcelebrity-wedding-crashers-from-tom-hanks-to-taylor-swift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrity%20wedding-crashers%3A%20from%20Tom%20Hanks%20to%20Taylor%20Swift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcelebrity-wedding-crashers-from-tom-hanks-to-taylor-swift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c9fc1cae8ea88b09c2207a2898e486f395699d2%2F0_0_970_943%2F970.jpg>
 Serena Williams crashes a wedding on Miami beach. Photograph: 
serenawillimas/instagram 
In 2014, Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> 
was on a Miami Beach stroll with tennis friendCaroline Wozniacki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/caroline-wozniacki>. Days earlier, Wozniacki 
had been dumped by fianceRory McIlroy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rory-mcilroy>, who had confessed that the 
moment the invitations had gone out, he hadrealised he wasn’t ready for marriage
 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2634873/Golfer-Rory-McIlroy-breaks-engagement-tennis-player-Caroline-Wozniacki-days-sent-wedding-invitations-not-ready-marriage.html>
. But that still didn’t stop Williams frominvading a beach wedding 
<http://www.people.com/article/serena-williams-crashes-wedding-miami-beach-photo>
, to pose with the bride in a leopard-print swimsuit.

Welcome rating: 7

Gary Barlow
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlBfbwoTJuf4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlBfbwoTJuf4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlBfbwoTJuf4&media=>
After one fan used the hashtag campaign #getgary2louswedding 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2619912/Gary-Barlow-makes-number-one-fans-dream-come-true-surprise-performance-wedding-day.html>
 to get Gary to crash Louise Newman’s wedding in 2014, Barlow announced that he 
wanted to sing at three more fans’ weddings in 2015. Cue thousands of requests, 
culminating in surprise gigs in Oxfordshire, Old Windsor and Liverpool. If 
nothing else it was at least therapeutic for Barlow, whointrospected 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-34238933>: “What started out as just a 
bit of fun turned into something much more meaningful and amazing.”

Welcome rating: 5

Taylor Swift
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcelebrity-wedding-crashers-from-tom-hanks-to-taylor-swift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41d21588921759b5e2fa67bf50efe0fadfa01129%2F0_0_1080_1080%2F1080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrity%20wedding-crashers%3A%20from%20Tom%20Hanks%20to%20Taylor%20Swift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcelebrity-wedding-crashers-from-tom-hanks-to-taylor-swift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrity%20wedding-crashers%3A%20from%20Tom%20Hanks%20to%20Taylor%20Swift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcelebrity-wedding-crashers-from-tom-hanks-to-taylor-swift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41d21588921759b5e2fa67bf50efe0fadfa01129%2F0_0_1080_1080%2F1080.jpg>
 Taylor Swift crashes the wedding of Max Singer and Kenya Smith. Photograph: 
taylorswift/instagram 



As even Swift’s own romantic relationships are dismissed as fake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/19/tom-hiddlestone-taylor-swift-match-made-in-heaven-pr-stunt>
, the term “Swiftian” takes on a new meaning when you consider the emotional 
dynamics of her turning up “spontaneously” at the wedding of a New Jersey fan 
this summer. The marriage itself had taken place a few days earlier, in the 
hospital room of the groom’s dying mother, where the pair had slow-danced to 
Swift’sBlank Space <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e-ORhEE9VVg>. Cue Swift 
popping up at the wedding 
<http://www.brides.com/blogs/aisle-say/2016/06/taylor-swift-wedding-crasher-dj-tells-all.html>
 to open her set with that song.

Welcome rating: 8

Snoop Dogg
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcelebrity-wedding-crashers-from-tom-hanks-to-taylor-swift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F833291fcb12f50132f34259cba1d2b9bb47ba979%2F23_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrity%20wedding-crashers%3A%20from%20Tom%20Hanks%20to%20Taylor%20Swift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcelebrity-wedding-crashers-from-tom-hanks-to-taylor-swift%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrity%20wedding-crashers%3A%20from%20Tom%20Hanks%20to%20Taylor%20Swift&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcelebrity-wedding-crashers-from-tom-hanks-to-taylor-swift%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F833291fcb12f50132f34259cba1d2b9bb47ba979%2F23_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Snoop Dogg crashes a Hindu wedding. Photograph: snoopdogg/instagram 



“He’s the bride’s mother’s favourite rapper,” is a phrase that will make many 
feel older than time, but news of that generational shift seems to have been 
the chief takeaway from Snoop’s decision to crash a Hindu wedding at the Hard 
Rock Hotel 
<https://www.americanbazaaronline.com/2014/09/12/rapper-snoop-dogg-attends-hindu-wedding-chicago-gate-crash-style/>
 in Chicago in 2014. Snoop was there ahead of a performance at the North Coast 
Music Festival, and, spotted by the photographer, was wrangled into the room by 
an overexcited Mrs Ghadiali.

Welcome rating: 9

Justin Bieber
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6AIEXSo4NIg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6AIEXSo4NIg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6AIEXSo4NIg&media=>



Is enjoying the music of Justin Bieber a clear sign you’re not ready for 
marriage? “I was actually wiping cake off my face,” the mis-named groom Rob 
McCool recounted. “So to seeJustin Bieber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/justin-bieber> was just a surreal 
experience.” Bieber had been strolling past McCool’s wedding venue in Malibu 
withSelena Gomez <https://www.theguardian.com/film/selena-gomez> when he heard 
a karaoke version of his own pedant-terrorising hitOne Less Lonely Girl 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LXUSaVw3Mvk> being belted out, and decided to 
improve on it <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6AIEXSo4NIg>. Incredibly, the 
bride’s teenage cousin singing it was a super-fan who’d previously met the 
pool-eyed pop mooner on the Ellen DeGeneres Show.

Welcome rating: 4

Maroon 5
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN6LDslTbW8o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN6LDslTbW8o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN6LDslTbW8o&media=>
Some wedding crashers straddle that awkward line between abstract fame and 
facial identifiability. Anyone who followed schlock-funk in the noughties will 
know ofMaroon 5 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/maroon-5>. But could you 
pick singer Adam Levine out of a police lineup? Regardless, in 2015 the band 
enlistedWedding Crashers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/107105/wedding.crashers> director David 
Dobkin to use several real-life LA weddings as a backdrop to their new video, 
with only the grooms being in on the crash. “Honey, Maroon 5 are going to play 
a song no one knows from ten years past their peak, and do it twice because the 
director wants to be able to cut between different angles”? Maybe it’s best 
they didn’t tell the bride.

Welcome rating: 3 
 