
The big “what ifs” of music are mostly to do with loss. What if Mozart had not 
died young, Beethoven had kept his hearing,Chausson 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b9/A-Ernest_Chausson.jpg> 
hadn’t ridden that bicycle into a wall? Occasionally a chance gain, if of a 
more isolated kind, grips our imagination. Had the Hungarian composer Zoltán 
Kodály (1882-1967) not been medically unfit for military service in the first 
world war, one of the greatest modern works for solo cello, his Sonata Op 8, 
might never have been written.

Alban Gerhardt <http://albangerhardt.com/> played this three-movement epic as 
part of a spirited launch event forCello Unwrapped 
<http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/cello-unwrapped#.WHevJNd4X9I>, the latest, 
ambitious year-long series of the kind Kings Place favours. With the main 
hall’s seating capacity only around 400, big concerto repertoire is out. Here 
is a chance, generously taken, to delve wider, deeper, more intimately. If your 
interest is to trace this most soulful instrument’s history, from coarse bass 
violin to poetic musical orator, you can: the programming of the year’s 45 
concerts could hardly be more diverse, inside and outside the western 
tradition, embracing tango and electronics, Indian and mainstream classical. 
Instruction is only an add-on: concerts of musical coherence are the 
imperative. Bach is always there at the heart, his six unaccompanied suites a 
shapeshifting presence across the entire series (with the special draw of that 
ever great exponentDavid Watkin <http://www.davidwatkin.com/>, exploring these 
work, and the art of continuo playing, across theweekend of 22-23 April 
<http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/whats-on/cello-unwrapped-the-core-of-continuo>).

One reason the choice of Kodály was so apt is its panoramic, sweeping view of 
the instrument’s capabilities. The sonata, written in 1915 but slow to become 
popular, encompasses a universe of sounds and styles. Baroque and folk 
traditions collide, not least in the “mistuning” – scordatura – of two strings, 
giving an earthy strangeness to the harmonies. Kodály revels in the sonic 
mimicking of zither, bagpipes and shepherd’s pipe, and draws on Hungarian 
funeral songs and military marches. Enormous spread chords and multiple trills, 
among other technical demands that send fingers and rosin flying, make it 
exhilarating, and surely exhausting, to perform.

Gerhardt plays an instrument by one of the great Venetian makers – a 1710 
Goffriller 
<http://stringsmagazine.com/alban-gerhardt-on-his-1710-goffriller-cello/> – and 
matches rich tone with control and restraint. He grew up in a musical family: 
his mother a coloratura soprano, his father a violinist in the Berlin 
Philharmonic, his brother a guitarist. All those influences, from the song-like 
lyricism to the silvered harmonics in the highest register and the extended 
plucked accompaniments – right hand bowing, left hand fingers making the melody 
and strumming the supporting chords – came together in a breathtaking 
performance.
 Alban Gerhardt removes his broken string before his Kings Place encore. 
Photograph: Nick Rutter 
This Berlin-born cellist had already been a generous soloist with Aurora 
Orchestra <http://www.auroraorchestra.com/> in Britten’s Cello Suite No 1 
(Canto primo), Vivaldi’s Cello Concerto in B minor, RV 424 and, elegantly and 
lyrically, in Tchaikovsky’s Rococo Variations. Gerhardt’s wry smile and 
occasional asides, as well as his technical mastery, meant he was well prepared 
for that ultimate string player’s nightmare: a broken string. With barely a 
moment’s pause he swapped instruments with the Aurora’s principal cellist and 
continued to the end with aplomb. Aurora, conducted byNicholas Collon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/06/facing-the-music-conductor-nicholas-collon>
, were impeccable accompanists, and caught fire in their own showpiece moments: 
Ravel’s Le tombeau de Couperin and Stravinsky’s Pulcinella Suite (1949 
version). Both composers harness the past to the shocking and new in these 
compact, incisive works.
 Christophe Coin at Kings Place. Photograph: Sophia Evans for the Observer 
Cello Unwrapped’s second evening captured an entirely different mood. The 
French cellistChristophe Coin <http://styriarte.com/en/artists/christophe-coin/>
 founded the Quatuor Mosaïques, a string quartet specialising in period 
performance. Coin uses little vibrato and plays without using an end pin, 
meaning the cello must be supported between the knees, an even more intimate 
relationship to the body than the usual dance-partner proximity of a modern 
cello (so brilliantly conveyed in that most celebrated of paintings of cellists,
Madame Suggia <http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/john-madame-suggia-n04093> 
by Augustus John). The resulting tone quality, helped by gut rather than steel 
strings, is firm and strong yet mysterious and elusive.

Opening with a ricercar <http://www.classical-music.com/article/what-ricercar> 
by Domenico Gabrielli (1659-90), Coin played Bach’s Cello Suite No 2 in D minor 
and, switching from baroque bow to classical then Romantic, played unfamiliar 
short works – no doubt favourite fare for cellists but new to me – by 
Dall’Abaco, Romberg and Battanchon. As a majestic finale this imaginative 
player used a five-stringed piccolo cello for Bach’s Suite No 6 in D major. 
Paradoxically the work’s symphonic splendour and challenging double stoppings, 
which can sound rasping, especially in the two gavottes, took on fresh grandeur 
and expansive ease. Did Bach write the suite for this kind of instrument? No 
one knows for sure. Christophe Coin put an ardent case.

 * Cello Unwrapped continues at Kings Place, London throughout 2017 
<http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/cello-unwrapped#.WHssdJJundS> Cello Unwrapped 
trailer. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MDrpj3-Ssxg>  