
In China, there is a phenomenon called the dingzihu, or the “nail house”. 
Dingzihu are real estate hold-outs: homes of people refusing compensation from 
corporations or mandatory acquisition by the government in order to make way 
for development. Their houses stand stark amid the mud and rubble of the 
construction site: isolated by deep trenches; flanked by bitumen and concrete; 
shadowed by a network of overpasses. A shack stands awkwardly by the entrance 
to a shiny mall forecourt. A tiny cottage with a vegetable patch blocks the 
path of traffic on a freeway. In some cases, whole apartment blocks are 
demolished, save for a single sliver of plaster and brick, ragged walls 
trailing loose wires.

Visually striking and eminently newsworthy, the dingzihu phenomenon has 
received a significant amount of media coverage in China and around the world. 
After all, tenacious residents hold out against isolation from amenities, 
sabotage, harassment, extortion attempts, assaults and enormous political 
pressure. When, in 2007,a three-year conflict between developers and a woman 
named Wu Ping in Chongqing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/apr/03/china.jonathanwatts>made 
international news, the Chinese government banned local media outlets from 
reporting on the story. Yet polls of the Chinese public showed overwhelming 
support for Wu, and bloggers around the country championed the case as an 
example of ordinary people standing up for their rights against the increasing 
power of big business. The house was eventually demolished after Wu and the 
developers finally reached a settlement. Nevertheless, pictures of Wu’s house, 
perched on a mound of land surrounded by 17-metre deep excavation, are still 
some of the most recognisabledingzihu images on the internet.

'Nail' house flattened after three-year row
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/apr/03/china.jonathanwatts>
Nail houses illuminate the great power divide between rich and poor. They are 
the literal concrete manifestation of defiance in the name of the personal, of 
the intimate. Their stubborn presence is a thorn in the side of corporate 
logic, a middle finger to the dominance of the market over every aspect of our 
lives. China is not the only place where real estate hold-outs result in 
strange anomalies in the cityscape. In the US in 2006,Edith Macefield’s Seattle 
home became famous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/09/up-house-seattle-pixar-edith-macefield>
 when she refused a $1m offer for her 108-year-old farmhouse. She died there in 
2008, aged 86, the house flanked on three sides by concrete walls that dwarfed 
her modest home. At Victoria University in Melbourne, where I worked, car parks 
have slowly swallowed entire blocks of residential properties save for one or 
two isolated outposts; in one case, a house, a shed and a garden surrounded on 
three sides by a vast concrete wasteland, divvied up for hire at $10 an hour. 
Handwritten signs hang on the fence, chastising users for noise, rubbish, 
graffiti. Part of me can’t imagine who would want to continue to live with such 
inhospitable surroundings – a sentiment I’m sure developers exploit as often as 
possible – but another part of me thinks, if this place were the product of my 
hard labour, if this was where I had made my home, I probably wouldn’t want to 
leave it either.

The idea of home is as nebulous as it is material. It is, on one hand, a 
physical space with a practical function: a demarcated area, cordoned off from 
others; a composition of the material possessions a person accumulates 
throughout their life; a place to cook, clean, care, eat and sleep. At the same 
time, it is a sensibility, an ideal: a feeling of sanctuary, comfort, 
belonging, knowledge and familiarity. It is both the product of labour and its 
opposite; a place of rest and retreat, and a constant project. Home doesn’t 
have positive connotations for everyone, of course, but the compassionate among 
us understand that itshould: that everyone has the right to feel safe and warm, 
to take shelter from the weather, to feel we belong, to be surrounded by what 
and whom we love. This nexus of place and sensibility is more than the sum of 
its parts. Home, regardless of where we locate it, is fundamentally in dialogue 
with our sense of identity, with how we orient ourselves in the world.

The emotional labour that goes into creating a home is essentially at odds 
with the market while simultaneously being exploited by it. Because to develop 
the sensibility, one must first have the place. A sensibility cannot be 
auctioned off to the highest bidder but a piece of land, a house, an apartment, 
a tin shed, even a promise – these are things on which you can put a price tag. 
And what better inducement for people to trade away the product of years of 
labour than the security of our very sense of self?

When we talk about making a home, we talk of putting down roots, a metaphor 
for permanence, for the best possible situation in which a being may not simply 
survive but thrive. A seed can travel on the wind for years before it finds 
ground fertile enough to support its growth and development, and allow it to 
expand, flower and bear fruit. Touproot oneself is fraught with risk; roots are 
delicate things, and not everyone copes well with an abrupt change in the 
fundamental conditions of their existence.

Coalition-led inquiry into housing affordability returns zero recommendations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/coalition-led-inquiry-into-housing-affordability-returns-zero-recommendations>
It suits developers and property moguls to have a perpetually transient 
population. It allows them to hike up rents, to sell and resell with increasing 
profit margins. Rental prices have been going up in Australia for years and the 
cost of purchasing property has risen sharply in real terms. That political 
dialogue so often references the “great Australian dream” – that baby-boomer 
cliche, the fundamentally anglo-capitalist, patriarchal stereotype of the 
quarter-acre block with its single-story house, a Hills Hoist and a picket 
fence, inhabited by a heterosexual couple and their three blond children – is a 
particularly cruel taunt to those of us who can neither see anything of 
ourselves in such an image nor have the means to make it so even if we wanted 
to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcents-and-sensibility-the-cost-and-meaning-of-owning-your-own-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb42f786180745abdc9244c1ece3845f217bd6307%2F0_101_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cents%20and%20sensibility%3A%20the%20cost%20and%20meaning%20of%20owning%20your%20own%20home%20%7C%20Stephanie%20Convery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcents-and-sensibility-the-cost-and-meaning-of-owning-your-own-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cents%20and%20sensibility%3A%20the%20cost%20and%20meaning%20of%20owning%20your%20own%20home%20%7C%20Stephanie%20Convery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fcents-and-sensibility-the-cost-and-meaning-of-owning-your-own-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb42f786180745abdc9244c1ece3845f217bd6307%2F0_101_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Wu Ping’s ‘nail house’ in Chongqing, China. ‘Their stubborn presence is a 
thorn in the side of corporate logic, a middle finger to the dominance of the 
market over every aspect of our lives.’ Photograph: AP 
A friend of mine works in native title, helping Indigenous communities in 
Queensland – with whom she often has family ties – reclaim some sliver of the 
land their ancestors knew intimately, cared for and shaped over tens of 
thousands of years, and violently wrenched from them over the past two and a 
half centuries. I think of them when I look at those pictures of nail houses: 
there is a shared sense of defiance, a refusal to countenance the idea that a 
dollar value could or should be placed on what we call home, and an 
understanding that places and people interact in ways that transcend the crude 
mercantile system under which we live. But that crude mercantile system is the 
precise reason why for many, a permanent home is something perpetually out of 
reach.

In the streets of Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>, increasing numbers of 
homeless people set up camp. Semi-permanent living arrangements involving 
trolleys, clothes, mattresses, milk crates, boxes and blankets now populate 
sheltered corners and disused alcoves across the city. Support networks are 
overwhelmed and yet continually defunded. People sit on public housing waiting 
lists for anywhere between nine months and 10 years.

'Lying in wait for your next chapter': the Sydney real estate nightmare | Paul 
Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/lying-in-wait-for-your-next-chapter-the-sydney-real-estate-nightmare>
The house in which I lived until recently (I have moved, on average, once 
every 18 months since I left my parents’ house) is wearing around the edges. 
One of the stairs and a number of fixtures are broken. Some of the locks don’t 
work. The carpet is old and worn. There is water damage in a number of rooms. 
The walls are so thin I heard every move my neighbours make. (Home, I often 
think these days, would be the place where I can always find silence.) If the 
house had been mine – if I didn’t know that I would have likely be gone in a 
year – I would have fixed it. But to make this placehome would be to pour 
emotional labour into a fantasy.

I don’t have children. My debts are not insurmountable. But two-thirds of my 
income goes on rent and it is a good month when I can save more than $150. If I 
could, theoretically, put that aside every month, in a couple of decades I 
might have scraped together enough for a deposit on a very small apartment. But 
there’s no chance of that when one needs to save for things as simple as a 
visit to the doctor, or a new coat for winter. The fact that I will probably be 
the recipient of my parents’ assets after their deaths – a proposition often 
floated by way of excusing the children of boomers from having a material stake 
in the discussion of systemic poverty – is neither comforting nor even certain: 
I am one of five children; my parents may yet live until I am 60; their assets 
may be diminished by the costs of aged care, or medical bills, or one of the 
myriad things that can bring the moderately comfortable to heel quickly. Their 
existence gives me a safety net for now but inheritance is not a solution to a 
world structured against the interests of the many. And there is no comfort in 
the prospect of financial security contingent upon profound grief.

In particularly unbecoming moments, I find myself looking forward to the 
property market crash, that great leveller of economic shocks, when the 
charlatans and financiers – those to whom other people’s lives are as 
insignificant as pieces on a Monopoly board – finally find themselves on the 
breadline with the rest of us. Part of me thinks, maybe I’ll be OK. But then I 
think about the prospect of still packing those damn cardboard boxes every 18 
months when I’m 80, of hauling the ephemera of my life around on crooked knees 
from one cold, shabby apartment to another, of wondering how the hell one can 
possibly afford to rent on the current aged pension, and I flash between 
profound depression and righteous, white-hot rage.

Scathing report damns Abbott’s handling of East West Link funds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/14/scathing-report-damns-abbotts-handling-of-east-west-link-funds>
When the drilling began for the now-shelved East West Link 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/14/scathing-report-damns-abbotts-handling-of-east-west-link-funds>
, in which hundreds of homes were compulsorily acquired by the Napthine 
Coalition government despite widespread public opposition, communities in the 
affected areas campaigned hard. They leafleted and conducted meetings; they 
disrupted drilling sites; they chained themselves to machinery; they physically 
prevented the construction work from being carried out. They were more than 
simply tenacious owners ofdingzihu; they fought for a vision of a better 
community: one built on sustainability and an intrinsic respect for the places 
people make their homes.

My great aunt Patty lived until she was 93 and was lucky enough to remain in 
the house she’d made home for more than 40 years. She died surrounded by the 
things she loved: books, exquisite china objects – tea cups, vases, ornaments – 
and a garden full of fantastically wild rose bushes, and narcissus that broke 
through the winter frosts in bursts of colour. Among the things I inherited was 
a small paper bag of bulbs that she had set aside for the summer. I still carry 
those bulbs with me from rental to rental, squeezing them into plastic pots and 
balcony window boxes where I can, and wait for the day when I am lucky enough 
to have my own patch of earth in which to plant them.

• This is an edited extract from the summer issue of Meanjin, out now (RRP 
$24.99, eBook $9.99)



 