
Ángel Di María’s stoppage-time goal spared Paris Saint-Germain an embarrassing 
defeat but the 2-2 draw at home toLudogorets was not enough to prevent Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> from winning Group A.

PSG needed a home win against the unheralded Bulgarian side to guarantee first 
place but the Dutch forward Virgil Misidjan put the visitors ahead in the 15th 
minute and the Brazilian Wanderson made it 2-1 in the 68th, shortly after 
Edinson Cavani had levelled for PSG with an overhead kick.

Arsenal finish as group winners after Lucas Pérez hits hat-trick in Basel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/basel-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
It was left to the former Manchester United winger Di María to save face for 
the French champions, but Ludogorets at least secured third place and a spot in 
the Europa League.Arsenal’s 4-1 win at Basel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/basel-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 secured them top spot.

Lionel Messi opened the scoring in Barcelona’s 4-0 win over Borussia 
Mönchengladbach, but he fell short of matching Cristiano Ronaldo’s goal record 
in the group stage of the competition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchampions-league-roundup-angel-di-maria-saves-psg-ludogorets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00f86410b80776bce9125d61f9e4416fc6ba7d00%2F0_102_3261_1957%2F3261.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20roundup%3A%20%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%E2%80%99s%20late%20goal%20is%20not%20enough%20for%20PSG&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchampions-league-roundup-angel-di-maria-saves-psg-ludogorets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20roundup%3A%20%C3%81ngel%20Di%20Mar%C3%ADa%E2%80%99s%20late%20goal%20is%20not%20enough%20for%20PSG&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchampions-league-roundup-angel-di-maria-saves-psg-ludogorets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00f86410b80776bce9125d61f9e4416fc6ba7d00%2F0_102_3261_1957%2F3261.jpg>
 Lionel Messi celebrates scoring the opening goal against Borussia 
Mönchengladbach. Photograph: David Ramos/Getty Images 
Messi struck his 10th group-stage goal this season, one less than the 11 
netted by Ronaldo with Real Madrid last season to set the record. Arda Turan 
scored a hat-trick forBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>
, who had already secured first place in Group C and were without Neymar and 
Ivan Rakitic because of suspensions. Coach Luis Enrique also rested striker 
Luis Suárez.

Manchester City were already assured of second place before their 1-1 draw at 
home toCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/manchester-city-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
.

Patrick Roberts goal earns brave Celtic a draw at lacklustre Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/manchester-city-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
Robert Lewandowski curled in a spectacular free-kick to give Bayern Munich a 
1-0 win over last season’s finalistsAtlético Madrid, with both teams having 
already qualified. Bayern’s win stretched their record to 15 straightChampions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> home victories 
and ended Atlético’s hopes of winning all six group matches. Atlético, however, 
still finished top of Group D.

Napoli won 2-1 at Benfica, both teams progressing to the knockout stage after 
Besiktas fell to an extraordinary 6-0 thrashing at Dynamo Kyiv. Substitute 
Dries Mertens, who had scored two goals in the 4-2 win againstBenfica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> in Italy, changed the Group B 
match after coming on as a substitute. The Belgium international set up the 
opener for José Callejon on the hour mark before securing the win in the 79th 
as Napoli topped their Champions League group for the first time.

It was meant to be a battle to advance at Estadio da Luz but it turned out to 
be a shootout for top spot as Besiktas collapsed in Ukraine.
 