
1) Manchester City v Monaco



First leg 21 Feb Second leg 15 Mar

Pep Guardiola will be content with this draw, but Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> are among the most exciting sides 
in Europe and perhaps the most underrated team in the competition.

Leonardo Jardim has created an exciting side who have scored an incredible 53 
goals in 17 Ligue 1 matches. Although Monaco share the goals around 
impressively, it is notable that Radamel Falcao has found his shooting boots 
again, scoring five goals in Monaco’s past two games. They are also tactically 
flexible, able to play both 4-4-2 or 4-2-3-1 effectively, as they demonstrated 
with 2-1 victories home and away against Tottenham Hotspur in the group stage.

City will start as strong favourites, although Monaco is a tough place to go – 
despite, or maybe because of, the famous lack of atmosphere.

Prediction Manchester City

Champions League final: Ronaldo ‘had feeling’ he would score winner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/29/champions-league-final-ronaldo-feeling-winner>
2) Real Madrid v Napoli

First leg 15 Feb Second leg 7 Mar

These sides have not met since the days of Diego Maradona. The European 
championsReal Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> are 
likely to keep up their impressive recent record in the competition: after six 
years of being eliminated at this stage between 2005 and 2010, they have 
reached at least the semi-finals for the past six seasons, triumphing twice.

Napoli’s main goalscoring threat will come from the former Real winger José 
Callejón, their top goalscorer – he cuts in dangerously from wide positions and 
is a clinical finisher. Dries Mertens and Lorenzo Insigne also offer 
unpredictable movement, while the centre-forward Arkadiusz Milik should return 
from injury in time for this tie.

Real are a strong side, however – better than last season in terms of 
organisation, and still brilliant on the counter-attack.

Prediction Real Madrid

3) Benfica v Borussia Dortmund

First leg 14 Feb Second leg 8 Mar

Two European champions meet for the first time in more than half a century. 
Benfica are a decent side, and while the coach Rui Vitoria is yet to fully 
demonstrate his tactical acumen in continental competition, Benfica caused
Bayern Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> a fright in 
the competition last season, narrowly defeated 3-2 on aggregate at this stage. 
The Argentinian attacking midfielder Eduardo Salvio has been their stand‑out 
performer in the competition this season, managing three goals and two assists, 
and rounded off a brilliant passing move to open the scoring in the 2-1 derby 
victory against Sporting Sunday.

Dortmund are a thrilling side, though – Thomas Tuchel has created a flexible, 
fast-paced team, and the talents of Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, Osumane Dembélé 
and the returning Marco Reus could overwhelmBenfica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica>.

Prediction Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund>

Arsenal better set for deep run in Champions League, says Arsène Wenger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/12/arsenal-champions-league-arsene-wenger-psg>
4) Bayern v Arsenal

First leg 15 Feb Second leg 7 Mar

These two clubs will face one another for the seventh and eighth times in the 
past five seasons. Bayern eliminatedArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> at this stage in both 2012-13 
and 2013-14.

However, the German club are probably weaker now. Although they top the 
Bundesliga, they are still a work in progress under their new manager, Carlo 
Ancelotti, and lost against bothAtlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> and FC Rostov in the 
group stage, also falling to a 1-0 defeat at Dortmund in the Bundesliga.

Arsenal appear more organised and tactically intelligent this season, while 
the use of Alexis Sánchez up front provides more dynamism. Their task for the 
first leg in Munich is ensuring they remain in the tie, and the second leg is 
not simply a familiar exercise in saving face.

Prediction Bayern Munich

5) Porto v Juventus

First leg 22 Feb Second leg 14 Mar

Juventus are probably being underrated – they are only seventh favourite for 
the competition – and this is a favourable draw for Max Allegri’s side. Capable 
of playing with a three-man defence, a four-man defence and a hybrid system 
that can catch out opponents, they have more goal threat after the summer 
arrival of Gonzalo Higuaín, who is still seeking to prove he can deliver in big 
games.

Porto are, as ever, a slick passing team offering plenty of width, and they 
have added another dimension to their play with André Silva, a rare prolific 
Portuguese centre-forward, managing nine goals in 13 league games this season, 
and another two in Europe. It remains to be seen whetherPorto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/porto> can frustrate superior opponents, 
though.

Prediction Juventus

6) Bayer Leverkusen v Atlético

First leg 21 Feb Second leg 15 Mar

These sides met at this stage two years ago, both winning 1-0 at home before 
Atlético triumphed on penalties. Tactically, this might be one of the most 
fascinating ties, with both sides extremely well organised and particularly 
clever in their pressing. Atlético’s style is suited to European competition 
and Diego Simeone might prioritise theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> with his side seemingly 
out of the Liga title race. The goalkeeper Jan Oblak and the centre‑back Diego 
Godín are among the best in Europe, while Yannick Carrasco, Kevin Gameiro and 
Antoine Griezmann provide tremendous pace up front.

Leverkusen are based around the goal‑poaching of Javier Hernández, but with 
Hakan Calhanoglu’s creativity and dead‑ball expertise, and a combative, mobile 
midfield, this could be a great contest.

Prediction Atlético Madrid

Juventus 1-3 Barcelona | Champions League final match report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/06/barcelona-juventus-luis-suarez>
7) PSG v Barcelona

First leg 14 Feb Second leg 8 Mar

Another repeat – these sides played twice in 2012-13 and four times in 
2014‑15, with Barcelona rampant in the quarter-final two years ago,winning 5-1 
on aggregate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/21/barcelona-paris-saint-germain-champions-league-match-report>
.

Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> have not been at 
their best this season, and their midfield passing has been 
uncharacteristically poor. They are more dependent than ever upon Lionel Messi, 
Neymar and Luis Suárez for moments of magic – but they rarely have quiet games.

PSG are struggling in Ligue 1, four points off the pace – which might not 
sound disastrous, but it is a significant decline considering they won the 
title last season by a ludicrous 31 points. Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s departure 
means the inconsistent Edinson Cavani leads the line. Marco Verratti, 
meanwhile, is the type of midfielder Barcelona should be looking to sign.

Prediction Barcelona

8) Sevilla v Leicester City

First leg 22 Feb Second leg 14 Mar

This could be brilliant – heavy pressing against counter-attack. The Sevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> manager, Jorge Sampaoli has 
taken his side to third in La Liga with a young, dynamic and cohesive side 
capable of truly wonderful football. The Italian midfielder Franco Vazquez has 
been particularly exciting, while Samir Nasri has also thrived and the former 
Blackburn and Stoke midfielder Steven N’Zonzi plays a solid midfield role for 
the club who have won three consecutive Europa League titles.

Leicester’s league form has been patchy, but their Champions League 
performances have largely been excellent, while the weekend thrashing of
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> showed 
Riyad Mahrez and Jamie Vardy have not lost their touch. Sevilla will have most 
of the ball, but Leicester can cause an upset.

Prediction Leicester City
 