
Arsenal

To top the group for once and still get drawn against the German champions who 
somehow managed to come second in their group is typicalArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal>. But you have to beat the big 
guns at some point, so we might as well start straight away – not that I think 
any unseeded team would have feared being drawn against us. We haven’t done 
anything to make Europe stand up and take note.

Our history of brittleness in the knockout stages means it’s hard for Arsenal 
supporters to be excited about this one – no matter how well the group stage 
went. We did what we had to do against PSG home and away but nothing more. 
Keeping it tight in the Allianz Arena is the key. I’d be more than happy with a 
draw from the first leg. Carlo Ancelotti’sBayern Munich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> side seem to be more 
fragile a team than they have been over the last five years, so progression 
isn’t beyond this Arsenal team.Cian Mulligan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1be293600ed6cb63df0904ab23aa82140d83ec4e%2F0_0_3888_2587%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1be293600ed6cb63df0904ab23aa82140d83ec4e%2F0_0_3888_2587%2F3888.jpg>
 Arsenal players celebrate after Marco Verratti’s own goal at the Emirates. The 
2-2 draw with PSG helped Arsenal top Group A. Photograph: 
Thomson/JMP/REX/Shutterstock 
Atlético Madrid

To top Group D in front of Bayern Munich was outstanding. The tight 1-0 wins 
over PSV, Bayern and FC Rostov, where our defensive qualities and clinical 
finishing shone through when it mattered, laid the foundation and, by the time 
we lost 1-0 to Bayern Munich in the last game of the group stage, it didn’t 
really matter.

The team needs to remain injury free. The golden quartet of Antoine Griezmann, 
Yannick Carrasco, Kévin Gameiro and Fernando Torres need to find the form they 
showed earlier in the season. They’ve looked a bit off the pace in recent La 
Liga games.

Atlético can easily reach the quarter-finals and quite possibly the semis. In 
the past five years under Diego Simone we have been nothing short of 
spectacular. Teams across Europe now fear having to play us. Simeone has turned 
an average side into a world-class powerhouse. Hopefully our European success 
can continue for a few more rounds at least.Pete
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F742ce124ec48ff83b7c10ef578fe9a72a11c238c%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F742ce124ec48ff83b7c10ef578fe9a72a11c238c%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 Yannick Carrasco celebrates after scoring the winner against Bayern Munich at 
the Vicente Calderon stadium. Photograph: Francisco Seco/AP 
Barcelona

We have performed as well as we should have considering the quality of the 
opposition in Group C. Celtic and Borussia Monchengladbach weren’t teams to be 
feared, and our one setback in Manchester occurred without Gerard Piqué, Jordi 
Alba and Andrés Iniesta. The irony is that Manchester City arguably have the 
easier of our last 16 draws facing Monaco.Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> was only one of a few 
teams I was most hoping to avoid.

The most important factor is the fitness and availability of Barcelona’s key 
players. Without Lionel Messi, Iniesta, Luis Suárez and Piqué, the task of 
beating the French champions becomes a lot more difficult. If PSG create a new 
identity under Unai Emery, they have the quality to exploit Barcelona’s 
weaknesses if we don’t have those players available.

If Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> don’t make the 
semi-finals I’ll be disappointed, but the quality of the opposition means that 
I wouldn’t be surprised if we went out early because of bad luck or an injury 
crisis.Aidan 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F952ea6be891511ba0d3eb3735f2280d03a54683a%2F0_0_4143_2989%2F4143.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F952ea6be891511ba0d3eb3735f2280d03a54683a%2F0_0_4143_2989%2F4143.jpg>
 Fitness will be key for Lionel Messi and Barcelona. Photograph: Manuel 
Queimadelos Alonso/Getty Images 
Bayer Leverkusen

Having gone six games unbeaten in Group E, we were perhaps a little 
unfortunate to only go through as runners-up. But the two draws against CSKA 
Moscow proved costly, and doubly so after we beat Monaco convincingly 3-0 in 
the last group game. But if we’d won the group we would have drawnManchester 
City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>, so I’m not sure if 
that is much better than having to face Atlético Madrid.

I’m very pleased to have qualified from a group where it looked like all four 
teams had ambitions to progress. Our overall away performance and 1-0 win 
against Tottenham Hotspur was clinical and made us believe we could go through. 
Wembley seemed to just swallow them up!

If our Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> 
adventure ends in the last 16, then so be it. We’ve had a good run. But it’s 
not certain that we’ll bow out, we’re capable of giving Atlético tight games. 
But we need to travel to Spain for the second leg with a substantial advantage. 
I don’t fancy our chances if we need to chase the game at the Vicente Calderon.
Adrian
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F521f892f1a374fa3080991289ee19b91223b7dd4%2F0_268_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F521f892f1a374fa3080991289ee19b91223b7dd4%2F0_268_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Bayer Leverkusen captain Stefan Kiessling. Photograph: Bernd Thissen/EPA 
Bayern Munich

We’ve done OK. Our shock defeat in Russia to FC Rostov was a blow, but beating 
Atlético Madrid <https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid> at home 
in the last group game was good for confidence at least. Finishing second 
wasn’t so bad as we have a good record against Arsenal.

A good result in the first leg at home is vital and a clean sheet will go a 
long way in securing our progress to the quarter-finals. We haven’t lost at 
home in the Champions League for 15 matches now so we’re confident of having a 
significant advantage before the return leg in London. We haven’t peaked yet, 
so I still think we have a good chance of winning the Champions League this 
year.

Bayern can win anywhere. Carlo Ancelotti has changed his formation recently 
and that suits the team much better. Come February this team will be a well 
oiled machine. The four-week winter break also means Bayern players have time 
to recover, while watching Arsenal go through a very busy schedule.Daniel 
Schaefers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9fc467fc91c84ecd5e63860df817e5858351057%2F0_0_3496_2227%2F3496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9fc467fc91c84ecd5e63860df817e5858351057%2F0_0_3496_2227%2F3496.jpg>
 Robert Lewandowski is congratulated by team-mate Arjen Robben after scoring 
Bayern Munich’s winner against Atlético Madrid in the final group game. 
Photograph: Action Press/REX/Shutterstock 
Borussia Dortmund

We were absolutely excellent in the group stage. You can’t go wrong with 21 
goals scored in six games, with 14 different goalscorers contributing. It was a 
joy to watch and a wonderful team effort. The irresistible, fluid play and 
tough mentality shown when coming from behind in the twoReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> encounters, which both ended 
2-2, stand out.

Going forward we must not lose sight of our defensive stability and balance, 
but our extremely young team has already demonstrated they can keep their cool 
under pressure. And with Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang leading the line we will 
always find opportunities to score.

I would say we are 70/30 favourites against Benfica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica>. If we progress further it will 
depend on the draw, but we know we can hurt anyone on our day. I would love to 
say we are going all the way, but I think we are conceding too many goals for 
that and maybe our team is a little bit unexperienced at this level.Stefan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6e19ce568fbe0c7b0c017a48b1d4a774d406ea%2F0_0_3264_2304%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d6e19ce568fbe0c7b0c017a48b1d4a774d406ea%2F0_0_3264_2304%2F3264.jpg>
 Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang celebrates after his goal against Real Madrid. 
Photograph: JuanJo Martin/EPA 
Benfica

We didn’t do as well as we had expected, but considering the amount of 
injuries we’ve suffered this season we have to be happy with still being in the 
competition. We lost two points in each of the games against Besiktas that were 
ours for the taking. In the end we got lucky with Dynamo Kiev’s victory against 
Besiktas.

We’ll have to be very good to hold Borussia Dortmund’s incredible attacking 
firepower at bay, and also be very effective on the counter-attack. We have to 
be brave enough to press their defence at the right times. With key players 
like Jonas, Jardel and Grimaldo coming back from injury, I think we have a 1/3 
chance of reaching the next round. The odds are against us and it might be a 
challenge too far this year.Antonio Oliveira 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a4d7bddb49583a3a937b2b997681b08ceac9f60%2F0_0_3012_1998%2F3012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a4d7bddb49583a3a937b2b997681b08ceac9f60%2F0_0_3012_1998%2F3012.jpg>
 Raúl Jiménez celebrates scoring for Benfica against Napoli. Photograph: Carlos 
Rodrigues/Getty Images 
Juventus

Juventus <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> have been there or 
thereabouts for the past three seasons and it was especially galling to watch 
Kingsley Coman come on and help knock us out last year. Add in the departure of 
Paul Pogba and you’d think things would be difficult, but there’s a renewed 
vigour around the team as evidenced by the unbeaten group stage.

Porto <https://www.theguardian.com/football/porto> represent a tough but 
winnable challenge; we should have too much for them over the two legs. I’d 
like to see more goals from Miralem Pjanic; he can score and needs to show it 
more, but otherwise he’s been a solid acquisition. I’d also like to see the 
rest of the team chipping in a bit more; Higuain is world class, but nobody 
else has reached double figures yet. We have to alter that between now and the 
round of 16.

We also have some notable records that are nice to see. Moise Keane becoming 
the first player born in the 21st century to play in the Champions League was 
lovely, and if we can make it to the final, it will be Evra’s sixth, which I 
believe is a clear record. I expect Barcelona, Real Madrid,Borussia Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund>, Manchester City, 
Bayern Munich, Atlético Madrid and Sevilla to join us in the quarter-finals, 
and I would welcome any of them.LeftPegger
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b9c16919dcb69c8a967c236355bc1c31819ade9%2F0_0_3500_2738%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b9c16919dcb69c8a967c236355bc1c31819ade9%2F0_0_3500_2738%2F3500.jpg>
 Moise Kean celebrates with his Juventus team-mates. Photograph: Giorgio 
Perottino/Reuters 
Leicester City

We had a relatively easy group stage but it was annoying to hear fans and 
pundits saying we were “lucky”. Sorry, but we earned that group as English 
champions and consequently a place as one of the eight group seeds. Despite the 
5-0 drubbing against Porto in the last game, where Claudio Ranieri put out a 
much weakened team, we have a chance over two legs againstSevilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sevilla> – especially if they set up to 
attack us on the basis of that anomalous result.

We need to stick to what we’re good at: soaking up the pressure and hitting 
teams on the break. Once we were crowned champions there was perhaps a 
different mindset for the players this season - that we now had to play like 
champions and tippy-tappy our way to victory. We need to utilise our strengths, 
our overlapping full-backs and wingers (Christian Fuchs and Marc Albrighton on 
the left, Danny Simpson and Rihad Mahrez on the right) and Danny Drinkwater in 
the centre of the park. They can all be devastating if we win the ball on the 
edge of our area. A dash forward for Jamie Vardy and Islam Slimani and either a 
beautifully weighted cross or a threaded through ball will see us home.

I’m under no illusions that we’ll win the competition but, being at home for 
the second leg of the last 16 against a good but not great side, I think we can 
make the quarter-finals. At that point it will entirely depend on the draw. If 
we get Real Madrid, Barcelona or PSG, who I expect to win their ties, we have 
little chance over two legs. But if we’re lucky enough to get the winners of 
Benfica v Borussia Dortmund, then an unlikely place in the semi-finals is not 
out of the question – and our European tour can extend into the spring!Ben Smith
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39fc35a11705ea0dfbff598efc533c1190395a83%2F0_0_2256_1499%2F2256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39fc35a11705ea0dfbff598efc533c1190395a83%2F0_0_2256_1499%2F2256.jpg>
 Shinji Okazaki celebrates after scoring against Club Brugge at the King Power 
Stadium. Photograph: Shaun Brooks/Rex/Shutterstock 
Manchester City

The Barcelona game was City’s best night in Europe since the takeover, but 
overall the group stage was a mixed bag. The games against Celtic and the away 
performance against Borussia Mönchengladbach were hugely underwhelming.

We need to find a defensive structure that doesn’t repeatedly offer chances to 
our opposition. Aside from the Barcelona game at home, we have presented our 
opponents with far too many chances. In the knockout stages these errors will 
be heavily punished. Hopefully Pep Guardiola will have decided upon a settled 
formation and line-up by the time the business end of the season kicks off.

Despite our recent struggles, I still think City can be a match for any team, 
especially if our defensive issues can be resolved. The semi-finals beckon if 
we can iron out the mistakes at the back.Hawkhurst 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ae3fad3b37092833ac41a8ebd21911081409561%2F0_0_3240_1781%2F3240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ae3fad3b37092833ac41a8ebd21911081409561%2F0_0_3240_1781%2F3240.jpg>
 Pep Guardiola watches on during Manchester City’s group game against Celtic at 
the Etihad. Photograph: Dave Howarth/CameraSport/Getty Images 
Monaco

We’ve played well so far and deserved to go through as Group E winners. It was 
nice to teach Tottenham a thing or two about the Champions League. Even if we 
crashed out of the competition now, at least we’ll always haveKamil Glik’s 
screamer against Bayer Leverkusen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M4n4ln4qJIM>!

Manchester City will be a tall order for us. Once occupying the same 
super-rich stratum as their English opponents,Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/monaco> have changed tack in recent years 
and promoted youth talent while cutting back on the spending. The result of 
this is a distinct lack of galacticos lining up for us in comparison to Pep 
Guardiola’s side. Radamel Falcao needs to turn up, as does Joao Moutinho; 
lesser-known squad players such as Mathieu Kowalewski and Patrice Boivin will 
probably be key, once the inevitable injuries hit. Good luck Jemerson trying to 
keep Sergio Agüero quiet for 180 minutes.

There’s a saying among Monaco fans: “Our club promises nothing and delivers 
less.” I don’t have high hopes, but perhaps that’s just the pessimistic nature 
of our fans. We never really got over that loss in the final to Porto in 2004. 
Sadly, I think City will get the better of us over two legs. But we’re not the 
favourites, so with the pressure off – who knows?Woolie Madden
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcf509624e3db857043c45609f0052a616630f01%2F0_0_3000_1996%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcf509624e3db857043c45609f0052a616630f01%2F0_0_3000_1996%2F3000.jpg>
 Kamil Glik celebrates after scoring the equalising goal against Bayer 04 
Leverkusen in Monaco. Photograph: Valerio Pennicino/Getty Images 
Napoli

Our two previous Champions League appearances both ended cruelly, so having 
progressed from Group B as winners we were hoping for third time lucky. 
However, drawing Real Madrid in the first knockout stage wasn’t part of the 
masterplan.

We will be hoping for a low-scoring match and a precious away goal at the 
Bernabéu then the atmosphere at the Stadio San Paolo will take care of the 
return leg. Chelsea, Bayern Munich, Manchester City, Arsenal and Borrussia 
Dortmund have all failed to win there in recent years.

I’m keeping everything crossed for a huge upset and a place in the 
quarter-finals. If Trump can win the US Presidency, then anything is possible, 
right?Napoli <https://www.theguardian.com/football/napoli> will upset Real 
Madrid – you heard it here first.Nestor Nicolas 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6d375f27486615fdbba24faed1f9728d10b2351%2F0_0_3906_2886%2F3906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6d375f27486615fdbba24faed1f9728d10b2351%2F0_0_3906_2886%2F3906.jpg>
 José Callejón in action against Besiktas. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty 
Images 
Paris Saint-Germain

PSG is clearly a club in transition. We produce some good football, like 
against Arsenal, where we deserved better results, but the performances against 
Basel and Ludogorets were clearly not good enough. Those disappointments might 
still cost us dearly. Key players are struggling; Lucas Moura keeps missing 
chances, Hatem Ben Arfa does not pass the ball enough, Ángel Di María still 
hasn’t played a good game this year. On top of that manager Unai Emery counted 
on Javier Pastore to be the go-to offensive midfielder and game-changer this 
year but he’s been injured for most of the last 12 months.

The best way to beat Barcelona would be to play a pressing game. PSG will not 
have the ball very much so it’s important to be very effective on the counter. 
Players need to step up. And Messi might have a couple of bad nights, you never 
know.Alex
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F180362b8717e08e80df1491354ae269e39144d48%2F0_0_4000_2751%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-14%23img-14&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F180362b8717e08e80df1491354ae269e39144d48%2F0_0_4000_2751%2F4000.jpg>
 Edinson Cavani celebrates a goal against Ludogorets Razgrad at Parc des 
Princes. Photograph: Jean Catuffe/Getty Images 
Porto

Porto has the youngest squad in the Champions League. This and a new manager 
meant a slow start. The home draw to Copenhagen was a nadir: a team adrift and 
bereft of ideas. But once Nuno Espírito Santo finally settled on a system and 
the younger players became more confident in their roles, the team developed. 
The 5-0 trouncing of Leicester is deceptive, as the Foxes were playing a 
second-string team. But it was a great way to end the group stage.

At least we didn’t draw an English team; Porto have a terrible record in 
England. But we’ll have a tough enough time containing Juventus’s stellar 
forwards. But the real key will be how the squad performs in the first game at 
home. Can this very young squad hold its nerve against the Italian champions? 
We need a positive result going into the return leg in Turin that’s for sure.

Realistically, the round of 16 is probably as good as it will get this season. 
The team is very talented but also very, very young. Porto are the only club to 
have won the Champions League in the last 20 years from outside of the big four 
countries (Spain, Italy, Germany and England). And the odds of winning it this 
season, low as they are, would certainly be higher than in 1987, when we took 
our first European title by beating Bayern Munich in Vienna. You just never 
know.Alan Gomes 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d50e9a62a820e1fd998c5b21a6e015889343d3e%2F0_0_2760_1881%2F2760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-15%23img-15&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d50e9a62a820e1fd998c5b21a6e015889343d3e%2F0_0_2760_1881%2F2760.jpg>
 Porto’s players celebrate a goal against Leicester City. Photograph: 
Xinhua/Rex/Shutterstock 
Real Madrid

We should have won the group. There’s no doubt about that. Borussia Dortmund 
played some wonderful attacking football, but we should have beaten them on 
both occasions. They found our weak spots defensively, but we went through the 
group stage unbeaten and hopefully we can keep that run going into the knockout 
stages.

We shouldn’t feel too down about the draw. With Bayern Munich also finishing 
second in their group it’s clear that the big guns are saving their very best 
for the knockout stages. Napoli will be a tough nut to crack in Naples, but by 
then we should have a significant advantage from the first leg in the Bernabéu 
to encourage us to push on. Defensively we need to be focused though. “We’ll 
score one more than you” is an even more dangerous tactic with the away goals 
rule lurking in the background. I thought that we had a chance of retaining the 
Champions League trophy this season and I stand by that. We just need a bit of 
fine tuning.Augustin
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2779c167e5b92250b3ebc732528fcdd9b2509663%2F0_0_2469_1725%2F2469.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-16%23img-16&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2779c167e5b92250b3ebc732528fcdd9b2509663%2F0_0_2469_1725%2F2469.jpg>
 Cristiano Ronaldo tells off a referee. Photograph: Gonzalo Arroyo Moreno/Getty 
Images 
Sevilla 

We’ve had an excellent season so far both domestically and in Europe. Our 
pressing game has been very impressive and the work ethic is admirable. To only 
be one point behind Barcelona in La Liga so close to Christmas is a great 
achievement, but we need to continue our fine form into the New Year.

We shouldn’t underestimate Leicester. It’s clear that they sacrificed their 
league form for a good run in the Champions League. I fully expect them to pick 
up in the Premier League now and grow in confidence before the round of 16 
ties. But we have nothing to fear either. Jorge Sampaoli has created a 
competent side and has installed a new self-esteem and self-confidence in his 
players. This is not a competition that allows you to get distracted though, 
and although I expect us to go through to the quarter-finals we need to make 
sure we don’t fall to the underdog.Rober
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F244a747beed8a3cb0130b1eab2ddfd57df399310%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%3A%20fans%20from%20around%20Europe%20reflect%20on%20the%20last-16%20draw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fchampions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-17%23img-17&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F244a747beed8a3cb0130b1eab2ddfd57df399310%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Sevilla’s Nicolas Pareja celebrates his side progressing to the knockout 
stages at the expense of Lyon. Photograph: Laurent Cipriani/AP  