
The trouble as 2017 begins is simplicity, as in simple cause and effect. 
Fifteen years ago, Britain devoured around 15m newspapers each morning. Now 
it’s 6m and falling. Meanwhile digital consumption/addiction accelerates away 
and social media dominate reading time and attention.

One habit dies; another takes over. That’s an obvious tale of cause and 
effect, a conclusion that broadcasters who don’t much appreciate the printed 
press find an easy recitation. One habit falls, another takes over. An equation 
so basic you don’t really have to think about it – nor try to set it in any 
historical context. But look back awhile before you look forward. For looking 
forward means looking back.

History has a way of answering questions – and my history in print began 
almost six decades ago at the Witney Press, 12 miles from Oxford. There, twice 
a week, academic ambitions pushed conveniently well to one side, some of us 
brought out the university paperCherwell. And there, too, we registered the 
hard, creaky truths about newspaper production: an old, thumping flatbed press 
down below, a composing room that shook as the first copies emerged, and three 
men who knew the ropes. Bill sat at the Linotype keyboard and set every word; 
George was head printer and head of everything; and then there was Trembly 
Charlie, who had a disconcerting habit of scattering lead slugs all over the 
floor as deadlines neared.

So I learned many things at the double. How to write stories that cut from the 
bottom. How to find extra space when tales wound up short. How to rummage in 
the big box of ancient wood type when you needed a headline bigger than 48 
point. (We had a scoop about a planned highway through Magdalen meadows – but 
the only letters left that made any Countdown-style sense proclaimed nothing 
beyond “THE ROAD”. OK, print it.). How not to panic or lose your temper. How to 
be very nice to Charlie when his hand started shaking again.

That was all good stuff, two years later, stoning in the women’s page at the 
Liverpool Daily Post. Even better stuff, seven years on, in the composing room 
at theGuardian in Gray’s Inn Road where – one early miracle of new technology – 
teletype setting (aka TTS) delivered more sticks of lead bearing only a vague 
approximation of the copy pumped down the line from a threatened but still 
fully staffed Manchester office.

Were there better ways of finding the future? Alastair Hetherington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/oct/04/guardianobituaries>, my editor, 
perhaps more interested in cabinet politics than printing systems, sent me on a 
tour of the US to report. I found a glorious newsroom at theMiami Herald, a 
faded pink paradise, huge picture windows overlooking a blue lagoon, which was 
pioneering optical character reading, OCR. But it worked slightly less well 
than our own TTS. Another one bit the dust.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-always-need-journalism-but-change-never-stops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d788e39c79cd54a9c0f6b9b8ac8b0c76073bde2%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Change%20never%20stops%2C%20but%20we%20will%20always%20need%20journalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-always-need-journalism-but-change-never-stops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Change%20never%20stops%2C%20but%20we%20will%20always%20need%20journalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-always-need-journalism-but-change-never-stops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d788e39c79cd54a9c0f6b9b8ac8b0c76073bde2%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 The Daily Telegraph’s ‘integrated’ newsroom. Photograph: Martin Argles for the 
Observer 
I sat in the newsroom of the Boston Globe, a computer on every desk – except 
in the editor’s office, where newfangled devices weren’t welcome. I went to 
Massachusetts as Atex became a name to conjure with and saw computer keyboards 
begin to replace typewriters (except at theGuardian, where the National 
Graphical Association insisted on having their stalwarts retrained on qwerty 
boards so that their rights to double key-stroking remained briefly inviolate).

Then I watched silently as, at last, the final remnants of hot metal were 
carried coffin fashion across the composing room floor, a way of life beaten 
out in traditional manner. I was there as journalists could at last set the 
paper themselves and lay it out on screen. I was around, and bailing 
desperately, when theIRA blew up our brand new Isle of Dogs print site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1996/feb/10/northernireland.davidpallister>.

And all of this, one crisis after another, one false dawn after another, 
seemed to promise some publishing nirvana just around the corner. An era where 
the ancestral cry of the overseer as chapel meetings dragged on would be no 
more. “Oh Mr Preston, the pots have gone cold!”. (No hot metal for 30 minutes.) 
A world where communication – from editor to reader – was instantaneous rather 
than lugubrious. A world where editions flowed seamlessly, where pages could be 
changed in a trice: a world where putting the news out on paper was a pleasure, 
not an obstacle race.

You could feel that print nirvana coming in the late 1980s and through the 
1990s. New papers, new supplements, new thicker editions, the transforming 
wonders of colour – and the cost of the print union legions fading away as they 
left to find a new life for themselves. (Wapping had delivered a moment of 
history as well as much bitterness.) But, of course, progress has a way of 
tripping over its own shoelaces, so the full magic of profit and reduced costs 
never quite happened. More of everything on many more pages meant more 
competition, which meant more marketing budgets. And then there was the 
beginning of the internet, a true new frontier.

Was it a revolution or merely another string to a newsroom’s bow? Core or 
peripheral? Small offices, and then much bigger offices, were needed to house a 
growing digital staff. Some newspapers – theTelegraph, the Guardian – thought 
they saw the point fast and developed theories of parallel, integrated 
production. Some – even theDaily Mail – watched and waited. Few quite predicted 
what would happen next.

But soon it wasn’t – as mostly it remains – a question of either digital news 
or print news. Soon, ominously, the answer was clearly both: a daily paper 
produced on ever thinner resources, a digital posting in need of constant 
rewriting and re-editing. Could the staff who served online and print be truly 
integrated so that one team covered both? TheTelegraph produced its giant wheel 
of a newsroom, one function lapping into another. Other papers invented even 
more complex copy and picture flows. Yet there was, and still isn’t, any clear 
resolution.

Staffing increased inexorably in any case. Technical reinforcements were 
essential at every stage. More programs needed more programmers. Tablets 
followed laptops as the device of choice – except that, as Rupert Murdoch 
discovered after he’d spent millions launchingThe Daily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/dec/03/news-corp-close-ipad-the-daily>, 
tablets were merely one more excuse for devising digital editions and tweaking 
them hour after hour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-always-need-journalism-but-change-never-stops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ed487d8ec1c9f31494e6f8add49d943162ad1dd%2F0_47_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Change%20never%20stops%2C%20but%20we%20will%20always%20need%20journalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-always-need-journalism-but-change-never-stops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Change%20never%20stops%2C%20but%20we%20will%20always%20need%20journalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-always-need-journalism-but-change-never-stops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ed487d8ec1c9f31494e6f8add49d943162ad1dd%2F0_47_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Murdoch launches the ill-fated Daily tablet newspaper. Photograph: Spencer 
Platt/Getty Images 
No. Obviously, it seemed, the basic answer would have to be different: 
smartphones in the wake of the iPhone, extra Apple and Android versions, 
material reprocessed to fit different-sized screens, and prospectively 
benefiting from the incontrovertible fact that users, especially young people, 
were used to paying to use their mobile phones. Here was the magic viability of 
feet firm on profitable ground – except that it didn’t work out that way.

There was, as it transpired, too much free news material out there you didn’t 
have to pay for. To this day, only about 10% of news on the net comes with a 
price tag. The central competition, therefore, had to be scrabbling for 
advertising riches to match the exponential growth figures as smartphones left 
tablets and laptops in the shade. Enter Netflix, Amazon and a host of streaming 
options. Enter an overwhelming demand for more video, together with ever more 
complex methods of measuring reader “engagement”. Enter a fresh array of 
web-only contenders fuelled with start-up investment.

And, suddenly, there was no salvation in subscription formulas. The demand now 
is for more free – but more free in any every sense as ad-blocking cuts 
revenues sharply and digital advertising to news-oriented sites stalls, leaving 
all those extra staff and all those investment hopes looking a trifle bereft. 
More, this is a general phenomenon on the new side of the fence. It isn’t just 
newspaper sites that face a challenge. BuzzFeed and other wunderkinds have to 
pause and ponder their profit forecasts. The Huffington Post runs out of Huff 
and puff. TheGawker has pulled the chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/02/gawker-media-hulk-hogan-lawsuit-settlement-peter-thiel>
 on its own legend. Only Facebook, Google and Snapchat stand tall for the 
moment, hoovering up ad money and leaving precious little for the rest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-always-need-journalism-but-change-never-stops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc7d12d6a3f891cc6a4a268cfde1865894032851%2F0_0_1218_731%2F1218.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Change%20never%20stops%2C%20but%20we%20will%20always%20need%20journalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-always-need-journalism-but-change-never-stops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Change%20never%20stops%2C%20but%20we%20will%20always%20need%20journalism&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-always-need-journalism-but-change-never-stops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc7d12d6a3f891cc6a4a268cfde1865894032851%2F0_0_1218_731%2F1218.jpg>
 BuzzFeed faces as much of a profit challenge as traditional news outlets. 
Photograph: Screengrab 
So those 60 years of personal history begin to weigh heavy again. It’s natural 
to decide that life’s shifts are permanent as one steady state supplants 
another. The future has arrived, and there’s no need to ponder any more. Think 
Concorde, the new, supersonic manifestation of travel. Think manned space 
adventure. And, diminuendo, think newsprint perishing like the wrapping of fish 
and chips while digital communication inherits the Earth.

But who, pray, deemed history moribund, like the print it supposedly consigns 
to the waste bin? Who decided that a story which has altered course so many 
times in my lifetime was now dead and buried? One spectacular crash, one 
daunting energy crisis, and Concorde itself was history. We didn’t need to go 
faster after all.

The difficulty with history’s familiar progress shtick is that, to reach a 
simple, seemingly stable conclusion, you have to stop the clock and declare the 
entire race over, completely run. But we all ought to know by now that this is 
a marathon course without a finishing line. An article, or, frankly, a book, 
which proclaims print closure is mere extrapolation, not conclusion: as that 
personal history tour of mine rams home.

The future changed when they bought a rotary press in Witney. The future 
changed when theLiverpool Daily Post gave birth to Trinity Mirror – and changed 
again when theGuardian seemed to leave Manchester for good. Was it Eddie Shah 
andToday? Or the saintly Andreas and his Independent? Is the future free or 
nestling behind a paywall? For that matter, has any non-specialist news 
provider found a stable foundation that guarantees survival 10 or 20 years 
hence?

The point about looking back is that this unwinding chronicle never ends, 
never finds a steady state. There’s a whole new world beyond Facebook and 
Google out there – and only one certainty firm in the mix. However produced, 
however delivered, this swirling world needs facts, perceptions, arguments, 
reflections, hard truths. This world needs journalism.

This is an edited version of Peter Preston’s chapter for Last Words? How Can 
Journalism Survive the Decline of Print? edited by John Mair, Tor Clark, Neil 
Fowler, Raymond Snoddy and Richard Tait and published this month by Abramis 
(£19.95). It is available to Observer readers for £15 on application to 
Richard@abramis.co.uk
 