
To glean the strategy behind Chanel’s no-expense-spared catwalk spectacular at 
the newly reopenedParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> Ritz on 
Tuesday, look no further than the seating plan.

The brand’s president of fashion, Bruno Pavlovsky, placed at his right hand 
the French culture ministerAudrey Azoulay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/01/french-film-classification-system-overhauled-right-wing-attacks>
, who wore an elegant red and black jacket in Chanel’s distinctive boucle 
tweed. At the next table was music producerPharrell Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/08/pharrell-williams-interview-daft-punk>
, winner of ten Grammy awards, and French-Cuban musical duoIbeyi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/30/ibeyi-french-cuban-twins-naomi-lisa-kainde-diaz-miguel-anga>
, made up of 19-year-old twins Naomi and Lisa-Kaindé Díaz.

Williams and Lisa-Kaindé Díaz were also wearing boucle tweed. It was a bold 
statement of a brand which sees itself not just as a fashion house but as part 
of the fabric of French culture – and which, nonetheless, has ambitions on a 
modern global stage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchanel-celebrates-its-place-in-french-culture-with-spectacle-at-paris-ritz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd740c8cbd20d8f57787ee2b8dfc181615dd3e470%2F108_418_2784_4082%2F2784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chanel%20celebrates%20its%20place%20in%20French%20culture%20with%20spectacle%20at%20Paris%20Ritz&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchanel-celebrates-its-place-in-french-culture-with-spectacle-at-paris-ritz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chanel%20celebrates%20its%20place%20in%20French%20culture%20with%20spectacle%20at%20Paris%20Ritz&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchanel-celebrates-its-place-in-french-culture-with-spectacle-at-paris-ritz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd740c8cbd20d8f57787ee2b8dfc181615dd3e470%2F108_418_2784_4082%2F2784.jpg>
 Pharrell Williams, left, with model Cara Delevingne and designer Karl 
Lagerfeld, right, at the Chanel show. Photograph: Bertrand Rindoff 
Petroff/Getty Images 
Gabrielle ‘Coco’ Chanel’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/nov/10/how-the-first-world-war-changed-womens-fashion>
 vision was focussed on a specific style, but Karl Lagerfeld has spent 35 years 
expanding that point of view so that the double C logo is as much an image of 
France as the Eiffel Tower – or, indeed, the Paris Ritz.

The Paris Ritz, reopened after it was hit by a fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/fire-engulfs-top-floor-of-paris-ritz-hotel>
, has played a vivid role in the city’s history. The tearoom is named for 
onetime regular Marcel Proust; the bar for Ernest Hemingway, whoattempted to 
personally liberate it from the Nazis on 25 August 1944 
<http://www.thelocal.fr/20140822/when-hemingway-took-back-the-ritz-bar>. So 
strong are the associations between the Ritz and stylish living that the hotel 
has become an adjective in its own right. Ritzy is a byword for luxury – as is 
Chanel.


Coco Chanel lived at the hotel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/28/hotel-place-vendome-ritz-tilar-mazzeo-review>
 for 35 years. This is not an uncontroversial chapter of Chanel history, given 
that it was her links with theVichy regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/16/french-archives-nazi-resistance-war-files-celebrities-coco-chanel-josephine-baker>
 which allowed her to do so during the second world war, but Lagerfeld chose to 
celebrate it nonetheless by returning to her home to stage three catwalk shows 
in one day over lunch, high tea and dinner.

At the teatime show – dress code “naturally elegant” – tables were laden with 
silver platters of Proustian madeleines, florentines and tuile cigarettes, 
along with Perrier Jouët and the Ritz’s own blend of Earl Grey. The show was 
opened byLily-Rose Depp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jul/16/lily-rose-depp-new-face-chanel-stylewatch>
, daughter of Johnny Depp and longtime Chanel model Vanessa Paradis, making her 
Chanel catwalk debut in a gold sequinned midi-length skirt and matching cropped 
top. Cara Delevingne followed with silk flowers in her hair, goofing the 
elegance of her ivory-tweed ensemble by pulling faces for the iPhone cameras as 
she weaved between the tables. The casting referenced cultural greats, as well 
as pretty faces: Levi Dylan, the grandson of Bob Dylan, was followed by Mick 
Jagger’s daughterGeorgia May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/05/georgia-may-jagger-with-modelling-sometimes-youre-punky-girly-sweet>
.


“Karl is not really a designer, he’s a researcher,” said Lagerfeld’s friend 
and longtime modelInès de la Fressange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2013/oct/15/ines-de-la-fressange-chic-five-items-wardrobe>
 after the show. Each Chanel show riffs on a different aspect of the house, 
from Chanel’s interest in astrology to herpassion for Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2012/dec/04/chanel-franco-scottish-affair-tweed>
, but this was one of several recent shows which returned to the theme of 
Paris, Lagerfeld’s adopted home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchanel-celebrates-its-place-in-french-culture-with-spectacle-at-paris-ritz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F978b84dfb29a898d9be4d75082a6eef349028701%2F0_95_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chanel%20celebrates%20its%20place%20in%20French%20culture%20with%20spectacle%20at%20Paris%20Ritz&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchanel-celebrates-its-place-in-french-culture-with-spectacle-at-paris-ritz%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chanel%20celebrates%20its%20place%20in%20French%20culture%20with%20spectacle%20at%20Paris%20Ritz&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchanel-celebrates-its-place-in-french-culture-with-spectacle-at-paris-ritz%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F978b84dfb29a898d9be4d75082a6eef349028701%2F0_95_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 People gather outside the newly reopened Paris Ritz as Chanel stages its shows 
inside. Photograph: Marc Piasecki/GC Images 
In March last year he recreated a Paris bistro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/10/karl-lagerfeld-love-letter-france-parisian-cafe>
 for the ready to wear show, a theme which he said was intended to show 
solidarity with the spirit of the city in the wake of the Charlie Hebdo 
attacks. Last December he decamped to Rome, only to recreate a Paris street as a
theatrical set in the Cinecittà studios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/01/chanel-karl-lagerfeld-heart-paris-rome>
.


Actor Clémence Poésy said she was struck “by a feeling of freedom” at the Ritz 
show. “It reminded me of how CocoChanel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/chanel> was the first to put shoulder 
straps on to handbags, so that women could use their hands,” she added.

In this show the handbags were worn cross-body, in the modern urban style. 
Shoes were eitherover-the-knee boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/09/over-the-knee-boots-set-to-be-the-shoe-of-the-decade>
 – a contemporary street style favourite – or laced 1940s cream brogues with a 
heel.

The clothes, with their drop-waists, louche sequins and nubbly, dressmaker 
tweeds, recalled the era when F Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald held court in the 
bar.

There was a sense of living it up – of putting on the Ritz, in the words of 
Irving Berlin. “The thing about the Ritz is that being here feels almost like 
it’s not real,” said Lisa-Kaindé Díaz after the show. “It’s like, the dream.”
 