
Charlie Griffin was the hero as Stevenage ended their first ever Football 
League game with a point following a 2-2 draw withMacclesfield. Peter Vincenti 
gave the hosts an early lead when he headed in Griffin's cross but Nat Brown 
soon headed in an equaliser. Emile Sinclair found Tyrone Bennett to put
Macclesfield <https://www.theguardian.com/football/macclesfield> ahead from 
close range but Griffin pounced with a minute remaining.

Scott Rendell's cool penalty on his debut and a late solo goal from the 
substitute Jon-Paul Pittman gaveWycombe a 2-0 home victory over Morecambe. 
Rendell headed Kevin Betsy's cross wide but made amends from the spot after 
Matt Bloomfield had been tripped in the area by Chris Shuker. Ben Strevens 
curled a 20-yard shot against the crossbar before Pittman sealed the win with a 
sublime 25-yard effort.

Southend's substitute Blair Sturrock salvaged a point for the financially 
troubled Essex club againstStockport. George Connelly appeared to have scored a 
controversial winner forStockport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/stockport> when he scored from a 
seemingly offside position. The Southend manager Paul Sturrock was sent to the 
stands for his complaints but saw his son Blair equalise from a corner.

Paul Buckle's young Torquay United side sent out an early-season warning of 
their potential when three goals in six minutes overwhelmedNorthampton. The 
left-back Kevin Nicholson got the ball rolling with a thumping drive before 
Danny Stevens set up Chris Zebroski to double Torquay's tally. A brilliant 
passing move resulted in Lee Mansell releasing the striker Elliot Benyon to 
secure the 3-0 win.

Port Vale showed their promotion credentials by kicking off their season with 
a hard-fought 1-0 win atBury. Vale are looking to build on last season's 
10th-placed finish and claimed a deserved victory through a rare goal by their 
left-back Lee Collins. Marc Richards knocked a Gary Roberts corner down for 
Collins to lash in from 10 yards.

Chesterfield celebrated a 2-1 victory over Barnet at their new Â£13m home but 
had their striker Craig Davies sent off. Dwayne Mattis tapped in and Jack 
Lester curled in a second goal before Glenn Poole replied forBarnet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barnet> from 20 yards. Steve Kabba was 
then caught by Davies who was given a red card while Kabba was carried off with 
what appeared to be a serious injury.

A debut goal for Gillingham's Adebayo Akinfenwa rescued a point for the newly 
relegated Kent club in a 1-1 draw withCheltenham at Priestfield. The debutant 
Wesley Thomas had put the visitors ahead when he took Keith Lowe's pass on and 
scored but Akinfenwa, on as a substitute, latched on to a Jack Payne throw 
before watching his header be tipped into the net by Scott Brown.

Last season's beaten play-off finalists Rotherham left it late to snatch a 2-1 
victory overLincoln. Rotherham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rotherham> 
went ahead when Adam Le Fondre pounced as Kevin Ellison's volley was cleared 
off the line. Lincoln equalised when Mustapha Carayol cut in from the left and 
scored but Ryan Cresswell headed in to mark his debut with a late goal.

Hereford's captain, Janos Kovacs, scored on his debut as a new-look side sank 
Crewe Alexandra 1-0.

Graham Turner's second spell as the Shrewsbury manager got off to an excellent 
start as a Jake Robinson hat-trick saw them come from behind to defeatBradford 
3-1. Bradford took the lead when Tom Adeyami converted a flick-on by James 
Hanson but Robinson levelled after Ian Sharps's shot was blocked on the line. 
Robinson then headed in Lionel Ainsworth's cross and completed his hat-trick 
five minutes later after latching on to Matt Harrold's flick-on. TheShrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> midfielder Kevin McIntyre was 
shown a straight red card late on.
 