
One of Charlie Hebdo’s most outspoken journalists has said she is leaving the 
French satirical magazine because it has gone soft on Islamic extremism.


Zineb El Rhazoui accused the weekly of bowing to Islamic extremists and no 
longer daring to draw the prophet Muhammad.

Her parting shot comes on the eve of the second anniversary of the jihadi 
massacre in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/07/charlie-hebdo-shooting-paris-magazine-target-raid>
 thatalmost wiped out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/feb/24/charlie-hebdo-staff-ponder-bittersweet-new-success-after-jihadi-terror-attack>
 the magazine’s staff. “Charlie Hebdo died on 7 January [2015],” the day the 
gunmen attacked the magazine, killing 12 people, Rhazoui told Agence 
France-Presse.

Charlie Hebdo puts broken-down Angela Merkel on cover of first German edition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/01/charlie-hebdo-puts-broken-down-angela-merkel-on-cover-of-first-german-edition>
Rhazoui, 35, who is followed everywhere by police bodyguards and is known as 
the most protected woman in France, also questioned the magazine’s “capacity to 
carry the torch of irreverence and absolute liberty”. She said: “Freedom at any 
cost is what I loved aboutCharlie Hebdo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/charlie-hebdo>, where I worked through great 
adversity.”

Rhazoui first said in September that she would be leaving, after the magazine 
was hit by a series of internal disputes and thedepartures of the cartoonist Luz
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/19/cartoonist-luz-to-quit-charlie-hebdo-magazine>
 and thecolumnist Patrick Pelloux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/15/paris-attacks-medic-we-were-treating-war-wounds-made-by-war-weapons>
. But she did not spell out the reasons for her exit, except to say it was “not 
the same after the loss of so many of the original [staff]”.

Charlie Hebdo first attracted the ire of Islamic extremists in 2006 when it 
republished Danish cartoons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/feb/07/pressandpublishing.france> of 
Muhammad and put a cartoon of him on its cover.


The magazine’s editor, Riss, who took over from Stephane “Charb” Charbonnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/13/stephane-charbonnier>, who was 
murdered in the attack, said: “We get the impression that people have become 
even more intolerant of Charlie,” he said. “If we did a front cover showing a 
cartoon of the prophet Muhammad now, who would defend us?”

Last year, he said he would no longer draw Muhammad. “We’ve done our job. We 
have defended the right to caricature,” he said.

Rhazoui, who was in Morocco at the time of the attack, said she has “not 
written a line” for the magazine for a year, although she has published two 
books, the latest of which is calledDestroy Islamic Fascism 
<http://nytlive.nytimes.com/womenintheworld/2016/10/18/zineb-el-rhazoui-charlie-hebdo-survivor-discusses-why-the-world-needs-to-destroy-islamic-fascism/>
.
 