
The footprints and signature on the doorstep have faded, but there's no 
confusion about who built these studios:Charlie Chaplin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charliechaplin>, dressed as the Little Tramp, 
is painted on the door. Time-lapse footage of the construction of this mock 
Tudor village – now owned by the Jim Henson Company and identified by a 12ft 
statue of Kermit above the entrance – appears in How To Make Movies, a film 
directed by Chaplin in 1918. It shows the small hamlet emerging among the lemon 
groves that once undulated here, a city rising from the dust.

I wonder how much of Hollywood would exist if Chaplin had never arrived. If 
the manager of his touring vaudeville troupe had never received that abrupt, 
misspelled telegram from some filmmakers: "IS THERE A MAN NAMED CHAFFIN IN YOUR 
COMPANY" would this still be a drowsy little village?

Chaplin first came to Los Angeles exactly a century ago, a British comic in 
his mid-20s, arriving in an era when screen actors were just beginning to be 
known by name. AtKeystone Studios 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Keystone_Studios>, where he started work, the 
director Mack Sennett told him to put on a comic costume one day – "anything 
will do". So Chaplin contrived an outfit where everything was at odds: "the 
pants baggy, the coat tight, the hat small and the shoes large," he wrote in 
his autobiography.

By the time he walked out on set, a few moments later, he knew who this 
character was. The man he would play for the next 22 years was, "a tramp, a 
gentleman, a poet, a dreamer, a lonely fellow, always hopeful of romance and 
adventure". The character was the ultimate outsider, and within two years he 
was also a global phenomenon.
 The Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel's pool. Photograph: Alamy 
At that time, the future of Hollywood – a district with just 500 residents in 
1900 – was far from guaranteed. The weather and light were similarly good in 
Florida and Arizona, and studios were thriving in New York. But in the time it 
took Chaplin to become the best-loved, highest-paid star the world had ever 
seen, Hollywood's destiny became undeniable. An industry town, devoted to 
telling stories, was born.

That makes Hollywood sound romantic, which isn't the obvious word to describe 
the area today. The walk from Chaplin's studio to Hollywood Boulevard is a blur 
of tattoo parlours, speeding cars and sprawling apartment buildings thrown up 
to house the steady stream of people who arrive with dreams of acting or 
directing in the shadow of the Hollywood sign. Tourists flock to the pavement 
outsideGrauman's Chinese Theatre 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TCL_Chinese_Theatre> in search of their favourite 
actors' handprints while, not far away, a large outdoor screen promotes
celebrity tours by popular gossip website TMZ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/sep/04/hollywood-tmz-bus-tour-eva-wiseman>
. There are people dressed as Elmo and Batman, in battered costumes, touting to 
appear in tourist photographs. A lone Chaplin impersonator twirls his cane, 
looking a little lost.

But peer closer and you can still find traces of old Hollywood. It's in the 
huge handprints and tiny footprints made by silent-screen stars Douglas 
Fairbanks and Mary Pickford respectively, in 1927 in the concrete outside 
Grauman's. And it's in the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel, which opened over the 
road, financed by the couple, the same year. Chaplin, a friend of Fairbanks, 
became a regular guest and it was here, in 1929, when the first Oscars ceremony 
took place, that Chaplin was given a special award "for versatility and genius 
in acting, writing, directing and producing" his 1928 film The Circus.

The Blossom Room, where those first Academy Awards were handed out in a 
ceremony for 250 people, is now a private venue but in the lobby is the Library 
Bar, which anyone can visit. It's a wood-lined, candlelit sanctuary of leather 
booths, with barmen who rustle up bespoke cocktails according to guest tastes 
rather than classic cocktail names, and it feels miles away from the tourist 
hullabaloo.
 Charlie Chaplin in a scene from The Circus. Photograph: Hulton Archive/Getty 
Images 
After our drinks, my partner Alex and I went to the Musso and Frank Grill 
<http://mussoandfrank.com/> , opened in 1919, where Chaplin dined so often he 
had his own booth at the front of the building, from which he could keep an eye 
on his car. With its smartly dressed waiters and red leather seating, it feels 
little changed. Our waiter told us the barman had been working there since 
1969. The food was hearty and reasonably priced, my spaghetti with meatballs 
($22) and Alex's clam linguine ($20) both delicious.

It was just a little further along Hollywood Boulevard that Chaplin filmed the 
first feature-length comedy ever made in the US, Tillie's Punctured Romance, 
released in November 1914. John Bengston's book,Silent Traces 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/58851.Silent_Traces>, shows stills from 
that film, in which Chaplin appeared with renowned comedians Marie Dressler and 
Mabel Normand, in the days when trolley cars rolled down this thoroughfare.

A short walk from Hollywood Boulevard is the barn leased by Cecil B DeMille 
and Jesse Lasky in 1913 to use as a studio for filming The Squaw Man (released 
1914), Hollywood's first dramatic feature. The barn now houses theHollywood 
Heritage Museum <http://www.hollywoodheritage.org/>, complete with a replica of 
DeMille's office circa 1914, and mouldings saved from the Garden Court 
Apartments, where Chaplin's first director, Mack Sennett used to live. Dave, 
one of the museum's volunteers, and a gentle man with the air of an urban 
cowboy, led us on a detailed, personalised walking tour on Hollywood Boulevard 
for $10 each.

Dave told us about the days when the signs "no dogs, no actors" would appear 
in the windows of houses to rent, took us past the Egyptian Theatre, which 
hosted Hollywood's first premiere: Fairbanks's swashbuckling Robin Hood in 
1922, and pointed out thePig'n'Whistle <http://pignwhistlehollywood.com/> 
restaurant next door.

"Charlie Chaplin would go in, go behind the bar, and make his own ice-cream 
sundaes," he said.
 The undimmed glamour of the Beverly Hills Hotel. Photograph: Niall Clutton 
It was difficult to imagine any old Hollywood stars spending time on this drag 
now. Pickford may once have caroused in its bars but these days, one imagines, 
she would be happier at home in Beverly Hills, where she and other stars were 
lured by theBeverly Hills Hotel 
<http://www.dorchestercollection.com/en/beverly-hills/the-beverly-hills-hotel>, 
after it opened in 1912.

Images of it in that era show it sitting in rural splendour, fields stretching 
for miles around it. The hotel, a pink ice-cream cake of a building hidden in a 
leafy grove, is still thriving among the types of people with money to pay for 
its opulence and discretion. Bedrooms have swag curtains and tasteful 
four-posters, sunken baths and black and pink marble in the en suites. In the 
grounds are 23 bungalows: Marilyn Monroe stayed in one, and Howard Hughes lived 
here for decades, with the staff catering to his unusual whims, leaving roast 
beef sandwiches in the trees, and hiding pineapple upside-down cakes in the 
grounds for his 2am treasure hunts.

The more straightforward guests tended, then and now, to eat in the hotel's 
restaurants, including the Polo Lounge, where for decades Chaplin had a 
standing reservation for booth number one. If he didn't show, it stayed empty. 
Anyone can make a reservation today and while the menu includes Siberian caviar 
for $180, the house burger, and West Hollywood salad (featuring quinoa, faro 
and kale), both $28, are more affordable options.
 Pig'n Whistle Restaurant and Bar. Photograph: Alamy 
From the Beverly Hills Hotel, Chaplin would have strolled to Virginia 
Robinson's estate <http://www.robinsongardens.org/> , where he played tennis 
and relaxed in the gardens while her pet monkeys roamed free. Two of the 
vivacious volunteers who have helped preserve the estate – Jeanne Anderson, in 
a perfect pink hat, and Marcella Ruble, in a peanut-shell necklace – showed us 
around the gardens, through the palm forest, with its flowering ginger and lady 
palm, the kitchen garden, with its lemon trees and creeping fig, to the metal 
garden seats, known as button chairs, that Robinson bought with Frank Capra.

"Try one," said Anderson. I did. It was ridiculously comfortable. You can book 
a tour today, see the bougainvillea weep over the tennis courts, and walk, once 
again, in Chaplin's footsteps.

• Flights provided by Air New Zealand (0800 028 4149, airnewzealand.co.uk 
<http://www.airnewzealand.co.uk/>), which flies direct from Heathrow to LA from 
£507 return. Accommodation was provided by the Hollywood Roosevelt (+1 323 466 
7000,thompsonhotels.com/hotels/la/hollywood-roosevelt 
<http://www.thompsonhotels.com/hotels/la/hollywood-roosevelt>, rooms from $139) 
and the Beverly Hills Hotel (+1 310 276 2251,
dorchestercollection.com/en/beverly-hills/the-beverly-hills-hotel 
<http://www.dorchestercollection.com/en/beverly-hills/the-beverly-hills-hotel>, 
rooms from $445)
 