
Antonio Conte has dismissed the gripes of rival Premier League managers over 
the scheduling of Chelsea’s Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-christmas-congestion>
 and new year fixtures, suggesting they are annoyed only at his club’s position 
at the top of the table.

Chelsea, who have a five‑point lead after a run of 13 consecutive league wins, 
are atTottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur>
 on Wednesday for their third match of the festive period.

Those games will have been spread over 10 days, making it the most favourable 
programme, in terms of rest periods, of the division. Southampton were the 
hardest hit, with their three matches crammed in over six days while, of the 
top six, Liverpool had the tightest schedule, with three games in seven days.

Chelsea football fans convicted of racist violence in Paris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/chelsea-football-fans-convicted-of-racist-violence-in-paris>
Jürgen Klopp, Arsène Wenger  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/arsene-wenger-arsenal-bournemouth-rest-periods>
and José Mourinho, the managers of Liverpool, Arsenal and Manchester United, 
have each complained about the scheduling, with Mourinho saying Chelsea and 
Tottenham had been granted a “privilege” in playing on Wednesday after all of 
the other clubs.

“I can reply that I didn’t do the fixtures,” Conte said. “I think that’s the 
simple reply.

“The advantage we have is one more day of rest over Tottenham [since the 
weekend matches]. That’s the advantage if we want to speak about advantage. But 
for me, the advantages are other things – during a season, different situations 
can happen when you can have advantages – but, for sure, not this.

“I think they [the rival managers] are angry for our position, not for the 
fixtures. I’m not disappointed. I think it’s normal. This also happens in 
Italy. I repeat – it’s always because you stay up [at the top].”

Conte also noted how Chelsea had played three games in seven days in the 
run-up to Christmas – against West Bromwich Albion, Sunderland and Crystal 
Palace – and, before the Spurs game, he sought to turn the focus inwards and 
not worry about being up there to be shot at. IfChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> were to defeat Tottenham, they 
would equal Arsenal’s top‑flight record in English football for consecutive 
wins.

“It’s logical to arrive at this sort of situation when you stay up because, at 
the start of the season, no one could imagine this,” Conte said. “It’s 
important that we continue in the same way – to think about ourselves and not 
look at the other teams and other situations.”
 