
Chelsea hope to use the money raised by Oscar’s £60m departure for Shanghai 
SIPG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/chelsea-ready-to-sanction-60m-sale-of-oscar-to-shanghai-sipg>
 to reinforce in midfield and defence next month, with discussions also planned 
with Diego Costa’s representatives aimed at securing the striker to a new deal.

Oscar’s club-record sale to the Chinese Super League side should be confirmed 
before the transfer window opens and, while Chelsea always anticipated being 
active in the market, the money will be ploughed back into the side.Antonio 
Conte <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> has seen his team 
move six points clear at the top of the Premier League but will hope to add at 
least two players to bolster his options and maintain momentum.

Oscar will get to count Chinese cash but he will pay a heavy price | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/oscar-china-chelsea> 
The manager accompanied the Chelsea technical director, Michael Emenalo, to 
France this month to watch Monaco’s Tiemoué Bakayoko and Djibril Sidibé in the 
Champions League against Tottenham Hotspur. Prising either player away in 
January may be difficult given the Ligue 1 club are involved in the Champions 
League – they play Manchester City in the knockout stage  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/champions-league-last-16-fans-knockout-stages>
– but both are aware of the interest. Fenerbahce’s Simon Kjaer and the Roma 
pair Antonio Rüdiger and Radja Nainggolan have been heavily scouted. Another 
player of interest to Chelsea, Leonardo Bonucci, has signed a contract 
extension at Juventus.

Chelsea have won 11 Premier League games in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/crystal-palace-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, equalling the club record, but Conte has spoken regularly with Emenalo and 
the hierarchy about their strategy in the transfer window.

“We must be very pleased with the side and with the achievement we’ve reached 
now, and I’m happy to play with these players,” said Conte afterSaturday’s 1-0 
win at Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/crystal-palace-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
. “But it’s logical that I have to speak with my club, to try to find the 
solution and make sure we arrive in a good position at the end of the season. I 
don’t know what will happen in January, but it’s important to talk to the club. 
We have a fantastic relationship and I have my ideas.”

Talks with Costa’s representatives are to take place in the new year aimed at 
tying the 28-year-old to a deal worth £200,000 a week. The striker’s contract 
expires in 2019 but there is a desire to extend the stay of a player who has 
scored 13 times in the league this season.

Costa has cut an unsettled figure at times since moving to Stamford Bridge 
from Atlético Madrid in 2014 but is as settled now as he has ever been. He is 
in Brazil on holiday having accrued a fifth yellow card of the season at 
Selhurst Park – his first caution in 11 matches – and, whereas the rest of the 
squad returned to training on Wednesday having had three days off, the forward 
has been granted an extra 24 hours away given he cannot play again until Stoke 
City visit Stamford Bridge on New Year’s Eve.

The Belgium forward Michy Batshuayi is expected to start in the Premier League 
for the first time against Bournemouth on Boxing Day, deputising for Costa.

Eden Hazard has had treatment on the knee injury sustained against West 
Bromwich Albion but, having impressed at Palace, should be fit enough to start 
on Monday.

The Football Association has confirmed Chelsea’s first-team assistant 
first-team coach, Steve Holland, will join Gareth Southgate’s coaching staff on 
a permanent basis at the end of the season. The 46-year-old has worked with 
Southgate since 2013, initially with the national set-up’s Under-21s and, more 
latterly, with the seniors during October and November. He will continue to 
combine his duties with those atChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> for the remainder of the season 
before joining the FA on a full-time basis.

“I am delighted to have Steve as my assistant manager,” said Southgate. “We 
have worked very closely for three years and I have upmost respect for the way 
that he works, his professionalism and the detail of his preparation. Our aim 
at the start was to encourage a young England team to play in a certain style 
and to develop a winning mentality; I think we certainly got a long way down 
the road to doing that with the under-21s. The challenge with the seniors is a 
greater one but Steve’s experience of working with elite players and coaches at 
Chelsea means he knows what a world-class team needs to look like.

“I’d like to thank Chelsea for allowing Steve to join up with us over the last 
three years. It’s great that Steve is able to work with us on the March camp 
[for the World Cup qualifier against Lithuania and friendly in Germany] but 
getting him on a full-time basis is very important and I was more than prepared 
to wait until May for that to happen. If we want to be successful then we have 
to employ the best people and for me, Steve is the best.”

Martyn Margetson, who had joined the national team as Sam Allardyce’s 
goalkeeping coach, will retain that role under Southgate, combining his duties 
with those at Cardiff City.
 