
Chelsea are set to exercise the option to recall Nathan Aké from his loan deal 
at Bournemouth. Antonio Conte said on Friday that he was evaluating the 
Dutchman’s situation and Eddie Howe, theBournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> manager, says he expects Aké 
to be recalled by his parent club.

Aké, who signed a new five-year deal with the London club in 2015, arrived at 
Bournemouth on a season-long loan from Chelsea in June and has since made 12 
appearances in all competitions for the club. “It looks like that will be the 
case that they will call him back, it’s not 100% finalised yet,” Howe said, 
speaking to the BBC, afterhis side’s 3-0 FA Cup third-round defeat at Millwall. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/millwall-bournemouth-fa-cup-match-report>
 “That would be a huge blow for us and with Nathan going back our defensive 
resources would be stretched. It would be a huge blow to us as he’s done so 
well.”

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in England, Spain, Germany, France 
and Italy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Howe is already without the Bournemouth captain, Simon Francis, through 
suspension, for the next two matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/bournemouth-appeal-against-simon-francis-red-card-rejected-fa>
 while centre-back Marc Wilson is an injury concern. Aké missed Bournemouth’s 
defeat at Millwall on Saturday and was one of 11 changes made by Howe from their
Premier League draw against Arsenal. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/bournemouth-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>

“It’s easier said than done to say we are going to recruit a player in similar 
stature to Nathan and I’m not sure there’s too many out there,” Howe said. “So 
that’s going to be a difficult one for us but we will assess our options and 
try and make the right decisions.”

Aké, who spent last season on loan at Watford, was limited to substitute 
appearances until breaking into the Bournemouth team in November. Bournemouth 
travel to Hull City in the Premier League next Saturday before home matches 
against Watford and Crystal Palace.Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> take on Peterborough United in 
the FA Cup on Sunday before travelling to Leicester City next Saturday.

Kurt Zouma is expected to make his first start of the season on Sunday at 
Stamford Bridge but Aké could further boost Conte’s defensive options. The 
defender’s last appearance for Chelsea came against West Bromwich Albion in May 
2015. “Aké is a really good player and now in the last five games he’s started 
to play with Bournemouth and is playing every game,” Conte said on Friday. 
“Honestly, I’m evaluating his situation, because Aké could be an interesting 
opportunity in this window, yes, for us.”
 