
Chelsea are still in talks with Atalanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atalanta> over the possible signing of 
Franck Kessié but the Premier League club but may have to wait until the summer 
before a transfer can be concluded.

Antonio Conte is a huge admirer of the Ivory Coast midfielder and would be 
keen for the player to joinChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> during this transfer window but 
there is an acceptance that Atalanta will want to keep him until the end of the 
current campaign.

Atalanta are holding out for up to €35m-€40m (£30m-£34m) for Kessié, who spent 
last season on loan at Cesena but has become a key player for the Nerazzurri 
this campaign. The 20-year-old has scored six goals in 16 appearances as
Atalanta have moved up the table to sixth in Serie A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/07/atalanta-rise-gasperini-serie-a-blog>
, only three points behind third‑placed Napoli. Losing Kessié now would be a 
big blow to their hopes of qualifying for Europe.

Gian Piero Gasperini, the Atalanta manager said after the club’s last game 
before the winter break that he hoped he would keep all his players in January. 
“I am not worried as I don’t think that any player will leave in January. The 
club have every intention to keep the players until June and we may even 
strengthen.”

The Ivorian midfielder’s agent claimed last week that several other Premier 
League sides, including Liverpool, Manchester United, Manchester City and 
Arsenal, were also monitoring Kessié’s situation and Juventus and Napoli are 
also interested in signing the player. Napoli, indeed, have a first-refusal 
option if they can agree a fee with Atalanta.

Kessié has been selected in the Ivory Coast squad for the Africa Cup of 
Nations having become a regular in Michel Dussuyer’s side in recent months.

A proposed move to Sunderland in August broke down after he was denied a work 
permit but his new status as a regular international and one of the 
highest-rated young midfielders in Italy should mean that is no longer an 
obstacle to any move to England.

Kessié’s agent George Atangana told the Guardian last week: “We have a lot of 
interest from the Premier League. I cannot say at this stage how much he will 
cost but we are talking about one of the best young players in the world.

“But for us the most important thing is that the technical project is the 
right one for him. Franck is very young so we have to be very careful about his 
development.

“Chelsea are very interested and it is a great club but we must take our time 
to consider all the options,” Atangana, who was due to meet Stamford Bridge 
officials in London this week, added. “Now we are in January so he has to play 
at the Africa Cup of Nations for Ivory Coast so I am not going to rush 
anything.”

Transfer window January 2017: all the latest moves and news – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive> 