
CHICAGO

Chicagoist <http://chicagoist.com/>

This series often returns to this stable of city blogs. Why? Because they 
perfectly fit our criteria: offering great insider knowledge that is just as 
accessible and useful to visitors. Expect to find everything from the city'stop 
vegan dishes <http://chicagoist.com/2013/08/21/chicagos_best_vegan_dishes.php> 
to the verybest burgers 
<http://chicagoist.com/2013/05/31/chicagos_best_burgers.php>. There's also a 
dash of local news (often of the weird-and-wonderful variety), plusupdates on 
local bands 
<http://chicagoist.com/2013/08/20/chicago_folk_band_receive_john_lenn.php>. 
Useful post: It has to be the quick-fix Best of Chicagoist 
<http://chicagoist.com/tags/bestofchicagoist> page: best cocktails 
<http://chicagoist.com/2013/07/17/chicagos_best_cocktails.php>, best cheap 
restaurants <http://chicagoist.com/2013/05/29/chicagos_best_cheap_eats.php>, 
best rooftop bars 
<http://chicagoist.com/2013/04/24/the_best_rooftop_bars_in_chicago.php> etc

Gapers Block <http://gapersblock.com/>
 I love Chicago: bumper stickers from Gappers Block. Photograph: Gappers Block 
"Gapers' block", or "gapers' delay", is a Chicago-born phrase for 
rubbernecking, ie spotting something of interest, such as an accident at the 
side of the road. That may sound a little morbid for a lifestyle site, but the 
idea is that people need to slow down and take more notice of their 
surroundings. The whole site has adopted a traffic theme: Slowdown is its 
events calendar; Rearview is a daily photo series, Drive-thru covers food, A/C 
tackles art and culture. The wealth of content makes it a collection of blogs, 
rather than just one, and it features a host of interesting local voices.
Useful post: The merchandise page could provide unusual souvenirs, such as 
button badges saying: "Don't call it the Willis Tower" (Sears, always, Sears) 
and "Don't call it Macy's" (locals still mourn the loss of theMarshall Field's  
<http://www.fieldsfanschicago.org/>store that stood in the same spot)

Chicago Hustles magazine <http://chicagohustlesmagazine.com/>

Founded by a "creative duo" who stay mostly behind the scenes, this site 
showcases "the passionate stories of artists and entrepreneurs in Chicago", and 
aims to serve an alternative readership. It covers news on roller derby games, 
festivals and underground club events. The Instagram feed is well worth a look: 
mixing humour with lots of love for Windy City life. Plus there's music, art 
and fashion. For more insight into the city, seeChicagoMag 
<http://www.chicagomag.com/>, Time Out Chicago  <http://www.timeoutchicago.com/>
andMy Kind of Town and Around <http://www.mykindoftownandaround.blogspot.co.uk/>
, a personal project by Lonely Planet writer Karla Zimmerman, which features 
plenty of out-of-the-ordinary finds.
Useful post: Why post a page of dull links when you can use the events fliers 
to create a colourful pinboard? Check it outthe latest happenings here 
<http://chicagohustlesmagazine.com/events-board/>

Good Beer Hunting <http://goodbeerhunting.com/>

Michael Kiser, author of this blog, says: "Since moving to Chicago almost 10 
years ago, I've seen the nation's craft beer movement explode first-hand. Few 
cities in the country have the range in beer styles, rich brewing history, and 
sheer determination to work hard and build an industry like Chicago does." This 
is where he documents that ever-growing movement, alongside photographer Jeff 
Cagle and food writer Emily Berman. There's more to this blog than Chicago (see 
the travels <http://goodbeerhunting.com/travels> section), but he can certainly 
point you in the right direction of a good local brew 
<http://goodbeerhunting.com/happyhours>. As tourists, we are holding out for 
him to share his expertise through a nice top 10, or some such, but maybe 
that's just not Kiser's style.
Useful post: See the events and festival page 
<http://goodbeerhunting.com/eventsandfestivals> for beer-fuelled good times

NASHVILLE

Music City Unsigned <http://www.musiccityunsigned.com>
 Ernest Tubb Record Shop, Nashville. Photograph: Alamy 
Most travellers come to Nashville for one reason: music. Get yourself in the 
mood for the trip with a visit to this site, which highlights some of the 
city's best talent. Start your local education with theonline jukebox 
<http://www.musiccityunsigned.com/blog> in the left-hand corner. See also: 
Nashvillest.com <http://nashvillest.com/> and Breakonacloud.com 
<http://breakonacloud.com/>.
Useful post: The events calendar <http://www.musiccityunsigned.com/#/calendar>

Nashville Eater <http://nashville.eater.com/>

This US-wide chain of blogs is always worth a look when you're searching for 
insight into a local food scene. Plan for your trip and keep ahead of the game 
with posts such asNashville's Six Most Anticipated Fall Openings 
<http://nashville.eater.com/archives/2013/08/26/nashvilles-most-anticipated-fall-openings.php>
. And don't miss a pick of18 of the city's best restaurants 
<http://nashville.eater.com/archives/2013/07/09/the-18-essential-nashville-restaurants-july-2013.php>
, a list specifically designed to appeal to both locals and visitors. For more 
on the city's food scene, seeNashville Restaurants 
<http://nashvillerestaurants.blogspot.co.uk/>, a smaller operation, with less 
whistles and bells but plenty of reviews on all types of cuisine.
Useful post: Where to eat brunch in Nashville 
<http://nashville.eater.com/archives/2013/08/20/where-to-eat-brunch-in-nashville.php>

Experience Nashville <http://experiencenash.blogspot.co.uk/>

The author here is billed as just "an average local" – but they've certainly 
got more savvy than most, and they're doing a great service for visitors by 
sharing the fruits of their years in the city. There are plenty of handy lists 
here, sharing favourite spots forpizza 
<http://experiencenash.blogspot.co.uk/2013/05/pizza-pizza-pizza.html>, coffee 
<http://experiencenash.blogspot.co.uk/2013/05/crema.html>, ice-cream 
<http://experiencenash.blogspot.co.uk/2013/06/sweet-summertime-in-nashville.html>
 and more. For extra tips, be sure to follow on Twitter, too (@experiencenash 
<https://twitter.com/experiencenash>). 
Useful post: A one-day itinerary for Nashville 
<http://experiencenash.blogspot.co.uk/2013/07/spending-day-visiting-nashville-heres.html>

MEMPHIS

I Love Memphis <http://ilovememphisblog.com/>
 Cadillac on display at the Graceland Museum, Memphis. Photograph: Alamy 
Blogger Kerry Crawford works for Memphis Convention and Visitors Bureau, so 
don't expect too much negativity here. But Kerry got her job because she loves 
her home town, not the other way round, and the enthusiasm is infectious. 
There's plenty of content here and, more importantly, plenty of clarity, so you 
can lay your eyes on exactly what you need. The drop-down menu at the top 
neatly breaks down the posts into handy categories:eat 
<http://ilovememphisblog.com/category/eat/>, do 
<http://ilovememphisblog.com/category/do/>, shop 
<http://ilovememphisblog.com/category/shop/> etc. (And, yes, there's an Elvis 
section <http://ilovememphisblog.com/category/meet/elvis/> too). 
Useful post: Try the five things to do this weekend 
<http://ilovememphisblog.com/category/this-weekend/>

Choose 901 <http://www.choose901.com/>

Why 901? That's the phone code for Memphis. The site's primary aim is to get 
people to live, work, volunteer and invest in the city, and its main tool for 
doing so is through promoting Memphis's best assets. Alongside theblogposts 
<http://www.choose901.com/?cat=1,6,4,554,590,5,14,1062>, there is a 
quick-reference "finds <http://www.choose901.com/901-finds/>" page, which 
provides a handy list of top places to eat and visit.

Useful post: Try the blogroll <http://www.choose901.com/901-blogs/> to see if 
there are any other sites that match your interests –cycling 
<http://www.bikinginmemphis.com/about/>, maybe?

Eat Local Memphis <http://www.eatlocalmemphis.org/>

As the title suggests, this site is a staunch supporter of independent 
restaurants, bars and cafes. Thomas Robinson is your guide and he keeps the 
site updated with plenty of big, appetite-boosting photos. The one downside is 
not being able to find the review/topic you need in an instant. Can we suggest 
a helping hand? Perhaps a little sidebar like other Memphis review site,Dining 
with Monkeys <http://diningwithmonkeys.blogspot.co.uk/>? Or maybe even 
searchable listings, as onHungry Memphis 
<http://www.memphisflyer.com/blogs/HungryMemphis/> (slightly hidden in the 
middle of the right-hand panel)? Nice site though. And we imagine Thomas has 
his hands full with his day job: working for anon-profit organisation 
<http://www.mifa.org/> that started the Something Good in Memphis 
<http://www.somethinggoodinmemphis.org/> movement.
Useful post: Burger talk 
<http://www.eatlocalmemphis.org/2013/07/28/the-hold-up-burger-time-at-the-holding-pen/>
 