
It’s a city of gangsters, a cradle of the blues, but if you want to explore 
Chicago there’s no better place to start than with its literature. The Windy 
City shaped the imagination of writers from Ernest Hemingway to Saul Bellow, 
from Philip Roth to Philip K Dick. Charlotte Jones laid out a few key 
coordinates when she described Chicago as “the unexpected cultural centre of 
European modernism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/aug/19/chicago-reading-american-literature-city-naturalism-modernism>
” and asked you to tell us your favourite books about Chicago. We’ve assembled 
the best recommendations, but feel free to keep on adding the books which 
capture the spirit of Chicago in the comments section below.

1. Native Son by Richard Wright 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099282938>
 (1940)

Native Son tells the story of young Bigger Thomas, a black American living in 
poverty and crime on the south side. An immediate hit when it first came out, 
selling 250,000 copies within three weeks of publication, this protest novel 
tackles the social conditions resulting from poverty like few others.Gary Daily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10247620> said: “The poetry in 
the blues, one of Chicago’s most profound hand-me-down gifts to the world, 
should not be missed. BB King, Howlin’ Wolf, Muddy Waters came out of the South 
to Chicago’s south side and music was changed forever. And the same course was 
followed by Richard Wright, the author of one half of a masterpiece, Native 
Son.”

In quotes from the book:

Violence is a personal necessity for the oppressed ... It is not a strategy 
consciously devised. It is the deep, instinctive expression of a human being 
denied individuality.

They hate because they fear, and they fear because they feel that the deepest 
feelings of their lives are being assaulted and outraged. And they do not know 
why; they are powerless pawns in a blind play of social forces.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F25%2Fbooks-about-chicago-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F17%2F1410966684912%2F0dbdc7b3-82f6-4e0a-bb7f-581ccd17e100-694x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chicago%20in%20books%3A%20readers'%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F25%2Fbooks-about-chicago-readers-picks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chicago%20in%20books%3A%20readers%27%20picks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F25%2Fbooks-about-chicago-readers-picks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F17%2F1410966684912%2F0dbdc7b3-82f6-4e0a-bb7f-581ccd17e100-694x1020.jpeg>
2. The Studs Lonigan trilogy by James T Farrell 
<http://www.penguin.com/book/studs-lonigan-by-james-t-farrell/9780141186733> 
(1932-35)

This book comprises the three novels James T Farrell wrote at the time of the 
Great Depression: Young Lonigan (1932), The Young Manhood of Studs Lonigan 
(1934) and Judgment Day (1935). The trilogy recounts the life of Studs Lonigan, 
from youth to death, charting his decline from a kind-hearted, ambitious 
teenager to a broken alcoholic, overwhelmed by material and spiritual poverty.
Swelter <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/39664437> 
commented:

No matter how gritty the milieu, stories set in New York City always seem to 
have a touch of glamour about them, albeit often out of reach or illusory. 
Chicago seems to inspire more consistently tough-minded tales. The Studs 
Lonigan Trilogy by James T Farrell is a great novel sequence set in the 
lower-class Irish-Catholic community in the 1920s and 30s.

In quotes from the book:

He had come to America, haven of peace and liberty, and it, too, was joining 
the slaughter, fighting for the big capitalists. There was no peace for men, 
only murder, cruelty, brutality.

So long, Lee. Give our regards to the Kaiser. And tell him there’s a few boys 
on 58th Street who’ll throw a party for him if he’ll drop around.

They served the rich, and tried to think that they were rich.


3. The Time Traveler’s Wife by Audrey Niffenegger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jan/31/featuresreviews.guardianreview17>
 (2003)


Chicago isn’t just about gritty realism. For phobette 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/39650480>, The Time 
Traveler’s Wife allows the reader “to see the city in a more romantic light”. 
Niffenegger’s debut novel mixes sci-fi and romance as it tells the story of a 
Chicago librarian called Henry, who suffers from a genetic disorder which 
causes him to jump backwards and forwards in time. It was also recommended by
Phil Hanrahan <https://twitter.com/lifeafterfavre>, Emma Hislop 
<https://twitter.com/EmmaHislop91> and Yas W <https://twitter.com/thadd31>.


In quotes from the book:

Chicago has so much excellent architecture that they feel obliged to tear some 
of it down now and then and erect terrible buildings just to help us all 
appreciate the good stuff.

Outside it’s a perfect spring night. We stand on the sidewalk in front of our 
apartment building, and Henry takes my hand, and I look at him, and I raise our 
joined hands and Henry twirls me around and soon we’re dancing down Belle 
Plaine Avenue, no music but the sound of cars whooshing by and our own 
laughter, and the smell of cherry blossoms that fall like snow on the sidewalk 
as we dance underneath the tress.

4. A Raisin in the Sun by  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408140901>
Lorraine Hansberry 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408140901>
 (1959)

This classic inspired an excellent Sidney Poitier film 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0055353/> and is still winning accolades on 
Broadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/04/a-raisin-in-the-sun-review-denzel-washington-broadway-revival>
, but reading the original play is a delight. Hansberry tells the story of 
Walter Lee, a black chauffeur in the south side of Chicago who is hungry for 
hope and charts the struggles of his family. The title comes fromLangston 
Hughes’s poem Harlem <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/175884> (“What 
happens to a dream deferred? / Does it dry up / like a raisin in the sun?”). 
According toCamaradeau <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3093987>
, it was the “first book that sprang to my mind ... a late product of the 
Harlem Renaissance-esque movement ... An absorbing story of racial tension and 
family struggle on the south side.”

In quotes from the book:

Beneatha: You didn’t tell us what Alaiyo means ... For all I know, you might 
be calling me Little Idiot or something.

Asagai: It means ... It means One for Whom Bread – Food – Is Not Enough.

At times it will seem that nothing changes at all ... and then again ... the 
sudden dramatic events which make history leap into the future. And then quiet 
again. Retrogression even. Guns, murder, revolution. And I even will have 
moments when I wonder if the quiet was not better than all that death and 
hatred.

Something always told me I wasn’t no rich white woman.

5. Gwendolyn Brooks <http://www.poetryarchive.org/poet/gwendolyn-brooks>


There’s usually one author whose name leaps from your recommendations – this 
time it was Gwendolyn Brooks. The first African-American to win the Pulitzer 
prize (1950) and to be appointed to the American Academy of Arts and Letters, 
she reached the literary stratosphere with her second collection, Annie Allen, 
a sequence of poems about a black girl growing up in Chicago. Her reputation as 
a poetovershadowed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/dec/07/guardianobituaries> her only 
novel, Maud Martha (1953) – but you should read it now, saysID695199 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2157749>. Her work was also 
recommended by
Gary Daily <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10247620>, Jasmine 
Davila <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11100739> and 
Babadhalgarag <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13662136>.

In quotes from the book:

She was afraid to suggest to him that to most people, nothing “happens”. That 
most people merely live from day to day until they die. That, after he had been 
dead a year, doubtless fewer than five people would think of him oftener than 
once a year. That there might even come a year when no one on earth would think 
of him at all.

What she wanted was to donate to the world a good Maud Martha. That was the 
offering, the bit of art, that could not come from any other. She would polish 
and hone that.

6. Studs Terkel’s Chicago 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781595587183>
 (1986) and his oral histories

Studs Terkel, radio legend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/nov/03/studs-terkel> and oral 
historian <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jan/23/history.usa>, has 
published several celebrated oral histories –Working 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Working:_People_Talk_About_What_They_Do_All_Day_and_How_They_Feel_About_What_They_Do>
,Race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/13/studs-terkel-race-us-20-years>, 
Coming of Age 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Coming_of_Age.html?id=cHLkAAAACAAJ&redir_esc=y>
,Hard Times 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hard_Times:_An_Oral_History_of_the_Great_Depression>
 – all of which are essential to understanding 20th-century America. Terkel, 
who took his nickname from James T Farrell’s character, is considered a “master 
chronicler of American life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/01/studs-terkel-usa> in the 20th 
century, veteran radical and vibrant soul of the midwestern capital of 
Chicago”. “To register him as ‘writer and broadcaster’ would be like calling 
Louis Armstrong a ‘trumpeter’ or the Empire State Building an ‘office block’,” 
wrote the Observer’sEd Vulliamy <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/edvulliamy>
 in his obituary. On top of his essential oral histories, his book Chicago – 
part memoir, part celebration of the city – is a must. Recommended by
Babadhalgarag <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13662136>, Nicole 
the Bitter <https://twitter.com/MildlyBitter> and Glenn Taylor 
<https://twitter.com/GlennTaylorBook>.

In quotes from the book:


Chicago is not the most corrupt of cities. The state of New Jersey has a 
couple. Need we mention Nevada? Chicago, though, is the Big Daddy. Not more 
corrupt, just more theatrical, more colorful in its shadiness.

They would sit and talk and tell us their hard luck story. Whether it was true 
or not, we never questioned it. It’s very important you learn people as people 
are.

I’ll never forget that Depression Easter Sunday. Our son was four years old. I 
bought ten or fifteen cents’ worth of eggs. You didn’t get too many eggs for 
that. But we were down.

7. The Devil in the White City by Erik Larson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jul/26/featuresreviews.guardianreview8> 
(2003)

This book is a novelistic retelling of events surrounding the Chicago World’s 
Fair in 1893. Larson tells the story of the architect behind the fair, Daniel H 
Burnham, in parallel with the life of the serial killer Dr HH Holmes, who 
killed his victims in a so-called “Murder Castle 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/H._H._Holmes#Chicago_and_the_.22Murder_Castle.22>
”. Recommended byBarry Crozier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/13673020> and Thaizinred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4624105>.

In quotes from the book:

It was so easy to disappear, so easy to deny knowledge, so very easy in the 
smoke and din to mask that something dark had taken root. This was Chicago, on 
the eve of the greatest fair in history.

Beneath the gore and smoke and loam, this book is about the evanescence of 
life, and why some men choose to fill their brief allotment of time engaging 
the impossible, others in the manufacture of sorrow. In the end it is a story 
of the ineluctable conflict between good and evil, daylight and darkness, the 
White City and the Black.

I must confess a shameful secret: I love Chicago best in the cold.

Place has always been important to me, and one thing today’s Chicago exudes, 
as it did in 1893, is a sense of place. I fell in love with the city, the 
people I encountered, and above all the lake and its moods, which shift so 
readily from season to season, day to day, even hour to hour.

8. Chicago by Alaa Al Aswany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/oct/04/fiction.alaaalaswany> (2007)

This novel, written by Egyptian dentist and journalist Alaa Al Aswany, tells 
the story of a group of Egyptian postgraduate students at the University of 
Illinois exploring their relationships and the difficulties they face in the 
city. It depicts the racism of post-9/11 Chicago as well as the corruption of 
the political regime back in their home country. A good novel both for an 
unusual take on the city and America and for a fascinating insight into Egypt 
before the Arab spring. It was recommended byTripFiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12123528>.

In quotes from the book:

Many do not know that chicago is not an English word but rather Algonquian, 
one of several languages that Native Americans spoke. In that languagechicago 
meant ‘strong smell’.

9. Sister Carrie by Theodore Dreiser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/05/100-best-novels-sister-carrie-theodore-dreiser>
 (1900)

The ultimate story of the American dream, as pursued by a young girl who moves 
from the country to Chicago.According to Robert McCrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/05/100-best-novels-sister-carrie-theodore-dreiser>
 it’s one of the 100 best novels written in English. “In some ways it’s crude 
and heavy-handed, blazing with coarse indignation, but in its day it was, 
creatively speaking, a game-changer,” he says. Sinclair Lewis, the US’s first 
Nobel laureate, said that it “came to housebound and airless America like a 
great free Western wind, and to our stuffy domesticity gave us the first fresh 
air since Mark Twain and Whitman”. ReadersBenjamin Dreyer  
<https://twitter.com/BCDreyer>and Emma Hislop <https://twitter.com/EmmaHislop91>
 recommended it.

In quotes from the book:

When Caroline Meeber boarded the afternoon train for Chicago, her total outfit 
consisted of a small trunk, a cheap imitation alligator-skin satchel, a small 
lunch in a paper box, and a yellow leather snap purse, containing her ticket, a 
scrap of paper with her sister’s address in Van Buren Street, and four dollars 
in money.

A half-equipped little knight she was, venturing to reconnoiter the mysterious 
city and dreaming wild dreams of some vague, far-off supremacy, which should 
make it prey and subject – the proper penitent, groveling at a woman’s slipper.

What have we missed? Add it in the comment thread below. And while you’re at 
it, tell us what cities and places you would like us to tackle next. You can 
email your ideas and suggestions to marta.bausells@theguardian.com.
 