
Chicago on a rainy Wednesday night. We've eaten hotdogs at a joint on North 
Clark Street where a "chocolate milkshake" costs $20 and the cashier gets 
topless. We've downed Old Style beers at a great old dive bar, theL&L Tavern 
(3207 North Clark Street), where you can buy a legal spirit made from distilled 
coca leaves, the raw ingredient for cocaine. We're revving ourselves up for a 
1,000-mile road trip through the "wheelhouse of American music", as my travel 
companionRev Timmy James <http://www.revtimmyjames.com/> puts it; starting here 
in Frank Sinatra's kind of town, and swinging down through Louisville and 
Nashville to Memphis.

We intend to stay drenched in regionally appropriate music and our hope is to 
find a good live show every night. Chicago, where the blues got electrified, 
Curtis Mayfield honed his funky soul, and house music was invented, is proving 
tricky. At the normally reliableCubby Bear <http://www.cubbybear.com/> 
(1059 West Addison), we walk out on a lame indie pop band. I say no to 
demon-infected thrash metal and the Rev doesn't like hip-hop, which rules out a 
visit to the South Side clubs whereKanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/picture/2013/jun/28/infomania-kanye-west> 
andLupe Fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/mar/03/lupe-fiasco-lasers-review> got 
started – that and the 40-odd murders down there in the last month.

So we fall back on the blues. We're about 60 years late for the best, when 
Muddy Waters and Howlin' Wolf were in charge, and Otis Rush was roaring and 
groaning on the West Side. But the tradition runs deep here, andcity still has 
at least 10 functioning blues clubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2010/mar/27/chicago-blues-clubs-buddy-guy>. 
They cater mostly for tourists these days, which the purists don't like, but 
the alternative is a lot of unemployed musicians and the final death of a great 
American art form.
 Kingston Mines blues club, Chicago. Photograph: Rex Features 
We step out of a taxi at Kingston Mines <http://kingstonmines.com/> (2548 
North Halsted), a family-run club with live blues on seven nights a week. We 
shuffle past the bouncers, pay $12 apiece, and enter a big low-slung building 
with two stages, and a kitchen serving ribs and Cajun food. The blues can sound 
stale and dated in the wrong hands, but that won't be a problem tonight. 
White-haired Carl Weathersby complains about his sciatic nerve but, once he 
gets limbered up, he has 40 years of stagecraft and musicianship to draw on, a 
smoking-hot band, and a powerful voice full of aching soul. When live music is 
this good, you lose track of yourself, and maybe that's a kind of freedom.

The next morning, with the afterglow shining through our hangovers, we spend 
more money than we were intending atDusty Groove <http://www.dustygroove.com/> 
(1120 North Ashland Avenue), a wonderful emporium specialising in soul, funk, 
jazz and hip-hop, mostly on vinyl. After a fortifying Italian beef sandwich at
Mr. Beef <http://www.mrbeefonorleans.com/> (666 North Orleans), we make a 
pilgrimage to the oldChess Records recording studio <http://bluesheaven.com/> 
(2120 South Michigan Avenue), where Chuck Berry, Bo Diddley and many others cut 
their best stuff.

The tour guide is Keith Dixon, grandson of legendary bluesman Willie Dixon, 
and he regales us with stories he heard growing up. The Rolling Stones wrote a 
song about the building and when they recorded an album here (12 x 5), Mick 
Jagger was so overcome by nerves and feelings of inadequacy that he stood 
facing the back wall and asked for Chuck Berry to be removed from the building. 
"You can't tell my grandmother this one," begins another story. Keith invites 
us to a free show that night, but it's time to hit the road.

Rev Timmy James, who performs blues and country under that name in New York, 
delves into his iPod, and comes up with Jesus Just Left Chicago by ZZ Top. 
"Drive like Jesus," he says, as we cross a big iron bridge with views across 
Lake Michigan. He lets the album play out and then it's Dwight Yoakam and 
bluegrass all the way to Kentucky.

Louisville, birthplace of Muhammad Ali and Hunter S Thompson, is an elegant, 
charming, bourbon-enthused city on the Ohio river. Bluegrass has long been a 
part of the city's soundscape, although its heartland is in eastern Kentucky 
and, since the early 80s, punk and indie have thrived here. Slint and My 
Morning Jacket are its biggest stars, along with cult singer Will Oldham, aka 
Bonnie "Prince" Billie, who plays around town regularly.-songwriter
 Chris Casello at Robert's Western World, Nashville. Photograph: Alamy 
We catch the Ritchie White Orchestra at a dependable indie rock club called the
New Vintage <http://www.newvintagelouisville.com/> (2126 South Preston Street). 
The spirits menu at the bar lists only bourbons, so we get some Buffalo Trace 
and Pappy Van Winkle as the building reverberates with driving rhythms, 
dissonant noise and weird harmonies. Ritchie White looks like Uday Hussein, 
Saddam's depraved younger brother, and he has stage presence to burn.

We meet a Filipino-American with a broad Kentucky accent called Mike Bucayu. 
He's a musician, a fanatical collector of punk and bluegrass records, and the 
proud owner of a basement door signed by the Ramones and various bluegrass 
dignitaries. The next morning, we go to his house, sign the door, and ask him 
how punk rock led him to bluegrass. "When I heard those banjos, I heard the 
same driving rhythm, and I was looking for something new to get into," he says. 
"Punk is limited. It's about teenage angst. But everything is in bluegrass, the 
whole of life, and they sing about heaven and hell too."

If you want to hear the best of it, he says, you need to drive east to Pike 
County, and ask at a gas station where the music's happening. Some other time, 
because we're off to Nashville, aka Nashvegas and Music City USA. On the road, 
we listen toLoretta Lynn <http://www.lorettalynn.com/splash/>, George Jones, 
Merle Haggard, Johnny Paycheck, and Dolly Parton's immortal Jolene. Neither of 
us enjoy the country pop that Nashville is putting out today. The ache has gone 
out of the music, replaced by sing-song anthems of celebration.

Country used to be the only game in town, but Nashville these days has an 
exploding rock scene. Dan Auerbach of the Black Keys is living and recording 
here. So is Jack White, who's opened a typically quirky record shop and 
novelties lounge calledThird Man Records <http://www.thirdmanrecords.com/> (623 
7th Avenue South), with a Tesla tower on top of the building.
 Third Man Records, Nashville. Photograph: Rick Diamond/Getty 
Broadway is a long strip of bars, clubs and souvenir shops, and following good 
advice, we head straight forRobert's Western World 
<http://robertswesternworld.com/> (416B Broadway), an old honky tonk where you 
can still hear traditional country played live. The best venue to experience 
the hipper side of Nashville is probably theMercy Lounge  
<http://mercylounge.com/>(1 Cannery Row), where we stumble upon a benefit show 
for a musician whose studio burned down. Local darlings Luella and the Sun are 
playing with Justin Townes Earle (Steve Earle's son), and Webb Wilder, who 
calls himself "The Last of the Full-Grown Men".

Justin Townes Earle, gangly and deeply stoned, plucks away at his acoustic 
guitar and croons winsomely – weak beer after high-octane Webb Wilder. Then the 
headliners take the stage. Luella is a gorgeous, freaky-looking art chick and 
clearly born for the stage. Her band plays dirty fractured blues and gospel, 
she's fierce and vulnerable, dreamy and screamy, and she changes tambourines 
many times. She's starting to get national recognition, and I suspect she'll go 
far.

Back on the Music Highway to Memphis, we have a dilemma. What should we listen 
to? Should it be Elvis? Rev Timmy has more than 700 of his songs. Should it be 
Johnny Cash, who walked into Sun Studio in 1955 as an appliance salesman? What 
about Al Green, who still preaches in his Memphis church, or Isaac Hayes and 
all those great soul artists onStax Records? Then there's Memphis blues and 
gospel to consider, the garage rock bands, even Justin Timberlake and Three 6 
Mafia. More than 1,000 songs have been written about Memphis, and nowhere else 
in America has a richer musical tradition.

We cruise into the city listening to the deep soul of James Carr and the 
horn-driven funk of the Bar-Kays. After the world's best barbecued ribs at the
Rendezvous <http://www.hogsfly.com/> (52 South 2nd Street), we wander the bars 
and clubs ofBeale Street, where Memphis has made a success of marketing its 
music to tourists. In search of more authentic surroundings, we head to a blues 
joint calledWild Bill's 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Wild-Bills-Memphis/124195187594729> (1580 
Vollintine Avenue, +1 901 726 5473) in the black part of town, only to find it 
closed for the night.
 Sun Studio, Memphis. Photograph: Lucas Jackson/Reuters 
We end up at Memphis's favourite dive bar, the Buccaneer Lounge 
<https://www.facebook.com/BuccaneerLounge?rf=152600704756181> (1328 Monroe 
Avenue), where $5 gets you local music most nights of the week. We walk into 
the birthday party of Dan Montgomery, who sings and plays in the 
rock-folk-Americana tradition, and is generous with his birthday cake. Also 
performing is Lahna Deering of Deering and Down, who sings huskily and 
soulfully under a painting of a mermaid having sex with a pirate.

Next morning, we're pleasantly surprised to see her again behind the cash till 
atSun Studio <http://www.sunstudio.com/> (706 Union Avenue). Then she changes 
her T-shirt and becomes the guide for the 12 o'clock tour. I had low hopes for 
the tour, but with storytelling and performing skills, and artfully chosen 
snippets of music and spoken-word recordings, she brings to life all the dramas 
and cliffhangers and happy accidents that attended the birth of rock'n'roll, 
and I was not the only one choking back tears in that shabby little room where 
the course of music changed forever.

Richard Grant <http://www.richardgrant.us/> is the author of Ghost Riders: 
Travels with American Nomads. His other books include Bandit Roads

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 