
It is a cold night in Chicago and the bars in the River North neighbourhood 
are bleeding dance music on to the street. The city skyline glitters as if gold 
dust has been thrown into the night, a blaze of shiny neon. I'm standing 
outside an unmarked door that I'm told will lead me back in time. This is
Untitled <http://http://untitledchicago.com/home-page/>, a subterranean 
speakeasy where the waiters dress in crisp white shirts, braces and fedoras and 
the entertainment is provided by elderly bow-tied crooners in black tuxedos who 
gamely encourage the diners to party like it's 1929.

A saxophone moans and a barman prepares cocktails. In the whisky room, the 
bottles are lined up high behind the bar, glowing gold in the dim light; a huge 
mirror hangs on the wall. Not everything, however, is quite as it seems. The 
mirror is actually composed of nine plasma television screens and while 
Untitled may look as if it's been around since the days of Capone, it opened 
less than six months ago. The planners studied old photographs of 1920s supper 
clubs for inspiration when designing the building and the menu includes 
Prohibition-inspired dishes, such as grit cakes with tomato jam and bison 
burgers.

I had come to this cavernous venue, on the site of a former furniture 
warehouse because Untitled is part of a trend that has seen new bars and 
restaurants taking inspiration from the rich history of Chicago to create 
something new. Some have looked to the 1920s – the era of speakeasies and 
supper clubs – others, like the revivedPump Room <http://www.pumproom.com/> 
which re-opened last year, evoke the celebrity encrusted glamour of 1950s and 
60s Chicago when the likes of Frank Sinatra and Judy Garland sang in (and 
about) the city. "We'll meet at the Pump Room, Ambassador East, to say the 
least," trilled Garland.
 The Pump Room evokes the glamour of the 1950s 
The Pump Room is a pleasant walk from downtown Chicago to the Gold Coast 
district and used to be the hottest celebrity haunt in the country. When he was 
in town, Sinatra would call ahead to the Pump Room and offer to pay the bill of 
anyone seated in his private booth if they would vacate it for him and his 
friends. Sinatra's booth is at the back of the restaurant, and when I visited 
it was the only unoccupied booth – as if the waiters still half expected the 
call to let them know he was on his way.

The new Pump Room tries not to intimidate guests with its history, but it's 
hard not to – the lobby walls are lined with old photographs of stars dining 
there, such as Bogie and Bacall, Marilyn Monroe and Clark Gable, Chaplin and 
Astaire. The refitted restaurant, which opened last year as part ofIan Schrager 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ian_Schrager>'s Public Chicago Hotel 
<http://www.publichotels.com/chicago/home/> – the Studio 54 co-founder last 
year renamed the Ambassador East and relaunched it as a no-frills hotel – has 
exchanged old-school glamour for classy understatement: yellow globes like 
atomic structures from the periodic table hang from the ceiling and the waiters 
look smart but casual.
 The bank vault-turned-lounge at the Bedford 
The new Pump Room is a revival of the old one, but elsewhere in Chicago old 
locations are being used in new ways.The Bedford 
<http://www.bedfordchicago.com/>, a new restaurant in the hip Wicker Park 
district, is located on the site of a former 1920s bank. I walked down the 
steps into the dimly lit wood-panelled dining room and was shown to a table 
next to the original bank vault. Many of the bank's original features still 
stand – the glass from teller windows has been made into lampshades and the 
bathroom stalls are the old private viewing rooms where rich folk would come to 
inspect their money. The undoubted highlight of the Bedford is, however, the 
vault with its giant circular silver door which leads into a refitted lounge. 
The room is lined from floor to ceiling with more than 6,000 original copper 
lock boxes. Candles flickered on low tables and a jewelled chandelier sparkled 
from the ceiling.

Later that evening I found myself searching again for an unmarked door, a pale 
yellow bulb dimly glowing above it. I pushed open the door and found myself in 
a narrow corridor which led to a set of velvet curtains. I parted the curtains 
and stepped into theViolet Hour <http://theviolethour.com/>. The cocktail bar, 
also in the Wicker Park district of Chicago, is named after a line from TS 
Eliot'sThe Waste Land <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Waste_Land>. Among the 
house rules for entering the Violet Hour is one that warns patrons "don't 
invite anyone you wouldn't want to invite to visit your mom on a Sunday 
afternoon". The bar was a high-ceilinged candlelit room that was tastefully 
furnished with tall-backed chairs arranged in clusters. The cocktails and 
drinks on the menu are inspired by the 1920s and the bar only allows seated 
guests so once the seats are taken a queue forms outside.

I took a sip of a non-alcoholic cocktail made with ginger, raspberry, lemon 
and orange and wondered about the wisdom of a non-drinker loving a cocktail 
bar. The Violet Hour worked because it was not aiming for the studied fake 
authenticity of Untitled and it was not a revival of a historic institution 
like the Pump Room. It was both derivative and original: living in the present 
but loving the past.

Essentials

United Airlines (0845 844 4777; united.com <http://www.united.com>) flies 
daily from London Heathrow to Chicago from £554 including taxes. Palmer House (
hilton.com 
<http://www3.hilton.com/en/hotels/illinois/palmer-house-a-hilton-hotel-CHIPHHH/index.html>
) has rooms from $139 (including tax). Public Chicago Hotel (publichotels.com 
<http://www.publichotels.com>) has doubles from $135. For more information, go 
to choosechicago.com <http://www.chicago.com>
 