
Writer Studs Terkel <http://www.studsterkel.org/> is probably my favourite 
Chicagoan. He may have been born in New York, but he lived in Chicago from 1922 
until his death in 2008. He knew its beginnings, its transitions and its 
contradictions. "Janus, the two-faced god, has both blessed and cursed the 
city-state Chicago …" he wrote. "Its character has been molded by the muscle 
rather than the word."

I won't try and capture the double character of the City of the Big Shoulders 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/poem/2043> (as Carl Sandburg 
calls it in his 1914 poem, Chicago). I just aim to feed you right and plug you 
into music with a soul.

I am not originally from Chicago. When I lived there for nine years, 
I was primarily out in the suburbs and the suburbs, dear reader, sure as shit 
ain't Chicago. Still, I got around a little and I retain some connections there 
who know its sights, sounds and tastes. One of those connections is my main 
man, Vitamin Steve Miller. Vitamin Steve helped me come up with the following 
suggestions for those who find themselves in "the Chi", hungry for street food 
and real-deal music venues.

For my money, tacos will sustain most any traveller on the hunt for good music 
and nightlife. With that in mind, if you find yourself in Lincoln Park, having 
experienced the magic of a free world-class zoo in the middle of a world-class 
town, head toTaco Joint at 1969 North Halsted. More than one person has called 
its chile rellenos the best in the city.
 Big Star. Photograph: Steve Miller, chicagoxstreets.com 
With your belly filled, walk half a mile north on Halsted to 2424 North 
Lincoln Avenue. There you'll findLincoln Hall <http://lincolnhallchicago.com/>, 
a great old theatre atop of which, in 1934, FBI agents crouched with their 
rifles and waited to kill bank robber John Dillinger when he exited theBiograph 
Theater <http://www.victorygardens.org/> across the street. These days, Lincoln 
Hall has live music almost every night. The September line-up includesDrew 
Holcomb and the Neighbors <http://www.drewholcomb.com/>, Charli XCX 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/charli-xcx>, and Clap Your Hands Say Yeah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/clapyourhandssayyeah>.

If you end up in the Wicker Park neighbourhood, I'd suggest two taco places. At
Antique Taco <http://antiquetaco.com/menu/> (1360 North Milwaukee Avenue) you 
will not go wrong with the pork carnitas or the crispy fish tempura and you 
could slide next door to theEmporium Arcade and Bar 
<http://emporiumchicago.com/>, where, drink in hand, you can play your heart 
out on such old favourites as Donkey Kong, Galaga or Space Invaders.

Big Star <http://bigstarchicago.com/> (1531 North Damen) has $3 whiskey shots, 
brilliant tacos de panza and a solid sense of the neighbourhood's working-class 
roots, reflected in the big star itself (ask about Nelson Algren).
 The Hideout. Photograph: Steve Miller, chicagoxstreets.com 
Make your next destination The Hideout <http://www.hideoutchicago.com/>. 
Tucked away at 1354 West Wabansia, it is odd and wonderful. Most nights will 
please eclectic tastes but, if you can, go forThe Hideout Block Party and AV 
Fest <http://fest.avclub.com/>, 6-7 September, where you'll see such greats as 
Neko Case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/mar/13/neko-case-middle-cyclone-interview>
,Mavis Staples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jun/23/mavis-staples-one-true-vine-review>
, andThe Hold Steady <https://www.theguardian.com/music/the-hold-steady>.

So keep your belly full and your ears open. Remember, Chicago is not New York 
and it is certainly not LA. The above-mentioned Nelson Algren wrote: "It used 
to be a writer's town and it's always been a fighter's town." I suppose the 
same could be said today. The people are iron-willed and tough, yet they spread 
wide their big shoulders and welcome the world to their streets, the crooning 
of Frank Sinatra's verse in every ear: Bet your bottom dollar, you'll lose the 
blues in Chicago.

Glenn Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/13/glenn-taylor-top-10-book-american-south>
, author ofThe Ballad of Trenchmouth Taggart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/16/ballad-trenchmouth-taggart-patrick-mccabe>
 and The Marrowbone Marble Company, and a teacher at West Virginia University

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 