
As “South Side”, our moustachioed, fedora-toting guide, points out the bullet 
holes that pockmark the cornerstone on the north wall of the grand, gothic Holy 
Name Cathedral, a dishevelled middle-aged man in a red anorak is tapping at the 
door of our tour bus.

“The bullet holes you can see in the stone come from a hit in 1926, on Earl 
“Hymie” Weiss <http://www.hymieweiss.com/>, a member of the O’Banion gang – Al 
Capone’s main rivals, ” says the guide while the man in red still taps away, 
getting more insistent and animated.

Chicago's music and street food will feed your soul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/17/chicago-music-street-food-soul> 
Eventually, South Side yields and asks him, through the glass, what he wants. 
I assume the anorak man is a tourist asking if he can join the bus tour at this 
late stage. “I’m related to Spike O’Donnell,” he beams, looking as if he’s 
three beers into an afternoon of leisure. “He was my great grand-uncle.”

“Yeah, OK buddy,” says South Side with a look of practised, conciliatory 
incredulity; then turns back to face us. “Everyone in Chicago’s got a story. 
Everyone’s related to a mobster.”

This city has an odd relationship with its gangster past. For some it is a 
mark of sin, for others a battle scar to flash with pride. And despite many 
attempts – most famously and bitterly by former mayor Richard M Daley – for the 
city to dissociate itself from the prohibition era, it remains a fascinating 
period in US history.

I’ve never agreed with Daley’s view. Capone was a man who drove around in an 
armoured green Cadillac and built soup kitchens for the poor while ordering the 
murders of judges; who forced the singer Fats Waller, at gunpoint, to play for 
three days straight at his birthday party, but then made him rich beyond his 
wildest dreams. A nice wiseguy, he wasn’t. But an interesting guy? No question.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fchicago-city-break-prohibition-era-nightlife-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422547396725%2F3a23cf9d-c2c7-463a-984c-7185e5e19645-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chicago%20prohibition-style%3A%20a%20city%20still%20married%20to%20the%20mob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fchicago-city-break-prohibition-era-nightlife-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chicago%20prohibition-style%3A%20a%20city%20still%20married%20to%20the%20mob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fchicago-city-break-prohibition-era-nightlife-tours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422547396725%2F3a23cf9d-c2c7-463a-984c-7185e5e19645-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sunset in the Chicago Loop district. Photograph: Adam Alexander Photography 
The Chicago History Museum <http://www.chicagohistory.org/>, in the Lincoln 
Park neighbourhood, has a section on Gangland Chicago among its many 
exhibitions, as well as organised pub crawls and discussions with experts on 
the era. I marvel at the ingenuity of devices to hide booze, such as a row of 
fake cigars hiding test tubes or a walking stick with a handle that cloaks a 
small beaker.

Top 10 live music venues in Chicago
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/17/top-10-live-music-venues-chicago>
If you want a great way to hear and see the sights of the prohibition era, the 
Untouchables Tour <http://www.gangstertour.com/> is a blast. As the tour bus 
trundles into the city’s actual South Side, we’re regaled with tales of 
mobsters such as Capone, Johnny Torrio, “Diamond” Jim Colosimo (so called as he 
would keep a bag of diamonds on him, sinisterly playing with them while talking 
to associates), red anorak man’s possible ancestor Spike O’Donnell, and Dion 
O’Banion, head of Chicago’s biggest Irish gang.

As some of the landmarks of the prohibition era are no more, the guides, South 
Side and Louie, make up for it by dressing up and dropping into character as 
hoods – complete with spats, pinstripe suits and two-tone shoes – while the 
sound system pipes out the rat-a-tat-tat of machine gun fire and jazz music to 
help us imagine the scene back in the 1920s. So, while the site of the St 
Valentine’s Day massacre is now a car park, in the hands of the guides we feel 
all the tension of the fateful 1929 day, with an account of how seven members 
of Bugs Moran’s gang were lined up and shot by hoods dressed as cops.
 By the lake … The Drake Hotel 
The next day I feel I’ve had enough blood and guts and want to hear more about 
what ordinary folk got up to in those boozeless, boozy times.Chicago Detours 
<http://www.chicagodetours.com/> is a walking tour that its founder Amanda 
Scotese describes as “a history of the way people had fun in Chicago”. So, as I 
follow Amanda into the bowels of Chicago’s odd double- and even triple-decker 
street layout, along the subterranean roads under South Wacker Drive, I’m shown 
iPad pictures of how the buildings looked then compared to now, and told of the 
music that would come streaming out of them. Later we stop for drinks in the 
grand437 Rush <http://www.philstefanis437rush.com/index.html> – one of the 
first venues to play a new-fangled type of music called jazz.

Perhaps the most absurd legacy of the Volstead Act of 1919 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volstead_Act> is its effect on Chicago’s 
nightlife. Speakeasies sprung up in every neighbourhood – so called as you 
would have to whisper the password to get in – and some still exist today, such 
asthe Green Door Tavern <http://www.greendoorchicago.com/> on North Orleans 
Street, and theGreen Mill <http://greenmilljazz.com/> in the Uptown 
neighbourhood. The Green Mill remains a stalwart of old-time good times, 
jumping till the early hours, with guests that dress the part: feather 
fascinators sticking out from ladies’ hats, men of all ages in homburgs and 
trilbys dancing the Charleston and the jitterbug, sipping whisky and gin 
cocktails chased down with a shot of Jeppson’s Malört, a local spirit that 
slips down about as smooth as granite.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fchicago-city-break-prohibition-era-nightlife-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422546931320%2F8dd8fada-c60d-459b-9a5c-d80c10564b8b-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chicago%20prohibition-style%3A%20a%20city%20still%20married%20to%20the%20mob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fchicago-city-break-prohibition-era-nightlife-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chicago%20prohibition-style%3A%20a%20city%20still%20married%20to%20the%20mob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fchicago-city-break-prohibition-era-nightlife-tours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422546931320%2F8dd8fada-c60d-459b-9a5c-d80c10564b8b-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Brimming with style … The Green Mill Cocktail Lounge 
In recent times, a host of newer restaurants and bars have sprung up taking, 
if not inspiration, then at least assimilation of the city’s gangster past. I’m 
talking about speakeasy-style bars such asDouble A 
<http://www.doubleachicago.com/> in the River North district, replete with a 
sliding wooden slat in the door to identify you as a John or a G-man, the
Drawing Room <http://thedrchicago.com/> in the Gold Coast, Trenchermen 
<http://www.trenchermen.com/> in Wicker Park and Scofflaw 
<http://www.scofflawchicago.com/> in Logan Square, which sit alongside venues 
with a more establishment air, like the debonairGlunz Tavern 
<http://www.glunztavern.com/> in Old Town or The Berghoff 
<http://www.theberghoff.com/> – the first place in the city to receive a liquor 
licence after prohibition officially ended in 1933.

To complete the homage to the Hollywood version of the era, see the white 
marble steps at Union Station where the famous shoot-out scene from The 
Untouchables (1987) was filmed; and theBlackstone hotel 
<http://www.chicagoarchitecture.info/Building/1213/Blackstone-Hotel.php>, where 
a ménage à trois between Capone, an underling and a baseball bat is said to 
have occurred.

To look the part, I visit the city’s wide choice of vintage clothing stores 
<http://chicago.cbslocal.com/top-lists/best-vintage-clothing-stores-in-chicago/>
, such asRandolph Street market <http://www.randolphstreetmarket.com/>, and get 
a proper wisgeguy hat atStore B <http://www.storebvintage.com/about> and Optimo 
<http://optimo.com/> – a Chicago institution whose clients include Johnny Depp, 
Jack White and the late, great John Lee Hooker.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fchicago-city-break-prohibition-era-nightlife-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422547104755%2F98685803-c6ca-414a-9d8d-a424e8ec47dd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chicago%20prohibition-style%3A%20a%20city%20still%20married%20to%20the%20mob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fchicago-city-break-prohibition-era-nightlife-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chicago%20prohibition-style%3A%20a%20city%20still%20married%20to%20the%20mob&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fchicago-city-break-prohibition-era-nightlife-tours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F29%2F1422547104755%2F98685803-c6ca-414a-9d8d-a424e8ec47dd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hats off to Sap … Saptarshi Ray in the Optimo hat shop 
The second place to get a liquor licence when the city went “wet” again was the
Drake hotel <http://www.thedrakehotel.com/>. It has a beguiling view of Lake 
Michigan, chandeliers and dragon-headed lamp fittings, and the elegant Coq D’or 
bar downstairs.

For those after a more modern hotel with a minimalist aesthetic, there’s Public
 <http://www.publichotels.com/chicago/home/>. Previously the Amabassador East, 
this was the playground of a different set of hatted hoodlums in the 1950s: the 
Rat Pack and their entourage. Frank Sinatra had his own table at the hotel’s 
famous restaurant – thePump Room <http://www.pumproom.com/> – just as Capone 
had his at just about every bar in town. And 90-odd years after the mobsters 
ran Chicago, they still have their fingerprints over much of what still makes 
the city special today.

How to do it

 The trip was organised by Choose Chicago (choosechicago.com 
<http://www.choosechicago.com/>), with accommodation at the Drake Hotel (+1 312 
787 2200,thedrakehotel.com <http://www.thedrakehotel.com/>, doubles from $139) 
and Public (+1 312 787 3700,publichotels.com 
<http://www.publichotels.com/chicago/home/>, doubles from $175).United (
united.com <https://www.united.com/web/en-US/default.aspx?root=1>, 0845 8444 
777) flies from Heathrow to Chicago from £557 return, including taxes
 