
The two brothers convicted in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/jan/22/edlington-brothers-jailed-torture-boys>
 of “appalling”, “sadistic” attacks on two other boys in Edlington, near 
Doncaster, South Yorkshire,have been granted lifelong anonymity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/09/edlington-attack-two-brothers-granted-lifelong-immunity>
 – with judge Sir Geoffrey Vos ruling that neither their original names nor 
their new identities could be revealed.

The brothers, 10 and 11 at the time of the 2009 attacks, now in their late 
teens, and no longer in custody, previously had anonymity until 18, and will 
join four others granted the lifelong protection of new identities. These are
Mary Bell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/apr/15/pressandpublishing.childprotection>
, who killed two young boys when she was 11,Jamie Bulger’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bulger> killers, Jon Venables and Robert 
Thompson, and Maxine Carr, who was convicted of conspiring to pervert the 
course of justice over themurders of Holly Wells and Jessica Chapman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/soham>.

What a gruesome roll call, and doubtless not one to inspire widespread concern 
for the lifelong wellbeing of the individuals concerned. Some might say, with 
feeling – returning to the Edlington case – that child perpetrators are given 
precedence over victims (child victims!), and where’s the justice in that? 
Where was the humanity for the victims from these individuals now coolly 
claiming their human rights? Yet isn’t it exactly these kinds of gruelling 
cases, and the challenging issues they throw up, that remind us all that, while 
society can’t stop horrific things happening, it can at least remain civilised, 
and direct the appropriate legal response? And that this in part requires a 
staunch belief in the potential for rehabilitation of even the most notorious 
child perpetrators.

The Edlington case was highly disquieting. The perpetrators (who had, among 
persistent acts of vandalism and delinquency, previously attacked another 
child, and tried to push yet another into the path of a car) lured the victims, 
aged nine and 11, on to wasteground. They then robbed, beat, and tortured them 
– stamping, choking, burning, striking with heavy objects, stabbing with 
sticks, pushing cigarettes into the wounds, forcing the victims to eat nettles 
and strip and sexually abuse each other. As has happened in other cases, the 
attack was partly filmed, making me wonder whether we’re immersed in an era of 
selfie-crime, where brutality, even the memory of brutality, is no longer 
enough – it must be recorded for some squalid form of “bragging rights”.

I don’t relate such details to sensationalise them – it feels essential to 
record and respect what the victims went through (the older boy nearly died 
from his injuries). However, it’s also important to keep an eye on other 
details – such as the family background of the perpetrators, their eventual 
placement into foster care, and the missed opportunities to help them 
(Doncaster children’s services were heavily criticised). The brothers came from 
a sprawling troubled family, with a drug-addicted mother, and a violent, 
jealous father, who regularly beat her and once “sliced” her face. After this 
last incident was related in court, the younger brother, otherwise impassive, 
broke down, sobbing into his cupped hands – surely an indication that this was 
not a “monster”, this was a child, who’d completely lost his way in the lumps 
and crevices of his own emotional scar tissue.

This isn’t some cack-handed attempt to “humanise” the brothers. They’re 
already human, and, crucially, remained so, even as children, when they 
committed their terrible crimes. Which is why this latest award of lifelong 
anonymity isn’t galling, an act of misplaced compassion squandered on the 
worthless; rather it’s both a testament to society’s belief in child 
rehabilitation, and a human victory to be proud of. The system is not 
infallible. (Venables failed to keep his own original identity secret, and was 
caught with child images.) However, what’s the alternative? Making grisly 
circus turns out of disturbed children for the rest of their lives, condemning 
them to endless disruption, upheaval, and threats at best? If society can’t 
stop such terrible things happening, a consistent and legal humane response 
isn’t only crucial, it’s all we’ve got.

Time is on Mick’s side: but then it always is for men
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbarabara-ellen-edlington--child-criminals-rights-just-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe487b2e5ceca2d3aca621f3461e2efca933f6306%2F0_226_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Child%20criminals%20also%20have%20rights%20in%20a%20just%20society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbarabara-ellen-edlington--child-criminals-rights-just-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Child%20criminals%20also%20have%20rights%20in%20a%20just%20society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbarabara-ellen-edlington--child-criminals-rights-just-society%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe487b2e5ceca2d3aca621f3461e2efca933f6306%2F0_226_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 This could be the last time: Mick Jagger at 73 is a father again, to his 
eighth child. Photograph: Sebastiao Moreira/EPA 
Mick Jagger has had his eighth child – a son, with partner, dancer Melanie 
Hamrick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/08/mick-jagger-father-for-eighth-time-aged-73-rolling-stones>
. Much of the reaction concerns the fact that Jagger is 73years old. Will he do 
a Kirk Douglas,100 last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/09/kirk-douglas-at-100-one-man-hollywood-mount-rushmore>
, and be around to see his son grow up? Who knows? He’s fit enough from all the 
touring, and the wealth can’t hurt.

Good luck to him. However, Jagger couldn’t seriously be held up as an example 
of older fathers being mocked the same as older mothers. Mainly because with 
women, it’s not just about being an older mother – for women, there’s barely a 
birth-giving age that isn’t deemed “wrong” by someone somewhere.

There’s probably a late-20s/mid-30s “window”, when it’s considered acceptable. 
But otherwise a woman can find that she and her pregnancy are deemed everything 
from too young, irresponsible, single, and careerist, on the one hand, to too 
old, selfish, deluded, dangerous, on the other.

The timing of a woman’s decision to have a baby can still be deemed a massive 
socio-political statement, to be questioned and criticised by all-comers. A few 
weak gags about Jagger taking his frame to the school pick-up don’t really 
compare.

With a hangover like that, I’d fire myself

Commiserations to Trishna Thakrar, who was just fired on The Apprentice 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/stayingin/tvfilm/the-apprentice-2016-trishna-thakrar-fired-after-getting-the-hump-on-gin-product-task-a3415966.html>
. I feel kinship with Thakrar because (spoiler alert) the task was 
alcohol-related and she ended up with a hangover, which may have contributed to 
her being fired.

I realise that the vast majority of readers out there are teetotal paragons of 
virtue. But, as others could tell you, it’s a special kind of hell to have to 
work through a filthy hangover.

I’ve had to do it feeling as though I’ve spent the previous night being bitten 
by a giant radioactive spider while being repeatedly dunked headfirst into a 
vat of whisky.

The times when the symptoms start morphing from nausea, headache and simple 
everyday misery to a surreal miasma of physical agony and creeping 
psychological dread, aka The Fear. What did I do? What did I say? Why didn’t my 
so-called friends just chloroform me? Add work to this already volatile mix, 
and it enters a whole new dimension of torment. What do these peoplewant? 
What’s with their bizarre uncool demands to do what you’re paid for?

Don’t they realise that you’re at the verge of typing with your nose, sobbing 
over the keys, as you claw pathetically at the mouse pad?

No, they don’t realise that you’re hungover. (Furtive darting glance). And 
they mustn’t realise.Oh no – do they realise? And so on.

Maybe I have an, ahem, “media perspective”, but who hasn’t soldiered bravely 
through a hangover at work, silently begging for death? Now that we’re in 
Christmas party season, spare a thought for all those wretched hungover 
photocopier-hugging souls.

Trishna did great, considering – in similar circumstances I’d have probably 
fired myself, just so that I could crawl back to my pit.
 