
China’s huge credit binge has increased the risk of a banking crisis in the 
world’s second biggest economy in the next three years, according to global 
financial watchdog.

An early warning of financial overheating – the gap between credit and GDP – 
hit 30.1 in China in the first quarter of this year, a report from the Bank for 
International Settlements (BIS) said on Sunday.

Any level above 10 suggests that a crisis will occur “in any of the three 
years ahead”, the BIS said. China’s indicator is way above the second highest 
level of 12.1 for Canada and the highest of the countries assessed by the BIS.

Truth, lies and trust in the age of Brexit and Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/truth-lies-and-trust-in-the-age-of-brexit-and-trump>
Debt has played a key role in shoring up China’s economic growth following the 
global financial crisis.Outstanding government, corporate and household debt 
reached 255% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/16/chinas-debt-is-250-of-gdp-and-could-be-fatal-says-government-expert>
 of GDP in 2015, fuelled in large part by a surge in company borrowing, up from 
220% just two years earlier.

China’s bank lending in August more than doubled from the previous month, with 
much of the gain down to strong mortgage demand.

China’s top banks are lending more to homebuyers and developers than at any 
time since at least the global financial crisis.

Despite the concerns surrounding China’s debt, UBS analysts said in a report 
earlier this year that they do not expect an imminent banking crisis.

A high domestic savings rate, underdeveloped capital markets, a relatively 
closed capital account and government ownership of banks and many large 
borrowers mean no one can easily “pull the plug” on its credit cycle, they said.

The BIS quarterly review also said that financial markets had coped well with 
the Brexit vote and other potentially disruptive political developments but 
asset prices may be running too high and the risks to market stability were 
growing.


Asset valuations were high, especially given that the foundations they are 
built on may not be so solid. It did not explicitly say that stock and bond 
markets were waiting to burst.

 BIS reports are not known for their stark language and blunt warnings, but 
they offer an insight into what is occupying the thoughts of the world’s most 
powerful and important central bankers.

 “There has been a distinctly mixed feel to the recent rally – more stick than 
carrot, more push than pull, more frustration than joy. This explains the 
nagging question of whether market prices fully reflect the risks ahead,” said 
Claudio Borio, head of the BIS monetary and economic department.

 “The apparent dissonance between record low bond yields, and sharply higher 
stock prices with subdued volatility cast a pall over such valuations. Banks’ 
depressed equity prices and budding signs of tension in bank funding markets 
added another sobering note,” the Switzerland-based BIS added.

 Central bank pledges after Brexit to provide liquidity and ensure smooth 
market functioning if needed, and the perceived shift towards a more 
accommodative global monetary policy framework soothed market jitters after 
Brexit, the BIS said.

 This helped ensure markets functioned smoothly, especially in fixed income 
markets, even though the UK referendum outcome took markets by surprise.

FCA chief cautions over relying on property to fund retirement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/fca-chief-cautions-property-fund-retirement-pensions-old-age>
 The perception of “lower for longer” global monetary policy drove bond yields 
to record low levels, compressed corporate bond spreads, and pumped up stock 
markets and emerging market bonds.

 “As Brexit receded in the financial markets’ rear-view mirror, exuberance 
resumed in full force,” said the Switzerland-based BISin its review headed 
“dissonant markets” <http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1609.htm?m=5%7C25>.

 Borio repeated the BIS view that central banks should scale back their 
extreme policy accommodation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/26/debt-fuelled-growth-trigger-financial-crash-governments-told-bis>
, and that a more “balanced policy mix is needed to bring the global economy 
into a more robust, balanced and sustainable expansion”.



Stock prices are buoyant despite weak earnings, while comparisons between bond 
yields and economic growth rates across the world’s major economies suggest 
government bond markets are extremely overvalued.

 Defining overvaluation for bonds is an inexact science, but over the past 65 
years 10-year US, Japanese, German and UK yields have broadly tracked nominal 
growth rates in these countries. Bond yields have been well below growth rates 
in all four for some time, the BIS said.

 On top of potential asset bubbles, risks include the increased reliance on 
electronic trading platforms and proliferation of trading algorithms, the BIS 
said. Both reduce the human element in trading, help lower trading costs and 
boost liquidity in normal circumstances, the BIS said.

 “[But] the spread of complex and often opaque trading strategies has raised 
concerns about potential implications for market stability in times of stress,” 
the BIS said.

 Pressures in the banking system are building too. Low and even negative 
interest rates, notably in the eurozone and Japan, have hurt banks’ profit 
margins and depressed the value of their shares.

 “Recent strains in money markets added to this overall adverse landscape,” 
the BIS said, noting that US money market regulatory reform has led to heavy 
outflows of around $250bn (£192bn) from the sector and pushed up Libor rates 
and spreads.

 This week, the spread between three-month dollar Libor and the federal funds 
US interest rate widened to its highest since 2009. Widening spreads are often 
seen as signs of underlying tension in the banking system, although this time 
around it appears to be more a result of the regulatory reforms.

Focus on London

Banks in Britain are the largest borrowers and lenders of euros outside the 
single currency area, BIS figures showed.

In its Quarterly Review, it said Britain’s vote in June to leave the European 
Union has focused attention on the role of London in the European and 
international banking system.

The forum for central banks gave no views on how the City of Londonwould fare 
after Brexit.

At the end of March, banks in the UK reported total cross-border lending worth 
$4.5tn, ahead of Japan and the US. Britain was the second-biggest recipient of 
crossborder bank credit at $3.8tn, behind the US.

Among foreign banks in Britain, American banks reported the largest 
outstanding foreign claims on Britain at $460bn.

Banks collectively from EU member countries, however, had claims totalling 
$1.3tn or 56% of all foreign claims on UK residents.

“The United Kingdom has a particularly important role as a redistribution hub 
for euro-denominated funds,” the BIS said.

Banks in Britain accounted for 54% of all worldwide euro-denominated claims 
booked outside the euro area, and 60% of all liabilities.

“Indeed, ever since the launch of the single currency, euro-denominated 
positions have been a major part of the cross-border portfolios of banks 
located in the United Kingdom,” the BIS said.
 