
Chinese leaders object to lectures about environmental pollution from 
high-consumption nations such as the US when a quarter of China's population 
still lives on less than $1 a day.

Until recently, Beijing said that while the environment was important China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> must "put development first" and 
should be allowed more leeway in tackling pollution. Now, increasingly alarmed 
by visible signs of global warming, the Chinese say they place "equal stress on 
development and conservation".

But when economic interests are at stake will development really be throttled 
back for the sake of the environment? So far, in the critical case of the car 
industry, the answer remains ambiguous.

Environmental arguments have to contend with a pro-car culture among 
provincial elites which has grown stronger during the past 20 years of economic 
reform. New motorways are a symbol of that development even though they are 
seriously under-used - largely because tolls are too high or slower-moving 
transport is banned.

Most Chinese towns, even in rural areas, have been rebuilt with wide highways. 
The bicycle, once the symbol of Chinese self-sufficiency, is being pushed to 
the side of the road.

China's official environmental website highlights the contradiction. One 
headline calls for a "new goal for automobile pollution control"; the other 
says, "China must encourage the purchase of automobiles."

By 2005, China hopes to meet European emission levels seen in the late-1990s. 
By 2010, it hopes to catch up with international standards and that does not 
take into account rising vehicle numbers.

Here the Chinese state planning commission's policy is unambiguous: "The 
automobile industry is one of the five mainstays of China: the promotion of 
automobile purchase must be placed in first position."

Beijing reassures itself by pointing out that there are only 15m vehicles in 
China, compared with 70m-plus in the US. But the comparison is incomplete 
without considering respective emission levels.

More serious efforts are now being made to cut emission levels in the big 
cities which are most visibly affected by pollution - Beijing has banned a 
fleet of mini-taxis while Chengdu has just staged China's first car-free day.

Permissible emission levels have been loweredand, less specifically, the 
government is to "encourage" production and use of clean-fuelled vehicles.

The big question is whether these tougher rules will be effective outside the 
main cities.

The Beijing media has highlighted a campaign on the capital's outskirts to 
prevent "air-polluting vehicles" entering the city. Most offenders, it 
explained, "were coal-carrying trucks" hailing from neighbouring provinces - 
and if the trucks avoid Beijing they will not be taken off the road.

Economists want to increase private car ownership to stimulate consumption and 
boost the home-grown car industry. Domestic automobile output rose to 1.83m 
units last year from just 150,000 in 1978. But with annual production capacity 
at 2.4m units, there is a strong incentive to fill the gap.

At present, nearly two-thirds of vehicles are used commercially, including 
buses and trucks, while the 5.34m "private" cars usually belong to government 
bodies or firms.

But real private ownership is looming for China's expanding middle class. 
There is intense competition to make economy cars around the magic price of 
100,000 yuan (Â£8,400) each. One in five urban families say they could and would 
afford such a car, prompting foreign carmakers to enter the fray: a process 
that will be helped along by China's entry into the World Trade Organisation.
 