
It was an improbable symbol of the embryonic romance between London and 
Beijing: a 16th-century Buckinghamshire pub where then prime minister David 
Cameron and Chinese president Xi Jinping sealed their countries’ “golden” 
friendship overa pint of Greene King IPA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/22/david-cameron-xi-jinping-village-pub-drink-pint>
.


Greene King strikes gold as Chinese demand soars after Xi Jinping pint
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/09/greene-king-hits-gold-as-chinese-demand-soars-after-xi-jinping-pint>
Now the Plough at Cadsden – a rural tavern near the official country retreat 
used by British prime ministers – has reportedly been sold to Chinese investors 
for an undisclosed fee.

“We are really pleased to have completed the sale of the Plough to SinoFortone 
Investment,” Neil Morgan, the Christie & Co director behind the salewas quoted 
as saying 
<http://www.morningadvertiser.co.uk/Legal/Property-law/The-Plough-at-Cadsden-sold-to-Chinese-investors>
 by the Morning Advertiser, a publication focusing on the pub sector.

“The pub became famous in Chinese circles following the visit of President Xi 
Jinping, and it has become quite a tourist attraction for Chinese visitors 
since, who are keen to sample the classic British food and beer that the 
president tried,” Morgan added.

Peter Zhang, the managing director of the government-backed investment group 
behind the deal, said: “We are so excited about this new adventure.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchinese-firm-pub-david-cameron-xi-jinping-pint-plough-cadsden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F958fd9e92635b4a303e54e4e0950d701c715029a%2F0_0_1923_3122%2F1923.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chinese%20firm%20buys%20pub%20where%20David%20Cameron%20and%20Xi%20Jinping%20enjoyed%20a%20pint&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchinese-firm-pub-david-cameron-xi-jinping-pint-plough-cadsden%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chinese%20firm%20buys%20pub%20where%20David%20Cameron%20and%20Xi%20Jinping%20enjoyed%20a%20pint&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fchinese-firm-pub-david-cameron-xi-jinping-pint-plough-cadsden%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F958fd9e92635b4a303e54e4e0950d701c715029a%2F0_0_1923_3122%2F1923.jpg>
 Then British prime minister David Cameron and China’s President Xi Jinping 
leave the Plough at Cadsden pub in October 2015. Photograph: Eddie Keogh/Reuters
“The English pub concept is growing very fast in China and it’s the best way 
culturally to link people from different countries and build friendships,” 
Zhang was quoted as sayingby the state-run China Daily newspaper 
<http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/world/2016-12/05/content_27577856.htm>. 

The Plough at Cadsden served its first ale during the Ming dynasty and today 
describes itself <http://theplough.pub/> as “probably the most famous pub in 
England” and “that kind of pub [where] everyone feels at home here and can be 
sure of a warm welcome”.

Because of its proximity to Chequers, the prime minister’s country home in 
Buckinghamshire,a succession of political figures has propped up its bar 
<http://theplough.pub/interesting-facts> over the years, including Edward 
Heath, Britain’s leader from 1970 until 1974.

The pub’s website says it also regularly hosts “a variety of local celebrities 
from the world of film, television and the music industry”.

It wasn’t until October 2015, however, when Xi and Cameron graced its bar 
during the former’sstate visit to Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/21/uk-china-cybersecurity-pact-xi-jinping-david-cameron>
, that the watering hole came on to Chinese radars.

Xi’s brief visit, which helped launch a controversial diplomatic flirtation 
dubbed the “golden era” of UK-China relations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/china-uk-golden-relationship-hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power>
, made the pub a magnet for some ofthe hundreds of thousands of Chinese 
tourists who visit Britain each year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/chinese-tourist-numbers-coming-to-uk-up-nearly-40>
.

“We read the news that President Xi visited here and would love to experience 
the food and drink that he tasted,” one such visitor, 26-year-old Miao Xin,told 
the China Daily last year 
<http://europe.chinadaily.com.cn/epaper/2015-10/30/content_22313289.htm>. 

Speaking to the same newspaper, the pub’s landlord, Steve Hollings, claimed Xi 
had sent him an email “thanking him, and saying that he enjoyed the meal and 
drink in the pub”.

But not all patrons have been impressed by the changes that have taken place 
since Xi’s visit.

“Seems to have lost its mojo,” one critic wrote of the Plough on Tripadvisor 
<https://en.tripadvisor.com.hk/Hotel_Review-g790316-d1527698-Reviews-The_Plough_at_Cadsden-Princes_Risborough_Buckinghamshire_England.html>
 in September.
 