
US president-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> would be a “naive” fool to 
launch an all-out trade war against China, a Communist party-controlled 
newspaper has claimed.

During the acrimonious race for the White House Trump repeatedly lashed out at 
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, vowing to punish Beijing with 
“defensive” 45% tariffs on Chinese imports and to officially declare it a 
currency manipulator.

As the election haze clears, Trump’s China conundrum will become clear | 
Jonathan Fenby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/trump-china-conundrum-clear-election-haze>
“When they see that they will stop the cheating,” the billionaire Republican, 
who has accused Beijing of “the greatest theft in the history of the world”,
told a rally in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/24/trump-tarrifs-china-economy-video>
.

On Monday the state-run Global Times warned that such measures would be a 
grave mistake.

“If Trump wrecks Sino-US trade, a number of US industries will be impaired. 
Finally the new president will be condemned for his recklessness, ignorance and 
incompetence,” the newspaper saidin an editorial 
<http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1017696.shtml>. 

The Global Times claimed any new tariffs would trigger immediate 
“countermeasures” and “tit-for-tat approach” from Beijing.

“A batch of Boeing orders will be replaced by Airbus. US auto and iPhone sales 
in China will suffer a setback, and US soybean and maize imports will be 
halted. China can also limit the number of Chinese students studying in the US.”

“Making things difficult for China politically will do him no good,” the 
newspaper warned.

Australia, China, and the lunacy of Trump's talk of a trade war | Bob Carr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/12/australia-china-and-the-lunacy-of-trumps-talk-of-a-trade-war>
China’s foreign ministry has used more diplomatic language to caution Trump 
not to square up to Beijing.

Foreign ministry spokesperson Lu Kang told reporters last week 
<http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/t1414502.shtml>: “I 
believe that any US politician, if he takes the interests of his own people 
first, will adopt a policy that is conducive to the economic and trade 
cooperation between China and the US.”

The excoriating editorial was printed hours after Trump spoke to China’s 
president, Xi Jinping. The president-elect’s staff said Trump thanked Xi for 
his well wishes and congratulations on his election victory.

The statement read: “During the call, the leaders established a clear sense of 
mutual respect for one another, and President-elect Trump stated that he 
believes the two leaders will have one of the strongest relationships for both 
countries moving forward.”

However, experts say officials in Beijing are still battling to untangle what 
a Trump presidency means for relations between the world’s two largest 
economies but wager he is unlikely to follow through on his most radical 
campaign pledges such asimposing 45% tariffs on “cheating China” 
<http://www.latimes.com/opinion/op-ed/la-oe-navarro-trump-trade-china-tariffs-20160721-snap-story.html>
.

Paul Haenle, a veteran US diplomat who is director of the Carnegie-Tsinghua 
centre at Beijing’s Tsinghua University, said: “The biggest lesson that they 
draw from watching our presidential campaigns over the years is that he will 
become more realistic and more pragmatic once he is in the position where he 
has to govern. That is what they are hoping for when it comes to Trump.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Haenle warned the introduction of protectionist measures would immediately 
“inject friction” into already fraught US-China ties as well as harming 
America’s own economy.

“If he follows through on a 45% trade tariff then I think it will be damaging 
to our own interests and we will have fallout that will affect our own 
companies and our own economy and it won’t be effective. It will not achieve 
what he is setting out to achieve. So from that standpoint he is going to have 
to moderate some of that rhetoric as he puts together actual concrete policies.”

Jorge Guajardo, Mexico’s former ambassador to China, said he too expected 
Trump to moderate many of his audacious campaign pledges when he took office.

“He’s in the hot seat now. He has got to deliver. It’s not the same as 
campaigning,” he said.

Guajardo said Trump’s bluster would be quickly replaced with more realistic 
talk as he understood that serious engagement with Beijing was now needed on a 
range of key issues including the Paris climate deal, North Korea and trade 
ties.

Attempts to strike a deal would soon be set in motion with Trump and the 
Chinese president, Xi Jinping, likely to come together early in his presidency, 
Guajardo predicted. “He’s a deal-maker and nobody is more of a deal-maker than 
China.”
 