
An environmental protest in China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
was aggressively put down at the weekend, with a large police presence 
continuing for days to prevent further demonstrations in an unusually 
heavy-handed response.


The protests started after the south-western city of Chengdu was shrouded in 
thick smog, with some residents placing pollution masks on statues. An unknown 
number were taken away by police, with security forces in riot gear seen in the 
city’s downtown shopping area.

China tops WHO list for deadly outdoor air pollution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/27/more-than-million-died-due-air-pollution-china-one-year>
Toxic clouds of smog are regular features of China’s major cities, with some 
studies showing pollution has causedabout 1 million premature deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/12/air-pollution-deaths-india-china>
 a year. China’s leaders have declared a“war on pollution” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/05/china-pollution-economic-reform-growth-target>
, but many state-owned companies are leaders in smog-producing industries such 
as steel, coal and power.

Authorities have been worried for years that the deadly air could spark 
protest.A 2015 film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/09/chinese-pollution-documentary-under-the-dome-taken-offline-government>
 focusing on the country’s pollution and its effect on humans was quickly 
censored after being watched hundreds of millions of times online.

Tianfu Square, in the heart of the city, was still closed on Monday, with 
police cars parked in the middle and officers at the edges preventing people 
from entering. Police ordered copy shops to record details of anyone seeking to 
photocopy flyers complaining about the smog and to contact the authorities, 
according to photos of an official notice circulating online.

Anyone placing large orders of face masks should also be reported, the notice 
said.

Police rarely allow protests in China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>
, but small-scale demonstrations are usually dispersed quickly and without mass 
detentions. The response in Chengdu was severe given the size, although exact 
numbers for the protest are unknown.

Some reported being stopped and questioned by police simply for wearing 
pollution masks in the same neighbourhood as the demonstration, according to 
social media posts, with at least a dozen being detained.

Residents quickly took to social media, calling for more action and posting 
photos of themselves with signs saying “let me breathe”.

“We won’t put up with this! Take to the streets! We are all guilty of 
producing a world like this. Come on, kids, let’s stay alive!” wroteone 
commenter according to Radio Free Asia 
<http://www.rfa.org/english/news/china/smog-protest-12092016121841.html>.

Police detained one man <http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1023137.shtml> for 
sharing photos that was purported to show a huge crowd protesting the smog, but 
was actually taken in 2012.

Chengdu, the capital of southwestern Sichuan province, lacks many of the heavy 
industries that cause the capital Beijing to issues“red alerts” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/21/beijings-smog-red-alert-enters-third-day-as-toxic-haze-shrouds-city>
 for pollution.

But the air is far from safe.

Levels of PM2.5, fine particulate matter that penetrates deep into the lungs, 
was more than six times the World Health Organization recommended yearly 
average inthe first half of 2016 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/eastasia/Global/eastasia/publications/reports/climate-energy/2016/Greenpeace,%202016%201Q%20city%20rankings_media%20briefing__0420.pdf>
, according to data compiled by Greenpeace.
 