
Chinese household debt has risen at an “alarming” pace as property values have 
soared, analysts have said, raising the risk that a real estate downturn could 
wreak havoc on the world’s second largest economy.


Loose credit and changing habits have rapidly transformed the country’s 
famously loan-averse consumers into enthusiastic borrowers.

Rocketing real estate prices in major Chinese cities in recent years have seen 
families’ wealth surge.

'This is just the start': China's passion for foreign property
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/sep/29/inside-china-passion-foreign-property-investment-uk>
But at the same time they have fuelled a historic boom in mortgage lending, as 
buyers race to get on the property ladder, or invest to profit from the 
phenomenon.

Now the debt owed by households in the world’s second largest economy has 
surged from 28% of GDP to more than 40% in the past five years.

“The notion that Chinese people do not like to borrow is clearly outdated,” 
said Chen Long of Gavekal Dragonomics.

The share of household loans to overall lending hit 67.5% in the third quarter 
of 2016, more than twice the share of the year before.

But this surge has raised fears that a sharp drop in property prices would 
cause many new loans to go bad, causing a domino effect on interest rates, 
exchange rates and commodity prices that “could turn out to be a global macro 
event”, ANZ analysts said in a note.

While China’s household debt ratio is still lower than advanced countries such 
as the US (nearly 80% of GDP) and Japan (more than 60%), it has already 
exceeded that of emerging markets Brazil and India, and if it keeps growing at 
its current pace will hit 70% of GDP in a few years. It still has some way to 
go before it outstrips Australia, however, which has theworld’s most indebted 
households 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/reserve-bank-governor-warns-against-higher-level-of-household-debt>
 at 125% of GDP.

The ruling Communist party has set a target of 6.5-7% economic growth for 
2017, and the country is on track to hit it thanks partly to a property frenzy 
in major cities and a flood of easy credit.

But keeping loans flowing at such a pace creates such “substantial risks” that 
it could be a “self-defeating strategy”, Chen said.

China’s total debt – including housing, financial and government sector debt – 
hit 168.48 trillion yuan ($25 trillion) at the end of last year,equivalent to 
249% of national GDP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/16/chinas-debt-is-250-of-gdp-and-could-be-fatal-says-government-expert>
, according to estimates by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, a top 
government think tank.


China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> is seeking to restructure its 
economy to make the spending power of its nearly 1.4 billion people a key 
driver for growth, instead of massive government investment and cheap exports.

But the transition is proving painful as growth rates sit at 25-year lows and 
key indicators continue to come in below par, weighing on the global outlook.

How Australian households became the most indebted in the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/15/how-australian-households-became-the-most-indebted-in-the-world>
Authorities “desperate” to keep GDP growth steady have turned to consumers as 
a source of finance because “many of the sources of capital through the banks 
and corporations are essentially used up”, Andrew Collier of Orient Capital 
Research told AFP.

Individuals have turned to pawn shops, peer-to-peer networks and other 
informal lenders to borrow cash against assets such as cars, art or housing, he 
said, to spend it on consumption.

Banks are also driving the phenomenon, Andrew Polk of Medley Global Advisors 
told AFP.

“Banks have been pushing people to buy houses because they need to make 
loans,” he said, as corporate borrowing has dried up.

Combined with a rise in peer-to-peer lending, with over 550 billion yuan 
borrowed in the third quarter of 2016, the risks of speculative investment have 
risen, S&P Global Ratings said.

Some analysts argue that China is well positioned to manage these risks, and 
has plenty of room to take on more leverage as families still save twice as 
much as they borrow, with some 58 trillion yuan in household deposits, 
according to OxfordEconomics <https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>.

“From an overall perspective, household debt remains in a safe range,” Li 
Feng, assistant director of the Survey and Research Center for China Household 
Finance in Chengdu, told AFP, adding that risks over the next three to five 
years were modest.

But Collier said that credit-fuelled spending was a “risky game”, because when 
capital flows slow, property prices are likely to collapse, particularly in 
China’s smaller cities.

That could lead to defaults among property developers, small banks, and even 
some townships.

“That will be the beginning of a crisis,” he said. “How big this becomes is 
unclear but it’s going to be a difficult time for China.”
 