
It has brought misery to millions and warnings that Britain has entered a 
calamitoustailspin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/03/britain-general-election-before-article-50>
 towards a future of recession, isolation and international irrelevance.


But in China, consumers have lauded Britain’s decision to quit the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
, taking advantage of the plummeting pound to go on post-Brexit spending sprees 
for Hermes handbags and Hugo Boss scarfs.

EU referendum: government faces legal action over Brexit decision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jul/03/parliament-must-decide-whether-or-not-to-leave-the-eu-say-lawyers>
“My first thought [after Brexit] was that the Harrods Summer Sale kicks off 
tomorrow,” one gleeful Chinese ‘leaver’ wrote on Weibo, China’s Twitter. “This 
means discount after discount!”

Chinese newspapers have filled with celebratory column inches in the wake of 
the 23 June referendum, even as the country’s political leaders mourn the 
potential loss of their most vocal European cheerleader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/china-britain-and-brexit-vote-to-leave-eu-robs-golden-relationship-of-its-lustre>
.

In an article headlined “Pound’s depreciation sparks shopping fever”, the 
Wuhan Morning Post told its readers to look on the bright side of Brexit.

“Britain’s exit has caused a devaluation in the pound which means that the 
same amount of yuan allows you to buy more,”it explained 
<http://mt.sohu.com/20160629/n456819324.shtml>. “A classic Burberry trench 
coat, for example would have cost you 13,757 yuan before. But on the day of 
Brexit you could find one for just 12,203 yuan.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fmark-carney-seeks-to-reassure-financial-markets-after-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20Carney%20seeks%20to%20reassure%20financial%20markets%20after%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fmark-carney-seeks-to-reassure-financial-markets-after-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark%20Carney%20seeks%20to%20reassure%20financial%20markets%20after%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fmark-carney-seeks-to-reassure-financial-markets-after-brexit-video&media=>
Mark Carney seeks to reassure financial markets after Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/jun/24/mark-carney-seeks-to-reassure-financial-markets-after-brexit-video>
Xiaoya Fu, a 25-year-old from Shenzhen, took the advice to heart.

She told Hong Kong’s South China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
Morning Post that one of her first acts after the vote had been to make her way 
to the Burberry website where coat prices had 9% slumped about to the 
equivalent of about £995.

“The Brexit is good news for me,” she said 
<http://www.scmp.com/business/china-business/article/1983680/chinese-shoppers-head-online-british-retail-bargains>
.

Yu Yiran, another happy Chinese shopper, told the Communist party-run Global 
Times tabloid she was elated by the result.

“I am going to buy a Louis Vuitton handbag as soon as possible in case the 
exchange rate changes again,” the 25-year-oldwas quoted as saying 
<http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/990810.shtml>.

Chinese tourists, more than 200,000 of whom visited Britain last year, have 
also been buoyed by the result of the referendum which caused the pound to fall 
toits lowest levels in more than thirty years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/23/british-pound-given-boost-by-projected-remain-win-in-eu-referendum>
.

On the eve of the referendum one pound was worth about 9.65 Chinese yuan, 
according to the online currency converter XE.com. On Monday its value had 
fallen to just 8.84 yuan.

Brexit: a disaster decades in the making | Gary Younge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/brexit-disaster-decades-in-the-making>
Ctrip, China’s leading online travel agency, said there had been a 200% spike 
in searches for British holidays on its booking app, according toa report 
<http://www.chinanews.com/cj/2016/06-30/7922362.shtml> in the China Youth Daily 
newspaper.

Overseas students also described the collapse of the pound as a boon.

Qu Xinyi, a 22-year-old student, who will start a masters degree in journalism 
at Cardiff University in September said Brexit had helped shave about 20,000 
yuan off her tuition fees.

UK-bound Chinese students had watched with delight as the referendum results 
came in and the pound fell through the floor, Qutold the Global Times 
<http://www.globatimes.cn/content/991601.shtml>. 


“Many of them were cheering as they watched the pound drop.”


Additional reporting by Christy Yao
 