
Taiwan president Tsai Ing-wen will transit through Houston and San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> during her January visit to 
allies in Latin America, her office said on Friday, prompting China to repeat a 
call for the US to block any such stopover.


Donald Trump is technology's befuddled (but dangerous) grandfather
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/30/donald-trump-technology-computers-cyber-hacks-surveillance>
Tsai’s office declined to comment on whether she would be meeting members of 
Donald Trump’s team. The US mission in Taiwan, the American Institute inTaiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> (AIT), said the visit would be 
“private and unofficial”.

 The president-elect angered China when he spoke to Tsai this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/trump-angers-beijing-with-provocative-phone-call-to-taiwan-president>
, in a break with decades of precedent. Trump’s attitude to China is uncertain, 
after he cast the country as a trade enemy during the presidential campaign and 
adopteda belligerent tone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/17/donald-trump-china-unpresidented-act-us-navy-drone>
 during a recent naval incident in the South China Sea.

In an interview after his call with Tsai, Trump also cast doubt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-questions-us-commitment-to-one-china-policy>
 on his incoming administration’s commitment to Beijing’s “one China” policy.

In a move apparently aimed at soothing tensions, the president-elect then 
appointed the Iowa governor, Terry Branstad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-administration-terry-branstad-ambassador-china>
 – a man China called “an old friend of the Chinese people” – as ambassador to 
Beijing.

 China is deeply suspicious of Tsai, who it thinks wants to push for the 
formal independence of Taiwan, a self-governing island that Beijing regards as 
a renegade province, ineligible for state-to-state relations.

 China’s foreign ministry repeated a previous call for the US not to allow the 
transit and not send any “wrong signals to Taiwan independence forces”.

 “We think everyone is very clear on her real intentions,” the ministry said, 
without explaining.

 The US, which switched diplomatic recognition from Taiwan to China in 1979, 
has acknowledged the Chinese position that there is only “one China” and that 
Taiwan is part of it.

 Tsai will transit in the US on her way to and from visiting Honduras, 
Nicaragua, Guatemala and El Salvador. She will leave Taiwan on 7 January and 
return on 15 January.

She will arrive in Houston <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/houston> on 7 
January and leave the following day. On her return, she will arrive in San 
Francisco on 13 January, presidential office spokesman Alex Huang told a 
regular news briefing.

 The AIT said the transit did not contradict the “one China” policy.

Putin says Russia won't expel US diplomats in tit-for-tat measure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
 “President Tsai’s transit through the United States is based on long-standing 
US practice and is consistent with the unofficial nature of our relations with 
Taiwan,” said Alys Spensley, acting AIT spokeswoman.

 “There is no change to the US ‘one China’ policy.”

 Spensley said Tsai’s transits would be “private and unofficial”.

 China has claimed sovereignty over Taiwan since 1949, when Mao Zedong’s 
Communist forces won the Chinese civil war and Chiang Kai-shek’s Nationalists 
fled to the island.

 Speaking to members of China’s largely ceremonial advisory body to parliament 
earlier on Friday, President Xi Jinping said next year China would make 
“unremitting efforts” at unification and developing peaceful relations across 
the Taiwan Strait, state news agency Xinhua said.

 Taiwan had as many as 30 diplomatic allies in the mid-1990s, but now has 
formal relations with just 21, mostly smaller and poorer nations in Latin 
America and the Pacific and including the Vatican.
 