
Beijing has signalled plans to curb Chinese firms’ investment in foreign 
assets, after revealing that companies fromChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> are on course to spend 1.12 trillion 
yuan (£130bn) on everything from British football clubs to a Hollywood film 
producer in 2016.

Companies from China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> ramped up their 
spending on overseas assets during the year, as a weakening domestic economy 
saw investors turn their attention overseas. A diverse array of targets 
included the maker of Godzilla, Aston Villa Football Club andthe pub in which 
former prime minister David Cameron and Chinese premier Xi Jinping once shared 
a pint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/chinese-firm-pub-david-cameron-xi-jinping-pint-plough-cadsden>
.

The spending spree boosted non-financial overseas investment 55% in the first 
11 months of 2016, putting Chinese companies on course to spend £130bn this 
year, compared with £86bn in 2015, said commerce minister Gao Hucheng.

Oscar's £52m move to Shanghai is worrying for Chelsea FC – and China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/oscar-move-shanghai-worrying-chelsea-china>
While foreign investment has soared, the amount of money flowing into the 
country is set to remain broadly flat at £92bn. This means the difference 
between investments abroad and those coming into China has reached an 
unprecedented £39bn.

The widening gap has triggered concerns about capital flight, where investors 
send their money out of the country rather than investing it to spur domestic 
growth. Gao signalled that Beijing would move to address the investment gap by 
reining in Chinese firms’ overseas spending and making it easier for firms from 
abroad to access theChinese economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/chinese-economy>.

He said the government would “promote the healthy and orderly development of 
outbound investment and cooperation in 2017”, in remarks at a conference that 
were published on the commerce ministry’s website. In November it was reported 
that China waspreparing a clampdown on non-Chinese mergers and acquisitions 
<https://www.ft.com/content/2511fa56-b5f8-11e6-ba85-95d1533d9a62>. 

Separately, the ministry said on its blog that China would sharply reduce 
restrictions on foreign investment access in 2017 to make it easier for 
overseas firms to spend their cash in the People’s Republic. No details were 
given on what restrictions would be changed.

Major Chinese investors have spread their investment around the world and 
across multiple sectors during 2016. One of the most high-profile purchases was 
part of amulti-billion dollar bet on high-end US real estate 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/sarahsu/2016/10/31/chinese-investment-in-u-s-real-estate-are-going-strong/#5a80015e36a6>
 by Chinese buyers. Insurer Anbang spent $6.5bn (£5.3bn) on luxury group 
Strategic Hotels & Resorts from private equity group Blackstone, continuing a 
flood of Chinese money into prime US property.

The deal came two years after the same firm paid Hilton Hotels $1.95bn for the 
Waldorf Astoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/oct/06/waldorf-astoria-hotel-chinese-insurance-company>
 in New York, a landmark art deco building ranked among the world’s most fabled 
hotels.

British assets have also proved tempting for Chinese firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/09/china-uk-investment-key-questions-following-hinkley-point-c-delay>
 and wealthy businessmen looking to add to their alreadysizeable clutch of UK 
investments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/10/chinese-investors-pump-money-into-the-uk-but-what-big-brands-do-they-own>
. State-backed China General Nuclear took a 30% stake in the£24bn Hinkley Point 
C nuclear power plant <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c>, 
helping France’s government-owned energy group EDF fund the project.

While Hinkley was the highest-profile Chinese foray into the UK, its investors 
have also showed they are partial to English football clubs,particularly those 
from the West Midlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/17/chinese-investment-west-brom-aston-villa-wolverhampton>
. Entrepreneur Guochan Lai bought West Bromwich Albion for a sum thought to be 
between £150m and £200m earlier this year. Businessman Tony Xia spent £76m to 
buy Aston Villa, even after the club had been relegated from the Premier 
League, vowing to restore the club to its former glory. Investment group Fosun 
International paid £45m to gain control of Wolverhampton Wanderers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fchina-to-rein-in-foreign-investment-as-domestic-growth-stalls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77c9bc4209782503b30189298cfbee064f6efaf0%2F0_33_4350_2610%2F4350.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20to%20rein%20in%20outward%20investment%20as%20domestic%20growth%20stalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fchina-to-rein-in-foreign-investment-as-domestic-growth-stalls%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20to%20rein%20in%20outward%20investment%20as%20domestic%20growth%20stalls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fchina-to-rein-in-foreign-investment-as-domestic-growth-stalls%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77c9bc4209782503b30189298cfbee064f6efaf0%2F0_33_4350_2610%2F4350.jpg>
 Chinese businessman Tony Xia bought Aston Villa for £76m earlier this year. 
Photograph: Neville Williams/Aston Villa FC via Getty Images 
Among the larger British acquisitions by Chinese firms in 2016 was the £1.4bn 
that travel firm Ctrip.compaid for flight comparison website Skyscanner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/skyscanner-sold-to-chinas-ctrip-in-14bn-deal>
. The takeover was announced just a day afterthe chancellor, Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammond-brexit-growth-deficit-housing-jams-universal-credit-minimum-wage-live>
, promised to stem the flow of British firms being sold to foreign investors 
before reaching their full potential.

Government-backed SinoFortone sealed a much smaller but diplomatically 
significant deal when itbought a 16th-century Buckinghamshire pub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/chinese-firm-pub-david-cameron-xi-jinping-pint-plough-cadsden>
 for an undisclosed fee. The Plough at Cadsden, Buckinghamshire – a rural 
tavern near Chequers, the official country retreat used by British prime 
ministers – hosted former PM David Cameron and Chinese premier Xi Jinping 
during a diplomatic visit that saw them set the world to rights over a pint of 
Greene King IPA.

Chinese investors were also involved in the consortium that agreed to pay 
£13.8bn by a majority stake in the National Grid’s gas pipeline network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/national-grid-stake-gas-macquarie-bank>
.

This year’s deals increase the scale of investment into the UK from China, 
which already owns or holds large stakes in household names such as Weetabix, 
Pizza Express and Thames Water.

One huge deal that was agreed this year but may not complete until early 2017 
is ChemChina’s$43bn takeover of Swiss seeds and pesticides giant Syngenta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/03/chemchina-makes-43bn-dollar-offer-for-swiss-pesticide-firm-syngenta>
. The deal would be China’s largest ever foreign acquisition and is seen as a 
key plank of its strategy to ensure food security for its huge population.

The bright lights of Hollywood have also attracted Chinese money. Investment 
group Wanda, headed by China’s richest man Wang Jianlin,paid $3.5bn for the 
Legendary studio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/12/hollywood-studio-legendary-bought-for-35-bn-in-largest-chinese-acquistion>
 behind films including Godzilla and Pacific Rim. Elsewhere, copper-processing 
company Anhui Xinke New Materials proved a more unlikely investor in the silver 
screen. The firmpaid $350m for the company that owns Voltage 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-xinke-material-film-idUKKBN139027>, the 
studio behind Oscar-winning films The Hurt Locker and Dallas Buyers’ Club.

Five major Chinese investments in 2016

£6bn – China General Nuclear will have a 30% stake in the UK’s Hinkley Point C 
nuclear power project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-chinese-firm-to-submit-essex-nuclear-plant-plans>
, approved this year.


£5.3bn – Insurer Anbang bought Strategic Hotels & Resorts from private equity 
group Blackstone.


£2.8bn – The Dalian Wanda conglomerate bought Legendary studios 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/chinas-dalian-wanda-buys-legendary-entertainment-for-3-5-billion-1452567251>
, which made Godzilla and Pacific Rim.


£1.4bn – Flight comparison site Skyscanner sold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/skyscanner-sold-to-chinas-ctrip-in-14bn-deal>
 to Chinese travel firm Ctrip.


£300m – Chinese businessmen and investors spent a combined £300m on three West 
Midlands football clubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/17/chinese-investment-west-brom-aston-villa-wolverhampton>
, West Bromwich Albion, Aston Villa and Wolverhampton Wanderers.
 