
With the World Cup in Russia looming ever closer, Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> has already faded into the 
familiar post-tournament haze, a flip chart of half-remembered moments. Goals 
from headers. Happy, well-adjusted Icelandic people. Cristiano Ronaldo 
close-ups. Roy Hodgson in a blazer looking noble and sad.David Guetta grinning 
and thrusting about behind his DJ plinth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/12/oignon-bag-euro-2016-diary-david-guetta-burgers-prawns>
 like the kind of uncle you have to keep an eye on at Christmas.

This week I was also reminded of the posters of smiling, face-painted fans 
Uefa slapped up around French city centres: huge disembodied mugshots of 
supposed football supporters from every country, eyes wide, gripped with an 
apparently cloudless childlike ecstasy at their proximity to this celebration 
of the power of the brave new shining joy of our own global tomorrow-sport.

Eden Hazard: ‘If I ever leave Chelsea, it will be after winning the league’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/eden-hazard-antonio-conte-chelsea>
Naturally the smiling heads provided some interesting points of contrast. 
Early on in France 2016 I saw a group of drunken Polish skinheads sullenly 
punching each other in the face near the Paris fanzone watched by a group of 
laughing Croats and, beyond that, plastered across some nearby awnings, by the 
huge beaming faces of Uefa’s love-army. The Poles were too drunk to actually 
land a proper blow. They kept having to sit down. Eventually it started raining 
and everyone wandered off.

There was still something oddly reassuring about the scene, if only for 
confirmation once again of the enduring gulf between the way the game is 
glossed and sold by its governing marketeers and the unyielding reality. In 
many ways this is still the best thing about football. For all the styling and 
the schmaltz, the attempts to ruin it with money, football refuses to bend 
completely, to lose its dingier corners. Above all, and for all its faults, 
football reserves the right to be stubborn, elusive and insistently 
uncontrolled.

With this in mind this week also brought arguably the most interesting largely 
inconsequential game of football ever played. On TuesdayChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/china> and Qatar drew 0-0 in front of 
32,000 people in the Tuodong Sports Centre Stadium in Kunming.

The result leaves China bottom of AFC third round World Cup qualifying Group A 
<http://www.fifa.com/worldcup/preliminaries/asia/group=275183/index.html>. 
Qatar are second bottom, five points off Uzbekistan in the third-place play-off 
spot. More to the point the draw in Kunming means neither China nor Qatar, 
football’s most spendthrift would-be superpowers, are likely to make it to 
Russia 2018.

Qatar have splurged billions not just on their own tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/dec/02/qatar-win-2022-world-cup-bid> 
but on various insurgent club football side projects. China famously announced 
a 50-point presidential plan to assail, take over and generally consume world 
football alive on every level. For now, though, the World Cup will just have to 
struggle on without the pair of them. Uzbekistan it is. Football may be 
stubborn and elusive but it does also have an excellent sense of humour.

The game itself was a brilliantly frustrating 0-0 draw. China had 60% of 
possession, 15 shots at goal and hit the post and bar. “All we need is some 
luck,” sighed Marcello Lippi, who was hired last month by the Chinese FA on an 
eye‑popping $20m a year. In another excellent twist China and Qatar now sit 
behind Syria. The same war‑torn Syria who will in March play Qatar,a nation 
helping to bomb its territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2015/oct/09/who-backs-whom-in-the-syrian-conflict>
, for the chance to play a World Cup inanother doing the same 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/04/russia-bombing-syria-affects-ousting-of-assad>
. Football may have a sense of humour but it’s a dark one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fqatar-china-football-world-cup-qualifying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F456e0775e3b9b71af90e87e51c336532aa2ab1d5%2F0_0_3576_2652%2F3576.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20and%20Qatar%3A%20spendthrift%20would-be%20superpowers%20unlikely%20to%20reach%20Russia%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fqatar-china-football-world-cup-qualifying%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20and%20Qatar%3A%20spendthrift%20would-be%20superpowers%20unlikely%20to%20reach%20Russia%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fqatar-china-football-world-cup-qualifying%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F456e0775e3b9b71af90e87e51c336532aa2ab1d5%2F0_0_3576_2652%2F3576.jpg>
 China’s Cao Yunding holds off Qatar’s Mohamed Musa. Photograph: 
STRINGER/AFP/Getty Images 
Confirmation of Qatar’s likely absence is the most notable point here. Expect 
Amazing was Qatar’sWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> bid slogan and to be 
fair it has been an amazingly troubled and divisive six years of prep.

The Qatari government’s Aspire Academy was supposed to have honed a generation 
of globally sourced stars by now but the senior side have seen no real benefit. 
The team who drew with China contained Ro-Ro, a Portuguese, Mohammed Kasola, a 
Ghanaian, Boualem Khoukhi, an Algerian, Karim Boudiaf, who was raised in 
France, Sebastián Soria, who is Uruguayan, and a pair of ageing Brazilians in 
Luiz and the 36-year-old Rodrigo Tabata, a native of São Paulo state who 
wandered through 18 different clubs before getting theQatar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/qatar> gig.

This was of course never going to be easy for Qatar, which has just 278,000 
full-time citizens. There will never be a convincing full-time “football 
culture” there and to complain about the absence is absurd. The spectacle of 
not just the worst but the most utterly pointless World Cup hosts team looms 
ever closer. A minor quibble perhaps, but couldn’t they at least have bought in 
somegood mercenary plastic Qataris?

China have more profound ambitions, with vast funds backing a range of “soccer 
powerhouse” programmes. Almost half a billion dollars has been spent this year 
on buying players for the domestic mega-league, which is certainly a very 
expensive way of getting to watch Gervinho haring off towards the corner flag 
on a regular basis. Vast national development programmes are in train. China 
don’t just want to host the World Cup. They want to win it, and soon.

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/18/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
And yet for all the pleasure in a grandiose sporting pratfall, we should be 
careful here. Staging a World Cup in a tiny petro‑state has always been a 
nonsensical notion of spreading the game. And yet, if we accept the modern Fifa 
World Cup as basically a kind of toxic burden, imposed by rapacious politicians 
on their toiling citizens, then in one sense Qatar actually looks like the 
perfect place to stage it.

Let a country with vast reserves of flukish fossil fuel wealth take the 
weight. Let them build their single‑use castles in the sand. Until the 
infrastructure demands of these vast sporting beanos are relaxed and applied 
more sensibly let the contagion land on Qatar, who can at least afford it.

The same goes for China. Why shouldn’t they hurl their national wealth at 
this? The lack of football culture is in part a legacy of the old politics, 
with its prohibition on gatherings and clubs. China is ploughing billions into 
a vast and terrifying football academy programme, with the goal of having 
30 million primary school pupils playing the sport within four years. Good luck 
to them. It will, at the very least, be fascinating to watch.

Just as for now failure on the pitch does a least have a ring of something 
authentically sporting. This is the enduring purity of the international game, 
which will not be bought, which can be cracked only through systems and process 
and planning.

In a sense, by trying and failing, China and Qatar have finally done something 
genuinely football. Waste, tedium, frustration, agonising 0-0 draws, a sport 
that simply refuses to do what it’s told. Sometimes when you go looking for 
something it comes to you in other ways. Enter: football. Welcome. Welcome to 
our world.
 