
At 8pm Beijing time on 25 June this year the tropical darkness over China’s 
Hainan province was temporarily banished by a blinding orange light. 
Accompanied by the thunderous roar of engines, a 53m-tall rocket pushed itself 
into the sky.

China is developing rapidly into one of the major space players
Fabio Favata, European Space Agency 
An increasing number of Chinese rockets have launched in the past few years 
but this one was significant for three reasons. It wasthe first launch of the 
new Long March 7 
<https://spaceflightnow.com/2016/06/25/chinas-new-long-march-7-rocket-successful-on-first-flight/>
 rocket, designed to help the Chinese place a multi-module space station in 
orbit. It was the first liftoff from China’s newly constructed Wenchang launch 
complex, a purpose-built facility set to become the focus for Chinese space 
ambitions. And it was the first Chinese launch where tourists were encouraged 
to go along and watch.

For a space programme that has long been shrouded in secrecy, it’s a major 
step. The Wenchang complex has been designed with large viewing areas, and in 
the sultry heat of that June night, tens of thousands of spectators stood 
cheering as the rocket began its 394km journey above the Earth and into orbit.

“China is developing very rapidly into one of the major space players,” says 
Fabio Favata, head of the programme coordination office at the EuropeanSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Agency’s (ESA) directorate of 
science.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f4764aef399fc678782c9be0ac50c97c0a812ef%2F0_0_1575_2362%2F1575.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f4764aef399fc678782c9be0ac50c97c0a812ef%2F0_0_1575_2362%2F1575.jpg>
 The Long March 7 carrier rocket moves vertically to the launch tower in 
Wengchang, 22 June 2016. Photograph: VCG via Getty Images 
China launched a pioneering “hack proof” quantum communication satellite, 
called Quantum Experiments at Space Scale 
<http://qz.com/760804/chinas-new-quantum-satellite-will-try-to-teleport-data-outside-the-bounds-of-space-and-time-and-create-an-unbreakable-code/>
, on 16 August from its older Jiuquan launch centre in the Gobi Desert. This is 
the first large-scale satellite designed to investigate theweird quantum 
phenomenon called “entanglement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/11/chinese-satellite-test-einstein-spookiest-claim>
” that so unnerved Albert Einstein he once called it “spooky”. In addition, 
China is preparing to launch another new rocket design, a new space station, an 
X-ray telescope and a crewed mission before the year is out.

China is estimated to spend around $6bn a year on its space programme. 
Although that is almost $1bn more than Russia, it is stilla fraction of the 
American space budget, 
<http://edition.cnn.com/interactive/2015/05/world/china-space/> which is around 
$40bn a year. Despite its large budget, the US made only 19 successful space 
launches in 2013, compared with China’s 14 and Russia’s 31. With numbers like 
this, it is clear that China has arrived in space, and is set to become 
stronger.

To use a Chinese phrase, they want to bring their own mat to the table. They 
want respect from the space community

“You will see the Chinese quite visibly begin to match the capacity of the 
other spacefaring powers by 2020,” predicts Brian Harvey, space analyst and 
author ofChina in Space: The Great Leap Forward  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/china-in-space.html>. Key to this will be the 
large manned space station, Tiangong, which they plan to have in orbit by then. 
Although not as physically large as the International Space Station America, 
Russia, Europe, Japan and other countries have been building and using since 
1998, China’s space station will have a broadly similar capacity to perform 
science.

“Science is becoming more and more important in the Chinese space programme,” 
says Wang Chi of the National Space Science Centre, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences. “We are not [just] satisfied with the achievements we have made in 
the fields of the space technology and space application. With the development 
of the Chinese space programme, we are trying to make contributions to human 
knowledge about the universe.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc721c8f336adb8afe47c57c3e672406815ad6535%2F0_0_704_467%2F704.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc721c8f336adb8afe47c57c3e672406815ad6535%2F0_0_704_467%2F704.jpg>
 Chinese astronauts of the Shenzhou 10 manned spacecraft mission, Wang Yaping, 
Nie Haisheng and Zhang Xiaoguang. Photograph: ChinaFotoPress via Getty Images 
Perhaps most impressive is the broad front on which the Chinese space 
programme is advancing. They are making strides in everything from human space 
flight to space science and planetary exploration.

So do the Chinese want to take over space? Brian Harvey, space analyst and 
author ofChina in Space: The Great Leap Forward, believes the Chinese simply 
want to be seen as equals. “To use a Chinese phrase, I think they are wanting 
to bring their own mat to the table,” he says. “They are looking for equality, 
they want respect from the world’s space community.”

To that end, China’s biggest inroad has been made with the ESA through the 
space science programme. Soon after the turn of the century. ESA launchedthe 
Cluster mission <http://sci.esa.int/cluster/> to study so-called “space 
weather” and the electrical malfunctions this could cause on satellites. The 
Chinese were keen to learn more about space weather too and came to the 
European agency with a proposal: they would build extra satellites to enhance 
the Cluster mission if ESA would collaborate with them.

“They understood that space weather was a key challenge as we rely more and 
more on technology in orbit,” says Christopher Carr, a physicist at Imperial 
College, London, who worked on the Cluster mission. ESA took care of the 
negotiations, allowing scientists, including Carr, to build the instruments 
unhindered. Although there were some differences in working methods that had to 
be ironed out, Carr says: “Overall it was an enjoyable collaboration.”

The Double Star mission was launched in 2003 and became China’s first 
scientific satellite. Cluster and Double Star have so far produced 2,300 
peer-reviewed science papers. “That is an enormously successful, astonishing 
scientific output,” says Carr.

China has gone from strength to strength. In December 2015, it launched the 
Dark Matter Particle Explorer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/28/spacewatch-china-dark-matter-particle-explorer-dampe>
, a satellite to look for the mysterious non-atomic matter that astronomers 
believe makes up a large fraction of the universe. This December, it plans to 
launch the Hard X-ray Modulation Telescope to look for black holes. ESA and 
China are working together on a new mission – theSolar Wind Magnetosphere 
Ionosphere Link Explorer 
<http://www.esa.int/Our_Activities/Space_Science/ESA_and_Chinese_Academy_of_Sciences_to_study_Smile_as_joint_mission>
 (Smile), which is slated for launch in 2021.

The Chinese know that the value of these collaborations extends way beyond the 
science. “We are the newcomers in space science, and don’t have much 
experience,” says Wang Chi. “International collaborations are the shortcut for
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> to catch up with the world. In 
addition, science, especially space science, should be the responsibility of 
all humans around the globe. International collaboration is the effective way 
to obtain the maximum science return from any space mission.”

Favata agrees: “At ESA we collaborate with all major spacefaring nations. If 
Smile works well it is likely to be the pathfinder for future missions.”

In stark contrast is America, where there is a blanket ban on working with 
China that dates back years. The most obvious consequence of this has been the 
exclusion of China from theInternational Space Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/international-space-station>. But far from 
slowing the Chinese down, the cold shoulder has actually speeded them up.

Circling above us at the moment is the disused shell of China’s first space 
station. The eight-ton Tiangong 1 (Heavenly Palace) was launched on 29 
September 2011 and hosted two three-person crews between 2012 and 2013. It is 
now abandoned and expected tore-enter Earth’s atmosphere some time later this 
year 
<http://www.space.com/33140-china-tiangong-1-space-lab-falling-to-earth.html>.

The Chinese will launch Tiangong 2, a second test station, next month. It will 
lead to a substantial orbital facility that will be in use by 2020. Known 
simply as Tiangong, it will be a key base for space research, with two large 
science modules joined together by a connecting service module.

“They can do a lot of science on it. It will have a research capacity that the 
ISS didn’t reach nearly as quickly,” says Harvey.

China is not planning to keep Tiangong all to itself. In June, it signed an 
agreement with the UN Office for Outer Space Affairs to open the station to 
experiments and astronauts from UN member states, specifically developing 
countries that find space too expensive at the moment.

And running the experiments is where China’s astronaut programme comes in. 
There have been just five crewed space flights since 2003, and none at all 
since 2013. This is deliberate. “The idea is to take a significant step forward 
each time,” says Harvey, “and they’re not going to cut corners in terms of 
safety.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7554cd2b48f807982a41944139ba61c80c707cf%2F159_58_2753_2008%2F2753.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7554cd2b48f807982a41944139ba61c80c707cf%2F159_58_2753_2008%2F2753.jpg>
 2011: the Long March II-F rocket carrying the China’s first space station 
module Tiangong 1 at the Jiuquan Satellite Launch Center in north-west China’s 
Gansu province. Photograph: AP 
For the next decade, the Tiangong space station is likely to be the principal 
destination. Their crew capsule is called Shenzhou (divine vessel). It looks 
similar to the Russian Soyuz modules probably because the Chinese bought Soyuz 
technology in the mid-90s. This same agreement saw the training of two Chinese 
astronauts at the Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Centre in Russia, who then 
returned to China and trained more astronauts themselves.

Twelve Chinese astronauts have now been into space, including Liu Yang who 
became the first Chinese woman in space on Shenzhou 9 in 2012. Assuming the 
Tiangong 2 gets to orbit in September, then Shenzhou 11 will follow on 16 
October, carrying two people whose identities have yet to be made public who 
are scheduled to spend a month on board.

I think the military element in the Chinese space programme is quite overstated
Brian Harvey, space analyst 
Looking to the future, the Chinese have already begun testing the larger 
replacement of the Shenzhou capsule. A scaled-down version flew on the June 
flight of the Long March 7 from Hainan. This larger vehicle will be capable of 
taking up to six crew to the full Tiangong space station or on missions to 
lunar orbit.

It was the secondary payload, Aolong 1 (Roaming Dragon), on that launch that 
raised eyebrows, and stoked fears in some quarters that the civilian space 
programme is just a front for more covert operations. Aolong 1 has a robotic 
arm that can grab another satellite and guide it to burn up in Earth’s 
atmosphere. Officially, it is to remove space debris from orbit but it could 
also be used as a weapon, bringing down a rival’s satellite.

Although this is true of any space debris removal system, doubts remain 
because China does not have an unblemished record in anti-satellite weaponry. 
In 2007, the Chinese shot down one of their own orbiting spacecraft in what was 
probably a thinly veiled warning to America. Chinese concerns had been growing 
since 2002 when the US withdrew from 1972’s Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty, 
which paved the way for President George W Bush’s administration to develop 
space-based weapons systems.

Since that time, concern over China’s militarisation of space has persisted in 
America. To others, however, that is little more than paranoia. “I think the 
military element in the Chinese space programme is overstated,” says Harvey. 
“It’s based on a misreading of the fact that their facilities are protected by 
the military. It’s a bit like saying the US military controlled the Apollo 
programme because the US navy took the returning astronauts out of the ocean. 
It doesn’t stand up.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8182d593f90ecfa8a703056ffad75adec29e8757%2F0_195_3328_4747%2F3328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8182d593f90ecfa8a703056ffad75adec29e8757%2F0_195_3328_4747%2F3328.jpg>
 The Long March 2D carrier rocket carrying the remote sensing satellite Yaogan 
IV blasts off in December 2008. China claimed the satellite was used for 
scientific research purposes. Some western analysts believed they were spy 
satellites. Photograph: ChinaFotoPress/Getty Images 
The military may not be in the driving seat, but it does launch about 15-20% 
of China’s space missions. The Yaogan series of satellites are billed as remote 
sensing missions but analysts believe they are actually spy satellites. “I 
suspect they are entirely military missions. I’ve never seen any scientific 
papers from the Yaogan missions,” says Harvey.

It is this American fear of China’s military that’s been driving the ban on 
collaboration, in particular the prevention of technologies being transferred 
to China by mistake. But now ESA has found a way to allow collaboration without 
the loss of control. It is “an elegant solution”, says astrophysicist Graziella 
Branduardi-Raymont at University College London, who is working on Smile. 
“China builds the basic spacecraft and sends it to Europe. ESA and its 
collaborators then attach the payload module, which holds the science 
instruments, and launches the mission. That way, no western tech goes to China.”

The Russians never got much further than paper studies in the 1970s. This is 
real, the spacecraft is already built

When it comes to rockets, China continues to develop a formidable arsenal of 
launch vehicles. Their rockets are called Long March and have been in 
development since the 1970s. The mainstay of their complement is gradually 
being replaced by the Long March 5, 6 and 7.

While the Long March 7 in June was capable of lifting about 13 tonnes into low 
Earth orbit, it is the Long March 5 that analysts are really excited about. Due 
to make its maiden flight this autumn, it’s capable of lifting 25 tonnes to low 
Earth orbit, rivalling anything the Americans, Russians or Europeans currently 
have. It is not yet known what the Long March 5 will send into orbit, but the 
giant rocket’s second flight, scheduled for next year, will be carrying a very 
special cargo. It will be a robotic mission designed to land on the lunar 
surface and send back samples of moon rock to the Earth for Chinese scientists 
to analyse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe0d156ea144532d75f4aa827e99c3acd0996171%2F0_0_2690_1774%2F2690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe0d156ea144532d75f4aa827e99c3acd0996171%2F0_0_2690_1774%2F2690.jpg>
 China’s Shenzhou 10 rocket blasts off from the Jiuquan space centre in the 
Gobi Desert in June 2013. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
The Chinese call their lunar exploration mission Chang’e, after the Chinese 
goddess of the moon. In December 2013 Chang’e 3 hit the headlines after it 
successfully deployed a small rover on the lunar surface. Despite some 
technical problems, it continued to return data until just a few weeks ago.

Now, China plans to land a similar mission on the far side of the Moon in 
2018. This will be a world first. “The Russians did think about such a mission 
in the 1970s but they never got much further than paper studies. This is real, 
the spacecraft is already built,” says Harvey.

Also in the advanced planning stages is a rover to go to Mars. Pencilled in 
for launch in 2020, the Chinese Mars mission is going to find itself racing 
Nasa and the ESA, which have their ownMars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/mars> rover missions launching that year 
too.

But what about a human landing on the moon? There could be no bigger sign of 
Chinese competency than that. Sure, America did it almost 50 years ago but with 
each passing year Apollo seems to have less relevance to the modern exploration 
of space. Nasa has held back from committing to a new round of lunar landings. 
Russia and ESA would both like to go to the moon but can’t go it alone. The 
Chinese, however, seem to have the lunar surface in their sights. Designs for a 
Long March 9 rocket are currently being studied. With the first launch for the 
Long March 9 due in 2025, China could very well be in a position to land 
astronauts on the moon by 2030. This puts it roughly neck-and-neck with 
America, which currently plans to send astronauts to lunar orbit in 2023 but 
which has made no commitment to returning to the surface.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5650cf318fb7174694b8cea9d894723c1b98fcc%2F0_234_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5650cf318fb7174694b8cea9d894723c1b98fcc%2F0_234_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 Liu Yang, China’s first female astronaut, waves during a departure ceremony 
before becoming the first Chinese woman in space in June 2012. Photograph: 
Jason Lee/Reuters 
Almost certainly this will be a flashpoint, but the ignition of a new space 
race would be a mistake. The Apollo programme of the 1960s cost the equivalent 
of hundreds of billions of dollars for little more than technological 
one-upmanship. Better now, surely, to cooperate, spreading the cost and the 
benefit across the world.

The Chinese space programme is gaining momentum year upon year. Its power lies 
not in unlimited funds but in carefully chosen projects, and the pursuit of 
clearly targeted goals – something the traditional space powers could learn 
from, especially when is comes to the crewed programmes.

At present there is no agreement on what to do when the current agreements to 
use the International Space Station come to an end in 2024. With America 
continuing to talk about hugely expensive missions to Mars, but with no real 
plans or budget in place to do this, Russia and ESA could increasingly find 
that their space ambitions are more aligned with those of the Chinese.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F303cb04e52aeb9e99df8e68406decd9ce5b1a00c%2F0_170_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%3A%20the%20new%20space%20superpower&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Faug%2F28%2Fchina-new-space-superpower-lunar-mars-missions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F303cb04e52aeb9e99df8e68406decd9ce5b1a00c%2F0_170_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Mission control at the Jiuquan space centre in the Gobi Desert after China’s 
longest manned space mission in 2013. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
What is clear is that the Chinese space programme is more willing than ever to 
cooperate. With the signing of the UN agreement to host foreign experiments and 
eventually astronauts on their space station, the Chinese are opening up. It is 
of course hard to imagine Russia and in particular ESA abandoning Nasa 
altogether, but it is not inconceivable. In the aftermath of 2008’s credit 
crunch, Nasa pulled out of a number of high-profile joint missions with Europe, 
including robotic Mars exploration and space-based observatories. This left ESA 
floundering for new partners, or frantically rescoping its missions. 
Increasingly, China will play a role in the international exploration of 
space, and although it is early days they have so far they have proved to 
be highly reliable.

A seismic shift in space power is taking place. Europe could pivot either way 
or balance in the middle. Although most still talk about China “becoming” a 
space superpower, it is likely that history will record the tipping point as 25 
June this year, when a giant rocket split the sky amid the cheers of more than 
20,000 tourists.
 