
China should plan to take Taiwan by force and make swift preparations for a 
military incursion, a Communist party-controlled newspaper has said, after US 
president-electDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
broke decades of diplomatic protocol in the region.

Before he even assumes the presidency, Trump has called into question 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/trump-tantrums-signal-trouble-for-china-us-relations-state-media>
 the longstanding US foreign policy of maintaining formal relations with 
Beijing instead of Taiwan, which China considers a breakaway province. He also
spoke directly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/trump-angers-beijing-with-provocative-phone-call-to-taiwan-president>
 with Taiwan’s president, the first such contact since 1979. Both moves have
infuriated China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-questions-us-commitment-to-one-china-policy>
.
One China policy 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=b22e94e8-7082-47a7-89d6-85a9b84c627a>
In response, the Global Times, a state-run tabloid that sometimes reflects 
views from within the Communist party 
<http://qz.com/745577/inside-the-global-times-chinas-hawkish-belligerent-state-tabloid/>
, said on Thursday that China should rebalance its stance towards Taiwan to 
“make the use of force as a main option and carefully prepare for it”.

“The Chinese mainland should display its resolution to recover Taiwan by 
force,” the paperwrote in an editorial 
<http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1023753.shtml>. If Taiwan were to declare 
formal independence, it went on, “the Chinese mainland can in no time punish 
them militarily”.

China has worked in recent years to deepen trade ties with the democratic, 
self-governing island with an eye toward an eventual unification. But the 
ruling Communist party has taken a tougher stance on Taiwan since theelection 
earlier this year of President Tsai Ing-wen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/taiwan-elects-first-female-president>
, whose party is seen asless keen on cosying up to mainland China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/taiwans-new-president-tsai-ing-wen-vows-to-reduce-dependence-on-beijing>
.

“The military status quo across the Taiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> Straits needs to be reshaped as a 
response and punishment to the current administration of [Tsai],” the Global 
Times said.

Chinese officials have already used less drastic “punishments”, such as 
limiting the number of mainland tourists to Taiwan and hinting at curtailing 
investments.

Images show 'significant' Chinese weapons systems in South China Sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/images-show-significant-chinese-weapons-systems-in-south-china-sea>
But while Taiwan is already feeling the brunt of China’s rage, the US could be 
next after Trump moves into the White House.

The president-elect has said he may use the One China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> policy, under which the US formally 
recognises Beijing over Taiwan, as a bargaining chip in future negotiations.

“I fully understand the One China policy, but I don’t know why we have to be 
bound by a One China policy unless we make a deal with China having to do with 
other things, including trade,” Trump said in aninterview with Fox News 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d2B_Egr0EcE>.

China swiftly responded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-questions-us-commitment-to-one-china-policy>
 to the comments, describing the One China principle as the “political bedrock” 
of ties between the two countries.

“We urge the incoming US administration and its leaders to fully recognise the 
sensitivity of the Taiwan question … [and] to properly deal with Taiwan-related 
matters in a prudent manner so as not to disrupt or damage the overall 
interests of the bilateral relationship,” China’s foreign ministry said.

The Global Times suggested pointing more missiles at Taiwan as leverage in 
negotiations with the island.

“If the Chinese mainland won’t pile on more pressure over realising 
reunification by using force, the chance of peaceful unification will only slip 
away,” it said. “Peace does not belong to cowards.”

Donald Trump attempting to play Nixon's 'China card' in reverse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-us-china-relations-taiwan-nixon>
The threat of military action has loomed over Taiwan’s population since the 
1950s. In the most dramatic confrontation, China fired missiles into the waters 
separating it from Taiwan in the run-up to the first free elections in 1996. In 
response, the US sailed an aircraft carrier through the strait in a show of 
solidarity.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fchina-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20warns%20Trump%20of%20damage%20to%20bilateral%20relations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fchina-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20warns%20Trump%20of%20damage%20to%20bilateral%20relations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fchina-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video&media=>
China warns Trump of damage to bilateral relations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/12/china-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video>
On Wednesday, China’s ambassador to the United States said Beijing would never 
bargain with Washington over issues involving its national sovereignty or 
territorial integrity.

Cui Tiankai, speaking to executives of top US companies, said China and the 
United States needed to work to strengthen their relationship.

“Basic norms of international relations should be observed, not ignored, 
certainly not be seen as something you can trade off,” he said.

“And indeed, national sovereignty and territorial integrity are not bargaining 
chips. Absolutely not. I hope everybody would understand that.”

He did not specifically mention Taiwan or Trump’s comments.

Reuters contributed to this report.
 