
A punishing week has left global stock markets nursing losses of more than 
$2tn in the first week of the new year after worries about China’s faltering 
growth and turmoil on its stock exchanges reverberated around the world.

Almost £85bn was wiped off the FTSE 100 in its worst opening week to a year 
since 2000, when the dotcom bubble burst. The blue-chip index closed at 
5,912.44 on Friday, down 0.7% on the day and 5.3% on the week.

Repeating the pattern of last summer, sharp drops on the world’s biggest stock 
exchanges mirrored plunging shares in China, where fresh signs of economic 
weakness andthe prospect of a ban on share sales by major stakeholders being 
lifted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/04/china-manufacturing-slowdown-ftse-100-stocks-markets>
 had sparked a wave of selling by smaller investors.


Moves in China’s yuan currency, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/06/denials-and-devaluation-as-chinas-currency-tumbles-to-five-year-low>
 which authorities allowed to weaken in an apparent attempt to bolster flagging 
exports, heightened alarm about the state of the world’s second-biggest 
economy. Beijing mustered what analysts called its “national team” to intervene 
and boost the yuan on Friday, offering some brief respite to markets in China 
and beyond.

But the mood remained cautious and gains on European exchanges were 
short-lived.Stock markets <https://www.theguardian.com/business/stock-markets> 
in Germany, France and the UK all finished sharply lower over the week, the 
pan-European FTSEurofirst 300 index had its worst week since 2011.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fchina-economy-global-stock-markets-share-prices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2366a0c4bffed891a9e6781f98a64a04a044820e%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20turmoil%20takes%20toll%20on%20global%20stocks%20in%20turbulent%20start%20to%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fchina-economy-global-stock-markets-share-prices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20turmoil%20takes%20toll%20on%20global%20stocks%20in%20turbulent%20start%20to%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fchina-economy-global-stock-markets-share-prices%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2366a0c4bffed891a9e6781f98a64a04a044820e%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The weaker yuan has continued to weigh on global markets. Photograph: Petar 
Kujundzic/Reuters 
In a choppy trading session on Wall Street, shares were boosted by news of 
stronger- than expected US jobs growth in December, but then pared gains as 
traders fretted about further interest rate hikes and the tough global economic 
outlook.


With just hours to go to the closing bell in the US, global markets looked on 
course to have rung in 2016 with trillions of dollars of losses. By Thursday’s 
US close, global stock markets had lost $2.23tn since the start of the year 
based on the S&P Global Broad Market index (BMI). The losses amounted to “more 
than the estimated US student loan debt and 12% of the US debt,” noted Howard 
Silverblatt, senior index analyst at S&P Dow Jones indices.

There were also sharp moves on commodity markets. The prospect of weaker 
global growth coupled with a supply glut pushed the price of crude oil to its 
lowest level for almost 12 years.


The price of Brent crude, the global benchmark, had risen more than 2% on 
Friday afterChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> sought to boost the 
yuan, and its stock exchanges abandoned a new “circuit breaker” mechanism that 
had been blamed for much of the stock market havoc. But echoing the see-saw 
pattern in stock markets those gains were later erased and Brent was trading at 
about $33 a barrel, near a low hit in 2004.

With worries about a global downturn intensifying, investors off-loaded 
riskier shares and flocked to so-called safe haven assets such as gold and 
government bonds.

“So much for the new year bringing some relief to the markets” said credit 
strategists at the French bank Société Générale. “Worries about China, the 
endless drop in oil prices and even new geopolitical tensions pounded the 
markets, punishing risk assets with a flight to quality that was in full 
swing,” they wrote in a research note entitled “What’s the Chinese for ‘ouch’?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fchina-economy-global-stock-markets-share-prices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7021e6946ba0bf5f60c142972663f3084ecb9866%2F0_0_4266_2558%2F4266.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20turmoil%20takes%20toll%20on%20global%20stocks%20in%20turbulent%20start%20to%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fchina-economy-global-stock-markets-share-prices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20turmoil%20takes%20toll%20on%20global%20stocks%20in%20turbulent%20start%20to%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fchina-economy-global-stock-markets-share-prices%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7021e6946ba0bf5f60c142972663f3084ecb9866%2F0_0_4266_2558%2F4266.jpg>
 China shares slipped again this week despite Beijing’s previous attempts to 
calm markets. Photograph: ImagineChina/Corbis 
Chinese stock markets were suspended twice in a week after 7% falls tripped a 
new circuit breaker mechanism. It had been intended to stem sharp sell-offs but 
in the end appeared to have the opposite effect and in a dramatic U-turn the 
mechanism was withdrawn just days after it had been introduced.

Chinese stocks recovered by 2% on Friday after the yuan edged higher following 
days of depreciation that had spooked investors and fuelled capital flight out 
of the country.

Jasper Lawler, market analyst at CMC Markets, said: “China’s removal of 
counter-productive circuit breakers, state buying and a rise in the yuan helped 
prevent another stock market rout and alleviated concerns that the central bank 
would continue the rapid devaluation of the currency.”


After a day of wild trading, the Shanghai composite index and the CSI 300, 
which comprises the biggest stocks from the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock 
exchanges, finished about 2% higher, at 3,186.78 and 3,361.56, respectively. 
Hong Kong’s Hang Seng added 0.6%.


The latest bout of stock market turmoil presents a major challenge to the 
Chinese president, Xi Jinping, who has portayed himself as the country’s top 
economic steward, ahead of the prime minister, Li Keqiang.


Xi was reportedly livid over a humiliating stock market debacle 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/crises-put-first-dents-in-xi-jinpings-power-1440977618>
 in mid-2015, lambasting senior economic officials after he appeared on the 
front cover of the Economist fighting to prop up Chinese shares.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fchina-economy-global-stock-markets-share-prices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4612e48f1e7b3ba98e87ae9e903daaec0845eaa1%2F0_18_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20turmoil%20takes%20toll%20on%20global%20stocks%20in%20turbulent%20start%20to%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fchina-economy-global-stock-markets-share-prices%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20turmoil%20takes%20toll%20on%20global%20stocks%20in%20turbulent%20start%20to%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fchina-economy-global-stock-markets-share-prices%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4612e48f1e7b3ba98e87ae9e903daaec0845eaa1%2F0_18_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Japan’s finance minister, Taro Aso, who questioned whether China could afford 
to keep propping up the yuan. Photograph: Issei Kato/Reuters 
Experts say the credibility of Beijing’s economic policymakers has been 
further damaged by the latest turmoil. The Japanese finance minister, Taro Aso, 
questioned whether Beijing could afford to keep supporting the yuan in light of 
its record decline in foreign reserves last month.

Christopher Balding, a professor of finance and economics at Peking 
University’s HSBC business school, said Beijing’s economic flip-flopping and 
“wild swings in policymaking” had severely damaged confidence.


“Chinese investors want very similar things that international investors want: 
they want clarity, they want to understand what is going on, they want to know 
what the policies are, they want stability and [to know] what the rules are,” 
he said.

“The constant back-and-forth and changes just don’t engender confidence that 
Beijing has really any idea what they are doing.”
 