
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has accused Japan’s “warlord” 
prime minister, Shinzo Abe, of threatening peace in the region, following the 
enactment on Tuesday of controversial laws allowing Japanese troops to fight on 
foreign soil for the first time since the end of the second world war.

The security laws, which were passed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/18/japanese-soldiers-could-fight-abroad-again-after-security-bill-passed>
 last September afterchaotic scenes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/japan-chaotic-vote-security-bills>
 in parliament, reinterpret the country’s pacifist constitution to enableJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> to exercise collective self-defence – 
or coming to the aid of the US and other allies – in overseas conflicts.

Japan extends military reach in disputed East China Sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/28/japan-extends-military-reach-yonaguni-disputed-east-china-sea>
In an online commentary, 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-03/29/c_135232813.htm> the state-run 
Xinhua news agency accused Abe of abandoning Japan’s postwar constitution, 
which limits the military to a purely defensive role, saying the move would 
“only serve to endanger the Japanese public’s right to live in peace”.

The legislation, the biggest shift in Japan’s defence posture since its 
wartime defeat in August 1945, would also “pose a severe challenge to peace in 
the Asia-Pacific region, which is already vulnerable”, the commentary said.

Abe’s Liberal Democratic party and its coalition partner pushed the laws 
through parliament, despitemass protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/16/japanese-anti-war-protesters-challenge-shinzo-abe>
 and warnings that Japanese troops could become embroiled in foreign wars.

Abe insists the self-imposed ban on collective self-defence inhibited Japan’s 
ability to respond to new security threats in the region, including North 
Korea’s nuclear weapons programme and more assertive Chinese naval activity.

Japan and China are embroiled in a longrunning row over ownership of the 
Senkaku islands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/senkaku-islands> in the East 
China Sea, while Tokyo has voiced support for the Philippines and other 
countries in their opposition to Beijing’s construction of bases in disputed 
areas of theSouth China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>.

Tensions between Beijing and Tokyo rose again this week after Japan switched 
on a radar station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/28/japan-extends-military-reach-yonaguni-disputed-east-china-sea>
 in the East China Sea, giving it a permanent intelligence-gathering post close 
to Taiwan and the Senkakus, known as the Diaoyu in China.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fchina-accuses-japan-of-threatening-peace-in-pacific-with-new-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1076f413a0fb23877b0274f0b1cdec13afdf3008%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20accuses%20Japan%20of%20threatening%20Pacific%20peace%20with%20military%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fchina-accuses-japan-of-threatening-peace-in-pacific-with-new-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20accuses%20Japan%20of%20threatening%20Pacific%20peace%20with%20military%20law&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Fchina-accuses-japan-of-threatening-peace-in-pacific-with-new-law%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1076f413a0fb23877b0274f0b1cdec13afdf3008%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 An aerial view of the Japanese island of Yonaguni, which is now home to a new 
military base. Yonaguni is 90 miles south of the disputed Senkaku island chain. 
Photograph: Reuters/Kyodo 
The new base on the island of Yonaguni is at the western extreme of a string 
of Japanese islands in the East China Sea, 150km (90 miles) south of the 
Senkaku islands.

Japan’s increasing sense of caution over Chinese military activity is being 
reflected in astrategic shift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/18/japan-steps-up-military-presence-east-china-sea>
 away from its northern maritime border withRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, despite concerns over possible 
Russian plans to build anaval base 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/29/japan-protests-russian-base-disputed-kuril-island-chain>
 on the disputed Kuril islands.

Soviet forces seized the islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/09/russia-build-southern-kuril-islands-seized-moscow-tokyo-abe>
 from Japan – where they are known as the Northern Territories – towards the 
end of the second world war. Russia’s refusal to return them has prevented the 
two countries from concluding a permanent peace treaty.

The Xinhua commentary made oblique reference to the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>, where Japan has no direct 
territorial claims, and accused Abe of pandering to US interests in the region.

The point of the security laws, it said, was to “ride the coattails of Uncle 
Sam’s ‘pivot to Asia’ strategy and pave the way for Japan to further meddle in 
regional affairs – not only territorial disputes with its neighbours, but also 
issues [in] whichJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> is not a 
stakeholder – with the United States, in a sabre-rattling way”.

It added: “Abe’s elaborate ruse to contribute to regional peace and stability 
has been exposed and once again unmasked Japan as a troublemaker and a pawn of 
the United States in interfering in Asia-Pacific region affairs.”

Abe said the security laws were designed to strengthen Japan’s security 
alliance with the US, where the Obama administration has welcomed the move.

“[We] can now help each other during emergency situations,” Abe told a 
parliamentary committee on Tuesday. “The bond of the alliance has been 
strengthened.”

The chief cabinet secretary, Yoshihide Suga, said the laws were “vital to 
prevent wars and protect people’s lives and livelihoods amid the increasingly 
severe security environment surrounding our country.

“The government will first preserve the peace through diplomacy and there is 
no change at all in our policy of proactive diplomacy for that purpose.”

Japanese voters are divided over the laws, however. A poll by the Yomiuri 
Shimbun newspaper published on Tuesday showed 47% of respondents did not 
approve of the changes, while 38% supported them. That compared to 58% who 
opposed the legislation last September, against 31% who approved.
 