
“My agent nearly had a heart attack when he came to see the show,” says 
Christian Curnyn <http://christiancurnyn.com/>, with a chuckle and a 
mischievous twinkle in his eye. The conductor is talking abouta now notorious 
production of Rameau’s opera Platée in Stuttgart in 2012 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tiyOj2QOcPw>. When the show started, Curnyn was 
on stage – asleep in a bed, having various sex acts performed on him by one of 
the leads.

This was not, however, what alarmed his agent. He had taken fright moments 
before, when he saw that the assistant conductor, not Curnyn, was at the helm 
of the orchestra. “He thought I must have pulled out,” says Curnyn, conductor, 
harpsichordist, baroque specialist, and one of the most adventurous and 
opinionated musicians working in opera today. “But then the orchestra started 
playing and woke me up. I moved through the audience, kicked in the door to the 
orchestra pit, chucked the assistant out, and got on with the show.”

Curnyn, 42, clearly loved being at the centre of the action in this gutsy 
smorgasbord of cross-dressing, love and lust 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tiyOj2QOcPw>, staged by the riotously 
imaginative Spanish directorCalixto Bieito 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calixto_Bieito>. And Curnyn’s interventions 
didn’t stop at simulated sex: it was his idea that during one of the opera’s 
most dazzling arias – sung by a soprano brandishing an electric guitar – a 
woman in the audience, actually a member of the cast, should jump up and shout: 
“That bitch fucked my husband!”

Such behaviour is unusual in conductors. Somehow, I can’t see Antonio Pappano 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/people/antonio-pappano> ever being quite so up for it. 
Glasgow-born Curnyn’s love of avant-garde productions started when he was a 
teenager, travelling to the Edinburgh festival to see theWooster Group 
<http://thewoostergroup.org/blog/> and Pina Bausch 
<http://www.pina-bausch.de/en/pina_bausch/>. It’s a grounding that has made him 
a natural collaborator with English National Opera (ENO), known for its
risk-taking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/07/the-damnation-of-faust-review> 
andexperimentation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jul/18/punchdrunk-eno-duchess-malfi-traviata>
.

We meet during rehearsals for the sixth show he has conducted at ENO in five 
years,a new production of Handel’s Rodelinda <http://www.eno.org/rodelinda>, 
directed by Richard Jones <http://vimeo.com/70176397>. “Every day’s a 
masterclass with Richard,” Curnyn says. But all of the ENO shows he’s been 
involved with have pushed the envelope of baroque opera, fromChristopher 
Alden’s Partenope in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/oct/11/classicalmusicandopera1> to 
Michael Keegan-Dolan’s recent Julius Caesar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/02/julius-caesar-eno-review>. Both 
proved controversial with critics, as didBarrie Kosky’s Castor and Pollux 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O-y2LWqb4Uw>, with its nudity, flagrant 
eroticism and – most shockingly for the delicate sensibilities of some opera 
fans – the disembodied hand that emerged from a mound of earth to masturbate 
singer Laura Tatulescu during one of her arias as Phoebe.

Curnyn, who describes that 2011 production as an “absolute masterpiece”, is 
still furious with critics for their “lazy journalism” in obsessing over the 
set, which was a large box seemingly made of MDF. “One of the things they all 
wrote was that Barrie staged the piece in an Ikea box. I mean, come on, can’t 
you think of anything more interesting to say?” The Guardian’s Tim Ashley 
definitely could, although his problem was the“whiff of misogyny in it all, 
with the male body displayed and admired throughout, while the female body is 
continuously distorted” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/25/castor-and-pollux-eno-review>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKxVZ2_bj4Ws%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKxVZ2_bj4Ws%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FKxVZ2_bj4Ws%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
But there’s no getting a word in. Curnyn is on a roll. “Or the movement and 
choreography in Julius Caesar,” he says, “which they compared to Pina Bausch. 
Actually, it had nothing to do with Pina Bausch, but she’s the only 
contemporary choreographer they’ve ever heard of.” He pauses, but only to tell 
me to make sure this goes on the record: “I literally had people coming up to 
me after both productions saying: ‘God, I’m so sorry you had to conduct that 
show.’ Well, I’m not! It’s a great privilege to work with people like Barrie, 
Michael or Richard.”

One other thing these reviews shared was thunderous praise for the music. That 
must have given Curnyn some pleasure? “Not really. People think it’s a 
compliment to say that the singing was good, or the playing was good, even if 
they hated the production. But it’s really not. I’d much rather the music and 
the staging weren’t separated. They’re both integral to the show.”

This is more than just another anti-critic tirade, though. Curnyn’s passionate 
defence of these shows and their directors comes from his fundamental views 
about how baroque opera can be relevant to today’s world. Not just relevant 
actually – intoxicating too. And if that means the conductor occasionally has 
to take his clothes off and hop into a bed, then so be it. “The thing is,” he 
says, “the opera world has to be challenged. Things have to change.”

The mission statement of the Early Opera Company (EOC) 
<http://www.earlyopera.com/>, which Curnyn founded in 1994 fresh out of 
university, promised that its productions would only be done in modern dress. 
“I’ve grown a bit more lenient in my old age,” he says, “but this is what it’s 
about: if you want to be true to the power of these pieces, you’ve got to 
understand the sensation they created when they were new. And in Rameau or 
Handel’s time, what audiences were seeing on stage were versions of themselves. 
They weren’t looking at people prancing around in pastoral costumes – they were 
looking at people in their own clothes. It wasn’t anything to do with looking 
to the past. It was totally new. That’s so important. Audiences today should 
look at the characters on stage and think: ‘That could be me’, ‘That’s us’ – 
rather than looking through some gauze of pseudo-restoration.”
 Rock opera … the strumming soprano in Platée. 
He wants the music to have a similar impact. When he works with his own 
players in the EOC – as he will in March with a groundbreaking, intimate 
production ofCavalli’s L’Ormindo at the new Sam Wanamaker Playhouse at the Globe
 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/theatre/whats-on/sam-wanamaker-playhouse/lormindo>
 – Curnyn can rely on their intimate knowledge of 18th-century style, manners 
and instruments. But that’s not true when he’s conducting the ENO, with its 
modern instruments and new-fangled ways of thinking.

Or Scottish Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera>. In 2005, their 
production of Handel’s Semele proved a baptism of fire. Curnyn set out to teach 
a modern orchestra how to perform with the inflection, articulation and 
subtlety he wanted. “I hadn’t a fucking clue what I was doing with the 
orchestra, to be honest,” he laughs. “But you learn on the job and I’m very 
grateful that, in the end, they did trust me. But orchestras do test you out – 
you have to be firm.”

As for ENO, he’s astonished by their endless ability to assimilate his ideas, 
and inhabit a world of unfamiliar tunings, different speeds, phrasings and 
ornamentation – so every performance feels new and alive. “When we did Julius 
Caesar, it was different every night. And it has to be.” That’s one reason why 
Curnyn’s ENO performances are so special: you feel they’re being invented right 
in front of you.

It’s time for him to go back to Rodelinda 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9D1QvMsT3rI&list=UUBvbgFj6GDMb5J41nl6hlhQ>. 
But before he goes, he quickly returns to a favourite theme: the need for 
avant-garde opera directors to be supported. “I don’t understand those 
conductors who just look at the musicians and don’t engage with what’s 
happening on stage. I mean, if you don’t like all that, if you don’t like 
modern theatre, then why do opera?”

• Christian Curnyn conducts Handel’s Rodelinda at English National Opera, 
London, 28 February to 15 March <http://www.eno.org/rodelinda>; and Cavalli’s 
L’Ormindo at the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/theatre/whats-on/sam-wanamaker-playhouse/lormindo>
, London, from 25 March to 12 April.
 