
“Did you want fries with that?” This was never a question I expected to be 
asked at a Christmas dinner, but then this wasn’t an ordinary Christmas. I had 
opted to spend the festive season in the gambling capital of the world, Las 
Vegas, and headed for the casino, wearing my Santa hat and expecting to see the 
festivities in full swing.

What I soon realised is that in a place like Vegas, where dressing up and 
make-believe are the order of the day, Christmas is pretty much like any other 
day. Soon, I was drinking margaritas at a bar complete with Elvis 
impersonators, waitresses who would rather be at home with their families, and 
touts trying to sell tickets for the Blue Man Group. I spent the evening 
desperately seeking Christmas, but found no carol singers, no snow outside the 
window and no tree in my bedroom.

By morning I decided I was going about this all wrong and instead of looking 
for a traditional 25 December, I made the most of being in Vegas by wandering 
the old-school casinos in Fremont Street, chatting to showgirls and having a 
Christmas dinner in a well-known fast food chain – with fries of course.

It wasn’t the first time I’d done something different at this time of year. I 
always try to be away during the festivities. Once, I enjoyed Christmas on 
Bondi beach in Australia – lots of sun, Santa hats and a barbie, and I spent 
one year floating on the Nile in Egypt where I lingered to see the New Year 
welcomed in with a single firework.

This year I’ll be heading overseas once again and, if all goes according to 
plan, will be spending Christmas Eve camping on the ice in Antarctica. It may 
not be a chestnut-roasting-on-an-open-fire scene, but at least I’ll be 
guaranteed a white Christmas.

 