
Two US banks – Citi and JP Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jpmorgan> – have been designated as 
potentially posing the greatest risks to the global financial system in an 
annual ranking by regulators.

Citi has replaced HSBC and joined JP Morgan in the highest ranking issued by 
the Financial Stability Board 
<http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/2016-list-of-global-systemically-important-banks-G-SIBs.pdf>
 (FSB), an international alliance of central bankers, policy makers and 
regulators that sorts 30 major banks into five categories.

The more systemically important the bank, the more capital it must hold to 
absorb losses during time of crisis. No bank has ever been placed in the 
highest, fifth category – which adds 3.5 percentage points to a bank’s capital 
requirement – since the FSB rankings were introduced five years. Citi and JP 
Morgan are in the fourth category.

The Big Short: is the next financial crisis on its way?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/big-short-financial-crash-steve-eisman-italy-banks-risk>
HSBC <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings>, Britain’s biggest 
bank, has been moved out of the fourth category for the first time to the 
third, reducing the top up to its capital by half a percentage point to 2%. 
Barclays has also had its status cut by one category, from the third to the 
less risky second bracket.

Citi is among three US banks which have been pushed up the rankings: the other 
two are Bank of America and Wells Fargo. The rising importance of Chinese banks 
is also illustrated as Industrial and Commercial Bank of China has moved up one 
ranking.

 Tomas Kinmonth, a fixed income strategist at ABN Amro, said the changes 
reflected the revised business models of some of the banks. “The European and 
UK banks are both retrenching and are trying to return to their core 
businesses. Thus the lowering of Barclays within the ranking comes partly as 
the bank moves to focus just on the American and European markets,” said 
Kinmonth.

“Counterintuitively, a decrease in the systematic importance of the banks can 
actually be a positive for the institution. The bank can be expected to have 
less equity set aside, and can in theory allow them to return more proceeds to 
existing shareholders,” he said.

HSBC has also been scaling back its global presence – it recently sold its 
operations in Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/hsbc-profits-fall> – and also 
reducing its exposure to risky loans.

Deutsche Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank>, which was 
described by the International Monetary Fund as the world’s riskiest bank, 
remained in the third category – where HSBC, Bank of America and French bank 
BNP Paribas also reside – requiring it to top up its capital by two percentage 
points. Deutsche was in the fourth category in 2012.

The FSB is chaired by Bank of England governor Mark Carney. Its role is to act 
a body coordinating policy towards the financial services sector around the 
world and monitor and assess vulnerabilities affecting the global financial 
system.

It is playing a key role in trying to end the “too big too fail” problem that 
was highlighted by the 2008 banking crisis. Assessing the so-called globally 
systemic banks – known as “G-Sibs” – is part of its role.

The banks are unlikely to need to raise more capital as many of them ready 
hold enough to appease regulatory demands. A list of the globally systemic 
insurers was also published, which includes Prudential and Aviva.
 