
The 2015 general election will take place nearly seven years after the 
financial crisis of 2008, yet the root causes of the crisis have barely been 
addressed by mainstream politics. This week the leading civil society groups 
working on transforming finance are calling for this to change.

On Thursday, a statement supported by 11 organisations 
<http://www.thefinancelab.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Transforming-Finance-Network-manifesto-asks-final.pdf>
 (pdf) – which include Share Action, NEF, Positive Money, Finance Innovation 
Lab and FoE – will set out the five major changes that the next government 
should put in place to create a finance system that serves the needs of 
society, environment and the wider economy.

Put simply, we’re asking for: 


• more diversity in banking, using the Competition & Markets Authority 
investigation in retail banking to accelerate growth in mutuals, peer-to-peer 
lending, community and stakeholder banks

• more responsibility in financial markets, encouraged by joining the EU 
Financial Transaction Tax (FTT) designed to curb unnecessary speculation

• more transparency in savings and investment, backed by a new Responsible 
Investment Bill

• more sustainability through the expansion of the Green Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-investment-bank> into a broader 
state investor akin to those in other developed countries such as Germany, 
France and Japan

• more democracy by asking the Bank of England to carry out a review of all 
monetary policy options available to government and central banks to influence 
the allocation of credit in the interests of the whole of society and the 
economy, and a debate over these options in parliament.

Each of these recommendations is backed by a specific campaign with its own 
coalition of support, but together they form the pillars of a new, sustainable 
approach to finance. When public outrage at the failures of the financial 
system was at its height during the Occupy protests, the challenge posed was 
“what is your alternative?” In the years since the crisis, civil society has 
begun to show how to create a financial system that is democratic, responsible 
and fair.

Alternative finance businesses – such as peer-to-peer lending, values banks 
and community finance – have been growing, consolidating and demonstrating 
their market strength. Figures from Nesta show that the size of thealternative 
finance market is growing at 150% 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/understanding-alternative-finance-2014.pdf>
 (pdf) every year and was worth £1.74bn in 2014. In December, 20 alternative 
finance playerssubmitted evidence 
<http://www.thefinancelab.org/finance-innovation-lab-leads-alternative-finance-coalition-call-competition-authorities-drive-greater-diversity-market/>
 to the Competition & Markets Authority on how its investigation into the 
banking market should look specifically to increase the diversity of business 
models.

The phrase “casino capitalism” was bandied about a lot immediately after the 
financial crisis. While we cannot eliminate speculation in capital markets, the 
very existence of practices such as high frequency trading undermines the 
assertion that investments are primarily about the long-term economic value of 
the asset. The EU proposed a financial transaction tax (FTT) as one measure to 
curb unnecessary speculation. The UK has not only opted out of it, but actively 
undermined the measure from the start. Nevertheless, theRobin Hood Tax campaign 
<http://robinhoodtax.org.uk/> has built an international coalition of support 
for the EU FTT withnearly 1m signatories 
<https://robinhoodpetition.org/?lang=gb>.

The investment industry, which looks after all of our pensions, is shockingly 
opaque and riddled with conflicts of interest. Campaigns such asShareAction 
<http://shareaction.org/> and True & Fair <http://www.trueandfaircampaign.com/> 
advocate legal safeguards to correct these market failures. ShareAction has 
drafted aResponsible Investment Bill 
<http://b.3cdn.net/sactionlive/2d4d83df05fef94fe5_zlm6id7x3.pdf>, which would 
enshrine savers’ rights to transparency over where their money is invested and 
clarify fiduciary duty to make sure the fund management industry is truly 
making decisions in the long-term interests of individual savers.

Most developed countries have a state investment bank as a key player in their 
own financial markets to take on long-term risks and lever in private capital. 
In Germany, KfW played a crucial role in the rapid growth of renewable energy 
and improving the energy efficiency of their housing stock. The UK has a Green 
Investment Bank and the British Business Bank – neither of which are fully 
fledged state banks with borrowing powers. Groups such as Green Alliance, 
Aldersgate Group, IPPR and E3G have called for this to change.

Positive Money <http://www.positivemoney.org/> and others have highlighted the 
fact that the majority of credit created by banks in the UK is allocated to 
property or financial assets. Less than 10% goes to productive lending into 
businesses. Since the 1970s, monetary policy has had no view on where credit 
should be allocated, only how much. Now, Lord Turner and Martin Wolf are 
publishing ideas on how monetary policy could be used in more imaginative ways 
to help the real economy.NEF <http://www.neweconomics.org/> and IPPR 
<http://www.ippr.org/> have made specific proposals for credit guidance 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/definancialisation-a-democratic-reformation-of-finance>
 andstrategic quantitative easing 
<http://www.neweconomics.org/publications/entry/strategic-quantitative-easing>.

Changing the financial system isn’t just about avoiding another crash. We need 
to fundamentally rethink the purpose of our financial system to ensure that it 
delivers what we need for society, the environment and the wider economy. Civil 
society is leading the way. Will our politicians follow?

Chris Hewett <https://twitter.com/chrisjhewett> is fellow of The Finance 
Innovation Lab and convenor of theTransforming Finance Network 
<http://transformingfinance.org.uk/> of civil society groups focused on finance 
reform.

Join the community of sustainability professionals and experts. Become a GSB 
member <https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox.
 