
Senior civil servants have called for a pay rise to deal with “unsustainable” 
Brexit workloads. TheFirst Division Association 
<http://www.fda.org.uk/Aboutus/About-us.aspx> (FDA), which represents senior 
civil servants and diplomats, said their pay does not “remotely compare with 
the wider marketplace”.

The union said officials could not do their work to the standard they would 
like due to an untenable workload and “inadequate” government resources. The 
challenge of working on leaving theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> while delivering existing government 
priorities has pushed the civil service “to its limits”, with officials working 
more hours for falling real-terms pay.

Brexit helps kill Francis Maude's hated civil service 'rank and yank' system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/dec/08/francis-maude-civil-service-performance-management-brexit>
In a survey submitted as evidence to the senior salaries review body (SSRB) by 
the FDA, 94% of respondents said their pay framework was “not fit for purpose”.

It comes as the row over Whitehall’s readiness for Brexit rumbles on after the 
resignation of Sir Ivan Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/04/ivan-rogers-brexit-eu-ambassador-ids-couldnt-be-trusted-by-ministers-claims-duncan-smith-politics-live>
 as the UK’s ambassador to the EU. FDA general secretary Dave Penman said: 
“Fresh from reducing the size of their departments, the SCS [senior civil 
service] is now tasked with implementing Brexit on top of all of the 
government’s existing priorities.

“Some haven’t seen a pay rise in a decade; all have seen their pay cut in real 
terms by around a quarter. The strain of the pay freeze and staff reductions is 
taking its toll. The previous chancellor’s policy of public sector pay 
restraint has led to a demoralised workforce and a civil service now reliant on 
expensive contractors and salary premiums for new hires.

“This chancellor needs to take a more realistic position and heed the FDA’s 
call for real investment in the SCS, not a never-ending series of temporary 
fixes dreamed up on the hoof that end up costing the public more than before 
the pay restraint began.”

But former Tory leader Iain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith> told the Daily Mail: 
“This is total nonsense.

“Senior civil servants should be embarrassed that their union is asking for a 
pay rise at a time when the entire public sector is subject to necessary pay 
restraint. These officials are simply being asked to do their job. They should 
be relishing the challenge – and the best ones will be.”

Steve Baker, chairman of the influential European research group 
<http://www.stevebaker.info/blog/> of Tory MPs, said: “For normal people 
earning normal wages these civil servants already look very well rewarded.”
 