
Felix Mendelssohn: A Midsummer Night’s Dream 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m0gHTNJVFtA>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm0gHTNJVFtA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm0gHTNJVFtA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm0gHTNJVFtA&media=>
Away with the fairies rather than with boring and restrictive patriarchal 
Athenians, you can feel Mendelssohn’s brilliant imagination flitting as deftly 
as a firefly in this beautiful piece of orchestration.

Leonard Bernstein: West Side Story (inspired by Romeo and Juliet) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k19YZKdKI60>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk19YZKdKI60&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk19YZKdKI60>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk19YZKdKI60&media=>
A major work from this brilliant conductor, composer and performer, West Side 
Story is even more relevant today as we confront our ugly attitudes towards 
issues of intolerance and racial difference.

William Walton: Suite from Henry V 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gPl0fkY9ncw>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgPl0fkY9ncw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgPl0fkY9ncw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgPl0fkY9ncw&media=>
As a child, I was obsessed with Laurence Olivier’s film of Henry V 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nIhYxshDPLg>, not only for the actor and 
director’s charismatic performance, but for Walton’s wonderful score – 
particularly during the battle of Agincourt. It became the Shakespeare play I 
most wanted to orchestrate, andluckily that opportunity came my way in 2012 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/discovery-space/previous-productions/henry-v>
. There are little snippets of Walton hidden in my score: I couldn’t help but 
make a tribute to this great composer.

Welcome Msoni: UMabatha (Zulu Macbeth) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XqUsqerEV8g>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fclaire-van-kampen-my-favourite-shakespeare-inspired-compositions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6644ab8802cf53c888cbdc41e0421ac6d1bbbaa8%2F0_0_2048_1402%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Claire%20van%20Kampen%3A%20my%20favourite%20Shakespeare-inspired%20compositions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fclaire-van-kampen-my-favourite-shakespeare-inspired-compositions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Claire%20van%20Kampen%3A%20my%20favourite%20Shakespeare-inspired%20compositions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F21%2Fclaire-van-kampen-my-favourite-shakespeare-inspired-compositions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6644ab8802cf53c888cbdc41e0421ac6d1bbbaa8%2F0_0_2048_1402%2F2048.jpg>
 Zulu actors perform UMabatha at Shakespeare’s Globe. Photograph: Adrian 
Dennis/AFP/Getty Images 
A powerful and exhilarating version of Macbeth came to the Globe in 1999: the 
company performed in Swahili but balanced the text with songs and dances from 
their South African tradition. Experiencing this felt incredibly authentic; I 
wondered if in performances of Shakespeare’s plays in the 1600s there had been 
more songs and dances than have come down to us. It felt right.

Sergei Prokofiev: Romeo and Juliet (ballet score) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W6Tb84v-KdA>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHtBRN5BXt6o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHtBRN5BXt6o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHtBRN5BXt6o&media=>
The balcony scene is more Shakespeare than Shakespeare. If you manage to 
listen to the score and watch Margot Fonteyn and Rudolf Nureyev dance this 
exquisite pas de deux, it is perfection on every level.

William Walton: Troilus and Cressida 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RVDx1eKzv7g>

I like the recording with Dame Janet Baker. This opera deserves far more 
outings than it has had.

Duke Ellington: Such Sweet Thunder 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=PLD4D52D7CF3105DBB&v=McGysWP0Jzo>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMcGysWP0Jzo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMcGysWP0Jzo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMcGysWP0Jzo&media=>
Twenty-two tracks inspired by Shakespeare’s plays. Nothing more to say. Buy it.

Michael Tippett: The Knot Garden: (The Tempest)  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BYCygItYjx0>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBYCygItYjx0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBYCygItYjx0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBYCygItYjx0&media=>
I am a huge Tippett fan and had to get something in here of his; The Knot 
Garden has allusions to The Tempest. I wish Tippett was performed more in our 
mainstream opera houses. I like the endearing awkwardness of his libretti; hisA 
Midsummer Marriage <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SaeFY4QWO6s> perhaps has 
some similar arcane and tenuous connections to A Midsummer Night’s Dream.

Giuseppe Verdi: Falstaff (Merry Wives of Windsor) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T4Buc8wTsbg>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT4Buc8wTsbg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT4Buc8wTsbg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DT4Buc8wTsbg&media=>
I have seen many productions of this wonderful piece. It is as fun to act as 
to sing, with a very touching and magical last act. In particular, I remember a 
spectacular Peter Hall production at Glyndebourne. It happened to be my 
daughter’s 11th birthday and she adored it. She became a classical actor who 
likes to sing.

Miles Davis: Bitches Brew (Macbeth)  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SbCt-iXIXlQ>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSbCt-iXIXlQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSbCt-iXIXlQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSbCt-iXIXlQ&media=>
Though technically not a score or reference to Macbeth, I have included Davis 
because, perhaps more than any composer from our period, he has the essence of 
something deep, big and beyond what we are all trying to grasp. This 
magnificent album was the inspiration for my own soundtrack toa production of 
Macbeth 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/discovery-space/previous-productions/macbeth>
, in which I used instruments to create a world hanging in the foul and filthy 
air of the witches.
 