
Finland’s Supercell has become Europe’s first ever “decacorn” – that’s a 
technology company worth $10bn – after a buyout from Chinese internet leviathan 
Tencent.

The deal will see Tencent and its partners secure an 84.3% stake in Supercell, 
best known for its Clash of Clans mobile game, paying $8.6bn (£5.78bn) for the 
pleasure. That values the overall company at $10.2bn, the first European 
technology startup to break that barrier.

While Supercell’s games are regularly at the top of download charts, its new 
owner is less well known in the west. Tencent is worth $207bn, and is most 
famous for its WeChat messaging app,a sprawling communications service 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-06-09/life-in-the-people-s-republic-of-wechat>
 which is China’s equivalent of WhatsApp, Twitter, Facebook, PayPal and the App 
Store all rolled in to one.

WeChat has 762 million monthly users, and many of them already play mobile 
games on the platform. Online games are responsible for half of Tencent’s 
overall revenue, and the acquisition could pay off for Supercell if it helps it 
break the Chinese market. Almost one tenth of global game revenue will come 
through Tencent’s holdings, according to market researchers Newzoo. As well as 
Supercell, Tencent owns RiotGames <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/games>
, which makes League of Legends, a Moba that is the highest-grossing PC game 
thanks largely to its strength in eSports.

“We want Supercell to be the world’s best place for creative people to create 
games,” said Supercell CEO, Ilkka Paananen. “At the same time, this new 
partnership offers us exciting growth opportunities in China, where we will be 
able to reach hundreds of millions of new gamers via Tencent’s channels.”

Supercell is already used to distant owners: until this week, it had been a 
part of Japanese telecoms firm SoftBank. But it remains to be seen whether or 
not Tencent is as hands-off as SoftBank was. “Under SoftBank we enjoyed a great 
deal of independence,”Paananen told the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/tencent-agrees-to-acquire-clash-of-clans-maker-supercell-1466493612>
. “I’d like to think of Supercell as a group of 190 entrepreneurs rather than a 
company.”

Supercell broke the $10bn barrier just days after a report from tech bank GP 
Bullhound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/20/britain-leads-europe-technology-unicorns>
 named it one of four companies likely to be the first to do so. That report 
showed that the UK has the most “unicorns” in Europe, with 18 British tech 
firms topping $1bn.
 