
Claudio Ranieri <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/claudio-ranieri> has 
dismissed any fears over his future as Leicester City manager but admits the 
club’s owner is not happy with their form.

Ranieri has left Jamie Vardy and Riyad Mahrez at home for Wednesday’s 
Champions League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> game in 
Porto, with qualification to the knockout stages already achieved, as he looks 
to revive their Premier League season.

Pochettino out to end Spurs’ Wembley jinx despite Europa League conundrum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/mauricio-pochettino-end-wembley-jinx-tottenham-europa-league-cska-moscow-champions-league>
Leicester lost only three league games en route to their shock title success 
last season and have already suffered seven defeats in this campaign, leaving 
them two points above the relegation zone.

But Ranieri is unconcerned about losing his job despite the dissatisfaction of 
the chairman, Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha. “Never, because it’s not my decision,” 
the Italian said. “The owner is always behind us, he always tells us how he can 
help us and is always positive. Of course, he’s not happy – no one at the club 
is.

“When we win, we win together. When we lose, we lose together. My experience 
says it’s important to stay calm and be positive, believe in your players and 
do the best for your team.”

Mahrez and Vardy will not play at the Estádio do Dragão while Robert Huth, 
Andy King, Islam Slimani and Kasper Schmeichel have also not travelled as 
Ranieri looks to keep them fresh for Saturday’s visit of Manchester City.

The champions are five points clear of second-placed Porto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/porto> in Group G, with the Portuguese 
side needing to win to be certain of reaching the last 16 ahead of FC 
Copenhagen.

Ranieri conceded that he would have taken a stronger squad if they had needed 
victory in Portugal but is happy to hand his fringe men a chance, with Demarai 
Gray, Leonardo Ulloa and Marcin Wasilewski expected to play and the 18-year-old 
midfielder Harvey Barnes in the group.

He said: “If we had to win, maybe all my players would be here, but I can 
choose. Always I have said we have a very good team. There are some players who 
didn’t play so far – they deserve their chance to show their potential.”
 