
Mahler: Symphony No 3
Larsson/ London Symphony Chorus/Berliner Philharmoniker (Deutsche Grammophon 
1999) 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mahler-Symphony-No-3-Gustav/dp/B000063TAJ/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1390224469&sr=1-1&keywords=abbado+mahler+3>

Recorded live at the Royal Festival Hall in London, this is not only one of 
the greatest of Abbado's Mahler recordings, but one of the finest performances 
of any of the symphonies ever issued on disc. It has all the qualities that 
made Abbado the greatest Mahler interpreter of his age - an unerring sense of 
structure and musical purpose, a profound expressive intensity that never 
became remotely sentimental, and the unique ability to make an orchestra 
apparently transcend its own capabilities.

Schubert: The Symphonies
Chamber Orchestra of Europe (Deutsche Grammophon 1986-87) 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Schubert-Symphonies-Chamber-Orchestra-Europe/dp/B003W16T9K/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1390224570&sr=1-1&keywords=Abbado+chamber+orchestra+of+europe>

Abbado was instrumental in the founding of the Chamber Orchestra of Europe 
<http://www.coeurope.org/> in 1981, and worked with it regularly in its 
formative years. Among the recordings he made during this time, this set of 
Schubert's symphonies stands out. After Mahler, Schubert was perhaps the 
symphonist with whom Abbado revealed the closest affinity, as the wit, 
elegance, charm, and - in the later works the psychological depths - of these 
performances reveal.

Ravel: Piano Concerto; Prokofiev: Piano Concerto No 3
Argerich/Berlin Philharmonic (Deutsche Grammophon, 1967) 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Prokofiev-Piano-Concerto-Ravel-major/dp/B000001GQQ/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1390225269&sr=1-1&keywords=abbado+argerich+ravel>

Of all the musical partnerships that Abbado forged with some of the greatest 
soloists of our time, three stand out. He worked regularly with Maurizio 
Pollini, with whom he recorded the Beethoven, Brahms and Schumann concertos, as 
well as a number of 20th-century works, while he was one of the select band of 
conductors with whom Martha Argerich would appear and record. Their 
collaborations were always special, and this early recording of two of 
Argerich's specialities captures their chemistry perfectly.

Schumann: Scenes from Faust
Terfel/Mattila/Rootering/Bonney//Graham/Swedish Radio Choir/Berlin 
Philharmonic (Sony Classical 1994) 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Schumann-Scenes-Goethes-Bryn-Terfel/dp/B000002AQH/ref=sr_1_2?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1390224777&sr=1-2&keywords=Abbado+scenes+from+faust>

As well as supreme musicality, intellectual curiosity was an important part of 
Abbado's approach to conducting, which led him investigate a wide range of 
neglected works, from a Schubert opera, to orchestral fragments of Mussorgsky, 
an early cantata by Debussy, to Schumann's choral masterpiece. The performance 
represents a real act of musical rehabilitation, any musical weaknesses were 
erased by sheer single-mindedness of the performance.

Simon Boccanegra
Freni/Cappucilli/Careras/Ghiaurov/van Dam/Teatro della Scala (Deutsche 
Grammophon 1977) 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Verdi-Simon-Boccanegra-Giuseppe/dp/B000001GXJ/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1390224874&sr=1-1&keywords=Abbado+simon+boccanegra>

It's hard to choose between Abbado's outstanding Verdi recordings, most dating 
from the 1970s and 80s when he was music director at La Scala, Milan. This 
version of Boccanegra, with an outstanding cast, is a genuine classic, though, 
not only as a souvenir of what was one of the landmark stagings (by Giorgio 
Strehler) in the history of Verdi production, but as a demonstration of the 
searching intensity Abbado brought to the composer, and his ability to 
characterise every detail without losing sight of the whole dramatic shape.

Berg: Wozzeck
Grundheber/Behrens/Raffeiner/Zednik/Haugland/Vienna State Opera (Deutsche 
Grammophon 1987) 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Alban-Berg-Wozzeck/dp/B000001G9D/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1390225016&sr=1-1&keywords=Abbado+Berg+Wozzeck>

Abbado recorded all but one of Alban Berg's works (his second, unfinished 
opera, Lulu being the omission). He was in many ways, the perfect Berg 
conductor, able to balance the music's debts to both late romanticism and 
modernism perfectly, without compromising either the music's formal clarity or 
its emotional power. A quarter of a century after it was recorded, this still 
remains the finest of all Wozzeck recordings on disc.

Stockhausen: Gruppen; Kurtág: Stele; Grabstein für Stephan 
Berlin Philharmonic (Deutsche Grammophon 1994) 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Karlheinz-Stockhausen-Gruppen-Grabstein-Stephan/dp/B0000012WY/ref=sr_1_1?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1390225104&sr=1-1&keywords=Abbado+gruppen+kurtag>

Abbado conducted a wide range of contemporary music. He was particularly 
associated with that of his friend Luigi Nono, but he premiered works by many 
other living composers too, and was one of the first great conductors to tackle 
Stockhausen's tour de force for three orchestras, Gruppen. This live recording 
is paired with two works by Kurtág, one of which, Stele, was composed for 
Abbado and the Berlin Philharmonic.
 