
This was the opportune moment for Claude Puel and his Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> team to make a statement. In 
the buildup to the match the Frenchman said how his players “had nothing to 
lose” and it was time for his team to back him up amid growing frustration at 
his defensive approach and his side’s poor form.

Nathan Redmond gives Southampton narrow edge against Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/southampton-liverpool-efl-cup-match-report>
His team did just that, laying down a marker albeit without any real swagger, 
as Southampton became just the third team to beatLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> this season.

Just two days earlier the Southampton manager batted away questions about his 
team being boring to watch. For Puel, it felt like a momentous evening even 
before a ball was kicked.

There was no cup fever and tickets were still on sale within a couple of hours 
of kick-off. Puel has been forced to explain his rigid rotation policy but he 
made the right call here, playing the strongest team available to him, although 
his captain, José Fonte, was omitted from the squad altogetherafter requesting 
a transfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/jose-fonte-out-of-southampton-squad-efl-semi-final-liverpool>
.

It took Southampton an age to get out of first gear but once the wheels were 
in motion they made Liverpool look rather ordinary and soon dispelled the bad 
energies surrounding St Mary’s, with a much-needed win on home turf. And in the 
end it was one of Puel’s most entrusted players,Nathan Redmond, who silenced 
the doubters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/southampton-liverpool-efl-cup-match-report>
.

Redmond had become the scapegoat of Southampton supporters’ frustrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/11/nathan-redmond-southampton-liverpool-efl-semi-final>
, with the winger-cum-forward guilty of recent profligacy in front of goal. 
Redmond played wide here, in his best position, and could have had a hat-trick 
but for Loris Karius, the much-maligned Liverpool goalkeeper. Redmond excelled 
under the lights and in the second half played his part in what should have 
been the goal that put Saints out of sight, only for Cédric Soares to fire 
against the side netting. Redmond knows the feeling.

Virgil van Dijk led from the back, while Oriol Romeu and Ryan Bertrand, two of 
Southampton’s most consistent performers this campaign, grew into the match. 
This was Southampton’s first of six matches in 20 days but Puel had to go for 
broke or risk further discontent from the stands, with supporters still 
adapting to the Frenchman’s style after the high–octane approaches of Mauricio 
Pochettino and Ronald Koeman.

For the opening 20 minutes, the hosts were second best and made to watch 
Liverpool control possession. Dusan Tadic, with a razor-sharp mohican, was too 
slow to react while Jordy Clasie was left chasing shadows. Jürgen Klopp’s team 
were comfortable in exhibition mode but unfortunately for Southampton, the 
fluorescent lime green shirts were not bibs but rather Liverpool, playing in 
their third kit.

But Southampton then reduced Liverpool to making bitty fouls and, just as when 
they played outa stalemate here in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/southampton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
, the visitors struggled to penetrate the Saints’ back line. Lucas Leiva passed 
the ball waywardly out of play and James Milner suddenly looked uncomfortable 
at left-back. Romeu was outstanding in midfield, continuously harassing Emre 
Can, and Clasie stood up to Daniel Sturridge, pinching the ball off the England 
striker at a critical moment. Then there was Van Dijk, impressive in defence 
and attack, making a foray into the Liverpool penalty area before stinging the 
palms of Karius.

It was Bertrand’s galloping run into the opposition half, seemingly bringing 
the Saints supporters with him, that saw Southampton come alive. Then the 
impetus from Redmond’s goal gave them the lift they had been looking for after 
three straight Premier League defeats and an FA Cup draw at Norwich City on 
Saturday. After the match Puel was delighted with the clean sheet and how 
priceless the one-goal advantage may yet prove at Anfield in a fortnight’s 
time. The challenge for his team now is to replicate the same level of 
performance on a regular basis, starting at Turf Moor on Saturday. “Now it’s 
important to show this level in all of our games in the Premier League and it’s 
important people understand we can do this game in the league,” Puel said.

Five Southampton players have swapped St Mary’s for Anfield in recent times, 
the most recent being Sadio Mané, and it’s plain to see why there’s a fear that 
Van Dijk will eventually join Adam Lallana, Dejan Lovren et al on Merseyside. 
The Dutchman marshalled Sturridge, who has had so much joy at St Mary’s of 
late, impeccably. Maya Yoshida, too, the Japanese defender who partnered Van 
Dijk, will have won plaudits.

Klopp summoned Divock Origi and the returning Philippe Coutinho – much to the 
anguish of the home supporters – but Southampton stood firm to take away a 
character-building victory. Puel lacks charisma and is quietly spoken but his 
slow and steady approach has given Southampton a good footing for the second 
leg and the possibility of reaching a Wembley final is – from nowhere – all the 
more palpable.

There were jitters – nobody will have felt them more than the manager – but 
Southampton, as the saying goes, marched on.
 