
Claudio Abbado's concerts were life-changing events 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yrLRZCbN3Eg> for anyone lucky enough to hear 
them. Towards the end of his life, above all with the concerts he gave with his 
Lucerne Festival Orchestra, which hefounded in 2003 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N8Mhji_lgCQ> and with whom he gave the last 
concerts of his life â€“ unforgettable, utterly shattering performances of 
Schubert'sUnfinished Symphony and Bruckner's Ninth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/aug/28/lucerne-festival-75th-celebration-abbado>
 - Abbado had taken orchestral music into a new realm of possibility and 
experience.

The Lucerne project was the zenith of a life in music that had as its 
essential credo a word that you don't always associate with conductors, those 
supposed tyrants of the podium: "listen". He used that word more than any other 
in the rehearsals I saw him lead with the orchestra, a hand-picked ensemble of 
some of the greatest chamber musicians, orchestral players, and soloists in the 
world, with the young musicians of the Mahler Chamber Orchestra at its core 
(another orchestra Abbado founded, in addition to the European Union Youth 
Orchestra, theGustav Mahler Jugendorchester 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FNNOZT0GC2k>, and Orchestra Mozart 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n3MAxc4Pu7k>). The message of listening was 
about encouraging every player in the huge ensemble needed to play Mahler's 
symphonies to listen to one another, to know the score as well as he did. Their
performances of all but the 8th 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mahler-Symphonies-Nos-1-Blu-ray/dp/B004P96WJ0/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1390217099&sr=8-1&keywords=mahler+abbado+lucerne>
, which Abbado didn't have the chance to play in Lucerne, are the most 
revelatory and moving Mahler performances of recent decades - arguably ever. 
The orchestra played with the subtlety, freedom, and intensity of chamber 
music, revealing new light on the music from within.
 'A deeper kind of listening...' Photograph: Riccardo Musacchio/EPA 
But there was another, deeper kind of listening that Abbado wanted to create, 
and that was to catalyse his musicians and his audiences to listen, to have 
contact with the musical substance not merely of the sounds the orchestra 
makes, but withthe silence 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Claudio-Abbado-Hearing-The-Silence/dp/B00A2K9ZOA> that 
comes before and after the music. That sounds ludicrous, paradoxical for a 
concert of orchestral music, which is all about the sounds, after all! But with 
those musicians in Lucerne, Abbado was able to lift the veil on some other 
realm of experience, to put us in touch with a larger mystery even than the 
notes the orchestra was playing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvOvXhyldUko%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvOvXhyldUko%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvOvXhyldUko%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
And what might seem riddle-like in words is unarguably, tangibly real when you 
encounter it: watch and listen to Abbado's performance ofMahler's Ninth Symphony
 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mahler-Symphony-No-9-DVD-NTSC/dp/B004DIPLOK/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1390217127&sr=8-1&keywords=mahler+abbado+lucerne+9>
 (all the Mahler performances, andmany of the other Lucerne concerts 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bruckner-Symphony-Accentus-ACC10243-Blu-ray/dp/B007KY4UU0/ref=sr_1_fkmr2_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1390217151&sr=8-3-fkmr2&keywords=mahler+lucerne+bruckner>
, are on DVD or Blu-Ray) to hear the most profoundly full, physical silence you 
may ever experience at the end of the final movement. Mahler's music passes 
into another world in the closing bars of the symphony; the silence that 
Abbado, the musicians, and the audience share after the sounds of the orchestra 
have crossed the border into nothingness actually embodies whatever that place 
might be. At the opposite end of the expressive extreme, but with exactly the 
same power to warp space, time, and existence, was the miraculous, massive coda 
ofBruckner's Fifth Symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/oct/16/claudio-abbado-cern>, when 
Abbado brought the Lucerne orchestra to the Royal Festival Hall in London, a 
performance that catapulted its audience into the cosmos.

Abbado's concerts with Lucerne always had these moments of epiphany, of 
revelation. But last year's programmes in Lucerne were different. That Schubert 
Unfinished and Bruckner 9 took place in that transfigured state of being from 
the very first note to the last. The whole concert was a communion between 
Abbado and his players of devastating intimacy and astonishing emotional 
bravery, which asked the most profound questions about what the musical 
experience, and even what life might be about, with its beginnings and 
unfinished endings, its questions and unfilled answers, its sounds and its 
silences. Abbado's concerts weren't mere performances of pieces of music, they 
were searing, transformative existential journeys 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IKQBKxuOgOg>. That they have come to an end is 
an unimaginable loss.
 