
How do you dramatise climate change? The obvious route, in recent films and 
novels, has been to imagine a future dystopia of rising sea levels and ravaged 
landscapes, where wars are fought over scant resources. The danger is that 
these sci-fi scenarios can seem so outlandish that they have the effect of 
distancing us from the present reality.

Theatre director Katie Mitchell confronted the subject in 2012 when she and 
the scientistStephen Emmott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jun/30/stephen-emmott-ten-billion>
 explored the issue of overpopulation. “We spent four or five months in 
workshops trying all the usual theatrical forms to present the subject,” she 
says, “and we ended up with a load of scenes that were a bit cheesy or 
ridiculous, that all seemed to diminish and oversimplify and sensationalise the 
subject. I had to conclude that, in my opinion, using existing theatrical 
formats was not going to work, and the only way to do it was to get the 
scientist up there using a different language to talk to people – lay person’s 
language.”

She took the project to the Royal Court and the result was Ten Billion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jul/19/ten-billion-review-royal-court>, 
a “dramatised lecture” by Emmott that Michael Billington described as “one of 
the most disturbing evenings I have ever spent in a theatre”. For Mitchell, the 
experience of working with Emmott was “life changing” in terms of the way she 
understood what was happening with the climate and the environment. “At the end 
of that process I stopped flying, I’ve now stopped buying any new clothes – the 
level of recycling in my house is unbelievable.” She also made a vow that she 
would make one piece a year that would address these issues.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDtTRaROP75w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDtTRaROP75w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDtTRaROP75w&media=>
 Trailer for Macmillan’s Lungs at the Berlin Schaubühne 
“I wanted to continue the work with scientists,” she says. After working with 
playwrightDuncan Macmillan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/23/duncan-macmillan-theatre-every-brilliant-thing-lungs-2071>
 earlier this year on his playLungs 
<http://www.schaubuehne.de/en/productions/lungs.html/m=221> at the Berlin 
Schaubühne – a production that was performed entirely off-grid, with the lights 
powered by actors who performed while pedalling static bikes – she brought him 
in as dramaturg and co-writer on her next collaboration, this time withChris 
Rapley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/01/royal-court-play-2071-global-warming>
, professor of climate science at University College London. Over the past 10 
months of intensive discussions and rewrites, from more than 1,000 pages of 
transcribed conversations, Macmillan and Rapley have created2071 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/2071>, which opens tonight at the 
Royal Court and which Mitchell describes as a companion piece to Ten Billion.

“As a dramatist, I’m interested in working with text in a different way,” 
Macmillan explains, when I meet them during a break in rehearsals at their 
south London studio. “There was the formal challenge of how to express Chris’s 
science, and what we could bring to him as theatre-makers – not just with a 
different audience for those issues, but in terms of technique and how to 
structure the material. For example, if Chris is writing a scientific paper or 
delivering an academic lecture, the convention is that you begin with your 
finding and go on to explain it. But that’s like Hamlet avenging his father’s 
death in the first five minutes. The simultaneous challenge we’ve had is how to 
take the anger and emotion out of the issue and at the same time make the data 
dramatically compelling to listen to.”

Both Mitchell and Macmillan are emphatic about the need to allow the “very 
cool, objective facts” to speak for themselves, through Rapley’s on-stage 
delivery and supporting video projection. “It’s not heavily theatrical,” 
Mitchell says. “It’s much more like you’re having a chat with Chris in his 
living room, and that creates a different relationship with the audience.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1Bny5JWZlE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1Bny5JWZlE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dy1Bny5JWZlE&media=>
“Chris is very clear that we can’t be dictatorial,” Macmillan says. “It’s 
about saying, what do we know and how do we know it? And doing that in a way 
that’s open and inclusive.”

But there is an unavoidable personal aspect to the piece, implicit in its 
title: 2071 is significant because it is the year in which Rapley’s eldest 
grandchild will be 67, the age he is now. Mitchell has a young daughter, and 
Macmillan became a father for the first time four months ago.

“My point has always been that I didn’t want the possibility of these changes 
occurring and for my child to say to me in 30 years’ time, ‘Did you know? Why 
didn’t you do anything?’” Mitchell says. “I couldn’t not act because I wanted 
to be accountable to my daughter in the future.”

She acknowledges that, if there was a fault with Ten Billion, it was that it 
was too bleak (Emmott ended the piece by saying, “I think we’re all fucked”.) 
By contrast, 2071 offers a glimmer of optimism. “Chris really is keen to 
encourage people to make constructive choices and take sensible action,” she 
says, “so it’s not just a punch in the gut. The subject’s been kicked around so 
much as a political football that I think we just don’t know a lot of the 
important facts. If theatre can do that in a tiny way – provide a platform for 
those facts to be communicated – then it’s done something really good and 
clear.”

• Until 15 November. Box office: 020-7565 5000. Venue: Royal Court 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/2071>. Then touring.

• Scientist Chris Rapley turns actor in theatre show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/01/royal-court-play-2071-global-warming>
 