
After a century of shooing away hunters, tending to trails and helping 
visitors enjoy the wonder of the natural world, the guardians of America’s most 
treasured places have been handed an almost unimaginable new job – slowing the 
all-out assault climate change is waging against national parks across the 
nation.

As the National Parks Service <https://www.nps.gov/index.htm> (NPS) has 
charted the loss of glaciers, sea level rise and increase in wildfires spurred 
by rising temperatures in recent years, the scale of the threat to US heritage 
across the 412 national parks and monuments has become starkly apparent.

As the National Parks Service turns 100 this week, their efforts to chart and 
stem the threat to the country’s history faces a daunting task. America’s grand 
symbols and painstakingly preserved archaeological sites are at risk of being 
winnowed away by the crashing waves, wildfires and erosion triggered by warming 
temperatures.

The Statue of Liberty is at “high exposure 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/activities/883/>” risk from increasingly punishing 
storms. A national monument dedicated to abolitionist Harriet Tubman, who will 
be enshrined on a new $20 note,could be eaten away by rising tides 
<http://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/legacy/assets/documents/global_warming/National-Landmarks-at-Risk-Full-Report.pdf>
 in Maryland. The land once walked by Pocahontas and Captain John Smith in 
Jamestown, the first English settlement in the US, is surrounded by waters 
rising at twice the global average andmay be beyond rescue 
<http://www.ucsusa.org/sites/default/files/legacy/assets/documents/global_warming/National-Landmarks-at-Risk-Full-Report.pdf>
.

These threats are the latest in a pile of identified calamities to befall 
national parks and monuments due to climate change. Receding ice, extreme heat 
and acidifying oceans are morphing America’s landscapes and coasts at a faster 
pace than at any time in human history.


New York's remodelled Governors Island has built-in climate change defense
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/19/governors-island-remodelled-climate-change-new-york>
“Yosemite’s famous glacier, once a mile wide, is almost gone,” fretted Barack 
Obamaduring a visit to the vast park in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/18/yosemite-obama-national-parks-climate-change>
.

“Rising temperatures could mean no more glaciers in Glacier national park, no 
more Joshua trees in Joshua Tree national park.

“Rising seas can destroy vital ecosystems in the Everglades and at some point 
could even threaten icons like the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island. That’s 
not the America I want to pass on to the next generation.”

Change, however, is inevitable no matter how quickly greenhouse gas emissions 
are cut. An NPSstudy from 2014 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0101302> 
found four in five of America’s national parks are now at the “extreme end” of 
temperature variables charted since 1901.

“We are starting to see things spiral away now,” said Gregor Schuurman, an 
ecologist at the NPS climate change response program. “We are going to look 
back at this time and actually think it was a calm period. And then people will 
start asking questions about what we were doing about the situation.”

Alaska: the front line

There is now a broad new push to work out exactly what heritage is at risk and 
how to best to react.

If there is a front line, it’s probably found in Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska>. The state has 24 national parks, 
including Denali, the largest protected park in the US at 6m acres. It is also 
part of the Arctic, the fastest warming region on Earth.

Permafrost, which currently sits underneath 80% of Alaska, is beginning to 
melt, causing sinkholes and landslides. The north-west coast is being chewed 
away by almost 150ft a year in places due to sea level rise aided by wind 
erosion from more intense storms. Wildfires are increasing, with a lack of snow 
cover allowing the flames to lick areas that haven’t burned in almost 5,000 
years.

These trends imperil treasures such as those found in Cape Krusenstern 
national monument <https://www.nps.gov/cakr/index.htm> on the north-west coast. 
It has extensive evidence of human habitation stretching back 9,000 years. The 
NPS is scrambling to survey the area as inundations are wiping away this 
heritage, often before archaeologists can document it.

Dael Devenport, an NPS archaeologist based in Anchorage, takes regular 
helicopter trips to survey the 70-mile coast of the park. There are groups of 
abandoned houses claimed by the sea and wind, containing items such as lamps, 
stone tools and ulus – a type of half moon-shaped knife used to skin seals and 
caribou. The Inupiat people who live in the region have retreated from this 
part of the coast.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fclimate-change-national-parks-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6a809b58e7a19808d65b7355e13cf8b5ab3a628%2F0_0_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%20change%20will%20mean%20the%20end%20of%20national%20parks%20as%20we%20know%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fclimate-change-national-parks-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%20change%20will%20mean%20the%20end%20of%20national%20parks%20as%20we%20know%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fclimate-change-national-parks-threat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6a809b58e7a19808d65b7355e13cf8b5ab3a628%2F0_0_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
 The remote Cape Krusenstern national monument, on the northwestern coast of 
Alaska, is being claimed by sea and wind. Photograph: Danita Delimont/Getty 
Images/Gallo Images 
“A lot of these sites haven’t been surveyed properly, we are trying to figure 
out which are most vulnerable and mitigate against that,” Devenport said. “You 
can see houses that are washing away, if you walk along the coast you see the 
profile of houses.

“Most people haven’t thought about how climate change affects archeological 
sites. A site is a snapshot in time, it’s not like we can pick it up and move 
it somewhere else. We are in danger of losing a great deal.”

The problem is exacerbated by rampant looting of artifacts. A recent survey 
found almost all of a former settlement of the Thule culture, ancestors of 
today’s Inuit, had been disturbed and stripped of items such as harpoon tips 
and figurines carved from walrus ivory. As permafrost melts and walls are 
washed away, more treasures are revealed to opportunists.

“It’s a big problem,” Devenport acknowledged. “It’s probably done by people 
from local communities who know where the sites are. They can sell items onto 
dealers, who can get about $50,000 for a figurine from a buyer in Japan.

“When that artifact has been pulled out from the ground and not documented, we 
lose all of that information. You’ve lost the whole story behind that item and 
how it was used.”

‘The longer we wait, the more we lose’

Further south, in the lower 48 states, a different heritage is at risk. 
Changing rainfall patterns are affecting a number of parks in the south-west. 
Extreme rain events caused two major wall collapses inhistoric structures 
<https://www.nps.gov/nr/feature/indian/2006/park.htm> at Tumacácori national 
historical park in southern Arizona.

The structures, built by Spanish missionaries more than 300 years ago, are 
made from adobe, a type of sun-dried clay. The NPS already devotes 2,500 hours 
a year to maintain these buildings. However climate change is placing a further 
strain on this heritage.

“For the more vulnerable sites, particularly adobe structures which seem to be 
the canaries in the coal mine in the south-western US, losses are already 
rapidly occurring,” said the NPS’ Lauren Meyer, who is heading new research 
into the issue.

Meyer said there is a “great urgency” to intervene and save cultural sites at 
risk from a rapidly warming planet. “The longer we wait to act, the more 
history we lose,” she said.

Conservationists complain about a lack of funding to identify and preserve 
at-risk sites, but even if these locations could all be propped up and 
artifacts protected, the changes to the wider ecosystems march on.

Climate change is set to alter American forests as much ​as the arrival of 
white settlers

Temperature increases vary slightly according to park (the Grand Canyon has 
warmed on average by 2.4F since 1916, while the Everglades has heated up by 
1.5F) – but the trend is inexorably upwards.

This warming is influencing a complex web of processes in national parks. As 
John Muir, considered the father of US national parks, put it: “Tug on anything 
at all and you’ll find it connected to everything else in the universe.”

Climate change is set to alter American forests 
<http://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/NationalParksClimate/?src=features-hp&eocn=home&eoci=feature>
 as much as the arrival of white settlers did. The fire season is expanding 
dramatically. Some species are suffering, such as the native birds of Hawaii 
targeted by invasive mosquitos, which are able to survive in higher elevations 
as the forest habitat warms.

The remaining 65 groves of huge sequoia trees in California, among the largest 
living things on the planet, could be decimated by a warmer, drier climate. 
High-elevation species, such as red spruce and balsam fir, could be pushed off 
the mountains. The tree that gives Joshua Tree national park its namemay not be 
able to adapt 
<http://www.earthisland.org/journal/index.php/eij/article/no_more_joshua_trees/>
.

Such changes cascade through the food chain. The grizzly bears of Yellowstone 
like to feast on the cone seeds of the white bark pine, a species under attack 
from the mountain pine beetle. If warmer winters fail to kill off the beetle, 
the bears will have to find another food source, impacting other species. A 
lack of snow for denning will affect bears and wolves; warming river waters 
will force out the salmon.

“It’s hard to predict exactly what will happen but some systems have been 
pushed over the threshold, certainly,” said Schuurman.

“We need to recognize that climate change is ongoing and we can only expect 
the impacts will get stronger time goes on. I tell park managers that whether 
they are thinking about climate change every day or not, it is likely to find 
you and tap you on the shoulder. We should take heed of it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fclimate-change-national-parks-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F766e5207a27b24810a209fb159b88b76e2b336a3%2F0_112_1632_979%2F1632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%20change%20will%20mean%20the%20end%20of%20national%20parks%20as%20we%20know%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fclimate-change-national-parks-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%20change%20will%20mean%20the%20end%20of%20national%20parks%20as%20we%20know%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fclimate-change-national-parks-threat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F766e5207a27b24810a209fb159b88b76e2b336a3%2F0_112_1632_979%2F1632.jpg>
 The number of glaciers in Glacier national park, Montana, has halved since 
1968 due to rising temperatures. All are on course to disappear by the middle 
of the century. Photograph: The Washington Post/Getty Images 
A pressing question for the NPS is how these changes will go down with the 
public. Last year was a record, with 305 million visitors to national parks. 
But Sally Jewell, secretary of the interior, recently warned that a lack of 
funding to deal with the “existential” threat of climate change, along with 
unchecked development, will lead to ruin.

Jewell said that current trends mean that the next century will mean “national 
parks and wildlife refuges will be like postage stamps of nature on a map. 
Isolated islands of conservation with run-down facilities that crowds of 
Americans visit like zoos to catch a glimpse of our nation’s remaining wildlife 
and undeveloped patches of land.”

Some national parks are already looking at how to respond to this potentially 
diminished future. Parks in the south, for example, may offer nighttime 
activities such as star gazing or bat-spotting.

Visitation could actually jump by nearly 25% in 2060 as it warms, according to 
one forecast 
<https://www.nps.gov/subjects/climatechange/upload/NPS_visitation_climate_brief.pdf>
.The summer months may become too hot for visitors to parks in the southwest.

Either way, it will be hard to hide that a trip to the Rocky Mountains in 
Montana <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/montana> to see Glacier national 
park won’t involve seeing any actual glaciers.

“Yes, that will be a visible and dramatic change,” said Schuurman. “Without 
being blasé in any way, people are adaptable and Glacier national park without 
its glaciers will still be a stunningly beautiful place. That said, I think 
anyone would look back and be sad about the loss.”

The effects of climate change

Temperature rise

Temperatures across US national parks have risen by about 2.4F in the past 
century.

Disappearing snow and ice 

The number of glaciers at Glacier national park has halved since 1968. All of 
the park’s glaciers are on course to completely disappear by the middle of the 
century.

Sea level rise

Approximately 40 protected sites are at risk from a 1m sea level rise, with an 
NPSanalysis 
<http://www.nature.nps.gov/geology/coastal/coastal_assets_report/executive_summary.pdf>
 calling it “one of the most obvious and most challenging impacts” of global 
warming. The Everglades could become inundated with salt water, with the 
ecosystem overwhelmed by invasive species drawn to its changed environment. 
More powerful storms could endanger the Statue of Liberty, which closed for 
nine months after Hurricane Sandy in 2012.

Wildfire

The wildfire season in the west is far lengthier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/30/wildfires-california-fueled-by-climate-change>
 than it was in the 1970s. The risk is compounded by shrinking snow abundance – 
in Yellowstone there is an average of 30 fewer days with snow on the ground 
compared to the 1960s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fclimate-change-national-parks-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41bf217c5dce6f9321332ebadc1f7ac938653449%2F0_7_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%20change%20will%20mean%20the%20end%20of%20national%20parks%20as%20we%20know%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fclimate-change-national-parks-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%20change%20will%20mean%20the%20end%20of%20national%20parks%20as%20we%20know%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F22%2Fclimate-change-national-parks-threat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41bf217c5dce6f9321332ebadc1f7ac938653449%2F0_7_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
 A wildfire burns in Yosemite national park. Almost 2,600 acres have burned and 
trails in the area have been closed. Photograph: Tiffany Rose/Getty Images  