
With just over two weeks until Election Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/23/trump-news-gettysburg-jessica-drake-hillary-clinton>
, Hillary Clinton is turning her attention to the congressional majorities that 
would bolster her agenda as president.


Porn star Jessica Drake is 11th woman to allege Trump sexual misconduct
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/trump-news-porn-star-jessica-drake-gloria-allred>
Campaigning in the battleground state of Pennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania> on Saturday, with running 
mate Tim Kaine in tow, Clinton dedicated a significant portion of her speech to 
attacking someone other than Donald Trump. The Democratic nominee laid into Pat 
Toomey, a Republican senator who has declined to say if he will vote for his 
party’s nominee on 8 November.

“He still refuses to stand up to Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>,” Clinton told a crowd of 
roughly 1,800 in Pittsburgh. “A lot of Republicans have. They have had the grit 
and the guts to stand up and say, ‘He doesn’t represent me.’”

Thus far, Clinton has made an explicit appeal to “thoughtful Republicans”, 
moderates and independents reluctant to support Trump’s candidacy.

While she will still extend a hand to Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> seeking refuge, it became 
clear this weekend that she will target vulnerable senators whose defeat could 
help form a Democratic majority.

“As we’re traveling in these last 17 days, we’re going to be emphasizing the 
importance of electing Democrats down the ballot,” she told reporters aboard 
her campaign plane. Noting her support for Katie McGinty,the Democratic 
challenger to Toomey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/trump-pennsylvania-senate-race-pat-toomey-kate-mcginty>
, Clinton added: “I will be doing the same as we go state to state, as will Tim 
[Kaine].”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fhillary-clinton-nothing-say-wikileaks-emails-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%20has%20%E2%80%98nothing%20to%20say%20about%20Wikileaks%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fhillary-clinton-nothing-say-wikileaks-emails-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%20has%20%E2%80%98nothing%20to%20say%20about%20Wikileaks%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fhillary-clinton-nothing-say-wikileaks-emails-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton has ‘nothing to say about Wikileaks’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/23/hillary-clinton-nothing-say-wikileaks-emails-video>
Clinton has expanded her lead over Trump, holding a roughly six-point 
advantage according to polling averages. But in Congress,Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> are in competitive races.

“I think in general you’re going to hear her do more of what she did [in 
Pennsylvania] in terms of trying to raise the stakes of the down-ballot races,” 
Brian Fallon, a spokesman for Clinton’s campaign, told the Guardian.

“We want to continue to extend an open hand to those voters that traditionally 
vote Republican to cast their ballot forHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, but at the same time 
there’s a different strain within the Republican party that’s made the decision 
to go all in on backing Donald Trump because they don’t want to offend his core 
supporters.

“They should be held accountable in two-and-a-half weeks, for having played a 
role in Trump’s rise and for standing by him even after he’s gone around and 
offended people and shown himself to be completely temperamentally unfit.”

Such was the case made against Toomey at Taylor Allderdice high school in 
Pittsburgh. Running through Trump’s controversial statements – calling Mexican 
immigrants “rapists” and “killers”, questioning Barack Obama’s birth, picking a 
fight with the parents of an Iraq war hero, his behavior toward women – Clinton 
asked voters why their senator was still undecided.

“How much more does Pat Toomey need to hear?” she said. “If he doesn’t have 
the courage to stand up to Donald Trump after all this, can you be sure he will 
have the courage to stand up for you when it counts?”

She also lavished praise on McGinty, who is in a dead heat with Toomey. An 
aide to Clinton said to expect similar arguments against other vulnerable 
Republican senators, such as Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, Ron Johnson of 
Wisconsin and Marco Rubio of Florida.

Democrats need to gain at least four seats to retake the Senate if Clinton 
wins, in which case Kaine would serve as a tiebreaker. Priorities USA, a 
pro-Clinton super pac, is investing in states including New Hampshire and 
Pennsylvania, planning to tie embattled Republicans to Trump.

Ted Kwong, a spokesman for Toomey’s campaign, said Clinton’s speech was 
“further proof that hyper-partisan, ethically challenged Katie McGinty will be 
a rubber stamp for everything Hillary Clinton wants to do in Washington.

“Pat Toomey has been and will continue to be an independent leader in the 
Senate on issues ranging from gun safety to ending Wall Street bailouts.”

‘We’ve been very fortunate’
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftrump-threatens-to-sue-sexual-assault-accusers-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20threatens%20to%20sue%20sexual%20assault%20accusers%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftrump-threatens-to-sue-sexual-assault-accusers-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20threatens%20to%20sue%20sexual%20assault%20accusers%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Ftrump-threatens-to-sue-sexual-assault-accusers-video&media=>
Trump threatens to sue sexual assault accusers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/23/trump-threatens-to-sue-sexual-assault-accusers-video>
Republican strategists concede that if Clinton’s lead grows, their hopes of 
holding on to the Senate will diminish.

For a change in the House, which the Democrats lost in the 2010 midterms, 30 
seats must fall. But any gain of seats would still empower Democrats to 
influence, if not obstruct, the agenda of House speaker Paul Ryan.

Barack Obama, campaigning for Clinton, has amplified his own efforts to put 
Republicans in Congress on trial. The president has argued that the GOP created 
Trump by adopting extreme positions that have rendered the party unrecognizable 
from that which supported presidents George W Bush, George HW Bush and the 
revered Ronald Reagan.

Trump looms large for Pennsylvania Republican tip-toeing around him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/15/trump-pennsylvania-senate-race-pat-toomey-kate-mcginty>
Clinton highlighted the fact that many Republicans have rebuked their nominee, 
choosing not to say all her opponents belong to the “Party of Trump”, as Obama 
has done.

Fallon said the Clinton campaign would continue “to differentiate between 
those reasonable Republicans and independents that are willing to go beyond not 
just rejecting Trump but also supporting her”.

“I think that we’ve been very fortunate,” he said, “and welcomed with open 
arms Republicans and independents that made the decision very early on that not 
only could they not support Donald Trump but that they believed that Hillary 
Clinton would make for a strong president.”

Where there was synergy with Obama’s message, Fallon said, was in taking to 
task those who continue to stand by Trump.

“Republicans are trying to localize their race and differentiate themselves 
from Trump with varying degrees of success,” Fallon said, adding that many such 
candidates were in key states for the presidential and Senate elections.

“That’s where I think you’ll see us focus our efforts in terms of trying to 
hold those Republicans’ feet to the fire.”
 