
Deprived by time and circumstances of almost all my strength, I find that my 
daydreams of being aWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon-2016>
 singles champion divide into two kinds: real and unreal. My daydream of being
Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> is unreal, 
because he moves so gracefully and I do not, and never have. It goes without 
saying that I could never play like him, either. Of course I couldn’t: the 
whole point of a daydream is that it lets you do the enviable thing. For the 
daydream to be real, however, it has to be plausible that it’s you doing it.

My daydream of being Rod Laver 
<http://www.tennis.com.au/player-profiles/rod-laver> is real, because he, like 
me, was never an adonis. Pigeon-toed and jug-eared, his image on screen 
made few women sigh. But that’s exactly what makes my daydream of being Laver 
so poignantly real. Whenever he hit his famous cross-court running forehand, he 
could have been me; and the shot seemed all the more uncanny because he himself 
was an ordinary-looking Aussie bloke. Then, as now, I did all the sighing 
necessary.

When Federer floats up on to his toes so he can get the racket high enough to 
sweep the ball smoothly into one of the opposite corners, there is no woman in 
the world who is not sighing. You can imagine them all passing out: Angelina 
Jolie, Angela Merkel, the Empress of Japan. But I promise, cross my heart, that 
it’s more what he can do, and not how gorgeous he looks while doing it, that I 
so envy. With that fact kept in mind, the daydream shifts safely into the area 
of the plausible.

Clive James: 'These boots say: I am not Taylor Swift'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/09/clive-james-glastonbury-taylor-swift-chvrches-lauren-mayberry>
Armed with our wishful thinking, we can keep Wimbledon always the way it was, 
an annual fixture as reliable in its format asTrooping the Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/picture/2016/jun/11/eyewitness-trooping-the-colour>
. The wish is so deep that even some of the regular participants behave as if 
nothing will ever change. This year,Sue Barker 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sue_Barker> was still, ah, the voice of the, ah, 
BBC, saying “ah” every few words, as if approaching the moment when, ah, one 
“ah” would actually precede the next and, ah, succeed it also. What would 
Wimbledon be like without her? Don’t worry, the chances are that you will never 
find out.

I, on the other hand, to be realistic, should prepare the small suitcase of 
memories that I will take with me into the beyond, so as to be ready when I 
meet other people who will know what I am talking about if I mention the 
splendour ofEvonne Goolagong 
<http://www.tennis.com.au/player-profiles/evonne-goolagong-cawley> moving at 
full speed, or the stunning moment when Clive James, two sets and three breaks 
down againstNovak Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>, 
hit the inside-out backhand line drive that changed the game. “And on Henman 
Hill,” said Sue, “they’re going, ah, mad.”
 