
The winter air in Tehran is often foul but for six days last week it was 
hardly breathable. A dense and poisonous chemical smog made up of traffic and 
factory fumes, mixed with construction dust, burning vegetation and waste has 
shrouded buildings, choked pedestrians, forced schools and universities to 
close, and filled the hospitals.


Anyone who could flee the Iranian mega-city of 15 million people has done so, 
but, say the authorities, in the past two weeks more than 400 people have died 
as a direct result of the pollution, known as the Asian “brown cloud”.

Air pollution more deadly in Africa than malnutrition or dirty water, study 
warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/20/air-pollution-deadlier-africa-than-dirty-water-or-malnutrition-oecd>
Tehran is far from alone. A combination of atmospheric conditions, geography 
and the start of the winter heating season regularly traps urban air pollution 
from October to February across a great swath of Asia. But this year has seen 
some of the worst smog episodes in nearly 20 years despite cities trying to 
reduce traffic and factory emissions.

As temperatures drop and people turn to burning waste to keep warm, pollution 
levels have been 15 to 20 times the World Health Organisation safe levels in 
three Indian cities –Delhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/06/delhi-air-pollution-closes-schools-for-three-days>
,Varanasi and Lucknow 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/india/india-news-india/delhis-not-alone-on-poor-air-quality-up-is-also-gasping-for-breath/>
.Traffic has been banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/21/beijing-bans-highly-polluting-cars-during-smog-alerts>
 andconstruction projects had to be stopped in Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/18/beijing-pollution-second-ever-red-alert-smog-china>
 asa dense layer of filthy air descended on northern China 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/world/asia-pacific/china-s-pollution-challenge-resurfaces-as-smog-blankets-beijing-1.2873756>
.

In Kathmandu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/mar/21/air-pollution-kathmandu-nepal-liveable-smog-paris>
, in Nepal, andKabul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/12/air-pollution-health-timebomb-poses-a-major-threat-to-development-who>
, Afghanistan, where pollution is regularly trapped in the cities’ valleys, the 
hospitals have been stretched with people suffering respiratory and cardiac 
illnesses.

“It is a dreadful situation,” said one Tehrani resident, who asked not to be 
identified. “You see a lot of elderly people in trouble. People get confused. 
You get worried about the children. People do not know if schools are going to 
open. People want to leave but they cannot. The worst thing is you can’t escape 
or do anything about it.”

The number of cars has trebled in Tehran and many other burgeoning Asian 
cities in the past 10 years. The authorities know that outrage is growing at 
the cloud of filth that settles over the region in winter, but they appear 
politically paralysed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fcloud-filth-envelope-asian-cities-urban-smog-air-pollution-india-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F618a30c3b434b2249b633a56cdae013665a7e972%2F0_89_3840_2303%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clouds%20of%20filth%20envelop%20Asian%20cities%3A%20'you%20can't%20escape'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fcloud-filth-envelope-asian-cities-urban-smog-air-pollution-india-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clouds%20of%20filth%20envelop%20Asian%20cities%3A%20%27you%20can%27t%20escape%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fcloud-filth-envelope-asian-cities-urban-smog-air-pollution-india-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F618a30c3b434b2249b633a56cdae013665a7e972%2F0_89_3840_2303%2F3840.jpg>
 Women wear masks for protection against pollution on a street in northern 
Tehran, December 2015. Photograph: Vahid Salemi/AP 
“On paper the solutions are easy. We need better gasoline, higher standard 
cars. We need to revise the transport system, increase the capacity of the 
subway, prevent more people coming into the city centres. They can have 
alternate days for vehicles but people buy two cars,” said Kaveh Madani, an 
Iranian lecturer in environmental management at the Centre for Environmental 
Policy, Imperial College London.

Beijing, a byword for pollution for 20 years, has gone the furthest of all 
Asian capitals toeliminate air pollution 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2015/07/22/chinas-war-on-pollution-leads-to-big-improvements-in-air-quality/>
, pledgingin 2014 to spend $76bn  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/chinas-choice/2014/jan/23/china-beijing-authorities-measures-tackle-air-pollution>
(£61bn) to clean up its persistently toxic air.

After being shamed ahead of the 2008 Olympics, Beijing relocated some of its 
most polluting factories andclosed its coal-fired power plants 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-03-24/beijing-to-close-all-major-coal-power-plants-to-curb-pollution>
,largely replacing coal heating with natural gas 
<http://www.chinaeconomicreview.com/china-nurtures-natural-gas>. But despite 
throwing financial and political resources at the problem, it was forced to
issue an “orange” pollution alert last week 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-11/16/c_135833715.htm>, the second 
highest.

Iran's government steps up efforts to tackle pollution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2014/mar/10/irans-government-steps-up-efforts-to-tackle-pollution>
New research last week confirmed India to be more polluted than China 
<http://bit.ly/AirPollutionGreenpeaceIndiaReportNov2016> for the first time. 
According to data 
<https://secured-static.greenpeace.org/india/Global/india/2016/docs/Deaths-due-to-outdoor-air-pollution-in-India-and-China---Greenpeace-India-report.pdf?1>
 (pdf) from the Global Burden of Disease project at the University of 
Washington, there were 3,283 premature deaths a day in India in 2015 as a 
result of particulate matter and ozone pollution, compared to3,233 in China 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/11/17/india-air-pollution-deaths-china-comparison-2015/>
. This compares with a just over one thousand a day inEurope 
<http://www.eea.europa.eu/media/newsreleases/many-europeans-still-exposed-to-air-pollution-2015/premature-deaths-attributable-to-air-pollution>
 andthe US 
<http://news.mit.edu/2013/study-air-pollution-causes-200000-early-deaths-each-year-in-the-us-0829>
 combined.


Data collected 
<http://www.healthdata.org/briefs/global-burden-disease-2015-factsheet> from 
more than 770 sources and analysed by almost 2,000 collaborators in 125 
countries show that the number of deaths linked to bad airrose 24% in 10 years 
in India 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/11/17/india-air-pollution-deaths-china-comparison-2015/>
, making 2015 the worst year on record. But in China air pollution deaths have 
roughly stabilised on 2005 figures.


Beijing, the study said, has successfully removed tens of thousands of old 
vehicles andcut out nearly 40,000 tonnes of pollutants a year 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/delhi-air-pollution-unlike-beijing-india-unable-to-remove-old-cars-from-roads/story-f0tSR9nUwvAqjJDth2v9lJ.html>
. New Delhi, by contrast,is still struggling to enforce a ban on diesel vehicles
 
<http://www.ndtv.com/delhi-news/6-day-old-ban-on-diesel-vehicles-for-delhi-has-already-been-suspended-754593>
.

The GBD report backs Greenpeace India’s analysis 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/india/en/Press/India-overtakes-China-in-number-of-deaths-due-to-outdoor-air-pollution-in-2015/>
 earlier this year of satellite-based particulate matter measurements. “This 
shows that China’s systematic efforts over 10 years to combat air pollution 
have achieved an impressive improvement – although pollution levels remain 
alarmingly high,” said a spokeswoman.


“Between 2005 and 2011, the particulate pollution levels in China rose an 
estimated 20%. 2011 was the worst on record for China but there was a dramatic 
improvement there towards 2015, while India’s pollution levels constantly moved 
upwards,” said Greenpeace.


Capital cities like Delhi and Beijing have money and political clout to tackle 
pollution within their boundaries, but are unable to check “transboundary” 
pollution that may originate hundreds of miles away, even in other countries.
This week India blamed Punjabi farmers in Pakistan burning stubble for much of 
Delhi’s pollution 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/03/world/asia/farmers-unchecked-crop-burning-fuels-indias-air-pollution.html?_r=0>
.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fcloud-filth-envelope-asian-cities-urban-smog-air-pollution-india-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f52d1a074498a743f14b783fcae13319765028c%2F0_158_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clouds%20of%20filth%20envelop%20Asian%20cities%3A%20'you%20can't%20escape'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fcloud-filth-envelope-asian-cities-urban-smog-air-pollution-india-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clouds%20of%20filth%20envelop%20Asian%20cities%3A%20%27you%20can%27t%20escape%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fcloud-filth-envelope-asian-cities-urban-smog-air-pollution-india-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f52d1a074498a743f14b783fcae13319765028c%2F0_158_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Boys play cricket in heavy fog on a cold winter morning in Kolkata, India, 
December 2015. Photograph: Rupak De Chowdhuri/Reuters 
Alarmingly, smaller Asian cities suffer pollution as bad or worse than in 
Delhi or Beijing.India has half of the world’s 20 most polluted cities 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/delhi/four-out-of-top-five-polluted-cities-are-in-india-delhi-not-among-them/story-Gn2htcLbESB3BpeYJ4mY8K.html>
, according to the World Health Organisation (WHO) and, says Greenpeace, it is 
a critical problem in15 out of 17 of India’s major cities 
<http://www.dnaindia.com/india/report-air-pollution-levels-above-prescribed-limits-in-15-of-17-indian-cities-with-naqi-stations-2156169>
.

Most Asian cities also have very limited ability to monitor pollution and 
cannot give citizens real-time warning of episodes. Whereas China has 1,500 
online stations monitoring PM2.5 pollution in 900 cities,India has only 39 
stations in 23 cities 
<http://www.newindianexpress.com/lifestyle/health/2016/nov/21/act-now-for-improved-air-quality-in-15-20-years-1541039.html>
.More than 70% showed pollution above safe limits 
<http://www.climatechangenews.com/2016/02/23/india-air-pollution-is-now-worse-than-china/>
.

But there are strong signs that countries and global bodies now understand 
understand that air pollution is a modern plague for developing countries, 
killing more people than in wars, braking economic development, and creating a 
dangerously unhealthy urban populations.

In a major study 
<http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/781521473177013155/pdf/108141-REVISED-Cost-of-PollutionWebCORRECTEDfile.pdf>
 (pdf) of the economic costs of air pollution, the World Bank this year found 
that in 2013 China lost nearly 10% of its GDP, India 7.69% and Sri Lanka and 
Cambodia roughly 8% because of air pollution.

According to the World Health Organisation (WHO) more than one in 10 deaths a 
year across the world are now associated with air pollution 
<http://www.healthdata.org/sites/default/files/files/infographics/Infographic_AAAS_Air-pollution_2016.pdf>
, from both household and outdoor sources, and85% of  
<http://www.healthdata.org/sites/default/files/files/infographics/Infographic_AAAS_Air-pollution_2016.pdf>
people worldwide 
<http://www.healthdata.org/sites/default/files/files/infographics/Infographic_AAAS_Air-pollution_2016.pdf>
 are exposed to pollution that exceeds WHO air quality guidelines for fine 
particulate matter.

“The magnitude of the danger air pollution poses is enormous,” said Anthony 
Lake, executive director of UN children’s agency, Unicef, which calculates that
300 million children <https://www.unicef.org/media/media_92979.html> now live 
in areas with highly toxic levels of outdoor air pollution.

“No society can afford to ignore air pollution. We protect our children when 
we protect the quality of our air. Both are central to our future,” he said.
 