
Professional clowns have condemned the craze for dressing in clown outfits to 
scare bystanders, saying it threatens their livelihood and their own safety, 
and risks permanently damaging the reputation of the artform.


Police forces were called to dozens of incidents over the weekend, as the “
killer clown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/07/creepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain>
” trend, which originated in recent weeksin the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/05/clown-sightings-south-carolina-alabama>
, swept the UK, fuelled by social media.

Now the world’s oldest clowns’ club has also hit back, saying the craze is 
“just not funny”.

“This is nothing to do with clowning, it’s to do with people hijacking a 
costume and for some sinister reason trying to scare people,” said Rob Bowker, 
spokesman for the UK-basedClowns International 
<http://www.clownsinternational.com/>.

“These idiots are undoubtedly affecting people’s awareness of clowns and 
undoing a lot of good,” said Bowker, who is based in the Midlands and performs 
asBibbledy Bob <http://www.bibbledybob.com/contact.php>. “My fear is that 
hospitals will say, ‘Oh, we can’t have clowns in because the children are 
getting scared,’ or stuff like that. And then all that work that’s been done 
over the years will be undone.”

The chair of the organisation, Noeleen Breem, AKA Clown Silly Tilly 
<https://www.facebook.com/Clown-Silly-Tilly-122927851074245/>, said she 
“absolutely” feared for the livelihoods of its members. “We are concerned about 
the impact on our reputation, the suggestion that clowns are something to be 
feared.”

Many members, she said, spend a lot of time with elderly people or sick 
children, and “everything is so gentle, so patient”. The craze for terrorising 
people, she said, “is the exact opposite of what clowning is. The clown is very 
vulnerable. The reason we find them funny is because we see their 
vulnerability. These people are turning that exactly the opposite away around, 
and behaving in a really abhorrent way that is really quite frightening.”

Officers in Thames Valley, Norfolk, Suffolk, south Wales, Cumbria, 
Gloucestershire, Bedfordshire, Essex, Northumbria and elsewhere have dealt with 
multiple incidents of the intimidating prank, as members of the public have 
reported being chased or threatened by people wearing clown costumes, and in 
some cases wielding weapons, too.


Creepy clown sightings spread to Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/07/creepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain>
Ch Supt Andy Boyd of Thames Valley police, which received 14 reports of clown 
incidents in 24 hours, warned that the craze was wasting police resources and 
could lead to arrest for public order offences.







Breem said she was aware of at least two recent incidents in which 
professional clowns had been booked for performances in derelict buildings, 
putting their own safety at risk. In addition, she said: “The last thing we 
want is to be having any concerns about repercussions on us if we are 
travelling in our costumes to and from shows.”

The current craze has gathered momentum in the US over the past month, 
apparently influenced by Stephen King’s horror story It, the villain of which 
is a clown called Pennywise. Kingtweeted earlier this week 
<https://twitter.com/StephenKing/status/783018957263568896> saying: “Hey guys, 
time to cool the clown hysteria, most of em are good, cheer up the kiddies, 
make people laugh.” However, it has not stopped the craze from spreading as far 
asAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/08/police-issue-warning-amid-reports-us-clown-craze-has-spread-to-australia>
 and New Zealand.
Stephen King (@StephenKing) 
Hey, guys, time to cool the clown hysteria--most of em are good, cheer up the 
kiddies, make people laugh.
 <https://twitter.com/StephenKing/status/783018957263568896> October 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/StephenKing/status/783018957263568896> 
Incidents reported to police in the UK have included four children from Durham 
aged 11 or 12 being followed to school on Friday by a man in a clown outfit who 
was armed with a knife. In Norwich, a 30-year-old man was arrested on suspicion 
of public order offences after allegedly jumping out at a woman in a park on 
Sunday, screaming and then chasing her.

On Sunday, a dog walker from Kent reported seeing a man dressed as a clown and 
holding what appeared to be a machete and a severed head, who ran towards him 
“laughing maniacally” before running away.

Bowker said his 10-year-old daughter had asked him to walk her to school on 
Monday because she was afraid of “scary clowns popping out”. “I have been a 
clown since before she was born,’’ he said. “Still, she vocalised that she was 
really scared about it, and it’s all the talk of the playground. It’s really 
tragic. Look at the harm they are doing.”

Circus Clown Rico <http://www.circusclownrico.co.uk/ChildrensEntertainer>, AKA 
Croydon-based Ricardo Caruana, who has performed as a clown for more than 20 
years, said he had already modified his act owing to the changing reputation of 
traditional clowns.

“I used to wear the full makeup, and I was very much in demand, but I hardly 
go out as the full clown any more,’’ he said. “I haven’t worn any slap for 
years, because people find it a bit too scary.”

While he still wears a colourful costume, he said: “I don’t wear the big shoes 
any more and I haven’t put a red nose on for years.” He added that he would not 
accept a booking for a street performance if full makeup was requested.

“It’s just become … ‘Let’s have a go at the clown, hit the clown, pinch his 
nose, step on his shoes.’ It just lost its respectfulness,’’ he said. “I don’t 
think there’s any respect for clowns out there any more.”
 