
The Co-operative Group’s 
<http://the%20co-operative%20food%20is%20encouraging%20people%20to%20surprise%20others%20with%20a%20random%20act%20of%20kindness%20in%20its%20festive%20campaign.read%20more%20at%20http//www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/co-operative-food-encourages-kindness-strangers-christmas-ad/1375394#f8eiAlqSlqrSQtcI.99>
 Christmas TV advertisement is featuring people involved with the local 
community groups that have benefited from its revamped membership scheme.

The Manchester-based mutual, which now focuses on groceries and funeral homes 
with some remaining financial services operations, said it wanted to show how 
shoppers buying itsaward-winning champagne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/18/supermarket-mince-pies-champagne-triumph-which-taste-test>
, smoked salmon and other foods for Christmas could help local charities by 
giving them financial support.

Christmas adverts 2016: this year's main offenders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/nov/15/christmas-adverts-2016-this-years-main-offenders-john-lewis-m-s-sainsburys-waitrose>
The images in the TV advert, which airs from Thursday evening, pair Co-op food 
with the local causes it helps to fund. The group has raised almost £1.5m for 
community groups across the UK since September and the campaign features four 
of them: Southport lifeboats, Leeds urban farm for people with learning 
disabilities, an amateur youth theatre group from Glusburn in Yorkshire and a 
male voice choir.

In September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/co-op-moves-loyalty-scheme-online-to-get-closer-to-members>
, the Co-op embarked on the latest stage in its financial turnaround plan by 
rolling out a revamped loyalty scheme intended to revitalise its relationship 
with its owner members. The new scheme gives its 5 million members 5% back on 
the cost of Co-op own-brand products and then donates 1% to three nominated 
local causes.


“For our Christmas 2016 campaign, we have focused on the very thing that makes 
the Co-op so special, showcasing how buying our brilliant own-brand food and 
drink can do good within your community through the 1%,” said Jemima Bird, 
Co-op customer director.

“As a convenience retailer who operates in the heart of communities across the 
UK, we see our membership scheme benefiting local causes every single day, and 
the groups in our Christmas advert had great fun participating in the filming, 
too.”

Ex-Coronation Street actor Emma Edmondson provides the voiceover for the TV 
advert which is part of a campaign – produced by ad agency Leo Burnett – that 
also includes posters, press, online, social and in-store advertising.



 