
Medicines containing codeine will require a prescription from 2018 amid 
ongoing concerns about overuse and abuse of the pain killer.

After being swamped with submissions on the proposal, the Therapeutic Goods 
Administration has decided products with codeine will no longer be available 
over the counter. The change will begin on 1 February 2018.


The regulator said it had taken in consideration the US, most of Europe, Hong 
Kong, Japan and UAE had already stopped the sale of codeine products without a 
script.

The painful truth about Australia's insatiable affection for opioids | David 
Caldicott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/04/the-painful-truth-about-australias-insatiable-affection-for-opioids>
Its public consultations indicated many consumers use low-dose codeine 
medicines to self-treat chronic pain, even though they are not intended for 
long-term conditions.

“This meant that consumers frequently became addicted to codeine,” it said.The 
TGA said the 2018 start date would allow consumers to discuss treatment options 
with their doctors.

Doctors have previously welcomed the move by the TGA, but pharmacists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/02/doctors-and-pharmacists-at-odds-over-plan-to-make-codeine-prescription-only>
 oppose it, saying it would clog up GP clinics and increase health costs, 
without effectively identifying addicts.

The use of common, opioid-based painkillers such as codeine, morphine and 
oxycodonehas increased by four times over the past decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/03/painkiller-use-quadruples-in-australia-as-codeine-and-other-opioids-abused>
 and Australian is among a handful of countries consuming the bulk of the 
world’s opioid medication supply, according to figures from the independent 
body responsible for implementing the United Nations international drug control 
conventions, the International Narcotics Control Board, published in the Lancet.


Codeine-related deaths in Australia doubled in a decade, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/05/codeine-related-deaths-australia-doubled-decade-study>
The Australian Medical Association has said it accepts the plan will result in 
additional health system costs and higher workloads for GPs, but AMA 
vice-president Stephen Parnis said that should be weighed up against the cost 
of harm inflicted by the misuse of codeine, intentional or otherwise.

“We are the only country really, in the developed world, where codeine has 
been available without a prescription,” he said.

“We also know that the number of people suffering avoidable harm in this area 
has been increasing over time, to the point where, at least in Victoria, the 
number of deaths from overdose of prescription narcotics is higher than the 
road toll.”

Parnis said codeine also posed a hidden danger.

“The body converts it to morphine and in fact a proportion of the population 
can convert it so quickly that they can suffer serious harm as a result.”
 