
SOUTH-GATE


The English national football team has had 14 permanent managers, a sequence 
stretching all the way back to 1946. The longest serving of those is still the 
first, Walter Winterbottom, who held on to the job until 1962. A nice man, 
Walter. Didn’t rock the boat. Anyway, that’s 16 years, a record that’s stood 
for another 54. Reason we mention this is because, at some point, someone’s 
going to break it. It’s about that time. Law of averages. Soall hail new boss 
Gareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/gareth-southgate-confirmed-new-england-manager-football-contract>
, who basic theories of statistical distribution strongly suggest he will still 
be in the post come 2033. Hurrah!

Southgate’s appointment had been expected to be formally announced by the FA 
board just after lunch. But there was quite a big cheese plate to get through, 
plus coffee, petits fours, digestifs and cigars. Followed by a gentle stirring 
of the bowels and appropriate toilette. Technical director Dan Ashworth was 
also expected to take up a couple of minutes by making Southgate’s case using 
PowerPoint and Clip Art. Finally a couple of the board members nipped back to 
the executive bathroom because the chutney and oatcakes served with the cheese 
were really rather rich.

Two-and-a-half hours later, the FA finally emerged. “We are delighted to 
confirm Gareth as England manager,” simpered chief executive Martin Glenn of 
their latest will-this-do selection, before adding some platitudes about his 
“understanding of the development set-up” and “being a great ambassador for 
what the FA stands for”, office buzz-phrases that just about work when 
displayed using Microsoft’s premier slide-show presentation program, but don’t 
really make too much sense out in the real world. Glenn also praised Southgate 
for “performing extremely well” during his time as caretaker coach, a spell 
which includeda draw that felt like a defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/15/england-spain-international-friendly-match-report>
 against some uninterested second-choice Spaniards anda garden-variety win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/england-scotland-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
 over a Scotland side who have long collectively given up on life.

“I am extremely proud to be appointed England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> manager,” smiled the man himself 
upon landing the job he didn’t want in the summer. “There’s huge potential. I’m 
determined to give everything I have to give the country a team that they’re 
proud of, and one they’re going to enjoy watching play. For me, the hard work 
starts now.” Hard work indeed, and for not much reward: it’s rumoured that 
Southgate isn’t getting the same level of financial package offered to Roy 
Hodgson and Sam Allardyce, and the four-year contract he demanded has a break 
clause after the 2018 World Cup, which sounds like a two-year contract to 
simple folk like us. Then again, who needs legally binding agreements when the 
law of averages is firmly on your side? This is surely the start of a 
Winterbottom-esque 16-year reign! You see if the Fiver’s wrong!

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Scott Murray from 8pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of Manchester United 1-1 
West Ham (3-2 pens), while Tim Hill is your man for Arsenal v Southampton from 
7.45pm GMT <https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“I’ve been dying in silence, with nobody to help me. I remember going to have 
a shop and not having money to buy something; I came to [Boavista] and said I 
needed money for food. They haven’t paid my house rent, haven’t paid for my 
electricity – I remember two days when I didn’t have any electricity in my 
house. They didn’t care; they don’t give me any money and don’t care for me.” – 
Nigerian international Michael Uchebo is not having the best time of it in 
Portugal,as reported by Nick Ames 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/michael-uchebo-boavista-exile-nigeria-argentina>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-appointed-england-manager-fiver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feefe01d37e42fc5e9ecae864390531d4a903e8b7%2F0_131_3424_2055%2F3424.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Coffee%2C%20petits%20fours%2C%20digestifs%20and%20cigars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-appointed-england-manager-fiver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Coffee%2C%20petits%20fours%2C%20digestifs%20and%20cigars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-appointed-england-manager-fiver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feefe01d37e42fc5e9ecae864390531d4a903e8b7%2F0_131_3424_2055%2F3424.jpg>
 Michael Uchebo represented Nigeria at the 2014 World Cup. Photograph: Glyn 
Kirk/AFP/Getty Images 
FIVER LETTERS

“I’m so excited at the prospect of another slice of Gareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gareth-southgate> appearing regularly on 
our TV. Pizza Hut adverts have just been, well, as bland as a brown paper bag 
without him. Its just a shame I’ll have to wait until June 2018. Still, I’ve a 
few purple tins, vocal chords, clenched waving fists to get through until then” 
– Peter Fosse.

Many thanks to the Fiver for its truly thoughtful and respectful presentation 
after the Colombian air disaster [yesterday’s Fiver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/forca-chapecoense>]. Well 
played, folks. And, assuming regular service will be resumed after that 
touching tribute, may I be the reluctant first of many pedants to offer 
“Southgate Out” – Mike Wilner.

“If Theo Walcott [Monday’s Quote of the Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/the-fiver-alan-pardew-crystal-palace>
] doesn’t get to 10 goals by Christmas and receive a coffee machine from his 
wife, I’ll happily donate mine to him. I bought it for a lot of money about 10 
years ago, despite it being an unknown brand. It’s really fast, but it breaks 
down pretty much every month and the end product is rather weak and often 
disappointing. I’ve tried to banish it to the right-hand side of my kitchen 
counter top to get it out of my way, but it always seems to end up sliding back 
into the centre. I’m convinced it has delusions of grandeur and thinks it’s a 
cooker or something” – Paul Fowler.

“Theo Walcott earns a reported £110,000 a week, and no doubt a goal bonus on 
top of that, yet is targeting one more strike before Christmas (ie doing his 
job) to ‘earn’ a £200 coffee machine from his wife? And people have the cheek 
to suggest that professional footballers don’t understand the value of money. 
My question is whether Coleen Rooney will be buying Wayne a Hatchimal for 
Christmas if he gets his place back in José Mourinho’s starting XI” – Ben 
Graham.

“May I offer José Mourinho a form of defence for the accusation that he kicked 
a water bottle in anger during Manchester United’s match with West Ham United 
at the weekend. He should state, as Einstein’s theory on the speed of lightis 
in question 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/28/theory-challenging-einsteins-view-on-speed-of-light-could-soon-be-tested>
, that he did not in fact connect with said bottle, but that it was some other 
form of friction, such as the wind, that caused the bottle to move” – Raymond 
Reardon.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>.Today’s winner of our 
prizeless letter o’the day is … Paul Fowler.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

£25m for Bournemouth’s Callum Wilson? £25m for Bournemouth’s Callum Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/west-ham-callum-wilson-bournemouth>
!

Pop quiz: with what did Tim Cahill score the winner for Melbourne City against 
Sydney FC in the FFA Cup final? a) his right foot b) his left footc) his head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/tim-cahill-heads-melbourne-city-to-ffa-cup-final-win-over-sydney-fc>
.

Chelsea have announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/chelsea-investigation> that 
they have retained an external law firm to carry out an investigation 
concerning an individual employed by the club in the 1970s, who is now dead. It 
is believed the investigation is connected to allegations of historical sexual 
abuse amid claims that the club sanctioned a secret payment to a former youth 
team footballer who accused the club’s ex-chief scout Eddie Heath of child 
sexual abuse.

The victims of the Colombian plane crash will be honoured at a mass wake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/chapecoense-plane-crash-victims-to-be-honoured-with-mass-wake-at-stadium>
 inside the stadium of Chapecoense, the club’s vice-president has said.

Chapecoense’s 42-year-old goalkeeper Nivaldo has announced his immediate 
retirement from football. “I was supposed to go on the trip but ended up 
staying. I didn’t travel to Palmeiras [on Sunday], because it would make my 
farewell game to play here against Atletico-MG, when I would complete 300 games 
for the club.”

STILL WANT MORE?

Steven Gerrard, Paul Robinson and Mr Pardew’s Palace are in David Squires’s 
crosshairsin this week’s cartoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/nov/29/david-squires-on-steven-gerrard-paul-robinson-and-mr-pardews-palace>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-appointed-england-manager-fiver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea6a8c8ac3597725ce54ec8c17bbac713104b989%2F0_0_921_409%2F921.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Coffee%2C%20petits%20fours%2C%20digestifs%20and%20cigars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-appointed-england-manager-fiver%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Coffee%2C%20petits%20fours%2C%20digestifs%20and%20cigars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fgareth-southgate-appointed-england-manager-fiver%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea6a8c8ac3597725ce54ec8c17bbac713104b989%2F0_0_921_409%2F921.jpg>
 Eyeball Paul. Photograph: Guardian 
“Divorced, beheaded and died; sacked, disgraced, resigned. Not forgetting of 
course seduced by sheikhs, humiliated by an emerging volcano-nation and bought 
and sold for a pint of wine and a keynote speaker gig. Like doomed Tudor wives, 
this seems to be the lot of England football managers now, remembered more for 
the frenzied drama of their departures than any tangible success on the pitch” 
– so beginsBarney Ronay’s take on our Gareth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/gareth-southgate-england-manager-man-for-the-times>
.

Former Newcastle player Derek Bell talks publicly for the first time to David 
Conn <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/derek-bell-abuse-coach> 
about the abuse he suffered by George Ormond, his coach at the Montagu and 
North Fenham boys football club.

Football’s sexual abuse scandal shows the media cannot flinch from putting 
itself at the centre of stories of institutional failure,says Marina Hyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/media-failed-victims-failing-spotlight-abuse-football>
.

Graeme Le Saux, meanwhile, has written a column explaining why clubs must work 
with organisations such as the NSPCC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/young-footballer-sexual-abuse-nspcc-spot-warning-signs>
 to train their staff to spot warning signs and deal with them.

The Ben Woodburn hype machine is in full flow. Impress your mates with some 
context,courtesy of Andy Hunter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/ben-woodburn-liverpool-wales-jurgen-klopp>
.

How a team from Luxembourg with a one-armed striker lost 21-0 to Chelsea. 
Craig McCracken explains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/beyond-the-last-man/2016/nov/30/chelsea-luxembourg-cup-winners-cup-jeunesse-hautcharage>
.

 Surely Leicester City’s title win beats Team GB or England rugby for the 
Spoty team award,reckons Paul Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/30/spoty-team-award-leicester-team-gb-england-rugby>
.

Diego Perotti, Tom Rogic and Felix Kroos all feature in this edition of GOALS 
OF THE WEEK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/best-goals-week-cristiano-ronaldo-ben-woodburn-liverpool>
.

And you asked the Knowledge which players have scored hat-tricks on their 
international debuts.The Knowledge has never been happier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/which-players-have-scored-hat-tricks-on-their-international-debuts>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>.AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


535? 535 AND NOT A PENNY MORE
 