
6.08pm BST 

Today's top tips
 Neon Boneyard, Las Vegas. Photograph: /Alamy 
Thank you to every one who sent in questions and to all our experts for their 
great advice and suggestions. Here are some of the highlights:

Vegas for kids from @mollyodonnell 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12113028>: Springs Preserve 
<http://www.springspreserve.org> has a host of fun indoor installations and 
educational desert activities (and even animals) for little ones.Pinball Hall 
of Fame <http://www.pinballmusuem.org> is not to be missed. And unique museums 
include the newMob Museum <http://www.themobmuseum.org> and if early or late 
enough in the day theNeon Sign Boneyard <http://www.neonmuseum.org> (pictured).

Mountain huts in Colorado from @sarahryan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12069801>:  Use the 10th Mountain 
Hut system to see the biggest and best of Colorado's mountains. They're open 
for hiking and biking in the summer and fall, and skiing in the winter and most 
of the spring. A few huts are accessible to beginners, but most of these trips 
require intermediate skills at least. You can rent a few bunks in a hunt or a 
whole hut. It's a very Euro experience (the whole system was created by 
soldiers from the 10th mountain division after WWII). Learn more at
http://www.huts.org/ <http://www.huts.org/>

Rent an airstream from @sarahryan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12069801>: Go retro and rent an 
airstream. This father-son team restores and rents airstreams and will deliver 
them to a location for you:http://airstreamparty.com/rent-me 
<http://airstreamparty.com/rent-me>

Vegas festival from @chuckmonster: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12120350> The Life is Beautiful 
festival <http://www.lifeisbeautifulfestival.com/> is taking place in downtown 
Las Vegas on October 26 & 27. It features an astonishing array of musicians, 
artists and celebrity chefs all doing their thing in front of a massive crowd 
wearing satin casino jackets.

Don't try to do too much from @mikematson 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12121274>: Anyone who works in 
these parks, will tell you that you can spend a whole year exploring these 
places and still not see it all. A hike into the backcountry will leave almost 
everyone behind and totally change your visit. Sometimes its worth it to focus 
your energy in one place. A good example is hiking to theSubway Narrows in Zion 
National Park <http://www.nps.gov/zion/planyourvisit/narrowspermits.htm>.

Find out more about native cultures from @theblondecoyote: 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12116633> A number of museums and 
heritage centers in the West are incredible repositories for artifacts and 
information about Native cultures. The Anasazi Heritage Center just north of 
Cortz, Colorado (home of Mesa Verde National Park), is one of the best. You can 
also visit some of the many ancient ruins in CO and UT. I highly recommend
Hovenweep National Monument <http://www.nps.gov/hove/index.htm> in southwest 
Colorado. Mesa Verde is tremendous, but tends to get crowded on weekends.
 Book Cliffs, Colorado, fantastic mountain biking territory. Photograph: 
/Corbis 
The best biking spots from @SarahRyan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12069801>: Fruita is a good 
stopover between Moab and the rest of Colorado with amazing trails in the Book 
Cliffs (pictured). Telluride is epic and unforgettable (and there’s a great 
little campground in town). Salida and Steamboat Springs are surrounded by 
endless options. If you’re camping, check out my guidebook Colorado Camping for 
a list of the best campgrounds for mountain bikers.


http://www.amazon.com/Moon-Colorado-Camping-Complete-Outdoors/dp/1598807544/ref=pd_sim_sbs_b_1
 
<http://www.amazon.com/Moon-Colorado-Camping-Complete-Outdoors/dp/1598807544/ref=pd_sim_sbs_b_1>

More biking tips from @Brettprettyman 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12122148>: For a totally unique 
experience consider riding the White Rim Trail in Canyonlands National Park. It 
is a 100-mile loop starting from the Island in The Sky Visitor Center. Most 
people take two or three days to ride it, camping along the way with a support 
vehicle. Permits are required. Here's a story and short video we did after 
riding it this spring.

http://www.sltrib.com/sltrib/news/56439032-78/bucketlist-utahbucketlist-trail-mountain.html.csp
 
<http://www.sltrib.com/sltrib/news/56439032-78/bucketlist-utahbucketlist-trail-mountain.html.csp>

Tips for the solo traveller from @theblondecoyote 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12116633>: I'd recommend looking 
into Meet Up groups in the US at 
href="http://www.meetup.com/find/">http://www.meetup.com/find/. There are lots 
of hikers out there organizing small group trips, usually for no or low cost.

And more on solo travel from @sarahryan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12069801>: Have you tried Rocky 
Mountain National Park? You can put together numerous 3-5 day loops with lots 
of time above timberline. I backpack solo there when I can and feel very safe. 
Plus, you're likely to see elk, bighorn sheep, tons of marmots, and there's 
been a few wolverine sightings on the west side of the park. I would also look 
into Great Sand Dunes National Park in the San Luis valley of Colorado. You 
could fly into Colorado, rent a car, and put together a big loop that takes in 
Denver, Salida, San Luis Valley, Taos, and Santa Fe. You won't be lonely in 
northern New Mexico--it's a magnet for solo travels. Happy trails!

Updated at 6.10pm BST

5.13pm BST 

Don't forget the state parks!

Expert Mike Matson <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12121274> 
says:

Everybody has heard about the National Parks, Zion, Bryce Canyon, Arches and 
Canyonlands. But lots of travelers don't realize that Utah has some amazing 
state parks too! Places likeKodachrome Basin state park 
<http://www.stateparks.utah.gov/park/kodachrome-basin-state-park>, Coral Pink 
Sand Dunes state park 
<http://www.stateparks.utah.gov/park-content/coral-pink-sand-dunes-state-park/about>
, andSnow Canyon state park 
<http://www.stateparks.utah.gov/park/snow-canyon-state-park> are all examples 
of state parks that can be added to any southwest loop road trip.

And fellow expert Mary Caperton Morton (the blonde coyote) 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/12116633> recommends:

I'll also add Goblin Valley state park 
<http://www.stateparks.utah.gov/park/goblin-valley-state-park> to that list. 
They even have showers! A rarity in Utah. Right outside the park you'll find 
ample free camp sites along the San Rafael Swell. Little Horse Canyon is a 
beautiful non-technical slot canyon near Goblin Valley.
 Goblin Valley state park, Utah. Photograph: Corbis 
4.50pm BST 

Quirky Vegas

Soulless, rabidly commercial, fake... these are the criticisms often levelled 
at Vegas. And they're true, on one level. But Vegas also has a brilliantly 
quirky, cool, even surreal side. OurLas Vegas city guide  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/series/las-vegas-city-guide>featured some 
great alternative places to stay 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2011/nov/16/top-10-alternative-hotels-las-vegas>
 combining old-school charm and kitsch; some great alternative shows,  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2011/nov/16/top-10-alternative-venues-las-vegas>
including improv and gonzo theatre; and somebizarre shopping experiences 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2011/nov/16/top-10-weird-shops-las-vegas>, 
including the Rainbow Feather Dyeing Company (should you feel the urge to don a 
feather boa), and the Zombie Apocalypse Store. As with most cities, in Vegas, 
steer clear of the blockbuster attractions and you'll find a parallel city that 
is anything but soulless (except perhaps for the zombies).

Watch the video about the zombie store here. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/video/2011/nov/17/las-vegas-zombie-store-video>
 Dyed feather boas, Las Vegas. Photograph: /Alamy 
4.24pm BST 

Reader question – travelling with a baby

@peterepka asks about road-tripping with a one-year old. Has anyone done it? 
What are the dos and don'ts? He doesn't say where he wants to go but any advice 
on particularly family-friendly destinations welcome. Has anyone hiked or 
trekked with a baby? Or is that best avoided?
Pete Repka (@peterepka) 
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> #usaroadtripwest 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23usaroadtripwest&src=hash> would the panel 
advise if it is possible to do a 10 day tour with a 1 year old baby ?
 <https://twitter.com/peterepka/statuses/357485029561073665> July 17, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/peterepka/statuses/357485029561073665> 
4.18pm BST 

Reader question – camping in August?

Leo Roberts (@leonickroberts) tweeted a request for campsite recommendations 
for an 11-day Denver-San Fran road trip via Mesa Verde, Moab, Bryce, GC, Zion, 
Vegas, Yosemite. Has anyone come across any great sites? Will he fry in a tent 
in August? Add your tips in the comments below
Leo Roberts (@leonickroberts) 
@guardiantravel <https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> Taking a tent on our Aug 
road trip: suggestions for campsites? And will we be able to handle the heat!?
#USAroadtripwest <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23USAroadtripwest&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/leonickroberts/statuses/357496800028008448> July 17, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/leonickroberts/statuses/357496800028008448> 
4.07pm BST 

What's your favourite national park?

Thanks to Jamie Lafferty (@megaheid) who tweeted this photo: 
Jamie Lafferty (@MegaHeid) 
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> Hard to pick a favourite 
national park in the region, but Bryce Canyon is a beauty:
https://t.co/KrlYSXpcMM <https://t.co/KrlYSXpcMM>
 <https://twitter.com/MegaHeid/statuses/357487828101382145> July 17, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/MegaHeid/statuses/357487828101382145>  Bryce Canyon, Utah. 
Photograph: /Jamie Lafferty 
2.13pm BST 

Top reader tip

 Top tip from @Dief <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/4323907>

Zion, Bryce, Arches - check, check, check... A little less visited? Try an 
overnight at Natural Bridges National Monument near Canyonlands. The bridges 
themselves are nothing compared to what you'll see at Arches and can be done in 
a few hours but it has some of the darkest skies in the US.

Natural Bridges <http://www.nps.gov/nabr/index.htm> was Utah's first national 
monument (declared in 1908) and the first international dark sky park. These 
photos are of Owachomo, the thinnest and most fragile of three natural bridges 
in the park, and considered to be the most elegant.
 Owachomo Bridge, Natural Bridges national monument. Photograph: © A. 
Geh/Corbis 
And here it is at night:
 The Milky Way glowing over Owachomo Bridge in Natural Bridges national 
monument. Photograph: © Jon Hicks/Corbis 
And one from the archives:
 The Edwin natural bridge, now know as Owachomo natural bridge. Photograph: 
/Young/National Geographic Society/Corbis 
Updated at 2.49pm BST

12.47pm BST 

Reader question
oleinwebster (@oleinwebster) 
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> #usaroadtripwest 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23usaroadtripwest&src=hash>. Driving Route 66 
with a detour to Las Vegas (prev stop Flagstaff). Must sees on the route in 
Nevada pls?
 <https://twitter.com/oleinwebster/statuses/357449907252109312> July 17, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/oleinwebster/statuses/357449907252109312> 
Don't forget you can also send us questions by twitter: @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> #usaroadtripwest 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23usaroadtripwest&src=hash>.

12.18pm BST 

Climbing in Canyonlands – watch the video

Steve "Crusher" Barlett, one of our local experts, was photographer David 
Levene's guide when he made thisvideo for Guardian Travel about climbing in 
Canyonlands, Utah 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/video/2012/jul/17/utah-canyonlands-climbing-video>
. It showcases some epic scenery – mile upon mile of amazing cliffs with 
incredible colours. We also love Steve's attitude to climbing – for him it's 
not about the lifestyle, the calorie counting or the cool gear; it's all about 
the landscape. He also proves that you don't have to be a pro to start 
climbing. He persuades David to scale a 150-foot tower of rock that no-one has 
ever climbed before – watch it to the end to see David's triumphant (read 
terrified) ascent... "What! I don't get to hold a rope?!"

11.58am BST 

Beyond the icons

@davecamden <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/1255058> is planning 
a 10-day road trip, starting and ending in Las Vegas. The stop-offs are Kanab, 
Cedar City, Moab, Gunnison, Canon City, Taos, Santa Fe and Flagstaff. He says:

I'm going to do all the obvious stuff, like Bryce Canyon and the Arches etc, 
but is there anything along the way that might not be in the tour guides?

Does anyone have any tips about exploring Utah beyond the icons - or should he 
stick to the famous parks given that he only has 10 days, and there are a lot 
of amazing parks? Where are the best places to stay near Bryce and the Arches 
and other national parks?

10.04am BST 

Meet the experts

Forming the backdrop in countless movies, this trio of states is among the 
most familiar in America – incredible desert-scapes of red rock cliffs, towers 
and riverbeds, and breathtaking mountain scenery. But deciding how to make the 
most of this vast, spectacular natural playground can be overwhelming – where 
to stay, what routes to take, which national parks to visit ...

Our panel of experts are long-term residents or frequent visitors to Colorado, 
Utah and Nevada, so can serve up plenty of insider tips to help you plan a trip 
through these cinematic landscapes.

The great outdoors is what this part of the US does best and many of our 
panelists are keen hikers, climbers, skiers and cyclists, and are happy to 
share their secrets, from where to stay when visiting Bryce Canyon to their 
favourite extreme sports companies around Boulder. And, if you are looking for 
the perfect campsite, two of our panelists have written the book, literally. 
Finally, amid this breathtaking landscape is, of course, one of the world's 
best party towns, so don't forget to post your questions on sin city too.

Post a question below, or tweet us your questions at @guardiantravel  
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel>using #usaroadtripwest

Colorado

Sarah Ryan is the author of Moon Handbooks Colorado Camping 
<http://moon.com/books/moon-colorado-camping/>. She loves to hike, camp, 
backcountry ski, bike, and raft all over the state. She’s an expert in getting 
off the beaten track in any season, with or without kids. She’s also a food 
lover, who enjoys culinary adventures in Fort Collins, Denver and Boulder.

Joshua Berman is travel columnist for the Denver Post 
<http://www.denverpost.com/>, where he specialises in outdoor adventures, 
hiking, and dude ranches. His work has appeared in the New York Times, Men’s 
Journal, Yoga Journal and National Geographic Traveler. Find him at
joshuaberman.net <http://joshuaberman.net/> and on Twitter at @tranquilotravel. 
<https://twitter.com/tranquilotravel>

Steve Bartlett is a climber, writer and photographer. He grew up in Kent, but 
has lived in Boulder, Colorado since 1983. He works for a local guidebook 
company,Sharp End Publishing <http://www.sharpendbooks.com/>, and is the author 
ofDesert Towers <http://deserttowersbook.com/>, a book about climbing in the 
south-west.

Claire Walter is an award-winning writer, guidebook author and blogger, based 
in Boulder, CO. She first visited Colorado to ski and moved there in 1988. She 
loves the state for the combination of year-round outdoor activities and 
cultural and culinary offerings. She blogs at travel-babel.com 
<http://travel-babel.com/> and culinary-colorado.com 
<http://culinary-colorado.com/>.

Mary Caperton Morton is a freelance science and travel writer who makes her 
home on the back roads of North America, living and working out of a tiny 
solar-powered Teardrop trailer. A regular contributor to EARTH magazine, where 
she writes the Travels in Geology column, Mary also pens an outdoor 
adventure/road trip blog at theblondecoyote.com <http://www.theblondecoyote.com>
.

Utah

Mike Matson is an outdoor writer and photographer. He's the author of Moon 
Take a Hike Salt Lake City 
<http://moon.com/books/moon-take-a-hike-salt-lake-city/> and Moon Utah Camping 
<http://moon.com/books/moon-utah-camping/>. His stories and photos have been 
published in the Utah Adventure Journal, Backpacker, National Geographic 
Adventure, and Canoe and Kayak magazines.

Brett Prettyman has been an outdoors writer at the Salt Lake Tribune 
<http://www.sltrib.com/> in Salt Lake City, Utah, for 23 years. He is currently 
working on an one-hour film "the Utah Bucket List" which features 12 must-do 
adventures in Utah. Stories regarding the Bucket List have been running in the 
Tribune with video clips since May. Check them outhere 
<http://www.sltrib.com/sltrib/news/56274391-78/utahbucketlist-bucketlist-river-canyon.html.csp>
.

Tyson Bradley is a senior guide and director and of Utah Mountain Adventures 
<http://www.utahmountainadventures.com/> and the author of Backcountry Skiing 
Utah. He is passionate about skiing and climbing in the Wasatch Mountains, 
where he guides 100 days per winter (ski, avalanche instruction, mountaineering 
and ice). In summer he teaches rock climbing.

Caroline Gleich is a pro skier. She has travelled all over the world in 
pursuit of the best snow but her favourite place to ski is the mountains around 
Salt Lake Cityl. Caroline skis for Patagonia, Zeal Optics, Nordica, Leki, 
Thule, Clif Bar, and Sanuk. Follow her atcarolinegleich.com 
<http://www.carolinegleich.com/>.

Dustin A Cook is an outdoor adventurer and photographer on the weekends and a 
business developer during the week. He also volunteers with Utah Country Search 
and Rescue, helping people who are injured or lost find their way back home 
safely. He blogs at utahoutdoorfun.com.  <http://utahoutdoorfun.com/>

Nevada

Molly O’Donnell is an editor and freelance writer whose work has appeared in 
various regional and national magazines and newspapers, and on National Public 
Radio. She co-foundedArtsVegas.com <http://www.artsvegas.com/>, and also 
contributes to Las Vegas Weekly, andDesert Companion 
<http://www.desertcompanion.com/>.

Chuckmonster is the founder of VegasTripping.com <http://www.vegastripping.com>
, an irreverent guide to the city. He is also a member of theVegas Gang Podcast,
 <http://www.vegasgangpodcast.com> a roundtable discussion of the global gaming 
industry. Follow him at @chuckmonster.

Updated at 6.11pm BST
 