
Miami has been where it's at over the last couple of days: Frank Gehry's New 
World Centre, the new home of the New World Symphony, opened on Wednesday night 
with a world premiere of a piece by Thomas Adès – Polaris: Voyage for Orchestra 
– a piece that sounded shimmeringly, scintillatingly brilliant listening to 
live overMinnesota Public Radio 
<http://minnesota.publicradio.org/radio/services/cms/> . In the hall, there was 
a video by Tal Rosner and brass players were placed all over Gehry's 
multifaceted auditorium, but even without surround sound or the visuals, 
Polaris was music that seemed weightless but weighty, and which mysteriously 
magnetised its musical material into competing poles of tonal attraction and 
conflict.

After the huge, surging energy of the piece seemed to have dissipated into a 
serene A major, Adès had a surprise in store at the end of the 13-minute work: 
a series of massively violent chords, as the music spewed out fragments of its 
material in a musical nuclear reaction, like the death throes of a collapsing 
star. Polaris culminated with a final chord of blinding intensity that Michael 
Tilson Thomas and the young players of the New World Symphony played with 
visceral commitment. Polaris is off to Los Angeles and that other Gehry 
auditorium, Walt Disney Hall, later in the year, and we need to hear it on 
Britain soon.

All that, and the fact that a piano washed up on a Miami sandbank last week 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/northamerica/usa/8285549/Piano-on-beach-sparks-mystery.html>
, an image captured in a series of haunting photos that made National 
Geographic – and which has, needless to say, been puzzling locals. A mermaid's 
music? The watery end of someone's musical dreams? The truth, as ever, is 
richer and stranger.Find out here 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/2011/01/26/2036256/piano-mystery-solved-movie-prop.html>
.
 