
FAILURE TO LAUNCH

When Crystal Palace lost against Manchester City the weekend before last, 
going down to a goal scored by an unmarked opposition player from a corner, 
their manager Alan Pardew declared that “the goals we’ve conceded from set 
plays is not us”. When, at the time, his team had just shipped their ninth out 
of 21 goals from set plays. The Fiver often gets lost in a reverie thinking 
about Gylfi Sigurdsson and last week we imagined and even predicted the 
Icelandic dead-ball specialist would be licking his lips, rubbing his thighs 
and shouting “Eranu indeed!” at the prospect of filling his boots against 
Palace at the weekend. And so it came to past, with Gylfi scoring directly from 
one free-kick, before setting up three of Swansea’s four other goals from set 
plays that led to some of the most comical breaches of Palace security since 
Michael Fagan broke into the Queen’s bedroom. All of this in a match that could 
only have been improved if “Pards” had done his dance after his side had gone 
4-3 up, before conceding two in injury-timeto lose 5-4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/swansea-city-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
.

Alan Pardew needs radical change to save job at Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/alan-pardew-needs-radical-change-save-job-crystal-palace>
Of course, while there is only so much Pardew can do from his technical area 
to ensure Christian Benteke stays awake, it seems abundantly clear that Crystal 
Palace players don’t listen to a word he says on the training ground, and on 
this occasion was at least prepared to point his Big Finger O’Blame at himself 
as well as others for Saturday’s debacle. “The goals we have conceded don’t 
reflect well on us and for me personally,”he declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/alan-pardew-needs-radical-change-save-job-crystal-palace>
. “The scrutiny on me comes with the territory. I will do what I always do, 
reflect on this game and try and correct it for the next one.” This whole 
reflecting on one game and trying to correct it for the next one hasn’t been 
working too well for Pardew of late, what with his team having lost six on the 
spin to maintain their record as the worst team in English football’s top four 
divisions this calendar year. Rumours suggest he may no longer be able rely on 
this strategy, as former England manager Mr Roy and his successor, keynote 
speaker Sam Allardyce, have been approached with a view to replacing him.

Assuming he is ushered to the door marked “Do One”, Pardew can at least 
console himself with the news that he won’t have to deal with the potential 
absence of Palace’s star player Wilfried Zaha during the Africa Cup of Nations 
scheduled to take place in Gabon from 14 January to 5 February. Despite having 
featured twice in friendlies for England, double the number of matches one of 
his future potential Palace managers was involved with the team, the 
Abidjan-born winger has nailed his colours to the Ivory Coast mast. “The 
Ivorian-English attacking midfielder Wilfried Zaha has chosen to play for the 
Elephants, under the colours of the Ivory Coast, his country of origin,” 
trumpeted an IFF statement released on Sunday night. The player was promptly 
accused of “turning his back on England”, by one particular newspaper more 
readily associated with the “encouragement” they tend to offer immigrants when 
it comes to returning from whence they came.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“It’s been a long process, we’ve had the baby now, so hopefully we can move on 
as a family” – Arsenal’s Theo Walcott lets it all out after being asked about
the birth of his second child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/theo-walcott-targets-ten-goals-christmas-arsenal-coffee-machine-present>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fthe-fiver-alan-pardew-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb906259ff7d968c7799212b1c565700a4ada6c3c%2F114_73_2302_1499%2F2302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Comical%20breaches%20of%20Palace%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fthe-fiver-alan-pardew-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Comical%20breaches%20of%20Palace%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fthe-fiver-alan-pardew-crystal-palace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb906259ff7d968c7799212b1c565700a4ada6c3c%2F114_73_2302_1499%2F2302.jpg>
 There it is. Photograph: Tony O'Brien/Reuters 
FIVER LETTERS

“Slowly clearing through my inbox from a week away on my honeymoon and was 
about to hit delete on a week’s worth of Fivers before noticing my mate Frank 
Turner’s name in the preview window. Scrolling down it seems that The Fiver has 
linked to the steaming nonsense that Clapton Ultras wrote about me and my 
friends. I’m not after a correction or clarification, or indeed for this letter 
to appear in The Fiver and I doubt any of your readers care. However I have 
commented onthe original blogpost 
<http://www.claptonultras.org/2016/11/22/not-stag-party-venue/> in question 
should the good folk at Fiver Towers be interested in what actually happened” – 
Sean Carroll.

“Theo Walcott says he’ll get a coffee machine if he scores 10 goals by 
Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/theo-walcott-targets-ten-goals-christmas-arsenal-coffee-machine-present>
? Despite being in the 2006 World Cup squad, he has been a latte developer” – 
Darren Leathley.

“As alluring as the idea is of getting a free copy of Football Manager 17 and 
taking Middlesbrough to pixelated mid-table obscurity, if it’s been down the 
back of The Fiver’s sofa, I think I’ll pass …” – Andrew Tate.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
letter o’the day is … Andrew Tate, who receives our last copy of Football 
Manager 2017 <http://www.footballmanager.com/games/football-manager-2017> from 
those good people at Football Manager Towers.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING

Join AC Jimbo and co for the latest thrilling instalment of Football Weekly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/audio/2016/nov/28/alan-pardew-on-precipice-as-crystal-palace-lose-again-football-weekly>
.

BITS AND BOBS

The paedophile football coach Barry Bennell has been taken to hospital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/barry-bennell-hospital> after 
police responded to a “fear for welfare incident” at an address in Stevenage on 
Friday night, where he was found unconscious.

Tony Pulis has lost his appeal against an arbitration ruling that he must pay 
Crystal Palace £3.77m after his departure from the club in 2014,after he was 
found to have deceived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/tony-pulis-crystal-palace-appeal>
 a Premier League managers’ arbitration tribunal. A big day for Steve Parish’s 
hair, you’ll find.

Tony Pulis ordered to pay Crystal Palace £3.77m after ‘deceiving tribunal’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/28/tony-pulis-crystal-palace-appeal>
Queen’s Celtic winger James Forrest has paid tribute to Brendan Rodgers after 
their Scottish League Cup finalwin over Aberdeen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/aberdeen-celtic-scottish-league-cup-final-report>
. “All the boys repaid him with the trophy and hopefully we can continue to do 
that,” he tooted. “It’s been a great start for the full team and we are just 
buzzing to get this trophy in the bag early doors.”

Jürgen Klopp is waiting around like a jittery expectant parent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/liverpool-philippe-coutinho-scan-ankle-ligament-damage>
 to find out just how long Philippe Coutinho’s ankle-knack will keep him out 
for. “I have no idea what it is,” he parped.

Mauricio Pochettino can’t get enough of £30m record Spurs signing, Euro 2016’s 
Moussa Sissoko. “You sign a player and then you expect something, and you don’t 
find what you expected,”he sniffed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/27/mauricio-pochettino-moussa-sissoko-tottenham>
.

Santos are sniffing around Bastian Schweinsteiger with head coach Dorival 
Junior in the market for moody social media snaps. “I told [the board] that we 
should try to get a big name in world football, or at least send an 
invitation,” he blootered. “It was just a recommendation … It won’t hurt us to 
try. A player like that can obviously lift the level of the team, but he has to 
come with an objective and an appetite.”

Portsmouth manager Paul Cook admits a full and frank conversation between 
captain Michael Doyle and defender Christian Burgess at half-time contributed 
to their 2-1 defeat to Stevenage. “I’m not going to insult Pompey fans’ 
intelligence. There was an incident, unfortunately, which resulted in two of 
our mainstay players coming off. They are vocal in what they do and sometimes 
that goes a little too far,” he sniffed.

Four League Two defeats on the spin have got John Sheridan feeling funky 
enough to order his first team to play in the reserves at Chesterfield on 
Tuesday.

And Toulouse boss Pascal Dupraz agrees that he made himself look a bit of a 
whopper by collapsing to the turf like he’d been hit by a cartoon wrecking ball 
when a paper aeroplane whistled past his ear during the 1-0 defeat by Rennes. 
“I heard the delegate tell me that I was making things up. I knew I was crazy 
but at this point [I thought] I’m going to get up and then we’re not going to 
make a movie about it,” he honked, as various media outlets did that for him.

STILL WANT MORE?

Your Premier League talking points, right here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/28/premier-league-10-talking-points-arsenal-manchester-city-liverpool>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fthe-fiver-alan-pardew-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a5a6ab3c75b9dedd163fd346ef1f54a8a2f3b0f%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Comical%20breaches%20of%20Palace%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fthe-fiver-alan-pardew-crystal-palace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Comical%20breaches%20of%20Palace%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fthe-fiver-alan-pardew-crystal-palace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a5a6ab3c75b9dedd163fd346ef1f54a8a2f3b0f%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Right … here. Composite: Action Images, Getty, AFP 
Paolo Bandini stopped chain-sipping espressos for long enough to pen this blog 
on how, just the 6,084 days after his pops scored to beat Juve,Giovanni Simeone 
inspired Genoa to victory over the shambolic Serie A champs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/28/giovanni-simeone-history-repeat-itself-genoa-thump-juventus-serie-a>
.

Danger, danger, high voltage! wails Michael Cox of the threat posed by 
Arsenal’s tactically astute, supercharged Alexis Sánchez. If you want to know 
how he keeps starting fires,follow this link 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/28/dangerous-alexis-sanchez-driving-force-arsenal>
.

Prefer pictures to words? Well focus your peepers on The Dozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/nov/27/the-dozen-the-weekends-best-premier-league-photos>
, featuring a steaming Yaya Touré, José Holebas and Xherdan Shaqiri having an 
exasperation-themed game of top trumps and more.

Raf Honigstein scratches your Bundesliga itch with a look back at Hamburg v 
Bremen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/28/jaroslav-drobny-sets-tone-in-hamburgs-and-bremens-derby-of-dysfunction>
.

English youth football coaches are now obsessed with fun instead of results, 
which probably means more abject failure for England fans to bathe in in the 
future,writes optimism’s Alex Clapham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2016/nov/28/english-football-coaches-barcelona-winning-natural-instinct>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


‘WE’VE GOT CORDUROY’ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zw9qN6_eXOg>
 