
On the last Monday of the Hindu month of Kartik (our 28 November), hundreds of 
farmers will travel to Bangalore’s Bull Temple from surrounding rural areas, 
carrying their newly harvested peanut crop in large jute sacks. The 
16th-century temple and its neighbouring streets in Basavanagudi, south 
Bangalore, become the setting for the annual Kadlekai Parishe (peanut fair). 
After they make an offering tododda basava – the “big bull”, a four-metre high 
statue of Shiva’s mount – the remaining crop is heaped in great piles on the 
pavements and roads surrounding the temple and sold during the two-day festival.

Keep on trucking … Bangalore’s food cart boom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/28/bangalore-street-food-trucks-india>
Roads are closed to traffic as locals flock to buy unshelled peanuts directly 
from the farmers, or sample them prepared in different ways: boiled, roasted, 
or salted. Under canopies of towering trees, roadside vendors hawk other 
popular snacks, such as puffed rice, plates of friedbonda (potato) and bhaji, 
thick slices of pineapple, cucumber, and watermelon, cups of sugarcane juice, 
and sticky sweets such asjalebi and Mysore paks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbangalore-peanut-festival-hindu-kadlekai-parishe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3be3c37aae3fa3313055ffb9abc4fcc29a55fc3e%2F0_8_3008_1806%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Completely%20nuts%3A%20Bangalore's%20peanut%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbangalore-peanut-festival-hindu-kadlekai-parishe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Completely%20nuts%3A%20Bangalore%27s%20peanut%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbangalore-peanut-festival-hindu-kadlekai-parishe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3be3c37aae3fa3313055ffb9abc4fcc29a55fc3e%2F0_8_3008_1806%2F3008.jpg>
 Photograph: Isabel Putinja 
Though it takes place in India’s fast-paced IT capital, this celebration of 
the peanut has the lively atmosphere of a village fair. Vendors peddle balloons 
and bright pink bags of candyfloss tied to long poles, and pavement stalls 
offer glass bangles and plastic trinkets, pictures of Hindu divinities and 
terracotta pots.

The near-500-year-old Kadlekai Parishe has its origins in a legend. When 
farmers noticed their peanut fields were being ravaged at night by a roving 
bull, they prayed to him and made an offering of peanuts. The next day, instead 
of damaged fields, they found an idol of the creature. Ever since, farmers make 
sure the bull gets first dibs on their peanut harvest by making this annual 
pilgrimage.
 