
Sir Peter Maxwell Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/peter-maxwell-davies> has died, aged 81. The 
Salford-born composer, universally known as Max, had been suffering from 
leukaemia for several years and died at his home in Orkney on 14 March.

A guide to Peter Maxwell Davies's music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/aug/20/peter-maxwell-davies-music-guide>
One of the foremost musicians of our time, Maxwell Davies was a fearless 
figurehead for the postwar avant garde. He made it his mission to connect with 
as many different audiences and performers as possible, writing music for 
children, for his Orkney community, as well as grand symphonies – 10 of them, 
concertos, string quartets, and music theatre works.

He was also an experienced conductor, holding the position of associate 
conductor/composer at both the BBC Philharmonic and Royal Philharmonic 
orchestras for 10 years, and guest conducting orchestras that included the San 
Francisco Symphony, Leipzig Gewandhaus and Philharmonia. He enjoyed a 
particularly close relationship with theScottish Chamber Orchestra 
<http://www.sco.org.uk/> as composer laureate.


From 2004 to 2014 he was master of the Queen’s music, and was knighted in 
1987. Last month he was awarded theRoyal Philharmonic Society’s gold medal 
<http://royalphilharmonicsociety.org.uk/index.php/awards/gold_medal> – the 
highest accolade the society can bestow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fcomposer-peter-maxwell-davies-dies-aged-81%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb34c0f2f4d22ab329738ae8137faee938ecc6d38%2F0_290_4817_2889%2F4817.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Composer%20Peter%20Maxwell%20Davies%20dies%20aged%2081&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fcomposer-peter-maxwell-davies-dies-aged-81%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Composer%20Peter%20Maxwell%20Davies%20dies%20aged%2081&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fcomposer-peter-maxwell-davies-dies-aged-81%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb34c0f2f4d22ab329738ae8137faee938ecc6d38%2F0_290_4817_2889%2F4817.jpg>
 Peter Maxwell Davies (left) conducts Welsh soprano Mary Thomas in a rehearsal 
for Revelation and Fall, February 1968. Photograph: Erich Auerbach/Getty Images 
Maxwell Davies started composing as a teenager, and studied at the Royal 
Northern College of Music, where his fellow students includedHarrison Birtwistle
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/may/14/contemporary-composers-guide-harrison-birtwistle>
, John Ogdon and Alexander Goehr. He came to international prominence in the 
1960s, most particularly with pieces such as Eight Songs for a Mad King 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v8mod9wAtMM> and Revelation and Fall in which 
he created a new, shocking and exhilarating vision of music theatre.

In 1971 he moved to Orkney, the landscape and culture of which had a deep 
impact on his music; in 1977 he founded the annualSt Magnus festival 
<http://www.stmagnusfestival.com/>, which he continued to be involved with 
until the end of his life.

“From the earliest days organising things from a phone box on Hoy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoy> to his more recent role as the festival’s 
honorary president, Max has won the hearts of the Orkney community and been a 
significant part of many generations of musicians from the islands,”said 
Alasdair Nicolson, the festival’s artistic director 
<http://www.stmagnusfestival.com/news/14-mar-2016-sir-peter-maxwell-davies>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbnnkL1t7PXY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbnnkL1t7PXY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbnnkL1t7PXY&media=>
 An Orkney Wedding, with Sunrise 
Maxwell Davies was passionately committed to the social responsibility of the 
composer and the concept of music as a social force. His third string quartet, 
written in 2003, was a defiant personal statement against the Iraq war; his 
2010 opera,Kommilitonen!  <http://www.maxopus.com/work_detail.aspx?key=549>was 
a dramatisation of student protest movements in the 20th century and a call to 
arms for today’s young people.

The composer’s 1980 chamber opera The Lighthouse was performed at the Royal 
Opera House’s Linbury theatre in October 2015, with Maxwell Davies in 
attendance. “The dazzling score ... held our attention. Luminous and salty, it 
conveys the desolate, sea-battered mood, the cries of seabirds, the waves’ 
roar, equally as tellingly as Britten in Peter Grimes, but in an entirely 
different musical voice. Maxwell Davies was there to take a bow and hug his 
performers. His smiles were reward enough for all,”wrote Fiona Maddocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/01/saul-glyndebourne-tour-review-orpheus-globe-the-lighthouse-maxwell-davies>
 in the Observer.

Peter Maxwell Davies at 80: ‘The music knows things that I don’t’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/19/peter-maxwell-davies-at-80-interview>
The previous year the ROH’s Antonio Pappano and the London Symphony Orchestra 
had given the world premiere of Maxwell Davies’s 10th symphony. “A wonderful 
opportunity presented itself to me when I was asked to conduct [it], a piece 
that was as much bound up with Italy as Max’s native land. [He was] a dear and 
generous man with whom it was a joy to collaborate and an example of 
perseverance in the world of music and the arts,” said Pappano. Reviewing,the 
Guardian’s Andrew Clements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/03/lso-pappano-peter-maxwell-davies-tenth-symphony-review>
 admired the work’s vivid and vivacious writing. “It’s one of the most movingly 
personal of Davies’s recent scores, and a major new symphony,” he said.

Peter Maxwell Davies: strikingly original music composed at white heat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/14/peter-maxwell-davies-british-composer-appreciation-andrew-clements>
Alan Davey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/21/were-too-darned-modest-about-we-do-radio-3-boss-alan-daveys-typical-day>
, controller of Radio 3, said: “We have lost a musical giant, a major composer 
with a strong and unique voice through all parts of his extraordinary career, 
from his early avant garde musical theatre works to his symphonies and his work 
for children and young people. It is a sad loss to the world of music and we 
will remember him through his recordings and the glorious spirit that shines 
through his music.” Maxwell Davies’s works have featured in over 50 proms over 
five decades, of which nine were world premieres. “The link with the Proms was 
not just through his strikingly individual music, but also a shared vision of 
bringing classical music to wider audiences,” said David Pickard, Director, BBC 
Proms.

What will be Maxwell Davies’s final large-scale work is, appropriately, a 
community opera, The Hogboon, thatSimon Rattle and the London Symphony 
Orchestra will perform in June 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=17633>. 
 