
I’m one of many people who came down here to help after hurricane Katrina in 
2005. Originally I was only coming for a couple of weeks, but that turned into 
the rest of my life.

When I first saw New Orleans, about eight months after Katrina, a lot of areas 
were unpassable and roads jammed with debris. You had to look in the newspaper 
to figure out which stores and restaurants were open each day. But what 
impressed me was the people – though they were facing a terrible situation, 
they were so resistant and stronger than you’d think possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F29%2F1419850543118%2F45ee7a9b-9d64-4c38-b069-f23b8a5c7804-1728x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Concierge%20John%20Fitzpatrick%20on%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Concierge%20John%20Fitzpatrick%20on%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F29%2F1419850543118%2F45ee7a9b-9d64-4c38-b069-f23b8a5c7804-1728x2040.jpeg>
 John Fitzpatrick is the concierge at the Bourbon Orleans Hotel 
One of the most important things for them was getting Mardi Gras up and 
running again for the next spring, to show that New Orleans was bouncing back. 
People were not giving up. The idea of moving or living in another part of the 
country just never entered into it.

Here’s some good advice on Mardi Gras. Don’t come down for the carnival 
weekend itself, as the crowds can be insane, with about one million people in 
the streets. It’s fantastic but if you come down the weekend before, you still 
see excellent parades and get a much better hotel rate.

Forget Mardi Gras balls – they are private so you can’t get into them. Go to 
theKrewe of Endymion’s <http://www.endymion.org/> blowout instead. They have a 
big extravaganza each year after the parade with celebrity music performers and 
floats and so on, and you can buy tickets online.

The neighbourhood walking krewes are the thing. They don’t have big powered 
floats, so it’s more intimate. Nobody buys a costume or cheap beads, everybody 
makes something, which for me goes back to the original spirit of Mardi Gras. 
It’s best to see them through the French Quarter and the Marigny neighbourhood, 
and now the Bywater to some degree.

I’m the captain of a sub-krewe called Krewe Of Python (No Relation) 
<http://chewbacchus.org/krewe-of-python-no-relation/>, and yes, we focus on 
Monty Python sketches. For our first parade, earlier this year, we dressed up 
as characters from The Holy Grail, handing outholy hand grenades of Antioch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xOrgLj9lOwk>. Next carnival we are doing The 
Spanish Inquisition, so we’ll be dressing up as cardinals and handing out 
edible rosaries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F29%2F1419851128961%2Fd419d20e-3899-42eb-a866-3cfeb9768f7a-2060x1379.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Concierge%20John%20Fitzpatrick%20on%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Concierge%20John%20Fitzpatrick%20on%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F29%2F1419851128961%2Fd419d20e-3899-42eb-a866-3cfeb9768f7a-2060x1379.jpeg>
 Mardi Gras in the French Quarter. Photograph: Alamy 
New Orleans is very different to other American cities because it is one of 
the few parts of the US that was not settled by the British. It was settled by 
the French and then taken over by the Spanish so it is historically very 
different. Culturally it has more in common with the Caribbean than, say, 
Chicago or New York.

New Orleans has the US’s only true indigenous cuisine. There are other great 
food cities, like New York or San Francisco, but the food is not particularly 
native to them, whereas many of the famous dishes in New Orleans were created 
here. That comes from being a port city which has fantastic, fresh seafood and 
the combination of French, Spanish, African, Caribbean and wherever-else 
cultures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F29%2F1419851602084%2Fb2946770-cce9-4b76-b401-8ba4b94f337d-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Concierge%20John%20Fitzpatrick%20on%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Concierge%20John%20Fitzpatrick%20on%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F29%2F1419851602084%2Fb2946770-cce9-4b76-b401-8ba4b94f337d-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Galatoires restaurant 
Creole cuisine is very rich with a lot of butter and butter-based sauces – 
gumbo, famous desserts like crème brûlée and bread pudding. People come down 
here and love it, then after three days they’re like: “I need a salad. I really 
need a salad!”

There’s supposed to be several ghosts in the hotel where I work, the Bourbon 
Orleans. It’s a grand old dame with a fascinating history – it’s been a 
ballroom, a convent and an orphanage over the last 200 years – and children and 
a Confederate soldier who committed suicide are said to roam the corridors. 
About a month ago a gentleman came to me and said he’d seen a ghost in the 
night. Though personally, I’ve seen far stranger things happen on Bourbon 
Street – most of them unmentionable here.

The hotel does not pay me to tell people where to eat, I am paid to match 
guests with their likes and tastes. It’s very subjective but here are three 
that I really like:Peche <http://www.pecherestaurant.com/> is a fantastic 
seafood restaurant in the Warehouse district run by chef Donald Link: the 
speciality is whole fish that you split with fellow diners.Marti’s 
<http://martisnola.com/>, in the French Quarter, is a new restaurant that has 
retained the magnificent old art deco interior (unusual in New Orleans). The 
food is Creole with a modern twist, and in a beautiful setting. The penne pork 
is particularly good, the quail is excellent, and they also serve great oysters 
on the half-shell. For tradition, I always recommendedGalatoire’s 
<http://www.galatoires.com/home>, which goes back to 1905 – it’s really old 
school Creole. Don’t make a reservation though as it will be on the first 
floor, not the historic beautiful ground floor room. If you want to get into 
the ground floor, you need to wait in line – and men must wear jackets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F29%2F1419852424675%2F44f2d6cb-01c8-4734-9ea1-a9a341c59865-1020x682.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Concierge%20John%20Fitzpatrick%20on%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Concierge%20John%20Fitzpatrick%20on%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F30%2Fnew-orleans-hotel-concierge-john-fitzpatrick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F29%2F1419852424675%2F44f2d6cb-01c8-4734-9ea1-a9a341c59865-1020x682.jpeg>
 The Bourbon Orleans Hotel 
Stay out of the French Quarter if you want to find good live music. Go down to 
Frenchmen Street instead: you have a fantastic choice of jazz – contemporary, 
traditional, brass bands – playing every night and you are not paying French 
Quarter prices for drinks, so it’s much kinder on the pocket.

I tell people to walk up and down Frenchman, stick your head in listen, see 
who’s playing. They always have a posting outside of who’s playing, but it’s 
more fun to discover it on your own.

My favourite spot down there is The Spotted Cat 
<http://www.spottedcatmusicclub.com/>. It’s a small place, bare boned, bar in 
the back, stage in the window. There is always a good crowd in there dancing 
and singing – you can hear the music out on the street. I was part ofKrewe du 
Jieux <http://www.krewedujieux.com/>, which held several events there – in fact 
four years ago I was the King of the Jews, the only Irish Catholic King of the 
Jews in the city’s history! But that’s New Orleans for you.

I love the fact that men here call other men baby all the time, or boo, as a 
term of endearment.

I run a pub quiz every Tuesday at a punk bar called Siberia 
<http://siberianola.com/>. I love geek trivia and do quizzes about video games 
or JRR Tolkien.

The Carousel Bar at the Hotel Monteleone is an actual carousel which revolves 
360 degrees every 15 minutes. It has to be my favourite cocktail bar – it’s a 
beautiful bar and they have great live music too.

• John Fitzpatrick is the concierge at the Bourbon Orleans Hotel 
<http://www.bourbonorleans.com/>

 