
In my time as a music journalist, I've been asked to do some pretty strange 
stuff. Flying to the West Bank to talk to Palestinian rappers; touring with 
Iron Maiden in their private jet; interviewing a naked Grace Jones in her 
dressing room. None of these things made me as nervous as the following words 
from my editor: "How do you feel about trying to conduct an orchestra?"

Conducting <https://www.theguardian.com/music/conducting>, as far as I knew, 
was some unfathomable sign language performed by ageing Russian mystics who 
definitely hadn't given up violin lessons after scraping through a Grade 3 exam 
20 years ago. When did I last try to read sheet music? Or even go to a 
classical concert? The more I thought about it, the more paralysed I felt.

Which is how I ended up in the home of Alice Farnham 
<http://www.alicefarnham.com/page4.htm>, who recently headed up the Women 
Conductors course 
<http://www.morleycollege.ac.uk/news/1802_morley_leads_the_way_for_new_women_conductors>
 atMorley College <http://www.morleycollege.ac.uk/> in south London, which 
hopes to redress the imbalance in this male-dominated profession. She began by 
playing me a recording of part ofPeter Warlock's Capriol Suite 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EFwt6exTne4>, and every time she showed me a 
hand gesture, I became fixated on reproducing it exactly.

She explained that it wasn't so much about copying her precisely, as all 
conductors have their own way of moving their arms. It was more about 
developing my confidence, whether I made my three beats into an imaginary 
triangle or as a line with points along it.

The mechanics were still worrying me, though, so we watched a YouTube clip of 
a three-year-old called Jonathan conducting along to a CD 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0REJ-lCGiKU> – my god, he's a prodigy! But 
it's his passion for the music that makes him so hilariously brilliant, 
thrashing his arms about in time to the crescendos, scrunching himself up when 
things get quieter. He seems to be living inside the song. Watching him made me 
feel more liberated to thrash about myself.

For a final confidence boost, we watched a Ted Talk about power poses 
<http://www.ted.com/talks/amy_cuddy_your_body_language_shapes_who_you_are>. I 
learned that taking a moment, before you go in front of your audience, to stand 
with your legs apart and arms outstretched makes you feel powerful – slouch 
down and you're already in a place of weakness.

The next day I met my musicians and found myself apologising again. My nerves! 
But it turns out that if you take the right, decisive, first breath and make 
the right eye contact, you bring everybody with you. And even though your eyes 
are reading various staves of music at once, for the different instruments, 
it's not as difficult as I thought to engage with everyone.

I'm not exactly sure what my hands were doing at times – I improvised the 
gestures, as long as my rhythm was good. I had a favourite violinist, whom my 
eyes got stuck on, before realising I was ignoring the poor invisible cellist, 
who needed my encouragement too. It's more of a cheerleading role than I 
realised. What I found strangest was that all these musicians, much more 
skilled than I, really wanted me to lead. The less I apologised, and the more 
power I assumed, the happier they got. You have to be bold to make your players 
feel safe. A realisation to take away with me, I am sure, even if I never 
conduct again.

Conducting feels to me like my family's two ways of cooking: my mum makes 
something lovely by throwing a few things together and guessing when they'll be 
done, whereas my dad is deeply uncomfortable unless following what he refers to 
as The Gospel According to St Packet. Most conductors are highly trained 
individuals with a deep understanding of classical music, but you do need to 
forget about St Packet and throw a few delicious things in too. A dash of 
rhythm, a touch of passion and one big power pose will get you a lot further 
than you thought.

Sophie attempted to conduct an orchestra with the help of Morley College, 
London SE1. For information on its conducting courses, visitmorleycollege.ac.uk 
<http://www.morleycollege.ac.uk/>
 