
Sydney FC <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc> have retained their 
superior A-League derby status, holding Western Sydney to a goalless draw in 
controversial circumstances. Saturday night’s stalemate will aggrieve the 
Wanderers, who should have been awarded a first-half penalty for Michael 
Zullo’s handball.

But Danny Vukovic’s late heroics in front of a crowd of 40,143 at Allianz 
Stadium ensured the Sky Blues’ unbeaten juggernaut rolled into a 15th game, as 
Graham Arnold’s league leaders stretched their undefeated derby record to three 
years and three days.

Both sides opened with gusto but the affair soon turned into an arm-wrestle as 
Tony Popovic’s outfit held their own against their in-form hosts. Sydney 
enjoyed the first attacking foray when Filip Holosko’s shot was cleared smartly 
by Jonathan Aspropotamitis before the Slovak winger stole in for a low cross 
that forced former Sydney goalkeeper Vedran Janjetovic to act quickly.

As expected, Janjetovic was roundly condemned for his cross-town defection, 
enthusiastically booed by Sky Blues fans with every touch. But the unperturbed 
gloveman handled the pressure well and pulled off one particularly acrobatic 
leap to tip a header over the bar.

Melbourne Victory hang on against Brisbane Roar in A-League classic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/melbourne-victory-hang-on-against-brisbane-roar-in-a-league-classic>
As Sydney looked to turn the screw, the Wanderers applied some pressure and 
were denied a clear penalty when Nicolas Martinez’s shot struck Zullo on the 
arm inside Sydney’s box. On the sideline, Popovic’s valve was ready to blow as 
referee Peter Green ignored his wild gesticulations and promptly ordered a goal 
kick.

It temporarily sparked the visitors but as the affair wore on the urgency 
diminished. While Western Sydney defended resolutely when needed, the Sky Blues 
struggled for front-third options, and Brazilian striker Bobo’s finishing and 
pass accuracy was especially awry.

Up the other end, Arnold’s pre-match prediction that Vukovic would not have to 
make a single save proved inaccurate early in the second half when the gloveman 
sharply denied Mitch Nichols’ glancing header. Vukovic was again forced into 
action soon after, parrying away Scott Neville’s 69th-minute bullet before 
sensationally stopping Jaushua Sotirio and Martinez in quick succession.

Popovic was happy the Wanderers had earned their first clean sheet of the 
season but lamented the denied penalty. “I’m getting sick of talking about it,” 
Popovic said. “It’s a penalty, it doesn’t get clearer than that.”

As expected, Arnold disagreed. “He had his back to it and his arm was tucked 
in, it hit him on the back of the elbow. I don’t think it was a penalty,” he 
said. “I thought the Wanderers performed well, they made it hard for us at 
times. Our execution let us down.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcontroversy-as-sydney-fc-and-wanderers-share-the-spoils-in-tight-clash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe08e793b8b936dcdcea56ef8d66e0a1f7dc30d19%2F73_0_3467_2080%2F3467.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Controversy%20as%20Sydney%20FC%20and%20Wanderers%20share%20spoils%20in%20derby%20clash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcontroversy-as-sydney-fc-and-wanderers-share-the-spoils-in-tight-clash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Controversy%20as%20Sydney%20FC%20and%20Wanderers%20share%20spoils%20in%20derby%20clash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fcontroversy-as-sydney-fc-and-wanderers-share-the-spoils-in-tight-clash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe08e793b8b936dcdcea56ef8d66e0a1f7dc30d19%2F73_0_3467_2080%2F3467.jpg>
 Paul Izzo defends valiantly against the Wellington Phoenix at Westpac Stadium 
on Saturday. Photograph: Mark Tantrum/Getty Images 
Meanwhile, sidelined with injury for nearly two months, Phoenix midfielder 
Michael McGlinchey celebrated his return with a crucial goal in Wellington’s 
1-0 win overCentral Coast Mariners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/central-coast-mariners>. McGlinchey’s 
ninth-minute strike proved decisive in strong winds and swirling rain at 
Westpac Stadium, as Wellington recorded just their fourth win of the season.

Sitting eighth on the ladder going into Saturday’s game, Wellington were 
without top goal-scorer Roy Krishna, who was red-carded in last week’s 2-1 loss 
away to Perth Glory. But McGlinchey’s return and that of defensive midfielder 
Vince Lia from suspension, combined with an outstanding showing from Kosta 
Barbarouses, got the Phoenix home.

The Mariners, 10th on the ladder and with five losses from their last six 
matches, looked to have found their timing early. But Wellington responded 
clinically when an inch-perfect Roly Bonevacia pass found McGlinchey. He 
rounded fellow All White Storm Roux before unleashing a raking strike which 
flashed past goalkeeper Paul Izzo on his near post.
 