
Well, it was never going to be possible to be comprehensive. Comprehensible, 
hopefully, but all-encompassing? Impossible. With only 50 weeks to accommodate 
a representative selection of the creators of the thing we call contemporary 
classical music (once we'd agreed on a working definition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/26/five-myths-contemporary-classical-music>
 of course),my guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/apr/23/welcome-new-contemporary-music-guide>
 was inevitably going to be driven by editorial selection rather than 
exhaustive completism.
And there were, of course, controversies in the choices I made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/series/a-guide-to-contemporary-classical-music>
 about which composers to feature. The common factor was that they were all 
composers whose music I felt was essential to include if I was to present a 
rounded portrait of today's classical music. But more fundamentally, it was 
driven by an entirely unscientific and instinctive feeling for the music that 
has made the deepest impression on me, and which, for the most part, has 
fascinated me and that I love.

Right now, though, I'm all too painfully aware of all those composers who may 
be on your lists but who didn't make the 50 chapters of the guide, all of whom 
could have done: Milton Babbitt, Giacinto Scelsi, Mauricio Kagel, Steve 
Martland, Michael Gordon, Mark-Anthony Turnage, James MacMillan, Henryk 
Górecki, Krzysztof Penderecki, Howard Skempton, Julian Anderson, Christopher 
Fox, Michael Nyman, Salvatore Sciarrino, Christian Wolff, Sofia Gubaidulina, Jo 
Kondo, Richard Barrett, Frederic Rzewski, Paavo Heininen. Good grief. And 
that's just 20 for starters.

Putting this guide together over the past year has been a revelation of the 
truly amazing riches that are out there on YouTube and elsewhere, thanks to 
some astonishingly generous and fulsome channels such as those ofNewMusicXX 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/NewMusicXX>, John11inch 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/John11inch>, p0lyph0nyXX 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/p0lyph0nyXX>, and others. I hope some of the words 
what I wrote may have led you to music you didn't know before, but the fact 
that you can hear the music that I've been vainly trying to describe at the 
click of a hyperlink has, of course, been essential to the series. As have your 
comments, debates, chastisements and encouragements.

But what I mostly feel is an even-greater sense of life-enhancing power of the 
music of these composers, individually and collectively, and a sense of how 
much there is to celebrate, share and be continually astonished by in the 
repertoires of new music. Each week was the start of a journey of discovery 
into another musical world. That journey is still going on, for all 50 of the 
composers I wrote about, and for all of those who I didn't, too. There's a 
whole world out there, which only seems richer, stranger, and more essential at 
the end of writing the series than it did at the beginning. In any case: these 
50 upbeats into the musical universes of composers fromElliott Carter (No 1) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/apr/30/guide-contemporary-music-elliott-carter>
 toKarlheinz Stockhausen (No 50) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/may/07/contemporary-music-guide-karlheinz-stockhausen>
 aren't going anywhere: use them, get stuck into them, and above all – listen!
 