
“Where is it?” I asked.

“Prince Edward County.”

“Where’s that?”

I should have known. It’s only a two-hour drive east of Toronto, about 
three-and-a-half west of Montreal. The county (as the locals call it) is 
technically an island – in the northern half of Lake Ontario – but it should 
not be confused with Prince Edward Island, the Canadian province that sits in 
the Gulf of St Lawrence, off the country’s east coast.

My wife told me more. “It says here the county is known for more than 35 
wineries, a big artists’ community, lots of nice restaurants, festivals, and
Sandbanks provincial park <https://www.ontarioparks.com/park/sandbanks>, which 
has one of the most spectacular beaches in Canada.”

“Stop,” I said. “You had me at wineries.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64b53d87d6b22ea3b8673990fb3c7d193b9bcb82%2F0_0_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cool%20in%20Canada%3A%20Prince%20Edward%20County%20%E2%80%93%20Ontario's%20great%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cool%20in%20Canada%3A%20Prince%20Edward%20County%20%E2%80%93%20Ontario%27s%20great%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64b53d87d6b22ea3b8673990fb3c7d193b9bcb82%2F0_0_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Green and golden … beach in Sandbanks provincial park. Photograph: Alamy 
It’s only in the past few years that Prince Edward County has really taken 
off. For generations of Ontarians, particularly those in the Toronto area, 
getting away from it all meant going north to so-called cottage country. The 
Muskokas or the Kawarthas or the Haliburton Highlands. But as those regions, 
particularly the Muskokas, became saturated with weekenders, and the price of 
even a simple cottage went sky-high, people looked east. And they found Prince 
Edward County, mostly a farming community of low, rolling hills and charming 
small towns, all surrounded by beautiful Lake Ontario and the Bay of Quinte.
Prince Edward County map, Ontario, Canada 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/nov/2016-11-08T17:25:19.html> 
About 25,000 people live permanently in the county, and another 6,000 – folks 
like us – live here part of the time. The area draws more than 550,000 visitors 
a year, most of those in the summer months when there’s a lot going on, 
including acheese festival every June <http://cheesefestival.ca/>, jazz and 
classical music weekends and art studio tours. But in the winter there’s 
cross-country skiing, ice fishing, skating,a maple festival 
<http://mapleinthecounty.ca/>, and best of all, most of those wineries are open 
year round.

There’s plenty of history, too. For one thing, Canada’s first prime minister, 
Sir John A Macdonald, grew up nearby and practised law in the town of Picton 
for several years. That bit of trivia may not make the kids jump and down with 
glee if you’re planning a trip here. But that beach will. There are actually 
three within the Sandbanks park, all safe and shallow. There are several 
campsites, and activities besides swimming include boating, sailboarding, 
hiking, fishing and cycling. You’ll see cyclists all over Prince Edward County.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddc010b361de86c2a1815900f379563ccdae41c7%2F0_132_5150_3090%2F5150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cool%20in%20Canada%3A%20Prince%20Edward%20County%20%E2%80%93%20Ontario's%20great%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cool%20in%20Canada%3A%20Prince%20Edward%20County%20%E2%80%93%20Ontario%27s%20great%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddc010b361de86c2a1815900f379563ccdae41c7%2F0_132_5150_3090%2F5150.jpg>
 Vineyard in the Waupoos area of the county. Photograph: Alamy 
There are five ways on to the island: four bridges, and a ferry that holds 21 
cars. You can drive from one end of the county to the other in about an hour, 
but it will take a lot longer if you stop in Picton, Wellington, Bloomfield or 
Consecon. Picton is the largest town, with three large grocery stores, even a 
McDonald’s, and of course, a Tim Hortons outlet, where Canadians get their 
daily coffee and donut fix.

Keep an eye out for Arts Trail or Taste Trail signs; they'll direct you to 
cuisine and art that are off the beaten path

But if you’re into finer dining, that’s not a problem. The county’s hot spot 
is theDrake Devonshire Inn <http://www.drakedevonshire.ca/> (doubles from £138) 
in Wellington (an offshoot of the fashionable boutique Drake Hotel in Toronto) 
where you can eat and drink with a view of Lake Ontario only a few feet away. 
Our favourite dinner place is thePortabella  
<https://www.facebook.com/portabellaonmain/>bistro, in Picton, where we tend to 
order the pan-seared pickerel (small pike) or the house pasta. Also in Picton 
is theBlumen Garden Bistro <http://www.blumengardenbistro.com/>, which does 
seared Atlantic diver scallops, or pulled braised rabbit with house-made 
gnocchi.

We also like the food at the Inn on the Mountain 
<http://lakeonthemountain.com/dining/the-inn/>, which hugs the Lake on the 
Mountain, a geological anomaly – a huge lake 62 metres about the Bay of Quinte. 
When we bought our place, we asked whether the lake had ever sprung a leak, 
given that if it did, our house would be washed away.

“Not in couple of million years,” the estate agent said.

We took comfort in that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F515ae44821bafcd6b23b7cfb17f9ecf5f65dbb1f%2F0_183_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cool%20in%20Canada%3A%20Prince%20Edward%20County%20%E2%80%93%20Ontario's%20great%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cool%20in%20Canada%3A%20Prince%20Edward%20County%20%E2%80%93%20Ontario%27s%20great%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F515ae44821bafcd6b23b7cfb17f9ecf5f65dbb1f%2F0_183_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Diners at the waterside restaurant at the Drake Devonshire Hotel. Photograph: 
Johnny C Y Lam 
There’s a strong farm-to-table movement in Prince Edward County. A highlight 
are the Saturday night dinners – sold out weeks or even months in advance – put 
on byJamie Kennedy <https://jamiekennedy.ca/pages/dinner-series>, one of 
Canada’s most famous chefs, at his farm in Hillier.

As for accommodation, the Drake Devonshire has great rooms that you’d be 
advised to book well ahead. The county is light on major hotels. Some of the 
more familiar chains can be found in the town of Belleville, just over the 
Norris Whitney bridge on the “mainland”, but there are dozens of B&Bs and 
several inns. The historic city of Kingston is about 45 minutes away, and from 
here it’s possible to make day trips to the county for food, drink, or bird 
watching.

We bought our place in Prince Edward County about 18 months ago, after my wife 
spotted in the real estate listings of a Toronto newspaper what could be a very 
nice getaway house for us. My study has a view of the Bay of Quinte, and I’ve 
seen everything from blue jays to eagles go swooping past.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6827d9e9158ea0eaa95c8946e20872dad0aaa60%2F0_652_1800_1799%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cool%20in%20Canada%3A%20Prince%20Edward%20County%20%E2%80%93%20Ontario's%20great%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cool%20in%20Canada%3A%20Prince%20Edward%20County%20%E2%80%93%20Ontario%27s%20great%20escape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fcanada-prince-edward-county-lake-ontario-linwood-barclay-crime-writer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6827d9e9158ea0eaa95c8946e20872dad0aaa60%2F0_652_1800_1799%2F1800.jpg>
 Rather dishy … Saturday night dinners from chef Jamie Kennedy are a regional 
highlight. Photograph: Jo Dickins 
The Loyalist Parkway, also known as Highway 33, runs from one end of the 
county to the other, and through all the main towns – Wellington and Bloomfield 
are particularly rich with galleries – but keep your eye open for signs reading 
Arts Trail or Taste Trail. They will direct you to food and drink and art that 
are off the beaten path.

This is the great thing about Prince Edward County. It’s not huge, and yet 
we’ve been here 18 months and are still discovering new things all the time.

• Linwood Barclay’s <http://www.linwoodbarclay.com/> latest novel, The 
Twenty-Three (Orion 
<https://www.orionbooks.co.uk/books/detail.page?isbn=9781409146537>, £18.99), 
is out now. To order a copy for £15.57 including UK p&p, visitthe guardian 
bookshop <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/twenty-three.html> or call on 0330 
333 6846
 