
Jeremy Corbyn has launched a strong defence of the Stop the War Coalition 
describing them as “a vital democratic campaign” as he rejected a call by the 
former shadow education secretaryTristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt> to pull out of a Christmas 
fundraising event.

In light of Labour’s byelection victory and his success in securing support 
among a party majority against the airstrikes in Syria, theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader took a bolder approach in 
saying the coalition “has repeatedly called it right”.

How MPs twisted my words on Paris attacks | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/how-mps-twisted-my-words-on-paris-attacks>
Corbyn spoke out after Hunt called on him to pull out of a Christmas 
fundraising event organised by the “disreputable” Stop the War Coalition. Hunt 
cited “ugly comments” about the shadow foreign secretary,Hilary Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hilarybenn>, and a blog on the 
coalition’s website which said that Paris was “reaping the whirlwind” of 
western military intervention in the Middle East. A Labour source pointed out 
that the Paris blog had been taken down because it did not reflect the 
organisation’s views.

A spokesperson for Corbyn rsaid: “The anti-war movement has been a vital 
democratic campaign which organised the biggest demonstrations in British 
history and has repeatedly called it right over 14 years of disastrous wars in 
the wider Middle East.

Britain carries out first Syria airstrikes after MPs approve action against 
Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/02/syria-airstrikes-mps-approve-uk-action-against-isis-after-marathon-debate>
“Jeremy Corbyn rejects any form of abuse in politics from any quarter. But he 
will not accept attempts to portray campaigning, lobbying and protest as 
somehow beyond the pale. In fact, it’s at the heart of democracy.”

Corbyn’s strong defence of the Stop the War Coalition came after the Guardian 
reported on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/04/jeremy-corbyn-labour-critics-warned-oldham-win-strengthened-leadership>
 that he will assert his authority over the shadow cabinet by making clear that 
Hilary Benn, the shadow foreign secretary, will need to hold the government to 
account on Syria in line with the thinking of the Labour party.

The Observer reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/05/labour-corbyn-critics-fear-shadow-cabinet-revenge-reshuffle>
 on Sunday that shadow cabinet ministers are braced for a “revenge reshuffle” 
of his senior frontbenchers which will see him move some of the eleven shadow 
cabinet members who voted in favour of the bombing.

The leadership is blaming the reports on Labour figures who are still 
struggling to come to terms with Corbyn’s leadership and his success in 
securing a majority in the three main centres of the party for his opposition 
to the airstrikes. They are the shadow cabinet, the parliamentary Labour party 
and the wider membership.

Corbyn is understood to have no interest in exacting revenge but is keen to 
ensure there is “coherence in the leadership team”. That might involve a 
reshuffle, but after Labour’s success in the Oldham West and Royton byelection 
and Corbyn’s success in winning majority support for his position on 
airstrikes, even on a free vote, he wants to concentrate on ensuring that 
shadow ministers such as Hilary Benn reflect the leader’s thinking.

The calls on frontbenchers to throw their weight behind Corbyn came as Tony 
Blair warned that political leaders who fail to understand the need to confront
Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> forces by military means 
are repeating the mistakes of politicians in the 1930s who advocated the 
appeasement of Adolf Hitler.

Recriminations begin against Labour MPs who voted for Syria airstrikes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/03/syria-labour-mps-recriminations-vote-airstrikes-benn-livingstone>
In an essay on the Tony Blair Faith Foundation website 
<http://tonyblairfaithfoundation.org/religion-geopolitics/commentaries/opinion/depth-challenge>
, Blair pointed to the 1930s, when Neville Chamberlain famously declared “peace 
in our time” after the Munich agreement. In remarks which appear to have been 
aimed at Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell, who oppose the extension of RAF 
airstrikes from Iraq to Syria, the former prime minister warned of an “uneasy 
parallel” with that time.



The Labour leadership dismissed Blair’s remarks, which echoed comments he made 
on the eve of the Iraq war in 2003. Sources said that Corbyn strongly believes 
in confronting Isis by cutting off their funding and by leaving open the door 
for UN-backed regional forces to uphold a negotiated settlement.

In a sign of the deep divisions in the Labour party, Blair praised Benn for 
delivering a “tour de force” in the Commons when he delivered an impassioned 
plea for the UK to join airstrikes inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> against Isis. The former prime 
minister told the Sunday Times: “I thought it was a tour de force and very 
important in restating the progressive case in helping people in need.”

The intervention by Blair came as Stella Creasy, the former deputy leadership 
contender, held a public meeting in her Walthamstow constituency to explain her 
decision to endorse the airstrikes. Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader, 
clarified remarks he made last week when he said that any Labour members who 
had joined a protest outside her house should be expelled. Creasy said that no 
protests took place outside her house and that a protest outside her 
constituency office had taken place when her staff were not in the building.
 