
It was with The Marriage of Figaro, the first of Mozart’s three momentous Da 
Ponte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/jan/07/classicalmusicandopera.mozart> 
operas, that I began my career as an opera director, six years ago atAugsburg 
theatre <http://www.theater-augsburg.de/> in southern Germany. And it’s to 
another of hisDa Ponte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/jan/07/classicalmusicandopera.mozart> 
operas that I turn for my first production for the Royal Opera House, Così fan 
Tutte.

For me, the great quality of the Da Ponte operas (Figaro, first performed in 
1786, Don Giovanni in 1787, and Così in 1790) lies in their ability to show us 
how we really are – mercilessly and yet affectionately at the same time. In 
their characters we encounter our own human weaknesses and the challenges we 
face. They can make us freeze in horror, or collapse in laughter. “Piu docile 
sono” says the Countess at the close of Figaro – “I am wiser”. She has learned 
something about herself and about others – and we have learned with her.

Così fan Tutte even says it in its subtitle: The School for Lovers. And it’s 
true that everyone who loves can learn something from this work. Da Ponte 
insisted for a long time on having this as his work’s main title, and it was 
how he referred to it throughout his memoirs. But Mozart preferred Così fan 
Tutte, which is a quotation from his earlier opera Figaro, where the music 
teacher Basilio sings: “Così fan tutte le donne” – that’s how all women do it. 
So in the title it’s women who are the guilty ones. It’s they who cheat. 
They’re unmistakably referred to in the feminine ending of the “tutte” – all 
men would be “tutti”.

Perhaps Da Ponte was aware of this misogynistic aspect when he advocated the 
more neutral title La Scuola Degli Amanti. After all, “amanti” includes both 
men and women. But Mozart preferred Così fan Tutte it is assumed because The 
School for Lovers is very close – too close – to the title of another opera by 
Mozart’s musical rival Salieri: The School of Jealousy (La Scuola de’ Gelosi).

Don Alfonso’s experiment succeeds, but at the opera’s close, the men are just 
as entangled as the women.

And so Da Ponte’s title was relegated to the status of a subtitle. It’s a 
shame because, for me, it goes right to the heart of the opera.

So what can we learn at this school for lovers? That infidelity is part of 
every one of us, and that no one is free of it in either thought or deed? This 
in itself is hardly new; but what Così does demonstrate is just how inconstant 
our feelings are. Don Alfonso is the master of ceremonies – really the puppet 
master – and he stages a test of fidelity. Two women are to be seduced by two 
foreigners while their lovers are away, but these foreigners are in fact their 
own lovers in disguise, seducing each other’s partner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcosi-fan-tutte-school-for-lovers-mozart-royal-opera-house-jan-philipp-gloger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb66dcd3c776377e592a8000013ac9d32885b468d%2F87_42_3965_2378%2F3965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cos%C3%AC%20fan%20Tutte%3A%20Mozart's%20school%20for%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcosi-fan-tutte-school-for-lovers-mozart-royal-opera-house-jan-philipp-gloger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cos%C3%AC%20fan%20Tutte%3A%20Mozart%27s%20school%20for%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcosi-fan-tutte-school-for-lovers-mozart-royal-opera-house-jan-philipp-gloger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb66dcd3c776377e592a8000013ac9d32885b468d%2F87_42_3965_2378%2F3965.jpg>
 Phelim McDermott’s fairground-set production of Così for English National 
Opera. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Don Alfonso’s experiment succeeds, but at the opera’s close, the men are just 
as entangled as the women. All four have invested real feelings in a false game 
and have come far too close to their respective “victim” – who is not their own 
original partner, but their friend’s lover. The misogyny of which the opera is 
so often accused is in fact superficial. When Alfonso speaks dismissively of 
women’s constancy as “the Phoenix of Arabia”, ie something that everyone swears 
exists but no one knows where, he is doing so to fuel the fire of his intrigues 
and engage his pupils in his game. Having won his bet, he calls infidelity a 
“necessity of the heart”, and says that he therefore wants to “excuse“ the 
infidel.

Despina, the maid, asks the central question in a recitative that is easy to 
overlook: “Amor cos’è?” – ​What is love?

And so it’s not surprising in this superficially misogynistic work that it’s 
Despina – Don Alfonso’s maid and collaborator – who asks the central question 
in a recitative that is easy to overlook: “Amor cos’è?” (What is love?) The 
young couples were very certain of its definition at the start of their story, 
but over the course of the opera their beliefs have been shaken. As, perhaps, 
have ours. Because the work shows us how varied and subtle are the powers that 
draw and bind us to each other. Love can be conjured up through certain 
encounters, situations and atmospheres – the charm of the exotic, the feeling 
of being in a different world that allows you to reinvent yourself, the bond 
that arises from feeling that you’ve saved the life of another, and lots more 
besides.

Everything that the lovers go through is set up by Don Alfonso and Despina. 
Thus love can be staged and constructed. But if this is the case, can any of us 
be certain about what we feel any more? Don Alfonso, an “old philosopher” 
according to the cast list, uses ambiance, mise-en-scène and dramatic 
situations to achieve his ends. In other words, he’s a stage director himself. 
“Non son cattivo comico” (“Aren’t I a great man of the theatre?”) he asks right 
after one of the most heartrending pieces in this tremendous score, the deeply 
feltSoave sia il vento <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=enDLyRWsdDk>. The opera 
is full of such ruptures, of allusions to the theatre, and also of quotations 
and self-references. It’s been called an “opera about an opera”, but the 
theatre that Don Alfonso stages shows us far more. It shows us how false 
emotion can turn into real emotion – even into something as intimate as love. 
This insight can be harrowing or comforting – or both simultaneously.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcosi-fan-tutte-school-for-lovers-mozart-royal-opera-house-jan-philipp-gloger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aef5990695ebb1c0e38bbe45d4c228bf18f6ac2%2F0_120_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cos%C3%AC%20fan%20Tutte%3A%20Mozart's%20school%20for%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcosi-fan-tutte-school-for-lovers-mozart-royal-opera-house-jan-philipp-gloger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cos%C3%AC%20fan%20Tutte%3A%20Mozart%27s%20school%20for%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fcosi-fan-tutte-school-for-lovers-mozart-royal-opera-house-jan-philipp-gloger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aef5990695ebb1c0e38bbe45d4c228bf18f6ac2%2F0_120_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Gregory Turay, Anne Marie Gibbons, Cara O’Sullivan and Mark Stone in a 2005 
production of the opera at the Coliseum. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
Don Alfonso’s role as the “director” of an experiment in love that uses 
theatrical means can be regarded as the key to my new production. There will be 
frequent changes of scene and of atmosphere, just as the libretto itself 
presupposes, but which one rarely sees in productions of the work today. And we 
decided to go one step further and have the story played out as if in an actual 
theatre. This has solved many of the opera’s problems. Every director of Così 
fan Tutte has to deal with the question of why the women don’t recognise their 
lovers through their disguises, especially since they get right up close to 
them. But if the women are led into a theatrical, imagined space at the very 
beginning, and if they are seduced into believing fictions, then this 
contradiction no longer applies.

The theatre space also embodies the basic conflicts of the work in itself. Our 
stage is a world of unlimited possibilities and self-discovery where boundaries 
may be transgressed. The auditorium, on the other hand, still represents a 
clear societal order. Out there, we see a whole series of couples seated next 
to each other, dressed to the nines. The starting point for our production is 
thus: what if two of these respectable couples were to stray on to the stage? 
Would they still be the same people when they returned to their seats?

There is almost nothing that is more difficult than playing at play, enacting 
an enactment. But there is also hardly anything that is more fun if you can 
work with such a wonderful, young, enthusiastic cast as we have at the Royal 
Opera House. All the same, every production of Così also demands precision, and 
that’s especially true in our case. Who knows when, what and who is playing 
what to whom? And how can I act so that it’s plausible that I’m just acting? 
Then there are the challenges that arise when a German engages in a discussion 
in English about an Italian libretto withsomeone who is Spanish 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/people/sabina-puertolas>.

But luckily we have the music, where there are no lies or misunderstandings. 
It is the medium in which the real events of this opera are depicted: how play 
becomes serious, and how a theatrical staging can lead us to the existential 
question – how do I want to live, and with whom?

• Così fan Tutte is at the Royal Opera House until 19 October 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/cosi-fan-tutte-by-jan-philipp-gloger>. The 
17 October performance will be relayedlive in cinemas in the UK and Europe 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/showings/cosi-fan-tutte-live-2016>.
 