
When Sidhant Pai visited a local rubbish dump in his home city of Pune, India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, he was struck by the size and 
intensity of the operation. Large black crows swooping overhead, roaming pigs, 
overwhelming odours and groups of waste pickers collecting plastic bottles in 
large white sacks.

There are an estimated 15 million people 
<http://www.innovationseeds.eu/Network-Library/Core-Articles/Global-Alliance-Of-Waste-Pickers.kl>
 globally who currently make their living from waste picking and many earn less 
than a dollar a day. A key problem, says environmental engineer Pai, is that 
workers only capture a tiny proportion of the value of the waste they collect, 
separate and transport to scrap dealers.

Together with his parents, Suchismita and Jayant Pai, he founded social 
enterprise Protoprint in 2012, one of a number of organisations trying to 
address the twin issues of poor conditions for waste pickers and plastic waste 
pollution. More than  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/24/plastic-new-epoch-human-damage>
300m tonnes of plastic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/24/plastic-new-epoch-human-damage>
 are produced globally every year, with much ending up in the ocean (onerefuse 
truck’s worth every minute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/more-plastic-than-fish-in-the-sea-by-2050-warns-ellen-macarthur>
), in landfill, or on city streets.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQE1uHxIzU5E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQE1uHxIzU5E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQE1uHxIzU5E&media=>
 ProtoPrint video 
“Our focus was on looking into different ways to add value to the waste, we 
were agnostic about the specific product,” Pai says. After experimenting with 
making a few different products, Protoprint settled on making the plastic 
filament – the “ink” –­ for 3D printers. “It added a tremendous amount of value 
to the waste plastic while still being relatively simple to manufacture at the 
dump.”

Protoprint partnered with SWaCH, a Pune-based cooperative wholly owned by 
waste pickers. Together they have set up a low-cost filament production 
facility at a local rubbish dump in Pune operated by SWaCH waste pickers to 
convert plastic waste – specifically high-density polyethylene (HPDE) mostly 
used for plastic bottles – into 3D printing filament to eventually be sold to 
Indian or international3D printing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/3d-printing> companies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2F3d-printing-plastic-waste-poverty-development-protoprint-reflow-techfortrade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cc6fd79b3eac1c0ebe5a574f23fed3c85b8c5f9%2F0_0_1328_720%2F1328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%203D%20printing%20help%20tackle%20poverty%20and%20plastic%20waste%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2F3d-printing-plastic-waste-poverty-development-protoprint-reflow-techfortrade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%203D%20printing%20help%20tackle%20poverty%20and%20plastic%20waste%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2F3d-printing-plastic-waste-poverty-development-protoprint-reflow-techfortrade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cc6fd79b3eac1c0ebe5a574f23fed3c85b8c5f9%2F0_0_1328_720%2F1328.jpg>
 Protoprint waste pickers. Photograph: Protoprint 
Protoprint buys filament from SwaCH for 300 rupees (£3.50) per kg – if waste 
pickers sold the plastic waste directly to scrap merchants the pickers would 
receive around 19 rupees (23p) per kg, says Pai. “After factoring in the costs 
of production and the various other expenses, there is still a six to eight 
times multiplier per kilogram of filament,” he says.

The market for filament, the majority of which is made from virgin plastic, is 
growing rapidly. Areport 
<http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/PressReleases/3d-printing-materials.asp> by a 
leading markets analyst predicted the 3D printing materials market would grow 
by nearly 266% over the next five years, to be worth £1.07bn by 2021.

However, most of it is expensive because of production and export costs, says 
William Hoyle, CEO ofTechforTrade <http://www.techfortrade.org/>. The British 
charity is working to promote and standardise an ethical way for filament to be 
made from the plastic collected by waste collectors.


Ethical filament will be cheaper to buy than commercial filament, Hoyle says, 
because waste plastic is free resource and production costs are lower in 
developing countries.


“The ethical filament standard is an open standard,” says Hoyle. “We see the 
certification process happening in two ways. First, the social, environmental 
and economic assessment would be done by the waste collection organisation ... 
Second, the technical quality standard will be assessed by an independent third 
party and we are in discussion with a specialist assessor that will undertake 
this task.”

Amsterdam-based ReFlow, a social enterprise based in the Netherlands, works 
with one of TechforTrade’s printing partners in Tanzania, STICLab, on a pilot 
project in Dar es Salaam.

Co-founder Jasper Middendorp compares the potential of 3D printing to the 
development of mobile banking or solar in Africa, both of which flourished 
because infrastructure was broken.

“Tanzania is highly import dependent and has very little of its own production 
infrastructure,” he says, and 3D printing decentralises production without a 
huge capital expense or a great deal of specialised knowledge. This, he says, 
helps “make countries more self-sufficient instead of importing products from 
abroad that may not be suited to the local context”.

Previously supported by seed funding and the founders’ own money, ReFlow has 
just closed off a Kickstarter campaign, raising €26,000 (£23,000) and plans to 
launch the product in Amsterdam in February 2017. However, it is still working 
on quality control. “We haven’t produced market quality filament yet,” says 
Middendorp, “but we are hoping to do so within a month.”

The quality of the filament made from recycled waste plastic is a challenge 
for the whole 3D printing industry, says Pai. Protoprint’s pilot unit is 
currently making filament but is not yet ready to sell to market as there are 
problems with warping.


3D printing and how it can revolutionise Australia’s remote communities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/06/3d-printing-and-how-it-can-revolutionise-australias-remote-communities>
The company is working with a team of senior polymer scientists from the 
National Chemical Laboratory to develop an additive for the filament to prevent 
the warping issue, funded by a government grant.

Protoprint says it currently has 4,000kg of pre-orders, mostly from small- and 
medium-sized distributors based in the US, UK, Germany and India looking to 
sample and test the filament. “We have not yet started commercial operations 
and are working on improving our filament quality before we do so,” says Pai.

Quality is not necessarily an insurmountable issue, says Thomas Birtchnell, a 
lecturer at the University of Wollongong andauthor 
<http://www.palgrave.com/us/book/9781137365651> of 3D Printing for Development 
in the Global South. Much of the recycled filament is destined for “the open 
source market for low-end products,” he says, “they may not look glamorous but 
they are still functional products that can be used in development contexts”.

The greatest potential 3D printing offers the developing world is not for the 
products made, but for “putting the means of production into the hands of the 
local people”, says Jeremy Faludi, a sustainable design strategy consultant and 
teacher at the Minneapolis College of Art and Design. The market for ethical 
filament is a small one, he adds, but “if the quality can match virgin filament 
at a similar price point, then it can be a large market. As with all things in 
sustainability, customers like the story, they’re just not willing to pay more 
for it.”
 