
Back in August, when Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump began 
consulting with Roger Ailes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/31/donald-trump-tv-media-empire-ailes>
 and hiredBreitbart CEO Stephen Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/17/donald-trump-stephen-bannon-breitbart-news-kellyanne-conway>
 to head his campaign, it was widely seen as Trump’s first move in shifting his 
focus away from actually running for president and instead leveraging his name 
into a media empire. His son-in-lawJared Kushner’s recent overtures 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/18/us/politics/donald-trump-tv-jared-kushner.html>
 to LionTree, a bank with a history of media investments, has only furthered 
that speculation.

But what if a Trump News Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/24/trump-tv-facebook-live-us-election-media-tomi-lahren>
 is just one part of the master plan? What if, in addition to a new Trump media 
empire, he’s preparing his followers to coalesce into a brand-new Trump 
political party?

Third parties aren't 'spoilers'. They're at the cutting edge of democracy | 
Kevin Zeese
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/21/political-third-parties-spoilers-abolitionists-movement>
There are historical analogues that point toward to the short-term viability 
of the idea. Despite the fact that our two-party system has had a lock on 
electoral politics since the 1790s, there have always been third parties – this 
year there are22 presidential candidates 
<https://ballotpedia.org/Presidential_election_in_Colorado,_2016> on the 
Colorado ballot.

The 1850s saw the rise of the American Party, better known as the “Know 
Nothings,” that were staunchly anti-immigrant and anti-Catholic. In 1856, their 
standard bearer, former president Millard Fillmore,garnered 22% of the vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/18/donald-trump-immigration-know-nothing-dangerous-republicans>
.

The danger in a new Know Nothing party under Trump isn’t that he’ll run again 
– though that’s the certainly not off the table – it’s the damage they might do 
in the 2018 midterm elections.

Trump has convinced his most ardent supporters that this year’s presidential 
contest is rigged. Well, in 1876, the election actually was rigged, and the 
aftermath of that contest sheds light on what could happen in America in the 
next few years.

The 1876 election pitted New York’s Democratic governor, Samuel J Tilden, 
against Rutherford B Hayes, the former Republican governor of Ohio. On election 
night, some southern states, including Florida and Louisiana,tried to throw the 
election to Hayes 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=wUMiCwAAQBAJ&lpg=PA40&dq=tilden%20florida%20south%20carolina&pg=PA40#v=onepage&q=tilden%20florida%20south%20carolina&f=false>
, even though it was clear that Tilden was winning. Moreover, when the 
electoral college met in December, three states submitted fraudulent returns, 
which meant that neither candidate had a majority. Ultimately, a special 
Election Commission voted 7-6 along party lines to appoint Hayes to the 
presidency.

Not surprisingly, there was widespread disgust 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=tshkbytuaM4C&lpg=PT62&dq=disgust%201876%20election&pg=PT62#v=onepage&q=disgust%201876%20election&f=false>
 both with the election and “the seemingly endless procession of scandals 
emanating from the nation’s capital”. This could easily describe the mood of 
voters today on both sides of the aisle.

As a Muslim-American, I will vote my conscience this November. By abstaining | 
Qanta Ahmed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/muslim-american-i-will-vote-my-conscience-by-abstaining>
Two years later, in the 1878 midterm elections, Americans showed their 
dissatisfaction with “politics as usual” by voting in 13 members ofthe populist 
Greenback Party <http://www.u-s-history.com/pages/h212.html> to the House of 
Representatives. The party hoped to reform both the American financial system 
and the country’s labor laws. While 13 congressmen doesn’t seem like many, it 
was nearly 14% of the national vote. Not only did both Democrats and 
Republicans lose seats – the rise of the Greenbacks meant any hope Hayes had of 
gaining traction in congress was lost.

More recently, look at the reaction in 1964 after Lyndon Johnson cruised to an 
unprecedented victory over Barry Goldwater. Republican stalwarts complained 
that the press had beenbiased against Goldwater from the start 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=v5X0PYgrjc4C&lpg=PA156&dq=bias%20against%20goldwater%201964%20shaffer&pg=PA154#v=onepage&q=bias%20against%20goldwater%201964%20shaffer&f=false>
, and many pundits saw LBJ’s victory as the death knell for the Republican 
party.

But a funny thing happened in the midterm elections of 1966. Rather than 
repudiate Goldwater conservatism, the Republicans used it to increase their 
power in Congress. While they didn’t capture control of either chamber from the 
Democrats, enough Republicans were elected to put the brakes onJohnson 
implementing his Great Society programs 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=-8ItjzFZB6sC&lpg=PP1&dq=busch%20horses%20in%20midstream&pg=PA100#v=onepage&q&f=false>
.

Picture what could happen in 2018 if a Trump Party – its voters fueled by a 
24-hour-a-day Trump News Network – makes significant inroads in the House. It 
will make the Tea Party’s resistance to Barack Obama seem tame by comparison. 
The Tea Party, at its heart, is about Constitutional originalism and has 
generally operated within the framework of the Republican party.


A Trump Party will have no such strictures. Since Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> doesn’t seem to understand 
the Constitution or care about the Republican brand, it’s likely a Trump Party 
won’t have any qualms about simply blowing up Washington and watching it burn – 
while all of it is gleefully covered on Trump News.

Some have argued that Trump’s presidential campaign is damaging his brand 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/01/donald-trump-2016-brand-business-213515>
. But that’s only true if his goal was to return to being a real estate 
developer/reality TV host after the election.

Imagine a Trump Party that first makes significant inroads in 2018 in 
congress, and then runs a presidential candidate in 2020 – could this third 
party candidate restrict Hillary Clinton to just one term? Both Rutherford 
Hayes and Lyndon Johnson declined to seek renomination. Could a Trump Party 
make it so difficult for her to govern that she simply throws in the towel?

If that’s the case, Trump will have vaulted himself from being a New York City 
real estate tycoon to a major figure in American political history. And while 
politics in Washington will grow even more polarized, Trump’s legacy will be 
secured, which is the only thing he truly cares about.
 