
 Councils across the country should protect pubs by barring developers from 
turning them into shops and flats, the beer drinkers’ lobby group Camra has 
said, after a London authority said it was stepping in to protect its historic 
drinking holes.

Wandsworth council in south London has told the owners of 120 bars and pubs 
that they have to seek councillors’ approval before changing the building’s use 
or knocking it down. Wandsworth said the 120 sites were chosen “due to their 
historic or architectural value or because they make a positive contribution to 
their community”.

Pubs are closing at a rate of 21 a week, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/10/pricey-pints-blamed-as-21-british-pubs-a-week-call-time-at-the-bar>
 according to the latest figures from Camra, and under existing regulations 
they can be converted to new uses without planning permission.

 In London, where the rate of pub closures is running at three per week, high 
property prices have made pubs increasingly attractive to developers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/23/pubs-last-orders-developers>
. In 2015, one agent told the Guardian that selling a pub in north London as a 
potential residential site could attract a price of up to £1m, while selling it 
as a trading pub would attract up to £450,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Flondon-council-protects-historic-pubs-conversion-wandsworth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ee6e30b310c440bf7e1b6298a24ab94fff75e34%2F0_43_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Councils%20should%20protect%20pubs%20from%20developers%2C%20says%20Camra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Flondon-council-protects-historic-pubs-conversion-wandsworth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Councils%20should%20protect%20pubs%20from%20developers%2C%20says%20Camra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Flondon-council-protects-historic-pubs-conversion-wandsworth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ee6e30b310c440bf7e1b6298a24ab94fff75e34%2F0_43_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 The Bedford in Balham, south London, was among the 120 pubs on Wandsworth’s 
council’s list. Photograph: Wandsworth council 




The death and life of the great British pub | Tom Lamont
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/13/the-death-and-life-of-a-great-british-pub>
 Colin Valentine, the group’s national chairman, said communities were not 
being given enough of a say in the process when the pubs were threatened by 
closure or change of use.

“Camra is campaigning for planning rules to be strengthened so that full 
planning permission is required before a pub can be demolished or converted to 
another use,” he said.

 He added: “In the meantime, we would like to see every planning authority in 
the country follow Wandsworth’s exemplary initiative in protecting its pubs and 
bars ... creating a fair and level playing field for pubs and their customers,” 
he said.

 Camra called on other councils to follow Wandsworth’s lead, but said changes 
to planning rules were needed to protect the country’s pubs. Wandsworth has 
protected the 120 pubs by serving “article 4 directions” that remove permitted 
development rights – which allow redevelopment of a site without planning 
permission – and forcing owners to get planning consent before any major 
changes.

 Wandsworth’s deputy council leader, Jonathan Cook, said in recent years the 
borough had lost “thriving pubs ... and each time it’s really hurt the local 
community”. He cited the example of the former Prince of Wales on Battersea 
Bridge Road, which had been turned into a mini-supermarket, and said the 
council had been unable to stop the move despite being the planning authority.

 Other councils have acted to protect individual pubs, but Wandsworth is the 
first to take action on this scale. It said the move could be copied across 
Britain to help protect the pub trade.

 “Wandsworth’s pubs are now the best-protected in the entire country and have 
a genuine defence against the relentless spread of mini-supermarkets and estate 
agents,” said Cook. “I very much hope that other councils will follow our lead 
by adopting pub-friendly planning policies and then stripping away permitted 
development rights from their local inns, bars and taverns.”

Earlier this year, developers who knocked down a historic pub in north London, 
the Carlton Tavern in Maida Vale, in order to redevelop the landwere ordered to 
rebuild it brick by brick <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-36754349>
.


 