
The sector that, more than any other, wanted a different result in the EU 
referendum could now be at the heart of what we might call an international 
rescue mission.

The creative industries, for nearly a decade the fastest-growing part of the 
economy, are Brand Britain. They play exactly into the prime minister’s stated 
three priorities – a new industrial strategy, greater social cohesion, and 
negotiating positives from Brexit. Their response to last June’s result 
demonstrates their resilience and ability to deal with everything thrown in 
their way. In the early summer they were clear about the country’s future. 
Indeed, so much so that, when the final figures for the Creative Industries 
Federation’s members survey came in, I feared it looked a bit North Korean. The 
UK’s TV and film companies, video games, digital creative, designers, fashion, 
publishers, great museums and galleries, architects, advertisers and 
universities had voted 96% to “remain”.

When the deed was done, the sector could have indulged in a lament. Instead it 
began the slog towards identifying opportunities from the great European 
reverse. At first glance this might have seemed a forlorn task. In Theresa May 
and Philip Hammond the government was in the hands of two figures with little 
track record of interest in the sector. Yet what if this interpretation is 
wrong? This is not a plea to an imperious government to do more for the arts; 
it is more a pointer to a government eager for “wins” about what the arts can 
do for it.

First the stats: the UK’s creative industries contribute almost £90bn net to 
GDP; it accounts for one in 11 jobs, a rate rising more quickly than all other 
parts of the economy. These jobs are also among the least likely to be lost to 
automation. Many of our commercial companies are shining examples of ingenuity 
and entrepreneurship. The link between culture and tech and science is strong 
and growing. Our publicly supported arts are largely very well run, deploying 
scant resources with great skill.

Across Britain, from Margate to Manchester, from Bristol to Nottingham, many 
arts organisations play a pivotal role in civic life. The more far-sighted 
local authorities (and there are many) have for two decades seen a stunning 
return on their investment, in terms of education, public health, tourism, jobs 
– and, most of all, pride. There is every prospect that Hull’s city of culture, 
which launches on 1 January, will be a resounding success. It has already 
attracted significant plaudits and investment. The Great Exhibition of the 
North in Gateshead and Newcastle follows in 2018.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fcreative-industries-key-to-uk-economy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a741e172b3d259b4008364a6677bb4f95e06ae%2F0_275_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Creative%20industries%20are%20key%20to%20UK%20economy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fcreative-industries-key-to-uk-economy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Creative%20industries%20are%20key%20to%20UK%20economy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fcreative-industries-key-to-uk-economy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe4a741e172b3d259b4008364a6677bb4f95e06ae%2F0_275_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Hull is the city of culture for 2017. Photograph: Neil Holmes 
For sure, some arts organisations continue to act as self-affirming liberal 
bubbles, allowing their detractors to denounce them as part of an “elite”. 
Mostly this is a lazy misperception. Many organisations are deeply ingrained in 
communities. Look at the English National Ballet’s current work with people 
suffering from dementia. What other form of activity has regularly delivered so 
much on so little?

What other form of activity also defines the UK so clearly? In China, in late 
2013, David Cameron was intrigued when asked in a social media chat why he 
couldn’t get the makers ofSherlock to hurry up with more episodes. Around the 
world, our fashion and design, our video games and theatre, are our calling 
cards.

During the coalition government, the then business secretary, Vince Cable, 
didn’t even recognise the creative industries as an industry, an omission that 
made no economic sense at the time or since. In the course of this month, Greg 
Clark will have the opportunity to rectify that and formally to place the 
sector where it belongs – at the centre of British economics and politics. In 
her forthcoming major speech on life after the EU, May has the opportunity to 
reinforce that message.

Will they? Ministers are at least listening and engaging. But old thinking is 
not hard to find. A month ago I was part of a UK delegation to Shanghai working 
on collaborations from virtual reality to Shakespeare. Culture was combining 
with education, tech, science and health. Then, in front of his Chinese 
audience, Jeremy Hunt gave a keynote speech on behalf of the UK government in 
which he described culture secretary Karen Bradley as running the “ministry of 
fun”. Bradley was less than thrilled at the depiction. Of all people, didn’t 
Hunt, a former secretary of state for the Department for Culture, Media and 
Sport, know that there is nothing soft about the creative sector?

There is a gaping hole in the government’s strategic approach – its consistent 
refusal to understand the link between arts education and economic success. If 
the prime minister wishes to limit the number of EU nationals working in the 
UK, she will need to make sure there are enough Brits to take their place. In 
this sector alone, there are 17 defined skills shortages in areas such as 
animation and visual effects.

Meanwhile, head teachers are being discouraged from investing in design and 
technology, arts, music and drama. Not only has this policy deprived children 
(particularly from disadvantaged backgrounds) from enjoying a rounded 
education, the economic consequences are already playing themselves out. 
Creative learning is not just a route into the arts, it is also essential 
across the economy. Ask app inventors or car designers. Oddly, Brexit might be 
the spur to sort this. If we don’t have ready access to the talent that filled 
our skills gaps for years, we have to find our own.

The cause for my tentative optimism lies in political self-interest. Which 
other sector can do all of the following – help improve social mobility, help 
repair societal rifts, drive exports, grow the economy and define the UK 
internationally?

John Kampfner is chief executive of the Creative Industries Federation
 