
It has been three decades since Stephen King unleashed Pennywise 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/It_(character)>, his malevolent clown character 
in the novel It. No one is quite sure why there have been dozens of sightings 
across the US in recent weeks, but one thing is certain: the scary clown craze 
has crossed the Atlantic.

People around the UK have reported a series of sightings of people dressed as 
clowns frightening children, with six separate reports of “clown incidents” 
reported by Northumbria police in the past week.

One of the most dramatic occured on Friday morning when a masked man carrying 
a knife jumped out in front of a group of 11 and 12 year-olds and followed them 
to school in County Durham. The pupils were left distressed but unhurt by the 
clown, who was wearing grey tracksuit bottoms, red shoes and a multicoloured 
top.

Neighbourhood sergeant Mel Sutherland said: “The children arrived at school 
understandably upset and distressed by this incident and we are currently 
trying to locate this man.

“We believe this to be part of a much larger prank which is currently sweeping 
across the USA and parts of the UK. It is very alarming [the man] was carrying 
a knife – however, we do not think he intended to harm the children and as far 
as we are aware, this is part of the prank.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fcreepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F288ac2bb878ca9d319798fe7c40aa4d95dca7323%2F0_0_1337_2000%2F1337.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Creepy%20clown%20sightings%20spread%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fcreepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Creepy%20clown%20sightings%20spread%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fcreepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F288ac2bb878ca9d319798fe7c40aa4d95dca7323%2F0_0_1337_2000%2F1337.jpg>
 A clown spotted on a mobility scooter heading south on Penistone Road, in the 
Hillsborough area of Sheffield. Photograph: Martin Lee Car Sales/PA 
Clown sightings: the day it all began
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/05/clown-sightings-south-carolina-alabama>
“There are currently several social media accounts dedicated to this ‘killer 
clown’ craze and we are also looking into those and who is using them.”

He appealed directly to those carrying out the pranks to consider the distress 
they are causing to young children.

Police in Northumbria have been on high visibility patrol in Newcastle in 
response to the clown sightings. While no one has been directly attacked or 
injured, incidents have included clowns jumping out from behind bushes and 
chasing pedestrians down the street.

The force previously issued a warning to a 13-year-old boy from Blakelaw  
<https://www.facebook.com/northumbriapolice/posts/10154003409731309>in 
connection with a clown incident, and a spokesman said the teenager had been 
carrying a knife as part of the costume.

Other sightings have taken place in Liverpool, where there were reports of a 
man dressed as a clown driving a Ford Transit van through the city centre 
<http://www.liverpoolecho.co.uk/news/liverpool-news/clown-craze-come-liverpool-11990598>
, as well as in Caernarfon, north Wales, where a schoolboyfilmed a clown 
standing near a children’s play centre 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/weird-news/terrified-boy-films-creepy-clown-8988638>
 late at night.

Clown sightings have also been reported near to schools in Ayr, Scotland, 
where parents have expressed anger after theirchildren shared fears about 
supposed “killer clowns” 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/local-news/terrified-ayr-parents-say-children-8992186>
 after rumours.
Jimmy Evans (@jimmyevans30) 
Can't get over seeing a scary clown driving a transit van through Liverpool 
city centre today, genuinely scared me to death
 <https://twitter.com/jimmyevans30/status/784048458864922624> October 6, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/jimmyevans30/status/784048458864922624> 
Stephen King tells US to 'cool the clown hysteria' after wave of sightings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/06/clown-sightings-stephen-king-it-pennywise>
Supt David Duncan of Police Scotland said the force had received “a few 
sporadic reports of individuals dressed as clowns in some areas”. He reiterated 
that many incidents reported on social media had been confirmed as hoaxes and 
emanate from overseas.

In Clacton, Essex, two schoolgirls were approached by a pair of clowns who 
asked if they wanted to go to a birthday party. The incident, which happened in 
Oxford Road at about 9am on Tuesday, prompted Clacton county high school to ban 
pupils from leaving the premises at lunchtime.

Acting Ch Insp Darren Deex of Essex constabulary said the force was aware of a 
number of reports from concerned residents across the county “relating to 
people dressed as clowns, specifically near to schools during opening times”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fcreepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e41b9574a49fbbc39a32397779f88d28c7a859%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Creepy%20clown%20sightings%20spread%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fcreepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Creepy%20clown%20sightings%20spread%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fcreepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e41b9574a49fbbc39a32397779f88d28c7a859%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A pair of clowns in Georgetown, Washington. Photograph: Anadolu Agency/Getty 
Images 
He said it appeared those dressed as clowns wanted to scare members of the 
public – there have been no reports of physical threats of harm or violence. 
“These incidents follow on from a ‘craze’ originating in the US whereby people 
dressed as clowns have been photographed or filmed carrying out various acts 
with the intention of scaring or causing fear,” Deex said.

“There has been huge public interest in these photographs and videos, 
particularly on social media networking sites which more often than not do not 
represent accurate reporting. This inaccurate reporting is further fuelling the 
craze and creating a perception of fear in the community.”

Deex also warned those thinking of being actively involved in the pranks that 
“in doing so they may commit offences under the Public Order Act 1986”.
Jamie (@TheGrandSlams) 
No! Just no! - Caernarfon boy films creepy clown lurking near children's 
playground in ...https://t.co/xKraRyWG5k <https://t.co/xKraRyWG5k>
 <https://twitter.com/TheGrandSlams/status/784223935558811648> October 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/TheGrandSlams/status/784223935558811648> 
Numerous victims have told of their terrifying encounters with the clowns. 
Megan Bell, a 17-year-old student with a lifelong fear of clowns, was chased by 
one as she walked along Queensway in Newcastle on Tuesday evening.


Bell told the Guardian: “I was walking home and saw a figure walking towards 
me; it was dark so I didn’t think about it. When the person got closer I 
noticed he was in a clown costume head to toe, and had a mask on. Being 
terrified of clowns I turned around and ran for what I thought was my life. I 
was screaming and shouting for help but no one was around, I was chased for 
about 20-30 seconds.”
megan bell (@Sexonmetria) 
It happened to me and i'm shaken and traumatised. Please be careful
 <https://twitter.com/Sexonmetria/status/783623380201312256> October 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Sexonmetria/status/783623380201312256> megan bell 
(@Sexonmetria) 
I HAVE NEVER RAN SO FAST IN MY LIFE. the only thought that goes through your 
head is 'i'm going to die' its scary and NOT a joke
 <https://twitter.com/Sexonmetria/status/783624634478583809> October 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Sexonmetria/status/783624634478583809> 
In Brotton, Emma Smith, 39, said she was “frightened to death” after she and 
her daughter spotted a clown lurking in the darkness. “Me and my 18-year-old 
daughter Morgan Lee were walking just along Sycamore Road when we heard a 
strange noise behind us,” Smithtold the Gazette 
<http://www.gazettelive.co.uk/news/teesside-news/knife-wielding-clown-police-investigating-11993995>
. “My daughter turned round, then grabbed my arm saying ‘Oh my god mam it’s a 
clown’.

“I turned round to see a person in a clown mask wearing dark clothes and he 
was just stood staring, in a stance with his knees and arms bent out. I told my 
daughter to just ignore it and keep walking – secretly I was frightened to 
death as I have nightmares about clowns. They’re one of my biggest fears and we 
were both scared at the time.”

The Brotton encounter took place last Saturday night and was believed to have 
been caused by teenagers playing pranks. But Cleveland police are now involved 
following another sighting on Thursday by a girl who reported seeing one clown 
possibly carrying a blade.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fcreepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52aea6d9e85e08e25586112a8344734c9cb114f6%2F0_0_2640_3300%2F2640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Creepy%20clown%20sightings%20spread%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fcreepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Creepy%20clown%20sightings%20spread%20to%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fcreepy-clown-sightings-craze-speads-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52aea6d9e85e08e25586112a8344734c9cb114f6%2F0_0_2640_3300%2F2640.jpg>
 The clown trend has also spread to Australia. Photograph: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty 
Images 
A force spokeswoman said: “Police were contacted after a young girl had 
reportedly seen a person wearing a clown mask and possibly in possession of a 
small knife standing in bushes at Byron Court, Brotton, in a park known locally 
as Mushroom Park, at around 6.10pm last night, Thursday 6 October.

“The girl was not followed or physically harmed in any way and officers are 
continuing to make enquiries into the report today.”

There have been a number of arrests in America after reports of men dressed up 
as clowns trying to lure children into woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/30/south-carolina-clowns-woods-children>
, as well as running around with knives and guns. On Thursdsay, horror novelist
King <https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking>  told America it was “time 
to cool the clown hysteria” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/06/clown-sightings-stephen-king-it-pennywise>
.

The clown trend has also spread to Australia, where police warned about people 
“parading in the public wearing clown masks”.

In the UK, anyone with information is asked to contact the police on 101.
 