
Yes: it’s Him again. For the last few weeks it’s been hard to turn around 
without bumping into Cristiano Ronaldo, burnished and gleaming, immaculately 
tuxedoed, proudly fondling his latest gong. Well, here’s another one. As 2016 
draws to a close the fifth edition of theGuardian’s annual top 100 footballers 
poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/20/the-100-best-footballers-in-the-world-2016-interactive>
 has a familiar chimney sweep at the top of its tree, with Ronaldo overtaking 
thereigning champ Lionel Messi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2015/dec/21/the-100-best-footballers-in-the-world-2015-interactive>
 to take the headline spot for the second time.

The 100 best footballers in the world 2016 – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/20/the-100-best-footballers-in-the-world-2016-interactive>
The No1 ranking reflects a year that saw Ronaldo collect winner’s medals from 
the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/28/real-madrid-atletico-madrid-champions-league-final-match-report>
 andEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
, while finishing as top scorer in the former and “Silver Boot laureate” – a 
second-placed prize for goals and assists combined – in the latter. Ronaldo 
scored 52 times in the calendar year. He was the headline player in two 
contrasting European champion teams: one steely underdogs; the other preening 
overdogs. Throughout he performed with undying efficiency in his favoured 
attacking areas, a marvel of the sporting age who turns 32 in two months’ time 
but remains an acme of preening, 12-packed athletic perfection.

All awards are, of course, a matter of opinion. The Guardian top 100 is at 
least a broad and impartial church. This year votes were drawn from an expanded 
panel of 124 judges based in 45 countries, from a diverse portfolio of eminent 
former professionals – including Javier Zanetti, Hernan Crespo and Faustino 
Asprilla – to a selection of football broadcasters and journalists from all 
across the globe. At the end of which Ronaldo beat Messi to top spot by a nose 
on the overall scoring system, with Antoine Griezmann a way back in third.

As ever polls like this raise questions about the role of the individual in 
what remains, for all the most energetic efforts of the marketeers, a team 
sport. The enduring beauty of football lies in the density of its patterns, the 
fine-point push and pull of team-play, the chemistry of tactics and systems.

Still though the eye is drawn to the headline acts. Predictably enough the top 
11 are all attackers, with Luka Modric the first midfielder to appear at No12, 
and Diego Godín and Sergio Ramos the top ranked defenders at 24 and 25 
respectively. Like Ronaldo, Pepe of Portugal andReal Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/realmadrid> was also a major part of 
those Champions League and Euro-winning teams. Pepe was also in Uefa’s Euro 
2016 team of the tournament. But here he slots in at No30 in our poll, just 
behind Mesut Özil.

 For all that, there is a lot to be said for celebrating the inspiring effects 
of extreme individualism. Ronaldo managed to help win the Euros despite 
appearing at times to be having a very public nightmare of scuffed chances and 
endless close-up TV grimaces; and despite having a game-ending knee injury 
early in the final. For all his amusing egotistical quirks, this was a 
stirring, exemplary, relentlessly dogged pursuit of collective victory.

 Just as impressive is the basic fact of finishing ahead of Messi, who remains 
not just the more imaginative and creative of the two, but arguably the 
greatest individual footballer of all time. Messi scored 59 goals in 61 games 
this year and did strange, stirring supernatural things with the ball on a 
regular basis. This is the guy who came second. Cristiano, hats off.

How the Guardian ranked the world’s top 100 footballers for 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/how-the-guardian-ranked-the-worlds-top-100-footballers-for-2016>
There are some notable trends further down the list. Players at Spanish clubs 
occupy the top six spots. Spain is also the most heavily represented nation for 
the fifth year in a row, ahead of France who surge up into joint second with 
Brazil. Ten Germans make the cut. Euro champsPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> have seven players, up from 
just one (yes: Him) last year. England have four top 100-ers, one fewer than 
Belgium, one more than Uruguay. Wayne Rooney, the control in that 12-year 
Ronaldo experiment, drops out of the list for the first time. Rooney received 
two votes this year.

 There is still a sense of turnover. Beyond the usual blur of A-listers 
Leicester’s outrageous spike of success has made an impact. N’Golo Kanté is the 
highest individual new entry at No16. Riyad Mahrez is 10th. One judge even 
voted Mahrez in at No1, not the worst call given the scale of achievement 
relative to his starting point. Similarly Jamie Vardy’s presence at No19, a 
decade on from combining football with working nights in a factory, is evidence 
of social mobility within the sport, even in an age of impossibly stratified 
riches.

 That said it is probably a good moment to muse one last time on that 
extraordinary duopoly right at the top, replicated in our poll in every year to 
date. It is still hard to get any real perspective on this shared domination. 
When both are gone their wondrously sustained level of performance will perhaps 
become clearer. Even now, 12 years of professional football down the line, the 
ranking still reads: Ronaldo-Messi, fresh air, more fresh air, a vacuum, 
tumble-weed, elevator music, more fresh air, then the rest.

 What happens next is unclear. Perhaps others will slip into that global champ 
role – Neymar, Gareth Bale – with similar annihilating success. One thing does 
seem certain. Whoever ends up replacing the current twin godhead is likely to 
have learnt their football in Europe or the Americas. This is the case with 98 
of our top 100. With Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Mahrez both essentially 
footballing Europeans, Mohamed Salah and Sadio Mané were the only top 100 
players to have learnt and played their youth level football outside the 
dominant club football continents. Unlike the ageing hegemony at the top, it is 
hard to see that changing any time soon.
 