
Sam Allardyce remains the only England manager in history with a 100% win rate 
but the bare fact is that he still has not tasted victorysince Adam Lallana 
pilfered three points in Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/slovakia-england-world-cup-2018-qualifier-sam-allardyce>
 in September. He has gone from one extreme to the other, albeit in brief 
spells.Even a return to Bolton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/06/sam-allardyce--bolton-hoping-crystal-palace-fa-cup-win>
, a rare place where he is greeted sympathetically, and a meeting with a team 
two divisions down the league ladder could not yield either an elusive first 
triumph as Crystal Palace manager or a sense of satisfaction.

“I was frustrated by the way we played in the second half,” Allardyce said 
after an awkward afternoon almost ended in defeat. Josh Vela rattled the Palace 
woodwork and James Henry threatened as Bolton scarcely looked a team 29 
positions below Palace. “We maybe had a bit of luck but we haven’t had a clean 
sheet for a long time. At least we got that,” said Allardyce. Indeed, Palace’s 
defence has been so porous that the last opponents they prevented from scoring 
on the road were Philadelphia Union, six months ago.

Ince hits winner as Derby County fight back to shock West Bromwich Albion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/west-bromwich-albion-derby-county-fa-cup-match-report>
On Saturday, as in that pre-season friendly, Palace drew a blank. “I was 
disappointed we didn’t finish our chances in the first half,” Allardyce said. 
For now Palace’s last FA Cup goal remainsJason Puncheon’s opener against 
Manchester United at Wembley in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/21/crystal-palace-manchester-united-fa-cup-final-match-report>
, prompting Alan Pardew’s infamous celebratory jig.

His successor ranks as Bolton’s greatest manager since the 1958 FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> winner, Bill Ridding. Allardyce 
has continued to be regarded as one of their own: theBolton News published a 
16-page tribute supplement for his first and, as it transpired, only match as 
England manager. His swift slide from grace may have met with schadenfreude 
elsewhere, but not here.

A good reception was guaranteed for an adopted Boltonian and he was applauded 
out of the tunnel, albeit by fewer than in the past.

“[To see] three tiers closed was very sad for me,” Allardyce said. “It has 
been a long time since I left and their demise has not been nice to watch from 
afar.” Bolton, regular top-eight finishers when Allardyce resigned in 2007, are 
a third-tier club now.

As Wanderers know, Allardyce has never been the dinosaur of caricature and he 
tinkered tactically, starting with a midfield diamond. It allowed him to 
partner Fraizer Campbell with Loïc Rémy in attack.

It was a delayed debut, five months after signing, for Rémy, the borrowed 
Chelsea forward. After failing to score in 2016, he could have had a hat-trick 
by half-time, clipping the outside of the post and twice drawing fine saves 
from Ben Alnwick.

His participation was then curtailed, Allardyce explaining: “Forty-five 
minutes is enough. We can’t afford him to get injured again. We want to see his 
pace and goalscoring ability again.”

Hull City give Marco Silva perfect start with victory over Swansea City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/hull-city-swansea-city-fa-cup-match-report>
Campbell had fashioned two of Rémy’s chances, the first with an improvised 
back-heel, and his capacity to create was illustrated again when he embarked on 
a mazy run, drawing in a host of defenders, before teeing up Mathieu Flamini. 
The midfielder skied his shot. “Being clinical deserted us,” lamented Allardyce.

And, as he admitted: “Bolton got better and better in the second half.” In 
particular, the irrepressible Henry did. When he crossed, the impressive Vela 
rose and headed against the woodwork. Henry spurned a glorious chance when he 
volleyed wastefully wide at the far post, came closer from rather further out 
when a piledriver flew just over and had a shot deflected into the side netting.

“James was excellent and could have scored two or three goals,” said his 
manager, Phil Parkinson. While Bolton, who are under a transfer embargo, have 
borrowed Henry from Wolves, Allardyce has warned Palace will have to invest 
heavily.

“We shall have some money to spend but it will have to be more than a bit 
because the prices are astronomically high,” he said.

They may touch heights in the transfer market, but they did not on the pitch 
on Saturday.
 