
Crystal Palace are braced to be without their player of the year, Wilfried 
Zaha, for up to five weeks in the new year after the twice-capped England 
international expressed his intention to declare for Ivory Coast before the
Africa Cup of Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>.

Wilfried Zaha – prince from the Palace now mixing with England royalty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/nov/12/wilfried-zaha-prince-palace-england>
Zaha, his family and his representatives are understood to have met the 
president of the Ivorian football federation, Augustin Sidy Diallo, and the 
team’s senior coach, Michel Dussuyer, on Sunday to finalise his agreement to 
represent the country of his birth. The 24-year-old, who was pictured holding 
the Elephants’ shirt, was apparently first approached by the former Arsenal 
forward andIvory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast> 
captain Gervinho, currently playing with Hebei China Fortune, to ascertain his 
interest.

Talks have been continuing with the Ivorian Football Federation since then, 
with the final administrative details of the switch now being formalised. Zaha, 
the eighth of nine children in a family who departed for England seeking better 
opportunities, left Abidjan at the age of four and settled in Thornton Heath, 
south London. He has graduated through Palace’s junior sides, made 13 
appearances for England under-21s and, on the back of eye-catching form in the 
Championship, earned his first senior cap underRoy Hodgson in a 4-2 defeat in 
Sweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/nov/13/england-roy-hodgson-wilfried-zaha>
 in November 2012.

A second followed at home to Scotland the following summer by which time Zaha 
was a Manchester United player but he has been overlooked ever since despite 
encouraging form since his return to Palace. He has one goal and four assists 
from his last five Premier League appearances in a side which has tumbled down 
the table and only last week the Palace manager, Alan Pardew, had urged the 
Football Association to reassure the forward he had a future in the national 
set-up.

Wilfried Zaha: I was not David Moyes’s cup of tea at Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jul/30/wilfried-zaha-david-moyes-manchester-united-louis-van-gaal>
“It’s a situation that’s been pushed forward, probably by his agent or people 
around him,” said Pardew on Friday. “I think Wilf is hopingEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> come in for him. Personally I 
think he warrants a call. Look at the numbers. The ball’s not in Wilf’s court 
but in England’s. I can understand his frustration. He’s played with players 
who are picked at that level and feels he deserves another chance. There aren’t 
many other English players who can beat players like he does in the Premier 
League. Some do but they’re not English.”

His absence if, as would appear inevitable, he is selected for the tournament 
in Gabon in the new year would represent a considerable blow for Palace, who 
could potentially be without their most creative attacker for games against 
West Ham United, Everton, Bournemouth and Sunderland.
 