
A woman killed while on a Sunday morning cycle with friends in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> has been described as a 
brilliant young doctor “destined to change the world”.

Canadian citizen Ann Formaz-Preston died on the side of the busy Mona Vale 
Road, Pymble, in the city’s north at 10am on Sunday after being hit by a male 
driver in a Toyota Corolla.

Police said Formaz-Preston had been with a small group of cyclists travelling 
south when she was hit by the car, which was heading in the opposite direction, 
at the intersection with Woodlands Avenue.

Her long-term partner, Christopher Vanneste, has remembered his “best friend” 
as a fitness fanatic who had been accepted to train in obstetrics and 
gynaecology. The young doctor was due to start at Sydney’s Royal North Shore 
hospital in a couple of weeks.

“Not only has the medical community lost one of our own, but the wider 
community has lost a promising young doctor,” the president of the Australian 
Medical Association’sNew South Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/new-south-wales> branch, Brad 
Frankum, said on Tuesday.

He urged every road user to take greater care on the roads. “Road accidents 
are always devastating to those involved, but particularly painful when they 
occur during the holidays – as it is a time that many people spend with loved 
ones.

'I am terrified of riding on Sydney roads': NSW cyclists on new road rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/11/i-am-terrified-of-riding-on-sydney-roads-nsw-cyclists-on-new-road-rules>
Formaz-Preston and her partner had moved to Sydney six years ago so she could 
start medical school at the University of Sydney. “She was placed at the San 
(Sydney Adventist hospital) and often used her bike to get to the hospital from 
our apartment on the lower north shore,”Vanneste told Fairfax Media 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/young-doctor-ann-formazpreston-killed-in-pymble-cycling-accident-20161219-gteikz.html>
.

The pair received permanent residency last year and were in the process of 
applying for citizenship.

John Watson, a San professor who trained Formaz-Preston, described her as a 
prodigy in the fields of obstetrics and gynaecology. “She was truly a pioneer 
of medicine and I have no doubt she was destined to change the world,”an 
emotional Watson told News Corp Australia 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/nsw/ann-formazpreston-colleagues-devastated-by-death-of-inspirational-doctor-killed-while-cycling/news-story/52811dd76a26212e8692e2778f5cc00a>
.

The 33-year-old was the fifth cyclist to die on NSW roads this year.


Vanneste said hundreds of people would be impacted by the accident, and urged 
everyone to take greater care and be more patient on the roads.


“We need to change our language to ‘people on bikes’ and ‘people in cars’, 
rather than thiswar on cyclists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/aug/24/sydney-australia-war-cyclists-fines>
 v drivers,” he said.


“Two people were involved in this crash but hundreds of people will be 
affected by this accident. A little more care and patience will go a long way 
to decreasing these terrible road tragedies.”


Investigations into Sunday’s accident are continuing.

 