
Adventure seekers who visit one of Britain’s great wild places are making life 
more difficult for farmers and putting cattle and sheep in danger, a livestock 
welfare charity claims.

 The chair of the Dartmoor Livestock Protection Society 
<http://www.dlps.org.uk/index.html>, which was formed in 1963, says the “idle 
amusement” of millions of visitors is threatening to squeeze out hill farmers.

Dartmoor ponies daubed with glow-in-dark paint to cut road deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/02/dartmoor-ponies-glow-in-dark-paint-cut-road-deaths>
In her foreword to the society’s annual report, Marion Saunders, its 
chairwoman, says: “We are concerned that the recreational overuse of Dartmoor 
is changing the character of the moor and having a detrimental effect on the 
animals. Off-road cycling, wild camping, marathon running, rock climbing, 
tobogganing, the tread of thousands of feet, hang gliding and more all occur on 
Dartmoor and they push hill farming in to the background.”

Almost 2.5 million people visit 
<http://www.nationalparks.gov.uk/students/whatisanationalpark/factsandfigures> 
Dartmoor in Devon every year, bringing £11m to the local economy. But Saunders 
claimed many visitors saw the moorland farmers as a nuisance.

“Farming becomes an annoying hindrance to the business of more land recreation 
and in the way of having fun,” she said. “Drivers resent slowing down just 
because of sheep are on the road, animals get chivvied off the common away from 
barbecues, tents are pitched where cattle normally walk to cross a river, and 
gates are left open because the importance of closing them is lost on those 
with no understanding of farming practices. As soon as snow falls, scores of 
cars carrying children and toboggans block the roads with drivers oblivious to 
the fact that farmers have work to do and fodder to transport.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdartmoor-livestock-at-risk-from-fun-seekers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6f8c7702d1f56af7379fbea1af65d0955ed54a6%2F679_589_4782_2869%2F4782.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dartmoor%20livestock%20'at%20risk%20from%20fun%20seekers'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdartmoor-livestock-at-risk-from-fun-seekers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dartmoor%20livestock%20%27at%20risk%20from%20fun%20seekers%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fdartmoor-livestock-at-risk-from-fun-seekers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6f8c7702d1f56af7379fbea1af65d0955ed54a6%2F679_589_4782_2869%2F4782.jpg>
 Visitors explore Dartmoor’s Haytor Rocks. Photograph: Alamy 
But she said that outdoor activities would vanish if there were no farmers on 
the moor. “If hill farming is getting in the way of leisure pursuits on 
Dartmoor, conversely an absence of grazing animals would put an end to almost 
all outdoor leisure activities. Dartmoor would become an overgrown and 
impenetrable wilderness.”

She quoted a letter Beatrix Potter wrote to the Times about a plan to fly 
seaplanes for visitors in Lake District. The author wrote: “I respectfully 
maintain that work, business and undisturbed customary use of centuries should 
be set before idle amusement.”

Saunders, who is a farmer, said: “Similarly here on Dartmoor the idle 
amusement of millions of visitors should not be favoured over traditional 
farming practices, nor be allowed to jeopardise the welfare of the livestock 
rightfully grazing the common land.”

By law Dartmoor National Park authority is obliged  
<http://www.dartmoor.gov.uk/aboutus/au-theauthority>to conserve and enhance the 
natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the national park, and 
promote opportunities for the “understanding and enjoyment of the special 
qualities of the [park] by the public”. The authority says it has eight 
objectives, the first of which is “to maintain a viable farming community that 
delivers a range of public benefits”.

The authority’s website promotes many of the activities 
<http://www.dartmoor.gov.uk/visiting/vi-enjoyingdartmoor> Saunders is worried 
about, including cycling, wild camping and climbing, as well as ones she did 
not highlight, including canoeing and letter-boxing 
<http://www.dartmoor.gov.uk/visiting/vi-enjoyingdartmoor/vi-letterboxing>, a 
pastime that originated on Dartmoor and which combines orienteering with 
hunting treasure and solving puzzles.

Woodland community facing eviction from Dartmoor national park
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/03/steward-woodland-community-eviction-dartmoor-national-park>
The authority’s chief executive, Kevin Bishop, said the problems faced by 
farmers were caused by a minority. “Our shared challenge is to influence the 
behaviour of these people so they understand their role in caring for this 
special place. Our national parks were designated by the nation for the nation 
to balance conservation communities and enjoyment. As an authority we are 
supporting the farming community and providing opportunities for people to 
enjoy and understand the national park.”
 