
The musicologist David Brown, who has died aged 84 after suffering from 
Alzheimer's disease, was a leading authority on Russian music whose four-volume 
study of the composer Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky was acclaimed as the definitive 
work on the subject.

He also produced other books on Tchaikovsky and on the composers Modest 
Mussorgsky and Mikhail Glinka, was editor of the New Grove Russian Masters 
series of composer biographies, and served on the editorial committee of Musica 
Britannica, the national collection of British music.

Brown had set out on his writing career with a 1969 tome on the Tudor composer 
Thomas Weelkes <http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/638798/Thomas-Weelkes>
, which was followed by a more concise one on his fellow madrigalistJohn Wilbye 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/643479/John-Wilbye> (1974). But by 
the time his second book had appeared he was already well established as an 
authority on Russian music, and in the same year Mikhail Glinka: a Biographical 
and Critical Study became the first important study of the composer to appear 
in English. Then followed his major work, Tchaikovsky: a Biographical and 
Critical Study, published originally in four volumes (1978–92), but also in a 
two-volume paperback edition (1992). His masterwork on Tchaikovsky was not only 
an authoritative biography but a descriptive analysis of his major works, and 
provided for the Russian composer whatJulian Budden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/mar/07/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
 had done for Giuseppe Verdi.
 David Brown began his writing career in 1969 
The final volume of the study was to prove controversial, as it suggested that 
Tchaikovsky had taken his own life in 1893, aged 53, after threats were made to 
expose him as a homosexual. Brown's main source for this theory was athesis 
promulgated by the Russian musicologist Alexandra Orlova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/Columnists/Column/0,5673,437352,00.html>, who 
argued that Tchaikovsky had been subjected to a "trial" in a court of honour 
held by former classmates from the School of Jurisprudence in St Petersburg – 
following which he chose honourable suicide rather than exposure.

Orlova's ideas were based on hearsay and dubious circumstantial evidence, but 
were accepted by Brown and a number of other authorities. However, they were 
strongly contested by others, including the Tchaikovsky scholar Alexander 
Poznansky, who in a series of publications produced compelling evidence that 
appeared to demolish the theories of courts of honour and suicide. Nonetheless 
Brown stuck to his guns, and in a second book in 1993, Tchaikovsky Remembered, 
he concluded that Tchaikovsky "committed suicide and that the court of honour 
story should be taken seriously, though [was] certainly not proven".

His new book drew on accounts of Tchaikovsky's contemporaries that had only 
recently entered mainstream Soviet scholarship, and was a compendium 
representing more than 80 voices from Russia, western Europe and the US, 
challenging cliches and received opinions about the composer. Although it did 
not entirely banish the view of his neurotic moodiness, it did offer evidence 
of his penchant for practical jokes, a sincere love of children and his 
willingness to speak without restraint among intimates.

Brown's policy as compiler of the new volume was to refrain from detailed 
comment, encouraging readers to make up their own minds from the evidence of 
the documents themselves. His final books were Musorgsky: His Life and Works 
(2002) and Tchaikovsky: The Man and hisMusic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/music> (2006).

Born in Gravesend, Kent, Brown went to Gravesend grammar school and studied 
English, Latin and music at Sheffield University, graduating in 1951 and taking 
his bachelor of music degree in 1952. His knowledge of Russian was acquired 
during national service (1952–54) at theJoint Services Schools for Linguists 
<http://www.royalnavyresearcharchive.org.uk/JSSL.htm> at Cambridge University 
(alongside Alan Bennett and Michael Frayn), and he was commissioned in the 
Intelligence Corps of the RAF.

After teaching in secondary schools and lecturing as a freelance in adult 
education, he became music librarian in Senate House at the University of 
London in 1959, and in 1962 was appointed lecturer atUniversity of Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofsouthampton>, becoming 
senior lecturer in 1970, reader in 1975 and professor of musicology in 1983. He 
retired from Southampton as professor emeritus in 1989.

His wife, Elizabeth, whom he met in Sheffield and married in 1953, was for 
many years concert manager at theTurner Sims Concert Hall 
<http://www.turnersims.co.uk/> in Southampton and a staff tutor in music in the 
adult education department of University of Southampton. In 2009 they were 
jointly awarded theCity of Southampton Award 
<https://www.southampton.gov.uk/council-partners/councillorsrepresent/mayorsoffice/cityofsouthamptonaward.aspx>
 in acknowledgement of their services to music in the city.

He is survived by Elizabeth and two daughters, Gabrielle and Hilary.

• David Clifford Brown, musicologist and author, born 8 July 1929; died 20 
June 2014
 