
Sacramento in northern California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> is a typical American city, in 
thrall to the car. Twelve miles west is the university city of Davis. It’s not 
a typical American city; it’s in thrall to the bicycle.

Squint and you could be in the Netherlands: people dot around on bikes. 
Schoolchildren. Students. Professors. Bank managers. There are bike paths on 
the University of California Davis campus and in the city, the civic symbol of 
which is a penny-farthing.Cycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/cycling> in Davis is not cultish: 
it’s ordinary, no special clothing required. In most American cities, the modal 
share for cycling struggles to reach 2%; in Davis it’s 20%. That’s well on the 
bike path to 25%, the average modal share for cycling in the Netherlands.

The campus, cheek-by-jowl with the city, is car-free. There are excellent rail 
connections to Sacramento, San Jose and San Francisco and, with a free bus 
service for students and university staff, it’s easy to live without a car in 
Davis. It’s even easier when your intra-urban travel can also be done swiftly 
and safely on a bicycle.

In the 1960s and 1970s, when the rest of America was building only for cars, 
Davis built for bicycles. A heady mix of factors created a bike culture: a 
pancake-flat topography, dogged citizen activism, and a political buy-in.

In the 1960s and 1970s, when the rest of America was building only for cars, 
Davis built for bicycles
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438168093312%2F940d5757-c434-4982-a1d8-87f0a1b7af34-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Davis%2C%20California%20%E2%80%93%20the%20American%20city%20which%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20the%20bicycle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Davis%2C%20California%20%E2%80%93%20the%20American%20city%20which%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20the%20bicycle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438168093312%2F940d5757-c434-4982-a1d8-87f0a1b7af34-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cycling in Davis is ordinary, no special clothing required. Photograph: 
Carlton Reid 
Davis didn’t measure bicycle use in the 1960s or 1970s, but, with a share of 
30% in 1980, it would be safe to assume the modal share was far higher in the 
preceding two decades. Legendary landscape photographer Ansel Adams catalogued 
in a 1966 photo series how the Davis campus once hummed with cyclists. One of 
his black-and-white photographs shows aparking stand with hundreds of bicycles, 
students riding to and fro on either side 
<https://localwiki.org/davis/Bicycling/_files/1963_AnselAdams.jpg/_info/>. It’s 
one of the most unAmerican photographs imaginable.

The photo series and the cycling infrastructure were commissioned by Emil 
Mrak, who, in 1959, was made chancellor of the University of California’s Davis 
campus, which was to be expanded. The expansion involved increasing the student 
population from 2,000 to 10,000 (it’s now 30,000). The city could cope with an 
influx of 8,000 people but would have struggled to accommodate 8,000 cars. The 
bicycle-loving chancellor directed architects to “plan for a bicycle-riding, 
tree-lined campus”. Prospective students were told not to bring cars but to buy 
bicycles.

A married couple on the academic staff had spent time in the Netherlands, and 
they formed a small but persistent action group to press for Mrak’s vision to 
be implemented by the city, too. One letter to civic authorities chided, “Where 
the leaders have no vision, the people perish.”

Car-use was restricted on campus, with drop-down barriers and a ban on student 
car ownership <http://housing.ucdavis.edu/prospective/parking.asp> (this is 
still in force). Bicycle routes were striped on the roads to the 37-block 
downtown core. Further chivvying from the action group led to the creation in 
1967 of bicycle paths separated from cars by concrete curbing, normal for the 
Netherlands but a first for America. Use of bicycles boomed. On an early-1970s 
cycle map, a tagline was added by the city’s business leaders: “Davis: The 
Bicycle Capital of America.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438357608969%2Ff8a6ba07-1165-4105-8e7f-e24c16ce72fe-2060x1695.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Davis%2C%20California%20%E2%80%93%20the%20American%20city%20which%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20the%20bicycle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Davis%2C%20California%20%E2%80%93%20the%20American%20city%20which%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20the%20bicycle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438357608969%2Ff8a6ba07-1165-4105-8e7f-e24c16ce72fe-2060x1695.jpeg>
 Bike riders on the campus of University of California, Davis circa 1960. 
Photograph: UC Davis Archive 
Today, 98% of the main streets in Davis have some form of bicycle provision. 
Cycle use is highest on the campus, with 50% modal share (lecture rooms are 
distant, timings tight). When 7,000 or so new students arrive each October, 
many struggle to cope during their freshman induction days – upperclassmen 
students gather at campus intersections and cheer as newbies wobble into each 
other on the bicycle-specific traffic circles.

How Groningen invented a cycling template for cities all over the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/29/how-groningen-invented-a-cycling-template-for-cities-all-over-the-world>
But for all its spacious and separated bicycle paths, its bike parking corrals 
with free air and use of tools, and its continued self-proclamation as the 
bicycle capital of America, Davis is becoming less and less of a paradise for 
pedalling. Cycling’s modal share in the City of Davis dropped to as low as 14 
percent in 2007 
<http://www.des.ucdavis.edu/faculty/handy/Davis_bike_history.pdf>, with the 
slack taken up by car and public bus use. When, in 2009, theUS Bicycling Hall 
of Fame <http://www.usbhof.org/> wanted to relocate from Somerville, New 
Jersey, it chose Davis but, if Davis thought securing this prestigious body 
would arrest cycling’s slide, it was mistaken.

In the Hall of Fame’s basement museum, I met with David Takemoto-Weerts, the 
bicycle coordinator at UC Davis since 1987. He’s a cycling enthusiast, 
attracted to the city because of its bike culture. It pains him to see 
cycling’s decline and he’s not entirely sure why a small, warm and flat city 
with such a well-connected and safe bicycle network should have halved its 
cycling modal share since the 1970s. By rights, cycling should be booming in 
Davis as it is elsewhere in the US; Boulder in Colorado is likely to soon 
overtake Davis as the bicycle capital of America. (Boulder has 160 miles of 
bike paths, and – to rub salt in Davis’s wound – it recently hired Dave “DK” 
Kemp, the former bicycle coordinator of the City of Davis, an expert at raising 
state funds for cycling projects.)

Takemoto-Weerts said the city of Davis is too “timid” when planning for 
cycling, guilty of resting on its laurels, while Boulder has created ambitious 
bicycle programmes and marketed its bike path network.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438169869141%2Fc6b3c05a-afd9-4e37-b801-011fe3a8a868-1020x579.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Davis%2C%20California%20%E2%80%93%20the%20American%20city%20which%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20the%20bicycle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Davis%2C%20California%20%E2%80%93%20the%20American%20city%20which%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20the%20bicycle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438169869141%2Fc6b3c05a-afd9-4e37-b801-011fe3a8a868-1020x579.png>
 Plans for a new Dutch-style junction in Davis. Photograph: City of Davis 
Like other Davis cycling experts I talked to, Takemoto-Weerts credits the 
“golden age” of cycling in Davis to Dave Pelz, who became the public works 
director for the city in 1968. It was Pelz, with a remit from pro-cycling 
politicians, who built the bike paths and created educational programmes such 
as “Mr Smartspokes”, a talking bicycle that toured the city’s elementary 
schools. When Pelz (and Mr Smartspokes) retired in 1999, a great deal of fizz 
went out of the city’s provision for cycling.

“The city backed away from its commitment to cycling that it had exhibited 
under Pelz,” agreed Takemoto-Weerts. “It may never return to the golden age we 
enjoyed under Dave and his crew.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438168191235%2F16215e34-a204-4a1d-9154-199dcdbc1276-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Davis%2C%20California%20%E2%80%93%20the%20American%20city%20which%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20the%20bicycle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Davis%2C%20California%20%E2%80%93%20the%20American%20city%20which%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20the%20bicycle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F29%2F1438168191235%2F16215e34-a204-4a1d-9154-199dcdbc1276-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cycling is so ingrained in Davis that the city symbol is a penny farthing 
This is an opinion shared by Ted Buehler, author of the only rigorous study 
into Davis’ cycling history 
<http://www.des.ucdavis.edu/faculty/handy/Davis_bike_history.pdf>. Via Skype, 
he told me that cycling had been the norm for almost every student and 
university staffer in the 1970s, but that since the 1980s the city’s lacklustre 
promotion of the bicycle had dented cycling’s popularity.

“A lot of students stopped riding bikes, and now ride the bus or drive a car,” 
complained Buehler, who moved to become a bicycle advocate in Portland, Oregon. 
Pulling on his beard, he added: “Even though Davis appears to be a magical 
place, it doesn’t create a strong culture of people who are excited about 
riding their bikes.”

But this could be about to change. A reinvigorated campaign group – Davis 
Bicycles! <http://www.davisbicycles.org/> – has been working hard to elevate 
the profile of cycling in the city and on the campus.

“Davis Bicycles! has done an enormous amount of research to push for better 
bicycle infrastructure,” argued Buehler.

“When there were plans for yet another car-parking garage, members of Davis 
Bicycles went out at all times of the day and night to measure the use of the 
existing parking garages. They demonstrated that there were always parking 
spaces available for motorists – the City of Davis eventually scrapped its 
plans, saving taxpayers $30m.”

(Davis Bicycles is also PR savvy about who collects its data – one of its 
latest travel surveys is being conducted by girl scouts with clipboards 
<http://www.davisbicycles.org/FixPonteverde>.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13a97e3087d914b1b4a60a6fcfa2afa10ade86fd%2F60_0_4848_2909%2F4848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Davis%2C%20California%20%E2%80%93%20the%20American%20city%20which%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20the%20bicycle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Davis%2C%20California%20%E2%80%93%20the%20American%20city%20which%20fell%20in%20love%20with%20the%20bicycle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Faug%2F03%2Fdavis-california-the-american-city-which-fell-in-love-with-the-bicycle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13a97e3087d914b1b4a60a6fcfa2afa10ade86fd%2F60_0_4848_2909%2F4848.jpg>
 Despite its well-connected bicycle network, Davis’s cycling modal share has 
halved since the 70s. Photograph: Carlton Reid 
Meredith Glaser, a student at UC Davis between 2001 and 2005, says the city 
needs to show its appreciation of cyclists if it wants to retain its boast as 
being the bicycle capital of America.

“Other cities have built ‘wow’ infrastructure, such as the Cykelslangen bridge 
[“cycle snake”] in Copenhagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/14/bike-lanes-bridge-copenhagen-new-cycle-snake-cykelslangen>
, or theHovenring in Eindhoven <http://hovenring.com/>. These iconic pieces of 
cycle infrastructure make people go on detours to get to them, and make them 
feel loved and cared for,” said Glaser, who is now the Amsterdam-based officer 
forDenmark’s Copenhagenize cycle-infrastructure consultancy 
<http://www.copenhagenize.com/>. 

“Davis has too little ambition,” worries Glaser. “It has not built any 
‘thank-you’ bridges – which say: ‘Thank you for cycling, thank you for your 
efficiency.’”

That’s no longer true, says Earl Bossard, an urban-planning professor at San 
Jose State University, California, and a Davis resident since 1986. Davis is 
starting to think big, he claims. It is building a “Dutch-style” traffic 
intersection, one of North America’s first (an intersection in Vancouver, 
Canada, offering separation for cyclists from motor traffic, is usually 
incorrectly credited as the first such intersection in North America). The 
Covell intersection in Davis is opening later in the summer – it was designed 
by theDutch Cycling Embassy <http://www.dutchcycling.nl/>, a commercial agency 
of the Dutch government, andMobycon <http://www.mobycon.com/>, a Dutch 
“place-making” consultancy.

People power: the secret to Montreal's success as a bike-friendly city
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/17/people-power-montreal-north-america-cycle-city>
I met with Bossard at the University of Amsterdam on the Planning the Cycling 
City 
<http://gsss.uva.nl/summer-winter/summer/content/planning-the-cycling-city/planning-the-cycling-city.html>
 summer school, billed as the world’s first university course on cycling. 
Bossard, who sits on the Davis transportation commission, said his adopted city 
is waking up to the fact it will have to up the ante if it truly wants to 
increase cycling’s modal share. In the last 20 years, city engineers have 
devoted too much time, energy and money to the needs of motorists, he says. 
(After a cycling activist measured the one-lane road in front of City Hall and 
argued that a bike lane could be accommodated, City of Davis engineers instead 
carved out two lanes for motorists.) But the focus on motorists could change 
soon: the next mayor is a bicycle activist, and he evencampaigned for votes 
from a cargo bicycle 
<https://twitter.com/DavisforDavis/status/459373045350531072>. Robb Davis – no 
relation to the city –takes office in 2016 
<http://cityofdavis.org/city-hall/city-council> and he may strengthen cycling 
provision in Davis. Bossard said voters knew the mayor-to-be was a cycling 
advocate.

“Davis’s original cycling culture in the 1960s was the result of citizen 
campaigning that led to political leadership,” said Bossard. “Robb Davis is a 
mix of both. With a cycling enthusiast in charge of Davis, we could move beyond 
the glory days.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 