
They had hoped to set sail together, negotiating the notorious Mediterranean 
crossing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/26/rising-death-toll-in-mediterranean-makes-2016-deadliest-year-yet>
 as a family. But in late April 2016, as the throng of refugees jostled on to 
the waiting boat, 13-year-old Dawit somehow went ahead and was separated from 
his mother and brother. Panicking, he attempted to leap overboard as the vessel 
pulled away from the Egyptian coast. Witnesses described the young Eritrean as 
“petrified” and sobbing as he watched his mother and younger brother, who were 
still on the shore.

Dawit survived the crossing – unlike more than 5,000 refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/record-migrant-death-toll-two-boats-capsize-italy-un-refugee>
 who drowned while making it in 2016 – arriving in Sicily before being taken to 
a reception centre in Rome. From there, he called his mother twice a day. The 
two were close, a bond amplified following his father’sdisappearance shortly 
after joining the Eritrean military. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jun/08/human-rights-abuses-eritrea-may-be-crimes-against-humanity-un-report>

But Dawit’s mother and brother never turned up. Their boat belatedly left north
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> on 3 June 2016. Chronically 
overcrowded, it was rocking alarmingly as it headed for Italy. Eventually it 
broke apart and sank. Both drowned.

You do not leave a sick and bereaved child in the road to deter others from 
trying to cross
Rabbi Janet Darley, Citizens UK 
Even by the standards of the multiple tragic narratives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/09/unaccompanied-child-refugees-suffering-laid-bare-sweden-human-rights-watch-report>
 of the refugee crisis, Dawit’s ordeal is shocking. But the orphan’s personal 
anguish is also about to affect the destiny of potentially thousands of child 
refugees. On 19 December, in a so-far undisclosed but groundbreaking judgment, 
the high court in Britain ordered that Dawit be brought to the UK immediately 
and reunited with his aunt in north London.

Delivering another legal defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/20/four-syrian-refugees-must-brought-calais-camp-britain-judges-rule>
 for the Home Office over its approach to the refugee crisis, the judgment 
carries profound implications for thousands of unaccompanied minors in Italy 
and throughout Europe. It allows the court to intervene when the Dublin 
regulation, designed to reunite unaccompanied refugee children with their 
families, is failing to protect the “best interests” of vulnerable minors.

Although attention has been focused on France and the aftermath of the Calais 
camp being dismantled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/teddies-tear-gas-canisters-what-remained-calais-camp>
, huge numbers of unaccompanied child refugees have gathered in Italy. UN 
figures reveal 19,000 minors arrived there between January and October 2016, an 
88% rise on the same period in 2015. A sizeable number are believed to have 
legal rights to family reunification in the UK, but campaigners say the system 
is broken. None were transferred from Italy in 2014 and 2015, and only three in 
2016.

It is almost certain that Dawit, who turned 14 last month, would have remained 
alone and traumatised in Rome had he not been identified by volunteers working 
forSafe Passage <http://safepassage.org.uk/>, a programme of Citizens UK, the 
social action charity chiefly responsible for the successful transfer of 
children from Calais to Britain and whose court triumph last January 
kickstarted the resettlement of minors in northern France to the UK. The belief 
is that Dawit’s case will act as a similar catalyst for children in Italy and 
Europe.

“The courts have given the government legal, but also moral direction in how 
they should approach this serious and desperate issue,” said Rabbi Janet Darley 
ofCitizens UK <http://www.citizensuk.org/>, which last year founded Safe 
Passage.

Darley said the Home Office’s attempt to block Dawit’s case was illustrative. 
“You do not leave a sick and bereaved child in the road to deter others from 
trying to cross. Particularly when it is our own government’s failure to make 
the Dublin regulations work that has blocked the pavements.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Feritrean-refugee-tragedy-guardian-observer-appeal-safe-passage-charity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F644c55e9f14fed6e8969d437b8ee747e736013b6%2F0_466_5319_3192%2F5319.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dawit%E2%80%99s%20story%3A%20how%20one%20young%20refugee%E2%80%99s%20tragedy%20could%20spell%20hope%20for%20thousands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Feritrean-refugee-tragedy-guardian-observer-appeal-safe-passage-charity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dawit%E2%80%99s%20story%3A%20how%20one%20young%20refugee%E2%80%99s%20tragedy%20could%20spell%20hope%20for%20thousands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Feritrean-refugee-tragedy-guardian-observer-appeal-safe-passage-charity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F644c55e9f14fed6e8969d437b8ee747e736013b6%2F0_466_5319_3192%2F5319.jpg>
 Migrants arrive in Palmero after being rescued by a Norwegian ship while 
attempting to cross the Mediterranean. Photograph: Antonio 
Melita/Rex/Shutterstock 
Dawit, whose identity cannot be revealed for legal reasons, is expected to 
arrive in London imminently, where he will stay with his British aunt, Sesuna. 
For her, it is the first positive development since travelling to Rome on 7 
June and telling Dawit that his mother and brother were dead.

Six months on, the teenager is unable to rationalise his loss. “He has found 
it extremely difficult to process this news and has appeared dazed and in 
disbelief,” say court documents chronicling his grief. Psychological 
assessments confirm Dawit is suffering from post traumatic stress disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/post-traumatic-stress-disorder>, a 
condition that deteriorates each day he is kept apart from his aunt. “The 
ongoing separation from his family is causing this vulnerable child harm and 
deep suffering. He is frightened and highly distressed,” say the legal 
documents.

Dawit’s plight has also highlighted the attitude of the Home Office to 
unaccompanied minors. The Dublin regulations were designed to protect the “best 
interests of the child”, but the court documents suggest a profoundly different 
approach. On 26 September, Dawit’s lawyers wrote to the Home Office outlining 
details of his “compelling case”, along with references to his declining mental 
state, suggesting the child be brought to London by 18 October. The Home Office 
did not respond. On 10 October his lawyers’s wrote again, this time requesting 
a transfer by 31 October. Again there was no reply. Critics say it is no 
surprise that the court judgment found the Home Office “acted unlawfully” in 
light of its obligations to the young Eritrean. So far, through the tenacious 
championing of Safe Passage, 220 children have been given refuge in the UK 
using the Dublin agreement.

Dawit’s lawyer, Mark Scott of Bhatt Murphy <http://www.bhattmurphy.co.uk/>, 
hopes the court triumph will transform the dynamic with thousands of minors 
benefiting. “This case sends a very clear message to European governments and 
the European commission: effective systems must be established so that the 
rights to family reunification in the European regulations and directives are 
accessible for children.”

For Dawit, broken by trauma and bewildered by the reluctance of adults to 
reunite him with the remaining members of his family, the legal victory offers 
the chance of a new life and an opportunity to heal.
 