
Indians will no longer be able to exchange expired currency for new notes 
after midnight on Friday as severe cash shortages continue to disrupt daily 
life across the country.

The prime minister, Narendra Modi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/narendra-modi>, gave Indians a 50-day window 
to declare and deposit their 1,000- and 500-rupee notes after a surprise 
announcement on 8 November that both denominations would become invalid that 
evening.

India's small businesses facing 'apocalypse' amid biggest financial experiment 
in history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/indian-businesses-demonetisation-apocalypse-biggest-financial-experiment-in-history>
The scheme, kept secret even from the Indian cabinet until the day it was 
announced, was intended to drain the finances of terrorists and criminal groups 
and to widen the tax base in a country where just 1% pay any income tax.

But it has suffered from poor planning and implementation, with only about 
one-third of the cash removed from the system replenished by the end of 
December, and just 40% of the country’s 220,000 ATMs able to regularly 
distribute cash.

Digital payments have boomed 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/Digital-payments-soar-by-up-to-300-after-demonetisation/articleshow/55902284.cms>
 in the past seven weeks but India’s rural economy and its vast informal sector 
–said to employ 
<https://thewire.in/80564/modis-demonetisation-move-may-have-permanently-damaged-indias-informal-sector/>
 80% of Indians and contribute 45% of the country’s GDP – have been suffocated 
by cash shortages.

Kashmir militants suspected of bank heists as rupee recall hits funds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/kashmir-militants-suspected-bank-heists-rupee-recall-india-demonetisation>
The Delhi government estimates up to 60% of migrant workers 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/cities/delhi/our-surveys-show-60-per-cent-workers-have-left-delhi-since-note-ban-says-govt-4451025/>
, almost all of them working for cash, have returned home to their villages to 
ride out the crunch.

Economists have also downgraded the country’s October to December growth 
forecast from 7.8% to 6.5%.


The most recent figures released by the Reserve Bank of India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> show that about 12.6tn rupees have 
been deposited since the rupee recall was announced, far more than the Modi 
government had predicted, indicating that it may have underestimated the amount 
of untaxed wealth being hoarded by citizens.


India currency note ban sparks ‘dramatic fall’ in sex trafficking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/22/india-currency-note-ban-sparks-dramatic-fall-sex-trafficking>
Defending the scheme, the finance minister, Arun Jaitley, said on Thursday 
there had been a 14.4% increase in the value of income tax collected since the 
policy was introduced, while indirect tax collection had grown by 26%.

The life insurance, tourism and air travel industries had also shown strong 
growth, he added.

Modi had promised that cash supplies would have returned to normal by 30 
December, and has scheduled a televised address on Saturday during which he is 
expected to outline the next steps.
 