
In a modest screening room on the Côte d’Azur last spring, the curtains went 
up on what were to prove the last scenes of a great Hollywood 
mother-and-daughter saga. An intrigued audience at the Cannes film festival 
joinedCarrie Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/27/carrie-fisher-obituary-star-wars-actor-writer>
, fragile in a black cocktail dress and accompanied by her French bulldog, 
Gary, for the world premiere of a documentary calledBright Lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/04/carrie-fisher-in-telluride-im-just-getting-bigger-and-older-thats-not-good>
. Largely shot in the privileged enclave of Beverly Hills, the film is the 
true-life story of coping with a celebrity parent and with the legacy of 
stardom. It is also a story that only really ended last week with the 
unexpected deaths of its two leading ladies: Fisher, 60, and her motherDebbie 
Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/29/debbie-reynolds-obituary-singin-in-the-rain-actor>
, 84.

Bright Lights: Starring Debbie Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/debbie-reynolds> and Carrie Fisher will now 
be shown by US cable television channel HBO this Saturday, as a fitting 
memorial to the wit and endurance of a mother-and-daughter showbiz team 
initially seen singing together on stage in the late 1960s, when the young and 
increasingly reluctant Fisher had a guest spot in her mother’s cabaret show.

The documentary revolves around a series of interviews, interspersed with 
Hollywood newsreel footage and home movie sequences, and it offers a glimpse of 
the eccentric domestic life Fisher latterly shared with Reynolds inside a 
luxury compound once owned by Bette Davis.

The Star Wars actor’s friend, Fisher Stevens, had originally agreed to direct 
the film, alongside his wife, Alexis Bloom, with the intention of showing the 
public how affectionately dependent the pair of warring relatives had grown. 
But as filming progressed last year it became clear that both actors were 
revealing a side of themselves that had never been seen before. It also became 
clear that both faced tough daily health challenges.

“We didn’t know it was going to get that dark,” admitted Stevens at a 
reception for the film. “That’s the beauty of documentary film-making, that you 
don’t know where your movie is going. But there were times when we had to turn 
off the cameras.” Now the film has a permanent valedictory note.

The public was always startled by the fact the young woman who found fame 
playing Kathy Selden inSingin’ in the Rain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/singin-in-the-rain> opposite Gene Kelly in 
1952 should be the mother of the young woman who in 1977 found fame playing 
Princess Leia in a space opera. The notion that star talent, or at least 
charisma, can be passed down the generations is particularly potent when it 
concerns Hollywood’s female firmament.Liza Minnelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/liza-minnelli> is still regarded as her 
mother Judy Garland’s representative on Earth and Melanie Griffith is judged of 
interest partly for just being the daughter ofTippi Hedren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tippi-hedren>. The status of Hollywood 
royalty was almost automatically conferred upon them.

And just as Minnelli once recalled a childhood spent watching spellbound from 
the top of the stairs as her mother performed songs at the piano for her dinner 
guests in the 1940s, so Fisher’s childhood was dominated by admiration for her 
mother:a well-known photograph taken by Lawrence Schiller in 1963 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/29/movies/debbie-reynolds-carrie-fisher-photo.html?_r=0>
 shows the six-year-old Carrie standing in the wings of a theatre, mesmerised 
by Reynolds’s performance on stage. “Walking down the street with her was like 
being in a parade,” Fisher once said. “I had to share her. She belonged to 
everybody.”

Even before the 1978 publication of Christina Crawford’s book Mommie Dearest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/may/25/biography.film>, with its 
allegations of cruelty at the hands of her celebrated mother, Joan Crawford, 
the idea that the excesses of stardom were incompatible with motherhood was a 
favourite trope of celebrity gossip columns.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdebbie-reynolds-carrie-fisher-hollywood-mother-daughter-bright-lights-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2105c482f37f688d064e4c15fac1cf192e2a299f%2F437_68_1451_1813%2F1451.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debbie%20Reynolds%20and%20Carrie%20Fisher%3A%20surviving%20instant%20fame%20and%20finding%20a%20lasting%20bond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdebbie-reynolds-carrie-fisher-hollywood-mother-daughter-bright-lights-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debbie%20Reynolds%20and%20Carrie%20Fisher%3A%20surviving%20instant%20fame%20and%20finding%20a%20lasting%20bond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdebbie-reynolds-carrie-fisher-hollywood-mother-daughter-bright-lights-documentary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2105c482f37f688d064e4c15fac1cf192e2a299f%2F437_68_1451_1813%2F1451.jpg>
 Fisher and Reynolds in 1972. Photograph: Rex 
Nowadays some of us might feel guilty for staring, rather as if we are 
passengers on one of those “homes of the stars” bus tours, but it is hard to 
pass by the Reynolds/Fisher epic without gawping a little. There is so much to 
see. First, there is the all-American drama of a high school beauty pageant 
winner who is plucked from nowhere for Hollywood grooming and becomes a 
sensation in one of the most famous musical films ever made. Then comes 
Reynolds’s marriage to Eddie Fisher, at the time on a par with Frank Sinatra as 
a swoonable crooner. Next up is his scandalous, marriage-wrecking affair with 
the beautiful widow next door, who just happens to beElizabeth Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/27/elizabeth-taylor-tribute-philip-french>
. Then along comes youthful Carrie, and before we know about her drug addiction 
and mental health struggles, she is established in an unrivalled position in 
the solar system as a sci-fi princess in the film that “saved cinema”. She goes 
on to have love affairs with Harrison Ford, Dan Ackroyd and Paul Simon, before 
developing a writing career and appearing in classics such asThe Blues Brothers 
andWhen Harry Met Sally <https://www.theguardian.com/film/when-harry-met-sally>.

The head of documentaries at HBO described Bright Lights as “a love story” in 
a recent interview withVariety. But the nuances of the dynamic between the two 
stars are exposed in the film. They are also evident in comments made last week 
by Carrie’s younger brother, Todd. After the death he told press that his 
octogenarian mother had been lost “without having Carrie to look after”.

The documentary shows Fisher trekking back and forth up the path to her 
mother’s home, where Reynolds awaits the cameras with full blow-dry and 
make-up. At one point they share a souffle with Gary the dog.

Yet the shared intimacies of the documentary are not the only justification 
for public interest in the private lives of these women. In 1987 Fisher wrote a 
thinly disguised novel about her conflict with her mother.Postcards from the 
Edge <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/postcards-from-the-edge.html> was made 
into a successful film directed by Mike Nichols and starring Meryl Streep and 
Shirley MacLaine. As a result of this portrayal, many assumed their feud had 
raged on. Not so. Although Fisher refused to see her mother for about a decade 
after she madeStar Wars, their fondness for each other won through. As Frank 
Bruni wrote in theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/30/opinion/sunday/debbie-reynolds-and-carrie-fisher-hollywoods-mother-daughter-fable.html?rref=collection%2Fcolumn%2Ffrank-bruni&action=click&contentCollection=opinion&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1&pgtype=collection>
 this weekend, they lived side-by-side in a state of truce. “This proximity 
clearly rattled [Fisher], but it reassured her, too. It was equal parts 
intimidation and consolation – in other words, motherhood itself.”

The new film revolves around Reynolds’s determination to keep performing and 
Fisher’s equal determination to protect her mother and see her hopes fulfilled. 
In what turned out to be Reynolds’s last two shows, first in Connecticut, and 
then in Las Vegas, we watch her powers diminish. Most poignant of all, however, 
is the aftermath of her failure to set up a museum in Hollywood for the wealth 
of studio memorabilia she had built up, including Monroe’s subway grate dress 
and a pair of ruby slippers fromThe Wizard of Oz. The collection was eventually 
sold off at auction to pay off debts. Perhaps nearly as moving is the moment 
when Fisher joins her mother for one final time on stage at Vegas.

During scenes shot in London, where Fisher has travelled to appear in Star 
Wars: The Force Awakens <https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>
, we see the personal trainer foisted upon her by Lucasfilm, the production 
company. Asked if she keeps in touch with co-stars Harrison Ford and Mark 
Hamill, Fisher replies sarcastically that they run into each other at the 
“celebrity cafe” where “we all just look more melted”.

In an interview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/20/carrie-fisher-harrison-ford-affair-star-wars-memoir-interview-simon-hattenstone>
 last year, Fisher confessed that her next meeting with Ford would cost her a 
blush or two. She had just publishedThe Princess Diarist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/20/princess-diarist-carrie-fisher-review-harrison-ford>
, a book which candidly chronicled their short affair. It was, she said, one of 
the most intense moments of her life and Ford had influenced her future 
relationships, steering her towards Simon, whom she dated for several years 
either side of an 11-month marriage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdebbie-reynolds-carrie-fisher-hollywood-mother-daughter-bright-lights-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b6a130deb7f147344d9033aa3bc5b989b08855d%2F0_38_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Debbie%20Reynolds%20and%20Carrie%20Fisher%3A%20surviving%20instant%20fame%20and%20finding%20a%20lasting%20bond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdebbie-reynolds-carrie-fisher-hollywood-mother-daughter-bright-lights-documentary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Debbie%20Reynolds%20and%20Carrie%20Fisher%3A%20surviving%20instant%20fame%20and%20finding%20a%20lasting%20bond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdebbie-reynolds-carrie-fisher-hollywood-mother-daughter-bright-lights-documentary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b6a130deb7f147344d9033aa3bc5b989b08855d%2F0_38_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Carrie Fisher, Todd Fisher and Debbie Reynolds for the opening of Irene at the 
Minskoff theatre in New York City, in 1973. Photograph: Ron Galella/WireImage 
“Paul was much more verbal. But there was something very diffident again. He 
was the same amount older. I was 21 and Paul was 36. They were both very 
cerebral and serious. And they were witty, which is different from being funny.”

For his part, Harrison is quoted as once telling Fisher: “You have the eyes of 
a doe and the balls of a samurai.”

Key to her character was a need to make people laugh. Her book recalls her joy 
at managing to amuse Ford with her impersonation of him early in their affair. 
In the film Fisher also talks about her childhood efforts to keep her errant 
father inside the family home by entertaining him. The scene in the documentary 
where she visits the 82-year-old singer in hospital in a halting moment of 
reconciliation was too painful for her to watch again, the director has said.

Last week Todd Fisher told the New York Daily News that a joint funeral 
service was “likely”, so fans may have only one occasion to say farewell to 
Reynolds, all smiles and pink satin top hats, and Fisher, all sardonic barbs 
and dress-down honesty.

Billie Lourd, Fisher’s daughter by the leading Hollywood agent Bryan Lourd, 
once said that Reynolds was annoyed that she was never described as “Debbie 
Reynolds’s granddaughter” and that both women urged her to avoid an acting 
career. Reynolds even showed Lourd diaries from her days on set in the 1950s, 
including a letter to herself which read: “Dear Debbie, you’re sitting in the 
make-up chair, you have no eyebrows, you’re a shell of yourself, and it’s 5am. 
How did you get here?”

“Her advice would be to keep true to yourself and don’t lose yourself. Or your 
eyebrows,” Lourd toldVanity Fair.

Nevertheless, in a fitting finale to the film, and perhaps to two performers’ 
lives, the final shots are of Fisher and Reynolds consoling each other on a 
couch, reciting the lyrics to There’s No Business Like Show Business.

Famous mothers and daughters

Kate Hudson and Goldie Hawn
Hudson, 37, made her name as a serious actor in Almost Famous in 2000. Her 
mother, 71, was the comic darling ofRowan & Martin’s Laugh-In of the 1960s and 
graduated to romcoms and earned an Oscar nomination in 1980 forPrivate Benjamin
. She returns to the screen inSnatched later this year.

Melanie Griffith and Tippi Hedren
The star of 1988’s Working Girl made ordinariness charming. In contrast her 
mother was Alfred Hitchcock’s ideal, remote “woman in grey” and represented 
highly-strung perfection in Alfred Hitchcock’sThe Birds and Marnie.

Jamie Lee Curtis and Janet Leigh
Curtis, 58, specialised in comedy, appearing in Trading Places, A Fish Called 
Wandaand Freaky Friday, after starring first in the 1978 horror classic 
Halloween 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/28/halloween-film-review-john-carpenter>
. Her glamorous mother starred in Orson Welles’sTouch of Evil, but is forever 
the doomed woman in the shower inPsycho.

Liza Minnelli and Judy Garland
Minnelli, 70, has survived a succession of health scares and remains a cult 
figure for her performance as Sally Bowles inCabaret. Garland still has higher 
cult worth, not just as Dorothy in theWizard of Oz, but also for her rendition 
of Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas inMeet Me in St Louis.

 * This article was amended on 3 January 2017. Tippi Hedred starred in 
Hitchcock’sThe Birds, not Vertigo.
 