
Montana Avenue in Billings is a startlingly urban raft on the vast, grassy sea 
of rural southern Montana. It has microbreweries, artists, a cowboy hat–fixing 
genius, solar-powered lofts, and huge summer street events, along with homeless 
people, addicts, and the occasional break-in or fatal stabbing in an alley. 
Saucer-size rodeo buckles, business suits, elaborate mustaches, and sleeve 
tattoos co-exist. Shop doors stand open on summer evenings, when the draw of 
Harry Koyama’s narrow gallery strengthens to an irresistible force. Harry 
himself is the lure, as much as his flamboyant canvases of wildlife, wild 
places, and the vivid people who populate southernMontana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/montana>. His presence pulls in locals who 
normally wouldn’t think of buying original art.

“You end up doing a lot of explaining,” Harry says, hands on knees on a 
straight-backed chair in the small studio behind his shopfront, having given a 
visitor the comfortable sofa that dominates the space. “Most people have some 
kind of enjoyment of art whether they know it or not.” In his 60s now, Harry 
came to painting late, after 35 years farming east of Billings. His hands are 
smooth but still bear the signs of rough work. He is slight and brown, with 
thinning hair and a face that falls into smiling lines even when he isn’t 
smiling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fdeep-in-the-american-west-meet-harry-koyama-a-beet-farmer-with-an-artists-soul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5033520d339c5101ae6463f9bd22a9d803bd5e5e%2F0_0_775_960%2F775.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Deep%20in%20the%20American%20West%3A%20meet%20Harry%20Koyama%2C%20a%20beet%20farmer%20with%20an%20artist's%20soul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fdeep-in-the-american-west-meet-harry-koyama-a-beet-farmer-with-an-artists-soul%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Deep%20in%20the%20American%20West%3A%20meet%20Harry%20Koyama%2C%20a%20beet%20farmer%20with%20an%20artist%27s%20soul&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Fdeep-in-the-american-west-meet-harry-koyama-a-beet-farmer-with-an-artists-soul%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5033520d339c5101ae6463f9bd22a9d803bd5e5e%2F0_0_775_960%2F775.jpg>
 Dancing, byHarry Koyama <http://www.harrykoyama.com/shop/>. Photograph: 
Courtesy of Harry Koyama 
In this place, Harry is an unlikelihood. Although ethnically Japanese, he has 
lived a classically Montanan life. His father, Tom, was born in Sheridan, 
Wyoming, the son of railroad immigrants from Wakayama,Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, who established a farm south of 
Hardin, Montana. Harry was born and raised in Hardin (current population a bit 
over 3,500) with seven brothers and sisters. He earned a fine arts degree and 
kept his creativity alive doing commissioned metal art—a popular local form—in 
winter. After a triumphant struggle with cancer in the ’90s, Harry returned to 
his boyhood love of painting. Collectors responded so passionately that by 
2003, he was able to paint full-time. Now his pieces go around the world, 
including to the US Ambassador’s residence in Beijing, where one of Harry’s 
massive bison watches over Ambassador Baucus.


As history has a way of doing, World War II intervened in this pastoral 
American story. Tom Koyama left for California shortly before the war broke out 
and married Emiko Kubo there in 1942. The War Relocation Authority arrested the 
pair on their honeymoon and shipped them to the Gila River War Relocation 
Center southeast of Phoenix, Arizona. Friends in Montana intervened and secured 
the Koyamas’ early release by insisting that the war effort required Tom’s 
expertise at bringing in the sugar beet harvest—but not before Harry’s eldest 
sister was born in camp.

Although Tom and Emiko never spoke bitterly of their imprisonment, they had 
camp friends who did so the rest of their lives, Harry recalls. His boyhood in 
the prosperous postwar years was distant from the experience of his parents and 
grandparents, but there were poignant moments. One of his art professors, Ben 
Steele, was a survivor of the Bataan Death March who struggled to put the past 
aside when a young Japanese American named Harry walked into his class in the 
1960s. “I never knew until years later,” Harry says of his old friend Ben, who 
welcomed the younger man to their Billings artists’ group when Harry moved to 
town in ’07.

As one of very few Asian Americans in the area, Harry occupied a middle ground 
between the white ranching community and the Crow Indians whose reservation 
borders Hardin. Today his art also occupies that middle ground. He paints Crow 
tribal members in full powwow regalia, as well as ranchland that has since been 
strip-mined for coal. His paintings often come with a story. “This is on 
so-and-so’s place,” he’ll tell a visitor, or “I saw that pheasant up Sarpy 
Creek a few years ago.” Relentlessly, the work calls out to the place.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Most of the year, Montana presents a nearly monochromatic landscape: white in 
winter, brown in summer, with a bright green moment in late spring. Raised on 
that sober palette, Harry Koyama is wanton in his use of color. His bears are 
red. His bison glow golden. “Color is my own enthusiasm with the profession and 
the medium,” he says. “Being able to express yourself with color is why I get 
into the vibrancy.” The animals are more lively and real for the impossible 
shades that represent them, because Montana’s wildlife is surreal, bigger than 
life, impossible to believe when you see it for the first time. The color 
evokes the awestruck feeling of those encounters. Encountering Harry, 
surrounded by these canvases, is a similar experience, a flash of brilliance on 
a quiet day, a busy street at the heart of a place he holds in the palm of his 
hand and offers, without bitterness.

 * Carrie La Seur is a seventh-generation descendant of Montana homesteaders, 
an environmental lawyer, and the founder of the nonprofit legal organization
Plains Justice <http://plainsjustice.org/>. She practices law on behalf of 
farmers, ranchers, and tribal members, and does a little writing, in Billings, 
Montana. Her work has appeared inThe Daily Beast 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/10/02/book-bag-gritty-stories-from-the-real-montana.html>
,Grist <https://grist.org/author/carrie-la-seur/>, Harvard Law and Policy 
Review,The Huffington Post <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/carrie-la-seur/>, 
Kenyon Review,Mother Jones 
<http://www.motherjones.com/blue-marble/2010/09/50-state-strategy-climate>, and 
Salon <http://www.salon.com/writer/carrie_la_seur/>. William Morrow released 
her debut novel,The Home Place 
<https://www.harpercollins.com/9780062323446/the-home-place>, in 2014. 
 * Public Streets is a series curated by Ellis Avery for Public Books 
<http://www.publicbooks.org/>.
 