
Christmas is hereditary; you get it from your parents. When I was growing up, 
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> meant getting to 
open one present after midnight mass and having to wait until after morning 
service for the rest. It meant hoping that no one would decide they wanted to 
talk to the vicar – my mother – after church, further delaying both presents 
and food. On some occasions, it meant an extra guest round the table and not 
being able to open your presents until they had left – those were the worst 
Christmases.

It also meant anything other than turkey, which my mother saw as an 
unnecessary faff alongside everything. But as far as my partner is concerned, 
Christmas means turkey, stuffing and cranberry sauce. Fortunately, Delia is on 
hand to help this year – the first time we are hosting Christmas – with an 
hour-by-hour guide to the final 36 hours of the perfect festive dinner.

I start with the stuffing. Now, there are some ingredients that always fill me 
with dread, and stale bread is one. Happening to have bread that is neither 
fresh nor furry feels like a level of preparation that I have yet to manage. 
Having eaten the last of the bread for breakfast, I head to the shops and use a 
fresh slice, with no noticeable problems. Delia’s recipe for stuffing is easy – 
make breadcrumbs in your processor, add the sage and onion, then take it all 
out and mix it with the sausage meat. And there you have your stuffing, which 
you can bung into the fridge until you need it.

Delia recommends that you make the cranberry sauce the night before, but it 
keeps well for about a fortnight, so you can make it whenever. It’s simplicity 
itself – just cranberries, sugar and port in a pan and hey presto!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fguide-to-perfect-christmas-dinner-the-delia-project-stephen-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F522f8c8a1fa83a949cb74d2fbd21d6da3e91dda0%2F0_303_2832_3539%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delia%E2%80%99s%20step-by-step%20guide%20to%20the%20perfect%20Christmas%20dinner%20%7C%20The%20Delia%20project&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fguide-to-perfect-christmas-dinner-the-delia-project-stephen-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delia%E2%80%99s%20step-by-step%20guide%20to%20the%20perfect%20Christmas%20dinner%20%7C%20The%20Delia%20project&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fguide-to-perfect-christmas-dinner-the-delia-project-stephen-bush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F522f8c8a1fa83a949cb74d2fbd21d6da3e91dda0%2F0_303_2832_3539%2F2832.jpg>
 ‘What is not simplicity itself is the turkey.’ Photograph: Jill Mead for the 
Guardian 
Not so simple is the turkey. Delia’s recipe provides an hour-by-hour breakdown 
of exactly how to cook your turkey. It is when I see that the first time on 
Delia’s timetable is 7.45am that my heart sinks. I’m aware that, at this point, 
anyone with a child under 10 will have broken into mirthless laughter at the 
idea that a 7.45am start on Christmas morning is excessively early. I know this 
because I made the mistake of complaining about the early start to my mother. 
No power on Earth could move me to start cooking lunch if I have to face outer 
screaming from small children. The whole thing is stressful enough when all I 
have to drown is my own inner screaming.

According to Delia, the important thing is to get both turkey and stuffing to 
room temperature by leaving both in a cool, dry place, which, considering the 
size of our flat and the turkey, is trickier than it sounds. Even getting it in 
the fridge requires a wholesale reordering of the interior to accommodate the 
thing. After much fretting, I leave it, covered over, in the bathroom. At the 
time of writing, none of my guests have keeled over, so I’m going to say it has 
been a success.

I preheat the oven, then stuff the turkey. Then, as per Delia’s instructions, 
I start peeling the potatoes ready for roasting, before leaving them in a pan, 
just covered in water, to boil later. “At this point, everything should be 
under control,” Delia writes, “so you can take time out of the kitchen to help 
the kids unwrap their presents, have a coffee or tidy the house.” I must admit 
that if, having got up at horrible o’clock, stuffed a turkey and peeled 
potatoes, my partner expected me to tidy the house, I would consult a divorce 
lawyer. Happily, the matter doesn’t arise, so, reasoning that it’s Christmas, I 
help myself to a drink.

“Pop the plates into the warming oven,” Delia writes. Not for the first time, 
I contemplate the gulf between the kitchen in my flat and the kitchen that 
Delia thinks I have. The turkey is so large that there is barely room for it 
and the roast potatoes in the bottom oven, so Delia’s all-in-one baked 
vegetables (of which, more below) are going in the top oven – which, to be 
honest, I’m not 100% certain is in working order. My partner, with the 
confidence of a woman who hasn’t used the oven since David Cameron was prime 
minister, assures me that it does work. I hope she’s right and help myself to 
another drink. Still, I reason that anyone who complains about cold plates can 
leave the flat via the balcony – and I elect not to warm my plates.

I spend the next hour fretting about whether the top oven works, and helping 
myself to increasingly larger glasses of port as our guests arrive. The more 
cunning of them ask if they can help out at all, while the more transparent 
ones content themselves with asking flatly what it is they have to do to be 
namechecked in the Guardian.

I take the turkey out to rest and whack the potatoes in the oven, before 
turning to the all-in-one baked vegetables. This is one of Delia’s clever 
tricks to avoid having to put the vegetables on the hob at that critical 
juncture when everything else – turkey, roast potatoes, sprouts – need to be 
either taken out of the oven, basted, parboiled or in some way interfered with. 
In other words, it saves on hob space. Simply add a little vinaigrette, salt 
and pepper, cover the vegetables in foil, bung them in the oven at the time you 
take the turkey out, and they’ll be ready when you take the potatoes out of the 
oven.

That done, all that’s left is to saute your chestnuts for the brussels 
sprouts. This is a recipe where instead of using one item of cookware for your 
sprouts, you first parboil them in one pan before sautéing them in another with 
chestnuts and shallots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fguide-to-perfect-christmas-dinner-the-delia-project-stephen-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9dc8c650a8c5671bd9820cd409bea857623ebe%2F816_0_2832_2832%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delia%E2%80%99s%20step-by-step%20guide%20to%20the%20perfect%20Christmas%20dinner%20%7C%20The%20Delia%20project&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fguide-to-perfect-christmas-dinner-the-delia-project-stephen-bush%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delia%E2%80%99s%20step-by-step%20guide%20to%20the%20perfect%20Christmas%20dinner%20%7C%20The%20Delia%20project&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fguide-to-perfect-christmas-dinner-the-delia-project-stephen-bush%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9dc8c650a8c5671bd9820cd409bea857623ebe%2F816_0_2832_2832%2F2832.jpg>
 ‘I spend the meal hoping someone will notice I have done something special to 
the sprouts. They do not.’ Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 
I spend the meal beaming every time someone says something nice about the 
turkey, fretting about whether I remembered to put all those pans in to soak, 
and hoping that someone will notice I have done something special to the 
sprouts.

No-one does. So there you are, folks: that’s what you’d have had to do get a 
shout-out in these pages. Still, a very happy Christmas – it wouldn’t have been 
half as fun without you.

 * This week, Stephen Bush 
<https://twitter.com/stephenkb?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 is cooking his way throughDelia’s Happy Christmas 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/delia-s-happy-christmas.html> (BBC Books, 
£25). You can watch Delia Smith’s free Online Cookery School videos at
deliaonline.com <http://www.deliaonline.com/>; @deliaonline 
<https://twitter.com/deliaonline>.

 * Stephen Bush is a writer and columnist for the New Statesman @stephenkb 
<https://twitter.com/stephenkb>
 