
“Once upon a time,” Delia writes, “nature provided us with a perfectly varied 
diet, leaving us blissfully free of a large amount of decision-making.” Other 
highlights of that time included cholera and dying during childbirth, but, says 
Delia, this came hand-in-hand with a bonus: “We could enjoy anticipating what 
each month in each year would bring and really look forward to it.”

Thanks to the advent of aeroplanes and cold storage, we are able to eat 
strawberries at Christmas, but we’ve forgotten what punnet-fresh strawberries 
in June taste like – or at least Delia thinks we have. “If we want to learn how 
to cook,” she intones, “we first need to know how to buy home-grown vegetables 
in season that have the finest quality and flavour.”

And she’s right. Of course, in addition to the culinary benefits, buying 
locally sourced produce is better for the planet, helping to stave off the 
unhappy time when I have to start taking a boat to work.

Thankfully, Delia is here to help, with what she calls “a vegetable calendar”. 
Strictly speaking, this is a vegetable alphabet, albeit one that only runs from 
A for asparagus to T for turnip. The upside of this is you can find a vegetable 
with ease if you happen to have bought it as part of your weekly shop or if 
you’re topping up on fresh vegetables of an evening, though it is less useful 
if you want to plan out your year.

There’s a downside to seasonal vegetables that Delia doesn’t mention, though, 
and it’s what I think of as “the chard problem”. Growing up, we grew our 
vegetables, which was lovely for most of the year, apart from the months when 
all the ground produced was endless chard. I like vegetables a great deal, but 
chard always struck me as particularly joyless, even on the first go around. By 
the second month, it gave meals the feeling of dinner at an internment camp.

Delia’s perfect cheeseboard. But what if you don’t like cheese? | The Delia 
project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/30/cheese-perfect-cheeseboard-the-delia-project-stephen-bush>
Once again, Delia is here to help, although there is no place for “chard” in 
her calendar, perhaps because even Delia can’t think of anything nice to say 
about it. She does, however, have a variety of ways to make the fourth 
successive month of cabbage a pleasure rather than a chore.

I like cabbage. As Delia says: “Fresh cabbage lightly cooked is full of 
goodness, packed with vitamins, minerals and flavour and it’s not expensive”. 
It can also be bought locally 12 months of the year – what’s not to like? Well, 
it’s the chard problem again. Cabbage is lovely, but you need to find ways to 
mix it up a little or you could grow to hate it. Step forward Delia’s recipe 
for cabbage with bacon, apples and cider, a concoction of which I was initially 
suspicious, because it looked like one of those recipes that drowns rather than 
enhances the flavour of the main vegetable.

But the three key ingredients go together surprisingly well, and the dish 
takes very little time to put together, so can easily be whipped up in the last 
stages of the rest of the meal. It goes best with roast pork or sausages and 
mash, though you can go meat-free and still have a lovely variation on cabbage. 
I’m not sure anything can save chard, though.

 * Stephen Bush 
<https://twitter.com/stephenkb?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
is cooking his way throughDelia’s Complete How To Cook 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/delia-s-complete-how-to-cook.html> (BBC 
Books, £40) in a year; You can watch Delia Smith’s freeOnline Cookery School 
<http://www.deliaonline.com/cookery-school> videos at deliaonline.com 
<http://www.deliaonline.com/>; @deliaonline 
 <https://twitter.com/deliaonline> 
 * Stephen Bush is a writer and columnist for the New Statesman. @stephenkb 
<https://twitter.com/stephenkb>  