
The past is another country, and the food is terrible there. Forty years ago, 
if you wanted to buy olive oil, you had to go to the chemist, and all of our 
vinegar was made from malt.

Even though the modern world is an increasingly terrifying place, it’s always 
worth remembering that we don’t have to eat salad cream any more, which is 
almost certainly a price worth paying for the distinct possibility that Donald 
Trump will trigger global apocalypse with a tweet.

But there are downsides to these days of abundance, says Delia: if the 
shoppers of times past suffered from a lack of choice, we now have a surfeit. 
“Supermarkets now have wall-to-wall oils and sometimes half as many vinegars,” 
she says.

She continues: “It seems that every country in the world can produce oils and 
vinegars, and not just from the humble olive or the grape but from everything 
under the sun.” Delia reserves a particular dislike for flavoured oils, which 
“take up valuable storage space”, suggesting that “if you want to incorporate 
other flavours in your oils, they are best added fresh”.

Extra virgin olive oil is for special occasions; for cooking, just plain 
slutty olive oil will do

These strange oils and vinegars end up gathering dust in kitchen cabinets, but 
fear not: Delia is here to help. Her guide to the wonderful world of salads 
starts with a handy primer on what these all do and what they should be used 
for.

There are the vinegars: you don’t need to be Hercule Poirot to work out what 
wine, sherry and cider vinegars are made from. But that balsamic vinegar is 
made not from wine but grape juice may come as a surprise.

Then there are the oils. Groundnut and grapeseed are effectively flavourless 
but are good for cooking and for certain dressings. The advantage of groundnut, 
Delia explains, is that it is cheaper. Then there is sesame seed oil, which 
must be used sparingly, as it has a powerful taste, and walnut oil, which must 
be used cautiously and goes rancid quicker than you can say “Why on Earth did I 
buy walnut oil?”

But the last and most important is olive oil. Delia answers the question we 
were all too embarrassed to ask: what exactly is extra virgin olive oil anyway? 
“Before we can understand ‘extra virgin’, we first have to clarify the word 
‘virgin’,” Delia writes, helpfully setting up a predictable joke about life at 
secondary school.

Delia’s secret to tasty seasonal winter veg | The Delia project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/06/delia-smith-seasonal-veg-recipes-stephen-bush-the-delia-project>
Extra virgin olive oil, she explains, is made from oil squeezed without 
chemicals from the olive that causes no deterioration of quality: it hasn’t 
been bruised, overheated or over-chilled. Delia dubs this “perfect virgin olive 
oil”, and recommends that every chef have an extra virgin olive oil for 
“special occasions” or, as I prefer to think of it, “dressings and fancy 
breads”. For cooking, just plain slutty olive oil will do.

All that learned, you’re ready to begin the art of dressing-making with 
Delia’s vinaigrette recipe, which will give you a good idea of how much sweeter 
or sharper your tooth is than Delia’s.

If you threw out your mortar and pestle to make space for all that walnut oil, 
you can achieve an identical experience by substituting garlic and mustard 
powder for garlic puree and mustard. That done, you can congratulate yourself 
on a vinaigrette well made, a palate prepared for the wonderful world of 
Delia’s salad-making.

 * Stephen Bush 
<https://twitter.com/stephenkb?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 is cooking his way throughDelia’s Complete How To Cook 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/delia-s-complete-how-to-cook.html> (BBC 
Books, £40) in a year; You can watch Delia Smith’s freeOnline Cookery School 
<http://www.deliaonline.com/cookery-school> videos at deliaonline.com 
<http://www.deliaonline.com/>; @deliaonline <https://twitter.com/deliaonline>

 * Stephen Bush is a writer and columnist for the New Statesman @stephenkb 
<https://twitter.com/stephenkb>
 