
The accountancy firm Deloitte <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deloitte> 
has taken the extraordinary step of apologising to the government and offering 
to stop bidding for Whitehall contracts for six months, after preparing an 
internal memo suggesting Downing Street had no plan for Brexit.

Deloitte said on Tuesday night it had “put forward a plan” for working with 
the government that was intended to “put this matter behind us”.

No 10 has not denied reports that the strategy includes a six-month moratorium 
on pitching for lucrative government work.

It comes some weeks after the note, written by a Deloitte consultant who had 
worked for the government,was leaked to the Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/whitehall-struggling-to-cope-with-scale-of-work-arising-from-brexit-vote>
. The note warned that cabinet splits were delaying the government’s ability to 
agree a negotiating strategy, which may not be ready for six months – well 
beyond Theresa May’s deadline of March 2017 for the launch of withdrawal talks 
with the EU.

It also identified “well over 500 projects” being undertaken by Whitehall 
departments to implement Brexit, creating the need for up to 30,000 extra civil 
servants.

If Brexit means liberation, why does it feel so dull and joyless? | Rafael Behr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/brexit-liberation-nation-european-union>
At the time, No 10 said the document had no credence as it was nothing to do 
with the government. However, Deloitte’s decision to apologise and impose a 
punishment on itself underlines how much displeasure it appears to have caused 
in No 10.

The accountancy firm said: “Deloitte regrets the publication of the two-page 
note, and has apologised for the unintended disruption it caused government.The 
note was for internal audiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/memo-about-whitehall-brexit-problems-was-for-internal-audience-says-deloitte>
 and was not a Deloitte point of view. We have put forward a plan for working 
with central government to put this matter behind us.”

The Deloitte note is one of a string of warnings about the scale of the task 
facing the civil service over Brexit.

Some of those highlighting the challenges are Gus O’Donnell, a former cabinet 
secretary; John Manzoni, the Cabinet Office permanent secretary; Simon Fraser, 
a former Foreign Office permanent under-secretary; Bob Kerslake, the former 
head of the civil service; and the Institute for Government.







 