
Delta Air Lines is banning for life a passenger who professed his support for 
President-electDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
on a flight to Pennsylvania and insulted those who did not, the company’s CEO 
said Monday.

Edward Bastian said in an internal memo 
<http://news.delta.com/ceo-delta-requires-civility-our-planes?platform=hootsuite>
 that the airline was also refunding the cost of tickets for other passengers 
on the 22 November flight from Atlanta to Allentown.

A video posted on Twitter shows a man standing in the aisle, yelling and 
insulting supporters of the Democratic presidential nominee, Hillary Clinton.
Yashar (@yashar) 
WATCH: Trump supporter calls women "Hillary Bitches" on flight to Allentown. 
Spoke to Emma Baum who shot video,@Delta <https://twitter.com/Delta> did 
nothing.pic.twitter.com/2ZBjNCurNM <https://t.co/2ZBjNCurNM>
 <https://twitter.com/yashar/status/802213440513310720> November 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/yashar/status/802213440513310720> 
The man asks loudly: “We got some Hillary bitches on here?” He proceeds to 
clap and yell Trump’s name a few times while other passengers seemingly try to 
ignore him, some staring at phones and tablets, others with arms folded.

Referring to Trump’s victory, he says: “If you don’t like it, too bad.”

The writer Yashar Ali posted the video to Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/yashar/status/802213440513310720>, writing that a woman 
named Emma Baum filmed the encounter. Baum had also shared the video on her 
Facebook page, according to a Pennsylvania newspaper.

Baum told the Morning Call 
<http://www.mcall.com/news/local/allentown/mc-trump-supporter-rants-on-delta-flight-to-allentown-2-20161125-story.html>
 newspaper that she first noticed the man while waiting to board the flight 
because he had chanted Trump’s slogan several times. She was originally seated 
next to him, but switched with another passenger. Baum, 21, who lives in Belize 
and was on her way home to visit family, asked the man about the election and 
he then stood up to talk to her, according to the paper.

The man was taken off the plane by a flight attendant, Baum said, but was let 
back on.

US election recount: how it began – and what effect it could have
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/election-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton-donald-trump>
Baum said she reported the man’s behavior to airport security after the flight 
landed.The New York Times reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/28/business/delta-air-lines-bans-trump-supporter-for-life-after-rude-remarks.html>
 that it was unclear what measures were taken after the flight landed in 
Allentown.

In responses to both videos, many were in disbelief that the man was not 
removed from the flight and speculated onhow different his treatment would be 
<https://twitter.com/stuartpstevens/status/802341644989251584> if he were not 
white or not speaking English. Ali continued to tweet updates as he soughta 
“decent” response <https://twitter.com/yashar/status/802361600967639040> from 
Delta.

Delta, an Atlanta-based airline, had previously apologized over the man’s 
outburst ina statement 
<http://news.delta.com/statement-regarding-disruptive-passenger-flight-248> 
released on Saturday.

Bastian said the crew questioned the man and made the best decision they 
could, given the information they had, and allowed him to remain on the flight.

“However, if our colleagues had witnessed first-hand what was shown in the 
video, there is no question they would have removed him from the aircraft,” he 
wrote Monday. “He will never again be allowed on a Delta plane.”
 