
At the intersection of two highways just outside downtown Detroit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/detroit>, a hulking relic of the city’s 
past looms over the skyline: the largest municipal trash incinerator in the US. 
It’s a facility that has raised concerns of nearby residents since its 
construction in the 1980s.

And some days, it stinks.

“The odors, if you ride I-94, you get this foul, rotten egg smell,” said 
Sandra Turner-Handy, who lives about three miles from the facility.

The 59-year-old said her son used to work a block away from the incinerator 
and said the smell was “constant”. Her granddaughter developed asthma while 
attending a school near the incinerator, but hasn’t used an inhaler since she 
graduated and moved away.

The persistent odor and emission of other polluting substances are among 40 
alleged Clean Air Act and state violations that have been logged against the 
company that owns the facility, Detroit Renewable Energy, since March 2015, 
according to a notice to sue by the Great Lakes Environmental Law Center.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fdetroit-garbage-incinerator-pollution-health-problems-environmentalists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72bc29f492666c57f9af3b12f952a282d1aa1c91%2F0_126_1944_2430%2F1944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Detroit%20incinerator%20is%20hotspot%20for%20health%20problems%2C%20environmentalists%20claim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fdetroit-garbage-incinerator-pollution-health-problems-environmentalists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Detroit%20incinerator%20is%20hotspot%20for%20health%20problems%2C%20environmentalists%20claim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fdetroit-garbage-incinerator-pollution-health-problems-environmentalists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72bc29f492666c57f9af3b12f952a282d1aa1c91%2F0_126_1944_2430%2F1944.jpg>
 Sandra Turner-Handy: ‘You get this foul, rotten egg smell.’ Photograph: 
courtesy of the Michigan Environmental Council 
“It’s the things that you can’t smell that are the most harmful,” said 
Turner-Handy. “And how do residents report something that they can’t smell?”

In 2015, the incinerator burned more than 650,000 tons of garbage, according 
to the notice. And since the beginning of that year, the incinerator has been 
fined for persistently violating an earlier agreement with the state for 
alleged state violations.

The law center also said in the filing that the incinerator presents a clear 
example of an environmental justice problem, as a majority of the trash burnt 
at the facility is imported from outlying communities, which pay $10 a ton less 
than Detroit todispose of garbage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/14/green-waste-distribution-methods-recycling-plastic-oil-epa>
.

Can incineration and landfills save us from the recycling crisis?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/14/green-waste-distribution-methods-recycling-plastic-oil-epa>
“In short, Detroit is subsidizing other communities throughout the State of 
Michigan <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michigan>, the Midwest, and 
Canada to dispose of its garbage at the Incinerator,” the filing said, with the 
incinerator “located in a neighborhood that is composed mostly of low-income 
people of color and is heavily overburdened by air pollution”.

There’s a long-running debate over whether incineration is better for the 
environment than landfills. But communities located near incinerators have long 
lamented that they bear the brunt of its adverse impacts on air quality.

Citing statistics from the EPA, the center said 7,280 residents live within 
one mile of the incinerator, of whom 60% live below the federal poverty line 
and 87% are people of color. An EPA report also found that the area is a 
“hotspot for respiratory related health impacts when compared to other Michigan 
communities”, according to the law center.

The notice to sue also names Michigan’s governor, Rick Snyder, along with the 
state and federal environment agencies. The agencies have 60 days to commence 
an enforcement action, the law center said, and if neither pursues any, a 
lawsuit may be filed on behalf of residents to enforce the Clean Air Act.

Detroit Renewable Energy, which says 
<http://www.detroitrenewablepower.com/about/> the facility provides energy to 
more than 140 buildings in the downtown and midtown neighborhoods, downplayed 
the litany of claims in the notice of intent.

In a statement, the company said that it has invested approximately $6m over 
the last few years to “improve odor management” at the facility. The company 
said it employs nearly 300 residents, operates a “sophisticated” 
waste-to-energy facility, and “places the highest priority on complying with 
the strict and complex requirements established by the EPA and the state 
environmental department.

“In short, we have done our part,” the company said. “Any claim to the 
contrary would simply be false.”

The law center says otherwise.

Beyond odor, the notice of intent to sue also highlights an additional 19 
violations for emitting carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, and particulate matter 
above legal thresholds. The incinerator creates a “significant amount” of 
particulate matter, said Nick Schroeck, executive director of the center, which 
“can get lodged in people’s lungs”.

The incinerator can’t be directly linked to cases of asthma, but the filing 
said
“particulate matter emissions have been shown to trigger asthma incidents, 
particularly amongst children”.

Activists are pushing for a ballot initiative for November 2017 to close down 
the facility in favor of cleaner-energy-producing methods.

“We initially approached this topic sort of by looking at what it was we could 
do that would be effective within the confines of city law, of state law, and 
how a ballot initiative could actually rectify a problem in the city,” said Mac 
Farr, treasurer and spokesman forSustainable Detroit 
<http://sustainabledetroit.co/>. “And we could take a policy change and use it 
to both unify the city and also make the lives of Detroiters better. This was 
the topic that we settled on.”

Trump tells a tale of Democrats' failure in Detroit, but locals aren't buying 
it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/09/donald-trump-economic-speech-detroit-michigan-locals-angry>
Farr said the group’s motivations for the ballot initiative stem from the 
“public health ramifications” of the incinerator.

“We have some of the highest rates of asthma [in Detroit], the highest that 
are clustered directly downwind of this incinerator,” he said. “It’s four to 
five times the statewide average, and there’s a public health dimension to this 
that needs to be addressed.”

Farr said the group hopes the ballot petition will force city officials to 
examine the issue, but it has no clear solution for how Detroit should dispose 
of waste without an incinerator. He suggested a more “robust, citywide 
recycling program” could “divert a lot of material out of the waste stream if 
we were to shut off incineration as a method of disposal”.

Officials estimated earlier this year that only 11% of households 
<http://www.detroitnews.com/story/news/local/detroit-city/2016/02/11/detroit-recycling-outreach-campaign/80254664/>
 in the city are recycling.

Dr Abdul El-Sayed, executive director and health officer at the Detroit health 
department, said issues surrounding the incinerator hadn’t been on his 
department’s radar until recently, but it’s now “very squarely on my plate”.

“I think it’s obvious that when you burn anything, it’s going to produce 
material that goes up into the air. That material can do a number of hazardous 
things,” El-Sayed said. “I think it’s clear that those things are not good for 
the lungs, and the eyes and some of the other organs … the heart. It’s, 
generally, not the cleanest, most efficient way of addressing the problem with 
garbage.”
 