
Deutsche Bank surprised investors by reporting a profit for the third quarter 
of the year <https://www.db.com/ir/en/download/DB_Interim_Report_3Q2016.pdf>, 
as its chief executive admitted the huge settlement it faces from American 
authorities for a decade-old mis-selling scandal was having “an unsettling 
effect”.


Germany’s biggest bank has been rocked by reports that the US Department of 
Justice might demandas much as $14bn to settle the long-running dispute over 
the way it sold residential mortgage backed securities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/european-banking-shares-unsettled-by-deutsche-bank-fine-fears>
 before the 2008 banking crisis.

Announcing profits of €619m, the chief executive, John Cryan, said: “The 
results for the quarter demonstrate well the strengths of our operating 
businesses and the outstanding work of our people. We continued to make good 
progress on restructuring the bank.

“However, in the past several weeks these positive developments were 
overshadowed by the attention around our negotiations concerning the 
residential mortgage backed securities matter in the United States. This had an 
unsettling effect. The bank is working hard on achieving a resolution of this 
issue as soon as possible.”


He warned staff in a memo 
<https://www.db.com/newsroom_news/2016/ghp/a-message-from-john-cryan-on-deutsche-bank-s-third-quarter-financial-results-2016-en-11734.htm>
 that “the situation will remain tough for some time to come”.

Revenues were depressed and there were some outflows, the bank acknowledged, 
as a result of anxiety about its ability to pay the penalty. The bank’s liquid 
assets – ones it can use quickly to pay demands for cash – fell €23bn to €200bn 
between the end of June and the end of September. But Marcus Schenck, the 
finance director, said this had now stabilised.

Cryan has made clear that Deutsche – which employs around 8,000 people in the 
UK – does not expect the final bill to be as high as $14bn and has dismissed 
reports that the bank has called on the German government for help.

Deutsche’s shares plunged last month to levels they last traded at in the 
1980s, slipping through €10, and the bank acknowledged that the anxiety about 
the DoJ settlement had knocked its business. On Thursday its shares were 
trading at around €13. A year ago they were at €27.

Cryan told analysts that reaching a deal with the DoJ and handling other 
litigation was his “top priority” but the timing is not under his control.

He admitted the ongoing talks were creating uncertainty: “Uncertainty that 
affects the market’s view of Deutsche Bank as an investment, uncertainty that 
affected some clients’ view ofDeutsche Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank> as a counterparty and 
uncertainty that even affects our financial planning and strategy execution.”

Cryan, a Briton who has been at the helm of Germany’s biggest bank since last 
year, said he was personally spending time with clients and attempting to 
“dispel some of the more lurid myths” about the bank.

“We know that when our name is in the headlines for the wrong reasons, our 
phone doesn’t ring as frequently,” said Cryan, who dismissed suggestions that 
investors were questioning his strategy for the bank.

The sale of Postbank – Deutsche’s high street operation – would not be rushed, 
he said, until an attractive offer was received. Cryan said he wanted to keep 
the asset management arm, which is currently being reviewed and is often 
regarded as a possible business for Deutsche to sell, as an integral part of 
the group.

The profits were a dramatic improvement on the same period last year when 
Deutsche made a €6bn loss. For the nine-month period, a loss of €3bn has been 
reversed to a €1.6bn profit.

Schenck said a decision had not been made on how bonuses would be paid to 
staff, but indicated that less would be paid out in cash and more in shares. 
“In what form variable compensation will be paid is not yet decided. Given the 
situation of the bank and the profitability situation … having more tied 
towards the share price development in the future seems to make sense,” said 
Schenck.
 