
How big is the penalty?

The US Department of Justice has started the negotiations at $14bn. That would 
make it one of the biggest settlements for mis-selling mortgage bonds, a 
scandal that erupted in the wake of the banking crisis when it emerged that 
banks had packaged up mortgages and sold them on to investors as residential 
mortgage backed securities.

It is the same, almost, as Deutsche Bank’s value on the stock market of about 
€16bn ($17.8bn).
fines and context 0952 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/db-fines-context/giv-1406yImq1UViFjWy/>
How big, and how healthy, is Deutsche Bank?


The bank’s assets are valued at €1.6tn ($1.8tn), or half a year’s output for 
the entire German economy. But weight those assets for risk, and the number is 
€397bn ($441bn). Germany has lots of banks, with more branches per person than 
comparable economies; on the high street,Deutsche Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank> is one among many.
Size 0956 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/db-size/giv-1406mrW9OmPsv7Et/>
When the European Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> 
Authority simulated a financial crisis based on banks’ balance sheets in June, 
the second worst performer was Deutsche Bank. Only Italy’s extremely troubled 
Monte dei Paschi di Siena came off worse.

Deutsche would point to its stock of easy to sell assets – its liquidity 
buffer – which stands at €215bn ($239bn) as a sign of its financial strength.

Investors fear that if the settlement with the justice department is as large 
as first suggested, it put the measures used by regulators to gauge its 
financial health under pressure. The bank’s share price has halved in the last 
12 months, and its stock market value is 25% of its the assets on its balance 
sheet.
share price 0957 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/db-share-price/giv-140600m8j0HOV5E5/>
Potential investors may also be put off by Deutsche Bank’s unusually large 
engagement with over-the-counter derivatives – complicated financial products 
such as futures contracts which banks sell to one another off the open market.
derivatives 1030 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/dv-resilience-1027/giv-1406jBittg9ShmVr/>
What are the implications for the rest of the banking system?

The International Monetary Fund said in June that Deutsche Bank was 
responsible for about 30% of the risk in the global financial system, and 
concluded it presented the biggest risk to the financial system, in part 
because of its connections to other major banks.
interconnex 0959 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/db-interconnex/giv-1406y631e7HuGyQ1/>
What can Deutsche Bank sell?

The bank has several subsidiaries (among many hundreds) which it could put up 
for sale. Abbey Life in the UK has already been sold, and the bank is also 
planning to dispose of its minority stake in Huaxia, a Chinese bank. But some 
of its other potential selloffs are more problematic; its profitable asset 
management division is an attractive asset, but losing it would dent the bank’s 
already soggy bottom line. Its German retail subsidiary Postbank is 
theoretically worth over €6bn, but proving tricky to sell off.
value of potential sale assets 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/db-assetsforpotentialsale/giv-1406l56vokarKuO2/>
There has been talk that Deutsche could be put together with its domestic 
rival Commerzbank. One of the reasons for the trough in its share price is the 
expectation that it will sell more shares to investors. This will bolster its 
crucial regulatory capital ratios but putting more shares in circulation means 
their value is likely to go down.
 