
Deutsche Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank> has said it 
will pay $7.2bn to the US justice department related to mis-selling of 
residential mortgage-backed securities and other activities during 2005 to 2007.


 The agreement is less than the $14bn the US asked Deutsche Bank to pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/deutsche-bank-must-pay-14bn-fine-to-settle-us-mortgage-case>
 in September to settle the claims. That negotiating figurecaused Deutsche 
Bank’s stock to plummet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/26/deutsche-bank-share-price-lowest-mid-1980s>
 and raised questions about the bank’s stability and the risks it poses to the 
financial system.

 Under the settlement, Deutsche Bank would pay a civil monetary penalty of 
$3.1bn and provide $4.1bn in consumer relief in the United States, such as loan 
forgiveness.

Deutsche Bank’s potential $14bn penalty in 10 simple charts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/deutsche-bank-potential-penalty-10-simple-charts>
The agreement was not final and there could be no assurance that the DoJ and 
the bank would agree on the final documentation, the bank said on Friday.

 Deutsche Bank expected to record a pretax charge of about $1.17bn in its 
fourth quarter because of the civil monetary penalty.

The settlement marked the first in a possible string of mortgage-related 
resolutions or lawsuits by the DoJ forEuropean banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/europeanbanks>.

 The DoJ on Thursday sued Barclays  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/22/us-justice-department-accuses-barclays-over-mortgage-misselling>
on charges of fraud in the sale of mortgage-backed securities in the run-up to 
the 2008-09 financial crisis.

Deutsche Bank does not plan a capital increase to cover the settlement, a 
person close to the bank said. The lender expects the agreement to be finalised 
in early 2017, before president-elect Donald Trump takes office, said the 
source, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.

A spokesman for the Justice Department declined to comment. 

Settling the mortgage-securities case would mean Deutsche Bank has shaken off 
one legal headache. Three major probes remain.

It still faces investigations into the alleged manipulation of foreign 
exchange rates, suspicious equities trades in Russia, as well as alleged 
violations of US sanctions on Iran and other countries.

Deutsche Bank’s “troubling practices” were widespread, including when trader 
Greg Lippmann told colleagues that many home loans the bank was packaging into 
securities were “crap” and “pigs”, according to a 2011 US Senate subcommittee 
report.

Lippmann has declined to comment on the report. 

Deutsche Bank: how did a beast of the banking world get into this mess?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/27/deutsche-bank-how-did-a-beast-of-the-banking-world-get-into-this-mess>
There has been fear among investors, companies and regulators that the 
penalties are too much for Deutsche Bank to withstand.

The US authorities is still pursuing mortgage allegations against other 
lenders in addition to Barclays.

Credit Suisse Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/31/barclays-and-credit-suisse-to-pay-biggest-ever-fines-for-dark-pool-trading>
 is in late-stage negotiations and has resisted a demand by the agency that it 
pay between $5bn and $7bn over its sale of mortgage securities, sources have 
said.

Royal Bank of Scotland, Wells Fargo, UBS and HSBC are also under 
investigation, according to company disclosures.

US banks have paid tens of billions of dollars over the past three years to 
settle with US authorities over misleading investors about the quality of 
mortgages underlying securities.
 