
If you’re a bank with a stock market value of €18bn (£15.4bn), a potential 
$14bn (£10.5bn) penalty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/european-banking-shares-unsettled-by-deutsche-bank-fine-fears>
 is deadly serious. But Deutsche Bank’s battle with the US Department of 
Justice could have wider implications. It is only three months since the 
International Monetary Fund said that Deutsche “‘appears to be the most 
important net contributor to systemic risks”. Translation: the bank is so big 
that it could become a danger to others, not just itself.

For the moment, there is no reason to panic. First, Deutsche is probably right 
to think that it won’t end up paying the full $14bn. It is normal for the DoJ’s 
claims to shrink as the two sides get into the argy-bargy of the settlement 
process.

Second, the DoJ’s claim has not arrived out the blue. Deutsche has known for 
years that this day was coming because it is one of several banks – including 
our own Royal Bank of Scotland – still on the hook for allegedly mis-selling US 
mortgage-backed securities in the run-up to the banking crash. Deutsche’s pot 
of provisions to settle legal claims runs to €5.5bn, although the trouble with 
the DoJ is one of several legal scraps.

Third, regulators’ post-crisis reforms are designed to deal with crises at 
individual banks, not prevent them altogether. Banks’ capital structures are 
ordered so that the riskiest bonds can be “bailed in” to provide financial 
support. Deutsche’s riskiest convertible bonds fell 6% in value on Friday – but 
that is what one would expect. Fourth, Deutsche has powerful political friends 
– note Berlin’s call for “fair treatment” by the US for its biggest bank.

The $14bn Deutsche Bank fine – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/deutsche-bank-14bn-dollar-fine-doj-q-and-a>
Yet the IMF’s summer verdict of Deutsche was sober. This is an underperforming 
bank with an identity crisis. By comparison with most other European giants, 
Deutsche’s post-crisis response has been slow and muddled. UBS sought refuge in 
its asset management business. Barclays, with the rock-solid Barclaycard in its 
portfolio, wants to be an Anglo-US transatlantic bank and has been steadily 
shedding non-core operations.

Deutsche, however, has so far resisted calls to change shape, even as its 
capital ratios have looked thin compared with rivals’. Possible self-help plans 
could involve selling the retail bank, Postbank, or the asset management 
operation but, so far, new-ish chief executive John Cryan has opted only for 
cuts to costs.

The strategy is credible but designed to avoid tapping shareholders for fresh 
capital. If the final figure from the DoJ is so big that an injection of cash 
becomes essential, Deutsche has a serious headache: the best time for a bank to 
raise capital is when it doesn’t need to, not when it is pushed into a corner.

 