
The US Department of Justice has extracted $12.5bn in settlements from 
Deutsche Bank andCredit Suisse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/creditsuisse> for a decade-old toxic bond 
mis-selling scandal. It has also started legal proceedings against Barclays, 
which, in an unprecedented move, has refused to settle with the authorities.

Deutsche <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank>, Germany’s 
biggest bank, will pay $7.2bn (£5.9bn) to the DoJ. The sum is considerablyless 
than the $14bn originally demanded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/deutsche-bank-must-pay-14bn-fine-to-settle-us-mortgage-case>
. Credit Suisse has agreed to pay $5.3bn. Both settlements relate to the 
complex packaging of home loans, which was a lucrative business for the banking 
industry until the 2008 crisis.

Barclays refuses to settle with US DoJ over 'craptacular loans'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/23/barclays-us-department-of-justice-loans-mortgage-bonds>
The DoJ did not disclose the size of penalty it wanted to levy on Barclays, 
but it is understood to be $4bn. It accused the bank of“plainly irresponsible 
and dishonest” conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/22/us-justice-department-accuses-barclays-over-mortgage-misselling>
.

The flurry of announcements just hours before the markets closed for the 
Christmas holiday came weeks before Donald Trump takes over as US president and 
follows months of negotiation between the banks and the DoJ, led by the US 
attorney general, Loretta Lynch.

The scandal dates back to 2005 and 2007, when banks packaged up home loans and 
used them to help create bonds – known as residential mortgage-backed 
securities (RMBS) – which were sold to investors. The mortgage repayments made 
by borrowers then provided a yield to the investor, so long as the borrower 
kept paying. The schemes fell apart when loans were made to borrowers who were 
unable to repay.

The penalties are part of Barack Obama’s efforts to hold banks accountable, 
and the first major agreements to be reached with non-US banks. JP Morgan, 
Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Citi have all 
been punished already.

There are further penalties to come, notably for Royal Bank of Scotland. The 
bank could face a bill of as much as £9bn, analysts have said. Its shares rose 
1% on hopes that it might soon be able to reach a settlement with the DoJ – 
which it had hoped would take place this year – or at least start to estimate 
its own bill.

Deutsche shares, which initially jumped 4%, ended almost 1% higher. Credit 
Suisse andBarclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> slipped 1% in 
thin pre-holiday trading.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fdeutsche-bank-credit-suisse-us-mortgage-securities-barclays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd71c217f5e7aa57206f28dc135822c1cd23df1dd%2F0_120_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Deutsche%20Bank%20and%20Credit%20Suisse%20agree%20multi-billion-dollar%20settlements%20with%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fdeutsche-bank-credit-suisse-us-mortgage-securities-barclays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Deutsche%20Bank%20and%20Credit%20Suisse%20agree%20multi-billion-dollar%20settlements%20with%20US&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fdeutsche-bank-credit-suisse-us-mortgage-securities-barclays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd71c217f5e7aa57206f28dc135822c1cd23df1dd%2F0_120_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Barclays Capital Bank building near Times Square in New York. Photograph: 
Alamy Stock Photo 
Under the settlement, Deutsche will pay $3.1bn and provide $4.1bn in customer 
relief, such as loan modifications and other assistance to homeowners and 
borrowers, spread over five years. Credit Suisse will pay $2.5bn and 
compensation of $2.8 bn over five years.

Much of the focus was on Deutsche, run by Briton John Cryan, which had been 
contesting the authorities’ original $14bn fine. When that news first leaked, 
its shares plungedto 31-year lows over fears about its ability to withstand 
such a high bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/26/deutsche-bank-share-price-lowest-mid-1980s>
.

There had been fears that Deutsche would need to embark on a cash call or even 
ask the German government for assistance, but the fact that $4.1bn of its 
payout for customer relief was not a lump sum helped soothe some of the anxiety.

 “A key area of concern has been removed,” analysts at Goldman Sachs said, 
noting that the $1.2bn hit Deutsche would take in its fourth quarter was 
“towards the lower end of market expectations”.

Some analysts said Deutsche would need to press on with its restructuring to 
avoid a cash call. “Positively, the deal is settled and out of the way, as it 
was thought that the issue could drag on into 2017,” said Thomas Kinmonth, an 
analyst at ABN Amro, who added that without restructuring a cash call would 
have to be undertaken before 2019.

 Deutsche’s shares have been pummelled on stock markets during 2016 over fears 
about its financial position. It had already set aside billions of euros in 
anticipation of the fine.

Barclays is the first bank to fail to reach a settlement and now faces lengthy 
court proceedings in New York to defend itself against claims it said were 
“disconnected from the facts”.


Two of its executives, Paul Menefee and John Carroll, are named by the DoJ. 
Crowell & Moring partner Glen McGorty, representing Carroll, said he would 
challenge “these ill-conceived and baseless allegations, and expects to be 
fully vindicated”. Menefee was not available for comment.

 The DoJ did not comment on the announcements by Deutsche and Credit Suisse, 
but as it filed legal papers against Barclays, Lynch said: “As alleged in this 
complaint, Barclays jeopardised billions of dollars of wealth through practices 
that were plainly irresponsible and dishonest. With this filing, we are sending 
a clear message that the Department of Justice will not tolerate the defrauding 
of investors and the American people.”

Where the money will go

The precise detail of the $6.9bn in “customer relief”, or redress, that 
Deutsche Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank> and Credit 
Suisse will have to pay for their misdemeanours is yet to be finalised with the 
DoJ. The schemes, however, are likely to match those agreed with other banks 
for the mis-selling of residential mortgage bond securities..

Goldman Sachs agreed in April to pay $1.8bn in consumer relief as part of its 
$5bn settlement. This was described as writing off loans “for underwater 
homeowners and distressed borrowers” and making other payments “for 
construction, rehabilitation and preservation of affordable housing”. It also 
had to provide cash to support debt restructuring, to prevent foreclosure, and 
to back housing quality improvement programmes. Goldman was also told to put 
$240m into community projects to finance affordable homes for rent and sale.

The DoJ typically deploys monitors, lawyers or housing experts to police the 
terms of the customer relief. The banks involved in the DoJ settlements do not 
necessarily have direct relationships with the homeowners, but have packaged up 
their loans to back the bonds.
 