
Antonio Conte <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> has no 
plans to hold clear-the-air talks with Diego Costa and the onus will be on the 
Spain forward in training this week to prove he warrants a swift restoration to 
the Chelsea side for the visit of Hull City on Sunday.

Costa, the subject of interest from the Chinese Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/diego-costa-dropped-chelsea-row-china>
 club Tianjin Quanjian, who would apparently be prepared to pay him £30m a 
year, said he was suffering from a back injury last week and duly became 
embroiled in a row with Chelsea fitness staff. He was excluded from the squad 
for the game at Leicester City on Saturday. He has since been pursuing his own 
rehabilitation schedule and worked outside at Cobham on Monday, as he did the 
previous day, while the rest of the first team and management staff enjoyed 48 
hours off following the3-0 win at the champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/leicester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
.

Patrick Bamford on verge of joining Middlesbrough after Chelsea accept offer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/patrick-bamford-joining-middlesbrough-from-chelsea-transfer-window>
Although there is an acceptance the striker may have been suffering some 
discomfort in his back, the club believe the situation came to a head only as a 
result of the emergence of that interest from China and, although they will not 
countenance selling the division’s joint-leading scorer mid-season, it appears 
increasingly likely he will depart Stamford Bridge in the summer. The events of 
the past week have ensured their original plan to secure Costa to new terms – 
his deal expires in 2019 – has effectively been abandoned.

Yet conviction remains at the club that Costa can be reintegrated into the 
team for the rest of this campaign, in an effort to ensure the issue does not 
derail the team’s pursuit of a second Premier League title in three years. Key 
to that, however, will be the player demonstrating an improved attitude and a 
willingness to fight to regain his first-team place.

Conte does not intend to instigate discussions with the player to smooth that 
return to the fold and will merely seek evidence of a positive reaction in 
training. The manager has always made clear to his players that their prospects 
of making the team hinge on impressing with work-rate and commitment in 
training in the buildup to a fixture and Costa, who has been urged to apologise 
to Conte by fellow senior members of the side, must now earn his recall.

The club’s medical staff are due to assess the striker on Tuesday and, if he 
is passed fit after the back trouble, he will rejoin his team-mates as they 
begin preparations for Sunday’s game. Costa, 28, will have to convince the 
manager that he deserves to play ahead of Willian, Eden Hazard or Pedro 
Rodríguez, all outstanding in that emphatic win at the King Power Stadium which 
stretched Chelsea’s lead at the top of the Premier League to seven points.

Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend’s action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/16/premier-league-10-talking-points-southampton-manchester-city>
Costa had agitated for a return to Atlético Madrid over the summer but, having 
been persuaded to stay, has 14 Premier League goals this season. He had 
originally been omitted from the squad for the fixture at Leicester following a 
row with a fitness coach last Tuesday after staff aired doubts over the 
severity of his back problem. His relationship with Conte, who had supported 
his medical staff’s assessment, were strained further after another heated 
exchange the following day.

That left him working on his own at Cobham, and later than the rest of the 
squad, last week and over the weekend, albeit he has been complying with the 
rehabilitation programme stipulated by the medical staff. He did take to social 
media on the eve of the Leicester game to publish a picture on Instagram 
alongside the message “Come on Chelsea”, with that post immediately ‘liked’ by 
theChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> captain John Terry 
and the midfielder Cesc Fàbregas. That pair were among the senior players 
encouraging Costa to knuckle down and put thoughts of a lucrative move to China 
on hold until the summer.

Conte made a point of stressing his leading scorer’s absence at Leicester had 
been born of the back complaint, but did not deny the rift which flared over 
the issue. He claimed publicly to have no knowledge of interest from China in 
the player, though Chelsea are believed to have been aware for around a month 
of Tianjin Quanjian’s eagerness to secure the player for as much as £80m.

Tianjin Quanjian’s ambition will not be dampened even in the wake of the 
Chinese Football Association reducing the number of foreign players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/chinese-super-league-reduces-number-foreign-players-allowed-to-play>
 who can appear for a club at any one time from four to three as they seek to 
curb “irrational” spending, and their intent is understood to have been lodged 
with the player’s representative, Jorge Mendes.

It remains to be seen whether the Costa issue influences Chelsea’s movements 
in the transfer market this month, with their owninterest in Swansea City’s 
Fernando Llorente 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/chelsea-want-fernando-llorente-diego-costa-back-up>
 established. Certainly, should Costa depart as anticipated in the summer then 
securing a replacement will become a priority at the end of the season, with 
Everton’s Romelu Lukaku, Christian Benteke at Crystal Palace and the Real 
Madrid forward Álvaro Morata to come into their thinking.
 