
Diego Costa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/diego-costa> believes he is 
unfairly criticised by the Spanish media and feels it happens because he is not 
Spanish by birth and does not play for Real Madrid or Barcelona.

An injury to Álvaro Morata saw Costa come off the bench in the first half of 
Spain’s 2-0 win away at Belgium in an international friendly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/01/belgium-beaten-2-0-by-spain-in-roberto-martinezs-first-match-in-charge>
 on Thursday, and shortly after coming on he provided the lay-off for David 
Silva’s opening goal.

Manchester City’s Sergio Agüero to contest violent conduct charge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/01/manchester-citys-sergio-aguero-to-contest-violent-conduct-charge>
The 27-year-old has scored just one goal in 11 appearances for Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/spain> since switching nationalities from 
his native Brazil in 2014, but defended his performance against Belgium.

“They criticise me a lot and if I played for Real Madrid or Barça and was a 
natural Spaniard they’d say I had a good game, possibly my best for the team,” 
Costa said on Thursday.

“I didn’t score but I can be useful to the team. I participated a lot in the 
game and I leave here happy, unlike in other games.“

Costa has had disciplinary breaches with his club Chelsea, including being 
banned for three games forstamping on Liverpool’s Emre Can last year, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/30/diego-costa-miss-manchester-city-three-game-ban-stamp-chelsea-liverpool>
 but has largely kept out of trouble while representing Spain.

David Luiz is not really Antonio Conte’s type, but Kanté will offer protection 
| Dominic Fifield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/01/david-luiz-not-antonio-contes-first-choice-at-chelsea>
“I haven’t done great things for Spain, I can’t lie, but when I play well they 
should say so. They criticise me for my character, but I also have quality,” 
said Costa.

Silva scored the second goal against Belgium from the penalty spot to round 
off a comfortable 2-0 win in coach Julen Lopetegui’s first game in charge since 
succeeding Vicente del Bosque.

Lopetegui recalling Costa after Del Bosque left him out of the squad for Euro 
2016 was one of a number of eye-catching decisions the new coach made in his 
first squad announcement, including dropping the former captain Iker Casillas.

Spain begin their qualifying campaign for the 2018 World Cup at home to 
Liechtenstein on Monday and Costa said he is optimistic about his and the 
team’s fortunes under the former Porto and Spain Under-21 coach.

“A new era has started. I have faith in my team mates,” said Costa. “It’s true 
that I have unfinished business with scoring but today I felt good and the 
goals will come.

“I’d be more concerned if I didn’t have chances, but the team is creating them 
and that’s good. I will score soon.”
 