
Dozens of diesel farms stand to win millions of pounds in lucrative contracts 
to keep the UK’s lights on, sparking anger from environmental groups.

National Grid, which operates the UK’s electricity network, said small power 
generators had bid for 15-year contracts starting in 2020-21, as part of the 
government’scapacity market reforms 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-announces-capacity-market-auction-parameters>
.

The contracts, for firms that produce below 100MW, will see them paid to be on 
standby in case of a shortfall from power sources such as coal, gas or wind.

Of the total 8.7GW of back-up power that firms have offered, 3.9GW – more than 
the generating capacity of the Hinkley Point nuclear power station – is from 
generators who say they will burn either gas or diesel.

The companies could make up to £787m between them, depending on how many opt 
for diesel over gas and how many are successful in the final auction in 
December.


Diesel power firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/06/uk-energy-bill-subsidies-driving-boom-in-polluting-diesel-farms>
 submitted bids to provide just 0.87GW in last year’s auction, winning about 
three-quarters of their bids,worth some £176m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/11/diesel-farms-built-subsidies-national-grid-auction>
.

Energy storage vital to keep UK lights on, say MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/15/energy-storage-vital-to-keep-uk-lights-on-say-mps>
The Department for Business, Enterprise and Industrial Strategy said it was 
unable to provide an exact figure for how much diesel generation had been bid 
for, although insiders said the true figure could be lower than 3.9GW.

But a spokesman said that even though diesel firms could be paid millions to 
be on standby, they were unlikely to contribute much to pollution because they 
would only run when there was a heightened risk of power shortages.

“Diesel generation accounts for less than 0.1% of total energy generation and 
will only ever be used for very short periods of time to provide instant 
electricity when it is needed.

“We are taking action on diesel emissions and all new diesel systems will have 
to comply with new emission controls,” the spokesman said.

A spokesman for climate change campaign group Sandbag <https://sandbag.org.uk/>
 said: “We are surprised and disappointed that so much new diesel could be 
built.


“There’s a risk we’re sleepwalking into a new generation of polluting diesel 
farms unless the government gets a grip on this. We need the right type of 
investment to help modernise our electricity system, and that certainly isn’t 
diesel.

“The government needs to ensure that the capacity auction is incentivising the 
right investment, rather than building a nationwide fleet of dirty diesel.”

Richard Black, director of thinktank the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit 
<http://eciu.net/>, said the government should be doing more to encourage the 
use of battery storage and demand-side response, where firms agree to reduce or 
shift their energy usage.

 “The capacity market is a necessary tool but it would be very sensible to 
design it so that it also fits in with the long-term objective of building a 
smart low-carbon system and fulfilling its aim of the UK becoming a world 
leader on battery technology,” Black said.

“They’ve missed a trick. They could have rewritten the rules and redesigned 
the capacity mechanism, they could have differentiated between clean and dirty 
energy and they chose not to.

“If they’d rewritten the rules to prioritise batteries and demand-side 
response then we might have more of those technologies available now.”

A spokesperson for Greenpeace said: “Britain is one of the world’s leading 
economies and the idea that in the 21st century we may have to rely on highly 
polluting diesel farms to keep the lights on is quite embarrassing.”
 