
Drivers of polluting diesel vehicles could soon be charged to enter many city 
centres across Britain, after the government accepted in the high court on 
Wednesday that its current plans to tackle the nation’s air pollution crisis 
were so poor they broke the law.

The humiliating legal defeat is the second in 18 months and ends years of 
inadequate action and delays to tackle the problem which causes 50,000 early 
deaths every year.

Ministers are now bound to implement new measures to cut toxic air quickly and 
the prime minister, Theresa May, indicated the government would this time 
respond positively: “There is more to do and we will do it.”

The most likely measure is using charges to deter polluting diesel vehicles 
from “clean air zones” in urban centres, which could be in place next year in 
London and in 2018 in Birmingham and other cities. Nitrogen dioxide, the 
pollutant at the heart of the legal case, has been at illegal levels in 90% of 
the country’s air quality zones since 2010 and largely stems from diesel 
vehicles.

EU law requires the government to cut the illegal pollution in the “shortest 
possible time” but legal NGOClientEarth <http://www.clientearth.org/uk/>, which 
brought the cases, argued the government’s plansignored many measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/18/treasury-blocked-moves-to-charge-diesel-cars-to-enter-polluted-uk-cities>
 that could help achieve this.

Make central London diesel-free to solve air pollution crisis – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/make-central-london-diesel-free-to-solve-air-pollution-crisis-report>
In the high court on Wednesday, Mr Justice Garnham agreed. He said it was 
“remarkable” that ministers knew they were using over-optimistic pollution 
modelling, based on flawed lab tests of diesel vehicles rather thanactual 
emissions on the road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/30/emissions-new-diesel-cars-far-higher-than-official-limit>
, but proceeded anyway. He also said the law required the protection of health 
to come above the costs of measures: “I reject any suggestion that the state 
can have any regard to cost.”

The government said it would not appeal against the decision and agreed in 
court to discuss with ClientEarth a new timetable for more realistic pollution 
modelling and the steps needed to bring pollution levels down to legal levels. 
The parties will return to court in a week but if agreement cannot be reached, 
the judge could impose a timetable upon the government.

At prime minister’s questions, May said: “We now recognise that Defra [the 
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs] has to look at the judgment 
made by the courts and we now have to look again at the proposals we will bring 
forward. Nobody in this house doubts the importance of the issue of air 
quality.”

The government’s own estimates show air pollution causes at least £27.5bn a 
year and in April MPs called the issue a “public health emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/27/uk-air-pollution-public-health-emergency-crisis-diesel-cars>
”.

ClientEarth lawyers said they looked forward to working with Defra ministers 
to make a genuine attempt to rapidly cut pollution to legal limits throughout 
the UK, including a national network of clean air zones by 2018. “The 
government will have to be tougher on diesel,” said James Thornton, CEO of 
ClientEarth. “If you put in clean air zones, it works overnight.”

“Today’s ruling lays the blame at the door of the government for its 
complacency in failing to tackle the problem quickly and credibly,” said the 
mayor of London, Sadiq Khan,who took part in the case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/make-central-london-diesel-free-to-solve-air-pollution-crisis-report>
. “In so doing they have let down millions of people the length and breadth of 
the country.” Khan aims to havepollution charging in place in central London by 
2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/05/sadiq-khan-unveils-plans-for-extra-charge-on-londons-most-polluting-cars>
 and across the area within the north and south circular roads by 2019.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdiesel-vehicles-face-charges-after-uk-government-loses-air-pollution-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3be9f287f56f763bb34b1588d07f7148f8d380db%2F0_77_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Diesel%20vehicles%20face%20charges%20after%20UK%20government%20loses%20air%20pollution%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdiesel-vehicles-face-charges-after-uk-government-loses-air-pollution-case%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Diesel%20vehicles%20face%20charges%20after%20UK%20government%20loses%20air%20pollution%20case&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fdiesel-vehicles-face-charges-after-uk-government-loses-air-pollution-case%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3be9f287f56f763bb34b1588d07f7148f8d380db%2F0_77_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The government said it would not appeal against the decision and agreed in 
court to discuss with ClientEarth a new timetable for more realistic pollution 
modelling and the steps needed to bring pollution levels down to legal levels. 
Photograph: Philip Toscano/PA 
ClientEarth defeated the government on the same issue at the supreme court in 
April 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/29/supreme-court-orders-uk-to-draw-up-air-pollution-cleanup-plan>
. Ministers were then ordered to draw up a new action plan, but on Wednesday 
that newplan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/17/illegal-air-pollution-will-blight-many-uk-cities-for-at-least-five-years>
 was also found to be illegal. The UK’s duty to cut illegal air pollution as 
quickly as possible derives from EU laws but the action required following the 
high court defeat will be taken well before Brexit takes place. The government 
has said it will transfer all EU rules into UK law but, post-Brexit, the 
government could revise air pollution legislation.

The court defeat is also a blow for the new runway at Heathrow the government 
has backed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/heathrow-airport-expansion-gets-government-approval-gatwick>
. Its approval depended on the effectiveness of the government’s national air 
pollution plan to meet legal requirements on air quality. The Liberal Democrat 
leader, Tim Farron, said: “This ruling deals a huge blow to May’s reckless 
Heathrow expansion plans. The government has already illegally delayed meeting 
EU pollution limits until 2025 - building a third runway would make the 
situation even worse.”

Documents revealed during the high court case showed the Treasury had blocked 
initial government plans to charge polluting diesel vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/18/treasury-blocked-moves-to-charge-diesel-cars-to-enter-polluted-uk-cities>
 for entering towns and cities blighted by air pollution, due to concern about 
the political impact of angering motorists.

Both the environment and transport departments recommended changes to vehicle 
excise duty rates to encourage the purchase of low-pollution vehicles. But the 
Treasury also rejected that idea, along with a scrappage scheme for older 
diesels, which ClientEarth supports.

The government’s draft plan had envisaged 16 clean air zones, but in the final 
plan the number was cut, on the grounds of costs to business, to just five 
outside London: Birmingham, Leeds, Nottingham, Derby and Southampton. The 
further cities and towns that now need to introduce clean air zones will be 
determined by the more realistic pollution modelling ordered by the court on 
Wednesday.

Keith Taylor, Green party MEP, said: “The failure highlighted by the judge 
today is as much moral as it is legal: ministers have displayed an extremely 
concerning attitude of indifference towards their duty to safeguard the health 
of British citizens.”
NO2 exceedance 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1QM6MaJVCX8zTeHR8aO9o-3HVpjfijuKGfkjCOEFKWiE> 