
A modern diesel car pumps out more toxic pollution than a bus or heavy truck, 
according to new data, a situation described as a “disgrace” by one MEP.

The revelation shows that effective technology to cut nitrogen oxides (NOx) 
pollution exists, but that car manufacturers are not implementing it in 
realistic driving conditions.

Diesel cars tested in Norway produced quadruple the NOx emissions of large 
buses and lorries in city driving conditions, according to areport from the 
Norwegian Centre for Transport Research 
<https://www.toi.no/environment-and-climate/diesel-cars-have-high-emissions-in-real-traffic-article33388-1314.html>
. A separatestudy for Transport for London 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/priorities/environment/clearing-londons-air/euro-6-emissions>
 showed that a small car in the “supermini” class emitted several times more 
NOx than most HGVs and the same amount as a 40-tonne vehicle.

“It is crackers,” said emissions expert James Tate from the University of 
Leeds. His own research, which uses roadside equipment to measure passing 
traffic, also shows the latest diesel models cars produce at least as much NOx 
as far heavier buses and trucks.

The issue of NOx pollution, thought to kill 23,500 people a year in the UK 
alone, gained prominence whenVW diesels were discovered to be cheating official 
US emissions tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/sep/23/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-explained-diesel-cars>
. The scandal also led to revelations that the diesels ofmany car manufacturers 
produce far more NOx on the road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/09/mercedes-honda-mazda-mitsubishi-diesel-emissions-row>
 than in EU lab tests, though not via illegal means.

The UK government say <https://consult.defra.gov.uk/airquality/draft-aq-plans> 
the failure to keep NOx from vehicles low in the real world means road 
transport is “by far the largest contributor” to the illegal levels of NOx in 
many parts of the country.

“It is disgraceful that car manufacturers have failed to reduce deadly 
emissions when the technology to do so is affordable and readily available,” 
said Catherine Bearder, a Liberal Democrat MEP and a lead negotiator in the 
European parliament on the EU’s new air quality law.

“The dramatic reduction in NOx emissions from heavier vehicles is a result of 
far stricter EU tests, in place since 2011 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2011:167:0001:0168:en:PDF>
, that reflect real-world driving conditions. If buses and trucks can comply 
with these limits, there’s no reason cars can’t as well.”

Greg Archer of Transport & Environment said: “Carmakers claims [that] new 
diesel cars are clean are preposterous. Governments must ignore the bleating of 
carmakers for lenient limits and fix the problem for good.”


Both the Norwegian and London research tested vehicles meeting the newest and 
strictest Euro6 standard in similar lab-based tests that – unlike EU official 
regulatory tests – are realistic simulations of city driving.

At the Norway Centre for Transport Research, the researchers found “all [12 
of] the tested heavy vehicles’ engines have very low emissions of NOx in real 
traffic” and that emissions had fallen tenfold from the previous models. But 
the seven diesel cars emitted four times more on average than the trucks and 
buses.

The Norwegian team concluded: “Test results have shown by effective removal of 
NOx from the exhaust gases of heavy vehicles that it is possible with Euro 6 
engines. This means that it is technically possible to achieve the same 
positive results for new generations of cars with diesel engines.” They also 
found that in cold weather the NOx from diesel cars soared to 11 time official 
levels.

The Transport for London research compared nine diesel cars, ranging from the 
super-mini class up to SUV, against three HGVs and one LGV. The NOx emitted 
from the cars was similar to that from the heavier trucks though one car – the 
smallest diesel tested – produced more than double the 12-tonne lorry and the 
same as the 40-tonne vehicle.

Tate said the reasons car manufacturers were not implementing the NOx 
reduction technology on cars were convenience and cost. The most common 
technology requires a chemical compound known as urea to be squirted into the 
exhaust gases, but a large urea tank would be heavy while a small one would 
require frequent refills. “It’s not really the image the manufacturers are 
looking for: you are in your smart suit filling up your expensive car – with 
urea,” he said.

In contrast, truck and bus drivers are happy to refill the urea tanks and the 
additional cost of the technology is easier for buyers of large and expensive 
vehicles to bear.
 