
Dimitri Payet’s agent has refused to comment on reports Marseille will meet 
West Ham officials this week to discuss his transfer, with the France 
international’s future in the Premier League looking increasingly doubtful.

Dimitri Payet and co cross a line with their striking self-indulgence | Daniel 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/14/dimitri-payet-striking-west-ham>
Payet was left out of West Ham’s 3-0 victory against Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/west-ham-united-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 after informing his manager, Slaven Bilic, that he wishes to leave the club. 
Writing in his matchday programme notes on Saturday the West Ham co-chairman 
David Sullivan insisted the 29-year-oldwould not be allowed to leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/west-ham-united-dimitri-payet-david-sullivan>
 this month, although it is understood the notes were written on Thursday and 
his attitude has since softened.

The vice-chairman, Karren Brady, also conceded on Saturday in her column for 
the Sun 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/sport/football/2611799/west-ham-disapointed-dimitri-payet-keep-star/>
 that “probably sooner rather than later he will be on his way”, while the 
co‑chairman David Gold has also admitted privately that Payet is expected to 
move back to Marseille partly because of his family’s unhappiness with life in 
London.

It is believed West Ham would be willing to sell if they receive an offer of 
about £30m and reports in France on Sunday claimed West Ham officials will meet 
the Marseille president, Jacques-Henri Eyraud, on Monday to discuss the 
transfer, although the player’s long‑term adviser Jacques-Olivier Auguste 
refused to confirm that when contacted by the Guardian.

Payet, who signed a bumper £125,000-a-week five-year contract in February 
2016, is still expected to be fined by West Ham, although there is a growing 
recognition Bilic could be better served with the funds generated from a sale 
rather than keeping an unhappy player at the club.

Andy Carroll believes the performance against Palace showed the unity of the 
squad without their star player.

“I think we have answered a few of the critics, 100%,” he said. “With 
everything that has been going on during the week and everyone talking it’s 
been tough, especially as the lads are close to one another. To put all that 
behind us and work as a team has been fantastic. The fans were like the 12th 
man and were great with their support.

“It was a great day all round. All the lads were fantastic and professional. 
They know what it means to the fans and the club. We stuck together and 
everyone is hungry and dedicated – and it showed in the performance.”

Simone Zaza has cut short his loan spell at West Ham to join Valencia for the 
rest of the season. The Italy international joined on loan from Juventus in the 
summer, but never found his feet in London, failing to score in 11 appearances 
in all competitions.

With the terms of his loan dictating that the switch would become permanent if 
he made 14 appearances, he fell out of favour and the deal has now been 
cancelled, freeing him to join Valencia.
 