
Looking out over the Danube river as it passes through central Budapest, Gabor 
Farkass, director of HungarianPlastics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/plastic> Association, bemoans his 
local authority’s careless attitude to recycling . “There are some sad pictures 
coming out in the media, because [scientists] check the riverbed, they check 
inside fish and birds, and they find a load of plastic,” he says.

After barely surviving decades of heavy pollution by industries in the 
communist era, the ecological status of the Danube river has dramatically 
improved. But threats from new sources of pollution are looming on the world’s 
most international river, which tracks almost 1,800 miles through 10 countries 
and four capitals.
Map of Danube 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/danube-zip/giv-157261u02kBIvmjiA>
 Map of Danube 
The river is seeing a rise in plastic waste, pesticide run off and 
pharmaceutical waste. But perhaps the biggest difficulty is working out exactly 
what and where these problems are. The last Joint Danube Surveyreport 
<http://www.danubesurvey.org/> by International Commission for the Protection 
of the Danube River (ICPDR) lists the top 20 hazardous substances to the entire 
river and found that just seven of them are officially reported on.

“We have a massive lack of information about what kind of pollutants 
industries are releasing into the Danube,” says Adam Kovacs, technical expert 
for pollution control at the ICPDR. He says that EU legislation is behind 
industrial development.

One of the newer pollution threats is microplastics, which can affect fish and 
fish larvae that confuse the particles with food sources. Astudy in Austria 
last year 
<https://www.bmlfuw.gv.at/wasser/wasserqualitaet/plastik_pilotstudie.html> 
discovered that 40 tonnes of microplastics, pieces of plastic 5mm or smaller in 
diameter, are being transported each year through the country’s stretch of the 
river alone. It found that littering, wind carry and ineffective waste 
management are key contributors as larger plastic particles in the environment 
breakdown into smaller microplastics.

Inside the lonely fight against the biggest environmental problem you've never 
heard of
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/oct/27/toxic-plastic-synthetic-microscopic-oceans-microbeads-microfibers-food-chain>
 If the synopsis sounds bleak, that’s because it is; despite the apparent 
urgency there is not yet a standardised scientific methodology for measuring 
microplastics in environmental samples. Scientists admit they know little about 
the long-term impacts to the Danube, human health, or the wider natural 
environment.

A vast number of industries use plastics in items ranging from automotive 
parts, cleaning agents and cosmetics to packaging, agricultural and 
pharmaceutical items. “Our ministry is working with plastics manufacturers, 
trying to reduce their plastic output into the Danube down to zero.” says Franz 
Wagner, from Austria’s federal ministry of agriculture, forestry, environment 
and water management, which funded research into the phenomena after nets in a 
study on Danube fish larvae also landed lots of plastic particles.

Rudiger Baunemann, director general at PlasticsEurope 
<http://www.plasticseurope.org/>, a continent-wide association for 
manufacturers, defends the industry, which he says is doing its best to help 
keep plastics out of the natural environment altogether. He says it’s unfair to 
put the sole blame on companies for the problem. Tackling it “needs to be a 
joint effort between industries, authorities, NGOs, and other stakeholders,” he 
says.

Farkass insists that recycling is a crucial element in tackling the scourge of 
plastics pollution to the Danube. Waste management facilities, especially 
highly effective ones, which are hugely expensive to develop, are key in 
tackling pollution issues, he says. Kovacs believes that future treatment 
plants will have an additional processing phase specifically for 
micro-pollutants.

The world's threatened rivers - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2016/sep/22/worlds-threatened-rivers-pollution-industry-agriculture-in-pictures>
Pollution from microplastics, however, is only a part of emerging threats to 
the river. Recent foreign investments in agriculture in downstream Danube 
countries, such as a$500m (£400m) investment 
<http://monsantoblog.com/2013/11/20/seed-processing-expands-in-hungary-romania-and-turkey/>
 in Hungary and Romania from seed giant Monsanto, are expected to increase 
pollution pressure over the next few years. When fertilisers reach the river, 
they can lead to eutrophication (a depletion of oxygen), causing algae to grow 
explosively, which eventually asphyxiates organisms living underneath.

Using mostly EU funds, Hungary <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary> has 
invested heavily in Budapest’s modern central wastewater treatment plant, which 
sits adjacent to the Danube shores near Ràkóczi Bridge. The capital’s waste 
enters the pungent-smelling plant as brown hazardous sludge, to eventually gush 
out into the river as treated clear water.

But stark political and economical disparities between the richer upper and 
poorer lower Danube countries, often means that such infrastructure becomes 
less effective the further downstream you go. The 2008 economic crisis hampered 
an EU roadmap to improve waste facilities throughout all Danube countries.

However, there are signs of hope. Romania, one of the poorest countries along 
the Danube is leading apan-European project <http://www.danubius-ri.eu/>, 
DANUBIUS-RI, to tackle some of the problems affecting the river. “The goal is 
to understand the formation, distribution and impacts of emerging pollutants 
from microplastics, agriculture and pharmaceuticals,” says project leader 
Adrian Stanica.


The region has been hamstrung by its communist past, says Ciprian Nanu, 
another member of the project and secretariat at European Innovation 
Partnership onWater <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water>, and this 
has traditionally made it hard to engage with business. But he is trying to 
pull together business, NGOs and other organisations to overcome this. “We have 
to start now to build business relations in order to introduce innovation in 
regional markets.”

The project is looking to engage innovative water tech businesses, similar to 
WatchFrog, which is developing technologies to measure and monitor a range of 
micro-pollutants in waterways.
 