
Visitors to the Galapagos Islands could be forgiven for asking what all the 
fuss was about. Disaster workers and ecologists may outnumber tourists, but 
there are few visible signs of a disaster; the wrecked oil tanker, stranded on 
rocks a mile offshore, is blotting the tropical landscape rather than 
destroying it.

"We were very, very lucky," says Carlos Valle, regional director of the 
environment organisation WWF, and part of the army of international 
environmentalists that has descended on the archipelago after last week's oil 
spill from the ship.

Simply keeping catastrophe at bay was never going to satisfy an environmental 
movement that wants the Galapagos Islands to remain as they were when Charles 
Darwin visited in 1839, particularly since most of the credit for the narrow 
escape is thanks to the winds and currents that carried the spill out to sea.

About a third of the islands' 600 or so native plant species are found only 
there. Of the 57 species of reptiles, land birds and mammals, more than 80% are 
found nowhere else. Among these is the world's only marine lizard, the only 
species of penguin and albatross found in the tropics, and a cormorant that has 
lived so long without predators that it has lost the ability to fly. All are 
uniquely vulnerable, hence the unique concern.

The Galapagos Islands were declared a national park in 1959, and developed an 
apparently model ecotourism industry - groups are sent island hopping to 
designated sites and always with a guide.

The local conservationists appeared confident at the helm, and the 
international environmental groups were pleased to have one less place to worry 
about. That was until the rusting Jessica ran aground on January 16, and, three 
days later, began leaking its cargo of 885,700 litres (234,000 gallons) of 
diesel and bunker fuel.

The oil-spill woke people to the realisation that the Galapagos was far from 
secure. The question is how to prevent a future disaster.

Some want to create a rapid reaction team ready to contain any emergency. But 
maintaining such a force would be expensive and the Ecuadorean government in 
Quito is already smarting at the estimated Â£350,000 bill owed to the US coast 
guard for services rendered. When this particular crisis is over, a request for 
international aid will certainly be made.

Others issues, such as fishing rights, could rattle the uneasy peace between 
science, tourism and the locals.

Increasingly strict quotas on fishing attest to the power of the 
conservationists, but clandestine catches of lobster, sea cucumbers and shark 
fins, much prized in Japan, show that victory is far from complete.

"What future?" ask graffiti scrawled by fishermen. "Our patrimony massacred," 
they continue, asserting people's right to fish freely, challenging the claim 
that the Galapagos belongs to the world.

Sitting on his porch surrounded by nets, Washington Escaraby is bitter about 
the constraints on his traditional fishing habits.

"If there aren't any other jobs how can they expect us not to fish?" He is 
also angry because the spill has kept him on dry land all week. A spill, he 
points out, caused by a ship delivering fuel for tourist boats.

While this raises the possibility of banning such deliveries, conservationists 
generally favour tourism to fishing, and would like the fishermen to switch 
roles.

But there is a problem, says Bishop Manuel Balarezo: until the big tour 
operators on mainland Ecuador relinquish control of the industry, the benefits 
for locals will be small.

"Often the people don't even get off the boat. They eat, sleep, and even buy 
their souvenirs right on board," the bishop says.

The islands, 600 miles off the coast of Ecuador, were uninhabited when Darwin 
spent five weeks here. Discovered by a Spanish bishop by accident in 1535, they 
acted as shelter for whalers and English pirates.

Up until 15 years ago, there were only 6,000 inhabitants. The number has since 
tripled prompting strict migration rules.

Scientists would prefer to deport everyone. But, as the locals are keen to 
point out, crime is almost unheard of and wages are far higher than on the 
mainland.

Bishop Balarezo says science must accept that near perfect is perfect enough.
 