
Nashville is so friendly. People talk about southern hospitality and it’s a 
reality. In Tennessee, people are genuinely warm, and invite you into their 
homes.

In Beth Nielsen Chapman’s quirkily beautiful sitting room, I listened to some 
of Nashville’s greatest songwriters play. There was Gretchen Peters, Kim Carnes 
and John Fullbright. Beth laid on food and wine – that’s very much part of the 
Nashville lifestyle – and the atmosphere was magical.
 Bob Harris. Photograph: Classic Rock Magazine 
You can get close to that experience at the Bluebird Cafe 
<http://bluebirdcafe.com/>. It’s an in-the-round experience similar to a house 
concert or “guitar pulls”, where musicians jam. People queue round the block 
for the Bluebird Cafe – it was where Garth Brooks was discovered, and Taylor 
Swift played there before becoming huge. The TV series Nashville was also 
filmed there, but it became so disruptive that now they film in a replica set.
 The famous Ernest Tubb Record Shop. Photograph: Alamy 
I’ve seen Alison Krauss doing the school run. There are no paparazzi in 
Nashville, so the stars live more freely and you see them on the street. 
Nashville’s always been the home of country music, but now it’s probably the 
premier music city in the world, and it’s a closely knit music community. Kings 
Of Leon, Black Keys, Keb’ Mo’, Jack White and Sheryl Crow all live there.


Ernest Tubb opened a record shop on Broadway in 1947 - and it’s still the 
place to buy old-time music. Tubb started Midnite Jamboree, a radio show of 
live gigs, on which Elvis, Patsy Cline and Loretta Lynn played. Nearby is the
Ryman Auditorium <http://ryman.com/>, where the Grand Ole Opry began in 1925 as 
a weekly radio show on WSM (it still broadcasts from Opryland, where you can 
see the shows). The Ryman was once a Presbyterian church, and people sat on 
church pews to watch concerts. At Opryland (a 30-minute drive or ferry ride 
away), you can record a song in the studio or sing at a mike on stage, see 
photographs of the stars and beautifully ornate dressing rooms. Its sense of 
tradition almost matches the Ryman.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-way-i-see-it-bob-haris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434105232045%2Fa411474b-92e0-466d-8170-983f481910cd-1460x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=DJ%20Bob%20Harris%20on%20Nashville%2C%20Tennessee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-way-i-see-it-bob-haris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=DJ%20Bob%20Harris%20on%20Nashville%2C%20Tennessee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F14%2Fthe-way-i-see-it-bob-haris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F12%2F1434105232045%2Fa411474b-92e0-466d-8170-983f481910cd-1460x2040.jpeg>
 Nashville’s Broadway. Photograph: Robby Klein 
I always meet up with 1950s megastar Duane Eddy for a curry when I’m in town. 
He’s the man who combined country and rock music in Nashville and called it 
“twang”. We go to a family-friendly place calledBombay Palace 
<http://www.bombaypalacetn.com/>, a casual Indian restaurant in Midtown that 
serves freshly made seafood, chicken, lamb and vegetarian dishes, as well as a 
buffet lunch and takeaways.

Music Row (16th Avenue) feels like a regular suburb but the houses are all 
studios and record labels. RCA Studio B <http://studiob.org/> was recently 
saved from demolition by a preservation committee fronted by 
singer/songwriter/producer Ben Folds. It was where Roy Orbison cut Only the 
Lonely and Elvis recorded It’s Now or Never. Most of old downtown Nashville has 
been preserved.

People play in bar windows for tips on Lower Broadway. Tootsies 
<http://www.tootsies.net/> and Robert’s Western World  
<http://robertswesternworld.com/>are famous honkytonk bars downtown where many 
stars began their career, hoping a record-label rep would wander in. Johnny 
Cash once kicked in the Opry footlights after one too many in Tootsies. Eric 
Church, now a massive star, started at the littleFiddle and Steel Guitar Bar 
<http://www.fiddleandsteel.com/>, and was signed by a label five years later.

On Monday nights at 3rd and Lindsley 
<http://www.3rdandlindsley.com/calendar.html>, you can hear the Time Jumpers. 
They are great session musicians who play on other people’s records, and the 
level of musicianship is phenomenal. The main guitarist is country superstar 
Vince Gill. People go up to his table and chat or take photographs with him. 
It’s so informal and lovely.
 The Ryman Auditorium. Photograph: Alamy 
There’s a great little diner called Noshville <http://www.noshville.com/> on 
the way out of town, in midtown Nashville. They serve food they say will “make 
your mother happy”. I’ve bumped into Emmylou Harris there, Hal Ketchum and 
Ricky Skaggs.

A short drive across the Cumberland river is bohemian east Nashville. It has 
trendy coffee shops, organic eateries, bars and pubs – it’s an enclave of 
Americana and Old Country, a rebel that doesn’t quite fit in with the Music 
City status quo.Five Points Pizza <http://www.fivepointspizza.com/> bakes on 
bricks in gas-fired ovens and has craft beers on tap, and3 Crow Bar 
<http://3crowbar.com/> is lively for trivia nights and pub food.

Santa’s Pub is a lovely intermix of the public and the famous. Run by a Santa 
Claus lookalike, with a beard to which I aspire, it’s in south Nashville near 
the Tennessee State Fairgrounds and has nightly karaoke. It’s still a hang-out 
of Kacey Musgraves, who’s won two Grammys and whose controversial lyrics about 
gay relationships and drugs grate with southern conservatism. Nashville is 
still “the buckle of the Bible belt”.
 Tootsies. Photograph: Alamy 
We stay at the Embassy Suites 
<http://embassysuites3.hilton.com/en/hotels/tennessee/embassy-suites-nashville-at-vanderbilt-BNAESES/index.html>
. Just west of downtown, near Music Row and Vanderbilt University, you get a 
family suite for around $270 a night. It’s functional and has a long happy 
hour. Less than a mile west isJimmy Kelly’s Steakhouse <http://jimmykellys.com/>
 in a preserved old mansion. Opened in 1934 and run by the third generation of 
Kellys, it has a cosy southern atmosphere with timber-panelled walls covered 
with paintings and memorabilia.

They have block parties in Nashville. In summer, a block will be cordoned off, 
a stage set up, and the road acts as an auditorium for the bands. People think 
nothing of music filling the air. I’ve been completely seduced by Nashville. I 
love it there.

Bob Harris’s new book, Still Whispering After All These Years 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/282198/>, is out now 
(Michael O’Mara Books, £20). To buy a copy for £16 including UK p&p, visit
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/282198/>
 