
Are you happy with 5% of every penny you save going into selling cigarettes? 
New research reveals how small investors in Britain are pouring their money 
into tobacco companies and giant oil and coal companies that are wrecking the 
environment without realising.

The report, released ahead of Good Money Week by ethical investment group 
Castlefield Advisory Partners, highlights how UK tracker funds are massively 
invested in tobacco and fossil fuel companies. Tracker funds have become hugely 
popular in recent years because they are very cheap, often charging less than 
0.5% a year compared to “actively managed” funds charging double or triple that.

The UK’s biggest tracker fund, the £5bn Vanguard FTSE UK All Share, has more 
than £200m worth of shares in British American Tobacco. Last year BAT sold 
663bn cigarettes in more than 200 markets around the world, under brands such 
as Dunhill, Kent, Lucky Strike, Pall Mall and Rothmans.

According to Castlefield, the six biggest tracker funds aimed at small 
investors have a combined £504m invested in BAT. Such is its size – it is now 
Britain’s fourth biggest company (and larger than BT, Vodafone and Lloyds). 
That means anyone investing in a FTSE All Share tracker will have 4% of their 
money in BAT, or 5% via a FTSE 100 index tracker.

Campaigners argue that with few restrictions on how companies advertise in 
places like Indonesia, cigarette manufacturers are making huge profits from 
damaging the health of young people in the developing world. Tobacco kills six 
million people every year and nearly 80% of the world’s billion smokers live in 
low- and middle-income countries, according to the World Health Organisation.

Trackers might appear a cheap investment solution, but people may not be aware 
they are financing damaging activities

Some savers in cheap tracker or “passive” funds – British investors have 
ploughed nearly £17bn into them in recent years – may also be unaware just how 
much of their cash goes to support fossil fuel extraction. The Vanguard fund 
has 11% of its £5bn of investments in oil and gas companies, largely through 
holdings in Shell and BP.

John Ditchfield, partner at Castlefield, said: “Trackers might appear to be a 
cheap investment solution, but we are concerned that people may not be fully 
aware that they are financing damaging social and environmental activities and 
putting investors’ money at risk.

“Automated ‘robo-investors’ are pumping hundreds of millions in pension 
savings and other investments into businesses which individuals would not 
choose to support, and may actively want to avoid, for example tobacco and 
heavily polluting fossil fuel companies.

“More than 70 countries have ratified the Paris Climate Agreement and it is 
about to come into force, but a large chunk of tracker capital is invested in 
coal, oil and gas, exposing investors to serious risk.”

Unlike actively managed funds, where investment managers can use their power 
to implement change, tracker funds do not hold companies accountable for their 
business strategy or social and environmental performance. But it’s not just 
ethically minded investors who are concerned about the huge investments in 
fossil fuels. Even the least environmentally conscious are concerned that the 
assets of oil and gas companies will be “stranded” underground, forbidden from 
being removed as climate change worsens. That would render these investments 
worthless.

Ditchfield warns that while undeniably cheap, tracker funds also come with 
other problems. Investors were left with large losses during the “dot.com boom” 
of 1999/2000, as tracker funds automatically bought company shares at the point 
where they entered the index, irrespective of the company’s underlying business 
model or level of profitability.

He argues that returns on actively managed socially responsible investment 
funds have outperformed most UK tracker funds over the last five years. For 
example, the WHEB Sustainability fund is up 31% over the past year, compared to 
the 16.7% gain in the Vanguard FTSE All Share tracker. Ditchfield also likes 
the Alliance Trust Sustainable Future fund, which, although only up 13% this 
year, has given investors a return of 30% over three years compared to 20% from 
the major index funds.

For every £10,000 invested with Vanguard, £1,440 would be in Shell, BP and 
BAT, “financing a range of damaging social and environmental activities,” says 
Ditchfield. “£10,000 in WHEB would be managed by a team of experts who publish 
detailed information of the case for making investments and track the social 
and environmental impact.”

Many pension schemes use trackers as their default investment, although some 
allow employees to choose an actively managed ethical fund’ instead. But 
finding a low-cost tracker is tough.

Vanguard offers socially responsible investment funds, but Ditchfield argues 
they fail to screen out fossil fuels. For example, the Vanguard SRI Global 
Stock fund is 5%invested in oil and gas.

Positive thinking
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fsavings-selling-cigarettes-wreck-environment-investments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b2ee5b6aac72993307bd96c60cabc0d9ddc9933%2F0_195_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20you%20want%20your%20savings%20to%20go%20into%20selling%20cigarettes%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fsavings-selling-cigarettes-wreck-environment-investments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20you%20want%20your%20savings%20to%20go%20into%20selling%20cigarettes%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fsavings-selling-cigarettes-wreck-environment-investments%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b2ee5b6aac72993307bd96c60cabc0d9ddc9933%2F0_195_3280_1968%2F3280.jpg>
 Academic Caroline Bird has been a keen investor in the Triodos Pioneer fund. 
Photograph: Michael Lloyd 
The majority of investors want their money to make a positive change to 
society and the environment but many have never been offered the chance to put 
there money in funds which do just that, according to ethical Triodos Bank,
writes Patrick Collinson. 


Research found that 62% expressed this view, but 51% said they had never been 
offered a socially responsible investment fund. The findings challenge the 
perception that ethical funds don’t give returns that are comparable to the 
mainstream. Nearly half of those who took part in the survey said they see 
sustainable and ethical funds as a “smart investment” and more likely to 
succeed in the long term. Indeed, over the past three and five years the FTSE 
All World (ex-fossil fuel) index has outperformed the FTSE All World index.


Huw Davies of Triodos Bank UK says: “Our research reveals that a majority of 
investors want sustainable and ethical investment options, and the industry 
must respond to this demand.”

Caroline Bird, 52, an academic in Bristol, has been a keen investor in the 
Triodos Pioneer fund, which buys shares in companies engaged in sustainable 
energy, medical technology and a cleaner planet.


“I was keen to be doing positive good for the future,” says Bird. “I want to 
invest positively to support a healthy sustainable planet and I don’t want to 
support businesses that put profit over everything else and trash the 
environment or treat communities badly.”

 