
Petra Kvitova <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/petra-kvitova>, a two-time 
Wimbledon champion, said she was “fortunate to be alive” on Tuesday after a man 
attacked her with a knife at her home, robbing her of around £155 and leaving 
her with potential career-threatening injuries.

Petra Kvitova focused on tennis return following knife attack and surgery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/petra-kvitova-focused-return-tennis-following-knife-attack-surgery>
Police in the Czech Republic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic>
 were hunting the assailant who conned his way into Kvitova’s flat in the 
eastern town of Prostejov by posing as an electricity-maintenance worker before 
trying to rob her at knife-point.

The attack happened before 8.30am local time when Kvitova, who was eating 
breakfast, answered the doorbell to a man who claimed he had come to read the 
meter. After being allowed into the flat, he threatened her with the knife, a 
police spokesman said.

The 26-year-old Czech fought back but suffered cuts to all five fingers of her 
playing hand, her left, sustaining damage to the tendons, according to the local
Prostojovsky Vecernik newspaper 
<http://www.vecernikpv.cz/co-se-stalo/zpravodajstvi/17684-prepadeni-kvitove-tenistka-ma-porezane-slachy>
. The attacker, described as around 5ft 11in and aged about 35, stole 5,000 
koruna before fleeing and is thought to be still at large. Police appealed to 
the public to report anyone meeting his description.

Kvitova, winner of the singles title at Wimbledon in 2011 and 2014, was taken 
to hospital in Brno, the Czech Republic’s second city, around 40 miles away, 
where she had an operation on Tuesday evening, according to her PR manager 
Katie Spellman. “Petra has undergone surgery for three hours and 45 minutes,” 
Spellman tweeted on Tuesday evening. “Considering the extent of the damage, the 
surgery went very well. Doctors repaired to tendons in all five digits of the 
left hand as well as two nerves. Petra will wear a cast on her hand for six to 
eight weeks and will be unable to bear weight for three months.

“Doctors are optimistic she will be able to play tennis again,” Spellman later 
told Press Association.

The player herself posted a message on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/petrakvitovaofficial/> and Twitter thanking fans for 
their support. “As you may have already heard, today I was attacked in my 
apartment by an individual with a knife,” she wrote. “In my attempt to defend 
myself, I was badly injured on my left hand. I am shaken, but fortunate to be 
alive. The injury is severe and I will need to see specialists, but if you know 
anything about me I am strong and I will fight this. Thank you all again for 
your love and support.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpetra-kvitova-attacked-intruder-home-czech-republic-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00907ea054f6dda1d4e78f8c0836b6e47beca127%2F0_156_4690_2814%2F4690.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctors%20optimistic%20Petra%20Kvitova%20will%20play%20tennis%20again%20after%20knife%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpetra-kvitova-attacked-intruder-home-czech-republic-tennis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctors%20optimistic%20Petra%20Kvitova%20will%20play%20tennis%20again%20after%20knife%20attack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fpetra-kvitova-attacked-intruder-home-czech-republic-tennis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00907ea054f6dda1d4e78f8c0836b6e47beca127%2F0_156_4690_2814%2F4690.jpg>
 Petra Kvitova had been due to take part in a charity tennis exhibition in Brno 
on Tuesday. Photograph: Vaclav Salek/AP 
Kvitova, currently the world No11, is a celebrity in the Czech Republic and 
her publicist, Karel Tejkal, said she appeared to have been the victim of a 
“random criminal act” and was not a carefully chosen target. “It was not that 
they would go intentionally to rob Petra,” he said. “Her injuries are not 
life-threatening.”

The attack has severely jeopardised Kvitova’s chances of competing at the next 
grand slam, the Australian Open, which begins in Melbourne on 16 January, and 
for which she was already doubtful because of a foot injury. That problem had 
already caused her to withdraw from the Czech Republic’s team for the Hopman 
Cup, which starts on New Year’s Day in Perth, Western Australia.

Petra Kvitova crushes Eugenie Bouchard to claim second Wimbledon title
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/05/petra-kvitova-crushes-eugenie-bouchard-second-wimbledon-title>
Kvitova endured one of her most troubled seasons in 2016, dropping out of the 
top 10 for the first time in three years although she did win the bronze medal 
at the Rio Olympics. A stomach problem early in the year affected her form and 
she went out of Wimbledon in the second round, after a bizarre 6-0, 6-7, 6-0
defeat to Shelby Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/29/shelby-rogers-french-open-2016-us-tennis>
 in the early stages of the French Open. She has recently announced that Jiri 
Vanek, a former Czech men’s player, will be her new coach in the 2017 season.

The incident evoked memories of previous attacks on elite tennis players. 
Monica Seles, the then world No1, suffered severe injuries that kept her out of 
the sport for 27 months afterbeing stabbed in the back at court-side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jul/05/monica-seles-interview> during a 
tournament in Hamburg in 1993. She returned in 1995 and though she won the 
Australian Open in 1996, it was her ninth and final grand slam title as she 
struggled to consistently find her best form thereafter.

In 2007 Russia’s Anna Chakvetadze, a former world No5, was tied up along with 
her parents <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/feb/27/tennis.sport1> 
during a robbery in Moscow in which masked men stole £150,000 in cash and 
jewellery.
 