
To some, activist shareholding will always be an oxymoron because corporations 
are trained on profit maximisation. But what if we take a more charitable view 
– isn't shareholder activism one of the biggest drivers of social change? It 
certainly has been credited withthe actions of the big pension funds in the 
1990s <http://www.fairpensions.org.uk/history-ri> which were instrumental 
in defeating apartheid. More recently in the UK, retired solicitor andWar On 
Want <http://www.waronwant.org/>activist Ben Birnberg forced Tesco into better 
supply-chain ethics via shareholder activism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/may/14/supermarkets.ethicalliving>.

As a shareholder, you're looking to get your issue – which could range from 
ridding a supply chain of conflict minerals to campaigning for more women on 
the board – on the agenda of the AGM, as a shareholder proposal. Modest 
shareholders need a sponsor who must own at least 5% of the voting shares or be 
a group of at least 100 shareholders owning no less than £100 worth of shares 
per holder – so it is possible to build a small collective. And while the 
shareholder proposals that tend to make the news at big AGMs are likely to 
involve sacking chief executives or a better design of a brand's knickers, 
increasingly they are concerned with social and environmental issues.

Still, it's probably wise to manage your expectations. You're unlikely to 
storm the AGM and get unanimous support on your first try.Historically, few 
social resolutions achieve majority votes, coming in around the 5–25% range 
<http://www.greenamerica.org/socialinvesting/shareholderaction/whattoknow.cfm>. 
It may not sound high octane, but this can be enough to trigger change. A good 
company doesn't ignore a band of vociferous, unhappy shareholders.

Perhaps you're looking for a more laid-back approach? Socially Responsible 
Investments attract those looking to curate their portfolio around their values 
by buying into designated funds (often screening out "bad" companies such as 
arms and tobacco). SRIs have recently been doing well, and there are nearly100 
UK funds <http://www.yourethicalmoney.org/>.

Next month's National Ethical Investment Week <http://www.neiw.org/> will try 
to convince us to become active investors again, building a bridge between 
morality and the markets. It comes at the right time. In terms of shares, we've 
been devolving responsibility to huge asset funds since the 1960s, when 54% of 
UK shares were owned directly by individuals.By 2010 that figure had plummeted 
to just 11.5% of UK shares 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201314/cmselect/cmbis/603/60303.htm>
. It's time we put our money where our mouths are.

Green crush
 Rob Hutt talking climate change to a Forest Green Rover footballer 
Changes in the concentration of atmospheric gases: it was never going to be an 
easy sell to the general public. ButMy Climate & Me from the UK Met Office is 
getting us to engage with climate science. Non-scientist Rob Hutt (pictured 
with a Forest Green Rovers footballer) has an appealing, every-bloke quality. 
He wanders about the UK gathering questions on camera from anybody and 
everybody. How will climate change affect seagulls or the quality of snow, and 
is it actually happening? No question too small, or indeed too large. We vote 
online for the best question and Rob gets the answer from a world-class expert 
in a jaunty filmed reply. All very simple, really. For details, go to
myclimateandme.com <http://myclimateandme.com>

Greenspeak

Ecotherapy {Ee-koe-they'r-app'y} noun

Holistic natural therapy, from green exercise to horticultural activities, 
that experts say has a huge positive impact on a range of mental health 
illnesses. Watch out for new research from UK academics next month.


If you have an ethical dilemma, email lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk>
 