
Does Donald Trump’s election as US president mean that globalisation is dead, 
or are reports of the process’ demise greatly exaggerated? If globalisation is 
only partly incapacitated, not terminally ill, should we worry? How much will 
slower trade growth, now in the offing, matter for the global economy?

World trade growth would be slowing down, even without Trump in office. Its 
growth was already flat in the first quarter of 2016, and itfell by nearly 1% 
<http://www.cpb.nl/en/data> in the second quarter. This continues a prior 
trend: since 2010, global trade has grown at an annual rate of barely 2%. 
Together with the fact that worldwide production of goods and services has been 
rising by more than 3%, this means that the trade-to-GDP ratio has been 
falling, in contrast to its steady upward march in earlier years.

This disturbing trajectory, argue the mavens of globalisation, reflects the 
resurgent protectionism manifest in popular opposition to the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership 
(TTIP), and now in Trump’s electoral victory. It means that the benefits of 
openness and specialisation are being squandered.

Causality in economics may be elusive, but in this case it is clear. So far, 
slower trade growth has been the result of slower GDP growth, not the other way 
around.

This is particularly evident in the case of investment spending, which has 
fallen sharply <http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2016/02/> since the 
global financial crisis. Investment spending is trade-intensive, because 
countries rely disproportionately on a relatively small handful of producers, 
like Germany, for technologically sophisticated capital goods.

Joseph Stiglitz: what the US economy needs from Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/joseph-stiglitz-what-the-us-economy-needs-from-donald-trump>
In addition, slower trade growth reflects China’s economic deceleration. Until 
2011 China was growing at double-digit rates, and Chinese exports and imports 
were growing even faster. China’s growth has now slowed by a third, leading to 
slower growth of Chinese trade.

China’s growth miracle, benefiting a fifth of the Earth’s population, is the 
most important economic event of the last quarter-century. But it can happen 
only once. And now that the phase of catch-up growth is over for China, this 
engine of global trade will slow.

The other engine of world trade has been global supply chains. Trade in parts 
and components has benefited from falling transport costs, reflecting 
containerisation and related advances in logistics. But efficiency in shipping 
is unlikely to continue to improve faster than efficiency in the production of 
what is being shipped. Already, motor vehicle manufacturers ship an automotive 
transmission back and forth across the US-Mexican border several times in the 
course of production. At some point, unpacking that production process still 
further will reach the point of diminishing returns.

So should we worry that trade is growing more slowly? Yes, but only in the 
sense that a doctor worries when a patient runs a fever. Fever is rarely life 
threatening; rather, it is a symptom of an underlying condition. In this case, 
the condition is slow economic growth, also known assecular stagnation 
<http://larrysummers.com/category/secular-stagnation/>, caused by depressed 
investment, which in turn reflects financial problems and policy uncertainty.

This, then, is the underlying condition. Trade agreements such as TPP and TTIP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ttip> address it only obliquely. 
Increased spending on infrastructure by governments, to boost investment and 
growth directly, is more to the point.

But whether the Trump administration and the new US Congress can design and 
implement a programme of productive infrastructure spending remains to be seen.

More generally, a political consensus is needed on growth-promoting policies, 
so that investment is not held hostage to political infighting. Whether this 
will be possible under Trump’s administration is another open question.

The story for cross-border flows of financial capital is even more dramatic. 
Gross capital flows – the sum of inflows and outflows – are not just growing 
more slowly; they are down significantly in absolute terms from 2009 levels.

But dramatic is not the same as alarming. In fact, it is mainly cross-border 
bank lending and borrowing that have fallen. Foreign direct investment – 
financial flows to build foreign factories and acquire foreign companies – 
remains at pre-crisis levels. So do cross-border borrowing and lending through 
stock and bond markets.

This difference reflects regulation. Having concluded, rightly, that 
cross-border bank lending is especially risky, regulators clamped down on 
banks’ international operations. In response, many banks curtailed their 
cross-border business. But, rather than alarming anyone, this should be seen as 
reassuring, because the riskiest forms of international finance have been 
curtailed without disrupting more stable and productive forms of foreign 
investment.


We now face the prospect of the US government revoking the Dodd-Frank Act and 
rolling back the financial reforms of recent years. Less stringent financial 
regulation may make for the recovery of international capital flows. But we 
should be careful what we wish for.

• Barry Eichengreen is professor of economics at the University of California, 
Berkeley; Pitt Professor of American History and Institutions at the University 
of Cambridge; and a former senior policy adviser at the IMF.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>
 