
A premium-priced toilet roll made from waste milk will be hitting Italian 
supermarket shelves amid the Christmas paraphernalia this winter.

Carezza di Latte – which translates as “milk caress” – is a collaboration 
between German fabric innovators Qmilk and Italian company Lucart, one of 
Europe’s largest manufacturers of paper and tissue products.

Qmilk made a name for itself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sour-milk-fibres-textiles-qmilk>
 a few years ago after developing hypoallergenic cloth woven from fibres that 
are made from a protein extracted from soured milk. Now the company has taken 
the original technology and adapted it to produce non-woven materials, making 
it possible to make loo roll.

“It’s dermatologically very good,” says Anke Domaske, a microbiologist and 
Qmilk’s founder. “It should be okay for people with allergies, even lactose 
intolerance, because even though you can technically eat it there’s no lactose 
inside it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeQOHzuZ9IPs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeQOHzuZ9IPs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeQOHzuZ9IPs&media=>
 Tenderly’s new advertisement for Carezza di Latte. 
The idea for Qmilk came about after Domaske’s stepfather was diagnosed with 
cancer. In the search for non-chemically treated clothing to support her 
stepfather’s weakened immune system – the global textiles industry isrenowned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sustainable-fashion-blog/toxic-chemicals-childrens-clothing-phase-out-greenpeace>
 for its use of potentially toxic chemicals, including hormone disruptors and 
heavy metals – Domaske found an unexpected solution in the form of sour milk.

“When milk turns sour, you have whey at the bottom and a solid at the top. 
Remove the whey and you have cottage cheese, which we dry to a protein powder. 
Then we put this in a sort of noodle machine, add water and make a sort of 
cookie dough. Then we work it through to produce fine fibres.”

Domaske estimates that Germany alone disposes of about 2m tonnes of milk per 
year. This isn’t excess milk that has gone off but milk that cannot be sold to 
start with, for example because a cow has been unwell or because it has been 
treated with an antibiotic that has a withdrawal period.

Poo power: Dutch dairy industry launches €150m biogas project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/02/netherlands-europe-dairy-industry-agriculture-biogas-cows-manure-poo-power>
The Qmilk business model is based on repurposing some of this waste milk. The 
company currently uses 1,000 tonnes of waste milk per year sourced from half a 
dozen farms local to Qmilk’s factory, and pays about four cents a litre for the 
waste milk.

“It’s not as much as for regular milk, but still good for farmers because they 
don’t have to throw their product away,” says Domaske. At present, Qmilk does 
not foresee any issues upscaling its model because waste milk is abundant 
globally.

From a design perspective, the notion of extracting value from a waste product 
is an exciting one, says Andrew Walters, director of research at design 
consultancy PDR on behalf of the organisation’s Ecodesign Group.

“However,” adds Walters, “there is a danger that if this took off more milk 
production could be directed this way, which would be worse for the environment 
than a well managed forest.”

While Qmilk manufactures the milk waste fibres, it is Qmilk’s customers, such 
as Lucart, that turn those fibres into fabrics, yarn or paper. Around the 
world, about 270,000 trees a day are flushed down the drain or end up as waste 
in the form of chemically-treated toilet paper,according to WWF 
<http://wwf.panda.org/how_you_can_help/live_green/fsc/tissue_issues/?>. 

For Domaske, the ability to create products such as loo roll is just the start 
now that the company has perfected its non-woven technology. It’s the 
difference between having seven production steps or one, says Domaske. With 
that in mind, the company is now exploring many other uses for Qmilk’s fibres.
Milk <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/milk> waste shoes anyone?
 