
When it works, writing songs for children is joyously rewarding – their 
enthusiasm is infectious, and you can feel them throwing themselves body and 
soul into your words and music. Get it wrong, and you will be greeted with a 
listless performance, or a mysteriously feeble sound.

My most recent attempt to entertain children through song is called Seasons & 
Charms – 12 new songs for Aldeburgh Music’s Friday Afternoons project, which 
will be sung by children up and down the country on Friday. Boys from the 
National Youth Choirs tried the songs out in April, and learned them all by 
heart in a couple of days. That emboldens me to think that, after quarter of a 
century, I may finally be getting the hang of this. Wary of hubris, I 
nonetheless offer the following tips to budding songwriters:

1. Write with children

Getting children to help you write songs is enormous fun, and gives you a good 
feeling for what catches their imagination, and how they sound. Working with 
children in east London on an opera about their neighbourhood, I discovered 
that they would much rather sing about body-snatchers than a suffering factory 
worker. Each act of our opera was set in a different period. When I asked them 
the distance in time between the Anglo-Saxons and the Elizabethans, I was 
confidently told “one million years”.

2. Find a brilliant lyricist

My regular writing partner Alasdair Middleton has the literary skills of a 
grownup and the mischief of a child. Asked for a set of 12 songs, I thought 
we’d write one for each month of the year. Instead, he came up with lyrics 
about a fast red car, a girl telling lies, the moon going mad and everything 
catching fire.

3. Find your inner child

Actually, finding my inner adult has always been the real challenge. When I do 
track him down, he’s usually saying: “Your music’s no good.” So I have to 
suppress him. I think it’s the child that comes up with the music and gets lost 
in the pleasure of sound.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwfxINVdabII&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwfxINVdabII>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwfxINVdabII&media=>
4. Keep it simple

This is easier said than done. However hard I try to avoid unnecessary 
complexity, things always turn out a little trickier than I intended. The best 
way of getting a richer texture is with canons or rounds, like Frère Jacques or 
London’s Burning. They are always exciting to sing, and more than repay the 
effort of working them out. If you repeat something, you must do it exactly: 
slight variations cost hours of rehearsal. Singing in harmony is particularly 
hard for children, so if you want to write in two parts, they should be 
contrasting.

5. Don’t go too high

Choristers and trained children can sing astonishingly high, and Benjamin 
Britten often had that sound in mind – but untrained children may only go up to 
D. I wrote a triumphant top E for a chorus of defecating sparrows in Tobias and 
the Angel, and I am disappointed to admit that it is often inaudible.

Don’t stop the music – children need a proper arts education | James Rhodes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/27/music-children-arts-education>
6. Not too slow

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> can get very restless 
listening to slow music. (The unlucky soloists who sing Lampwick’s dreamy songs 
in my opera The Adventures of Pinocchio are often greeted with a fusillade of 
rustling sweet wrappers.) Singing slow music is also a challenge because 
children run out of breath.

7. Catchy if you can

Only use the ideas that stick in your mind and won’t go away. If you can’t 
easily remember them, you can be pretty sure the children won’t either.


 * Twelve new songs written by Jonathan Dove with lyrics by Alasdair Middleton 
will be performed across the country for Aldeburgh Music’sFriday Afternoons 
<http://www.fridayafternoonsmusic.co.uk> Big Sing on 18 November
 