
A young person held on remand at the Northern Territory’s notorious Don Dale 
detention centre is in a stable condition after an undisclosed medical 
emergency.


NT authorities on Sunday reported the young person, who has since been 
identified as a 12-year-old girl, was flown toMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> for emergency medical 
treatment after an incident on Sunday morning.

Jeanette Kerr, the acting chief executive of the NT Department of Territory 
Families, which oversees youth justice, said the young person was expected to 
make a full recovery. Kerr said support had been offered to the young person’s 
family as well as to staff who responded to the incident.

Kerr had earlier said an investigation had begun and early indications were 
youth justice staff had acted appropriately and in the best interests of the 
child.

The ABC reported the detainee was a 12-year-old girl 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-16/don-dale-detainee-believed-to-have-swallowed-glass-in-self-harm/8185750>
 under the care of Territory Families, who was the subject of international 
media after policearrested her and put her in handcuffs 
<http://www.ntnews.com.au/news/northern-territory/girl-11-handcuffed-in-front-of-fellow-students-at-tennant-creek-primary-school/news-story/b30b35ea322786c5f09b536f448230d1>
 in her Tennant Creek school classroom.

Guardian Australia has confirmed the girl’s identity, and understands she was 
taken into custody last week for alleged breaches of conditions related to 
previous offences.

On Saturday morning she presented as unwell. Guardian Australia was told she 
was transferred from RoyalDarwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/darwin> hospital to Melbourne for 
treatment after an x-ray, but was in a stable condition.

The office of the minister for Territory Families and the department would not 
comment about the girl’s identity, the medical episode, or the circumstances of 
her arrest and detention.

The department also refused to respond to claims by the girl’s grandmother 
that it was not giving her timely updates about her granddaughter.

The NT government is under increasing pressure to make immediate changes to 
the youth justice system, which the acting chief minister, Nicole Manison, last 
week conceded was broken.

Juvenile detainees launch class action against Northern Territory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/juvenile-detainees-launch-class-action-against-northern-territory>
“Kids go into incarceration, they’re coming out then they’re reoffending and 
they’re ultimately ending up in adult prison systems,” she said. “That shows 
you the system is not working.”

A royal commission into the protection and detention of children in the NT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/royal-commission-into-northern-territory-juvenile-detention>
 was launched last year after ABC’s Four Corners broadcast footage of detainees 
being mistreated and abused.

It is scheduled to report in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/northern-territory-juvenile-detention-royal-commission-given-four-month-extension>
, but detainee and victim’s advocates and sector workers have called for the 
government to act now, including for an increased investment in diversionary 
measures.

The number of detainees held in Don Dale has decreased over the past year, but 
youth crime in NT towns and cities remains a widespread concern as overall 
rates fluctuate in different areas and town centres.

High-profile cases continue to spark anger among the public, including an 
ongoing police hunt for a 17-year-old boy accused of stealing a car and 
crashing it in a Darwin suburb over the weekend.

Allegations of mistreatment at Don Dale continue to surface, including claims 
that another teenager was teargassed inside his cell in April last year. He is 
among a number of detainees party toa class action lawsuit against the NT 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/juvenile-detainees-launch-class-action-against-northern-territory>
 over their treatment.

“The public has every right to be concerned about community safety, as we all 
want to live in safer communities,” said Jared Sharp, the general manager of 
Jesuit Social Services.

“But we cannot allow fear and concern to overshadow the bigger picture – which 
is that youth crime rates across Australia are actually decreasing and there is 
no ‘youth crime epidemic’ as some would suggest.”
 