
The 2016 American presidential election has been an absurd, exhausting and 
bruising spectacle. Now imagine living through it all as a Muslim American. 
Somehow, this election has managed to cram all the Islamophobic sentiments of 
the last 15 years into the span of 15 months, and then morph them into one ugly 
thing.

Donald Trump is largely to blame. He called for “a total and complete shutdown 
of Muslims” entering the country until it became clear that the proposal was 
embarrassingly ill-conceived, only to be replaced by the equally vague “extreme 
vetting”. He fought publicly with the Gold Star Khan family, suggesting Ghazala 
Khan was not “allowed to speak” at the Democratic convention because of her 
Muslim faith. Heaccused 
<https://theintercept.com/2016/06/15/top-republicans-pretend-donald-trump-didnt-just-say-u-s-muslims-shield-terrorists/>
 Muslim Americans as a group of harboring terrorists. There’s more, but we all 
know the story by now.

A Muslim woman was set on fire in New York. Now just going out requires 
courage | Linda Sarsour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/new-york-muslim-woman-set-on-fire-eid-al-adha>
Trump has insulted and defamed many different groups along the way, but what 
we may not realize is how it’s different when it comes to Muslims. Over the 
course of the campaign, Trump has very publicly reached out toLatino 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-trump-latinos-20160820-snap-story.html>, 
African American 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/cheats/2016/08/19/trump-to-african-americans-vote-for-me-what-do-you-have-to-lose.html>
 andLGBTQ 
<http://qz.com/823649/donald-trump-unfurled-a-rainbow-flag-with-lgbt-written-on-it-at-a-rally-in-greeley-colorado-to-express-his-so-called-support/>
 voters to ask for their support. We can question his sincerity, but the 
gestures are there. He even briefly tempered his tone regarding Mexicans during 
aquickly arranged visit 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-mexico-visit-20160831-snap-story.html>
 to President Enrique Peña Nieto in Mexico City last August.

His daughter Ivanka 
<https://www.fastcompany.com/3063963/behind-the-brand/ivanka-trump-doesnt-flinch>
 and wifeMelania 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/10/17/politics/melania-trump-interview/> have defended 
him for his unforgivable behavior toward women, and Ivanka alsorecorded 
<http://time.com/4515709/ivanka-trump-campaign-ad-women/> an official campaign 
television advertisement openly courting women voters for her father. Trump 
denies the charge he mocked a disabled reporter, and despite a bevy of 
antisemiticincidents 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/10/donald-trump-anti-semitism-young-jews-214314>
 involving Trump and his supporters over the past months, he has alsodirectly 
<http://www.sun-sentinel.com/florida-jewish-journal/news/broward/fl-jjbs-candidates-1102-20161101-story.html>
 sought Jewish American support. Such is his style of leadership: he may insult 
you, but he still wants your vote.

Not so with the Muslims. A tiny handful of Muslim Americans may, bizarrely, be 
Trump supporters, but that doesn’t diminish the fact that, while attempting to 
engage every other constituency, Trump’s campaign has made essentially zero 
public outreach to the Muslim electorate. It’s as if Muslim citizens already 
don’t exist in Trump’s America.

The irony is that Trump’s willful blindness to Muslim voters may lead to his 
defeat. Muslims may only account for a small part of the American population, 
but a concertedpush 
<http://www.voanews.com/a/us-election-muslim-voters/3576727.html> by Muslim 
Americans during this season has meant that there are now over a million 
registered Muslim voters, more than double the number in 2012. And Muslims tend 
to live in key battleground states such as Florida, Michigan, Ohio and Virginia.

But Hillary Clinton may not be able to count on all of those votes either. 
Many Muslim Americans have long been uncomfortable with her hawkish foreign 
policy record and her superficially inclusive rhetoric. “We need American 
Muslims to be part of our eyes and ears on our frontlines,” is a standard 
Clinton refrain, and with it we hear the suggestion that our communities live 
on some kind of “frontline” of warfare.

This is so not true: the front line of Costco, maybe. Most Muslim Americans 
are boring, middle-class folk. Clinton also seems to see Muslim Americans as 
separate from her idea of “we” (“we” need “them” to be part of “us”) and to 
believe that we, as a group, carry some insider knowledge about evildoers that 
we may – or may not! – be willing to trade in exchange for equal treatment in 
the United States.

This is offensive to our citizenship, and Muslim Americans must be afforded 
the same rights and protections as everyone else without precondition. But what 
this campaign has really shown is how contested and precarious the place is for 
Muslim Americans today. That won’t change after 8 November, regardless of who 
wins.

Even with a Clinton victory, Trump and his “movement”, which is how he refers 
to his campaign, will not simply vanish. And the suggestion that Trump is 
merely using the election as a platform from which to start a new media empire 
is hardly comforting, as if there has never been a connection between mass 
media and far-right politics. So how prepared are we, as a nation, to deal with 
Trumpism after Tuesday?

How we learned all the wrong lessons from 9/11 | Moustafa Bayoumi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/11/911-15-anniversary-united-states-lessons>
If there’s any good news to come out of this election, it’s that the country 
now recognizes the potent political force that is Islamophobia. And Americans 
are beginning to understand that fighting anti-Muslim bigotry is not 
fundamentally about protecting Muslims, but about preserving the vision of a 
functioning, pluralistic and democratic society. Now we must be prepared to do 
the work necessary to hold our leaders to that standard every day, and not just 
once every four years.
 