
It was once a brand synonymous with gold and marble; a sign of guaranteed 
opulence if not necessarily good taste. Instead, the taint of sexual assault 
claims and alleged racism hung over the formal opening of the latest building 
to bear the Trump name: the Republican presidential candidate’s newest hotel in
Washington DC <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/washington-dc>.

Just 723 short steps along Pennsylvania Avenue from the White House, this may 
be the closestDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
comes to the heart of political power this year, but the glitzy launch was 
meant to be the highlight of his business calendar.

Rooms during inauguration week in January were marketed at up to $500,000 
each. During asoft launch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/13/trump-international-hotel-washington-opening-protests>
 in September, Trump ensured wall-to-wall media coverage by using the occasion 
to finally admit he had been wrong to doubt Barack Obama’s right to American 
citizenship.

Donald Trump: a brand in danger or a daring re-invention?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-money-blog/2015/jul/22/donald-trump-net-worth-political-brand>
But weeks of political scandal appear to have taken their toll on the brand. 
During the recent IMF meetings in Washington, usually the busiest week of the 
year for luxury hotels in the city, rooms could befound online at a significant 
discount 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/10/trumps-d-c-hotel-shows-as-poll-sink-so-does-his-brand.html>
 compared to its sold-out rivals.

While Trump was boasting of the building’s 5ft-thick walls during Wednesday’s 
ribbon-cutting ceremony, the sound of political protest out on the street could 
be heard from inside the lobby. Overnight,Trump’s star on the Hollywood Walk of 
Fame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/26/donald-trump-hollywood-walk-of-fame-star-damaged>
 was destroyed by a vandal with a sledgehammer and pickaxe.

The candidate sounded wistful and unusually subdued as he took a break from 
the campaign trail to attend the launch. “With the notable exception of 1600 
Pennsylvania Avenue, this is the most coveted location in DC. The best 
location,” said Trump.

Even the struggling campaign’s slogan, “Make America great again”, was watered 
down, perhaps succumbing to criticism that it implies the country is no longer 
at its best. ‘The United States is great. Its people are great,” said Trump, 
during brief political remarks that followed the launch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-opens-international-hotel-campaign-trail-brand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6890c7cbf84098146c141c4526eefc3278754933%2F269_0_3020_1812%2F3020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20lends%20name%20to%20new%20hotel%20so%20near%20%E2%80%93%20and%20so%20far%20from%20%E2%80%93%20White%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-opens-international-hotel-campaign-trail-brand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20lends%20name%20to%20new%20hotel%20so%20near%20%E2%80%93%20and%20so%20far%20from%20%E2%80%93%20White%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-opens-international-hotel-campaign-trail-brand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6890c7cbf84098146c141c4526eefc3278754933%2F269_0_3020_1812%2F3020.jpg>
 Donald Trump Jr, Eric Trump, Donald Trump, Melania Trump, Tiffany Trump and 
Ivanka Trump cut the ribbon at the new Trump International hotel. Photograph: 
Gary Cameron/Reuters 
“My theme today is five [sic] words: ‘under budget and ahead of schedule’,” 
added Trump. “You don’t hear those words too much within government, but you 
will. This is what I want to do for our country.”

 Ivanka Trump, whose name has been attached to both the hotel’s spa and its 
flagship suite over two floors of the bell tower, also sounded worn down by the 
steady stream of attacks. “This political season has been one of the most 
interesting journeys of my life,” said Trump’s daughter. “Each day I have heard 
critics attempt to deride my father’s business. But one of the most telling 
things is the thousands of people who have worked with him who continue stand 
by his side.”

 Eric Danziger, chief executive of the family’s hotel business, insisted the 
group was still meeting internal projections. “This has been a very rewarding 
year for Trump hotels. Our business continues to exceed our targets,” he said. 
But he somewhat spoiled the attempt to put a brave face on signs of commercial 
backlash by confirmingrecent reports 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/25/travel/donald-trump-hotels-new-name-scion.html>
 that the next hotel venture would not bear the family name and would instead 
be called “Scion hotels”.

In Manhattan, the many buildings that bear Trump’s name have become a magnet 
for middle fingers from passing motorists, withreports of dumped dog excrement 
and hurled eggs 
<http://www.latimes.com/politics/la-na-pol-trump-name-snap-story.html>. 
Management of one apartment complex has refused requests from residents for 
Trump’s name to be removed, citing cost and the risk of being sued.

The election had already been costly for the Trump brand. Early on, NBC 
severed ties 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/nbc-cuts-business-ties-donald-trump-over-immigration-remarks-n383856>
 over Trump’s immigration remarks. Macy’s dumped his menswear line. There have 
been attempts to remove his name from hotel projects from the Middle East to 
Canada.

But the combination of weeks of sexual assault allegations – all vigorously 
denied by Trump – and plummeting poll numbers mean the hotel launch comes at a 
particularly bad time.

“We’ll build a wall against racism and bigotry,” read a banner on display 
outside the main entrance as an army of political reporters descended 
beforehand. “This is not really a hotel; this is a symbol of Trump’s political 
ambition,” claimed Eugene Puryear, a protester with theAnswer Coalition 
<http://www.answercoalition.org/>. “This is another opportunity for Trump to 
create this myth about his so-called business prowess.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-opens-international-hotel-campaign-trail-brand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95071dba3172b7f022f69e7b2c7fb818c08f9846%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20lends%20name%20to%20new%20hotel%20so%20near%20%E2%80%93%20and%20so%20far%20from%20%E2%80%93%20White%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-opens-international-hotel-campaign-trail-brand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20lends%20name%20to%20new%20hotel%20so%20near%20%E2%80%93%20and%20so%20far%20from%20%E2%80%93%20White%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-opens-international-hotel-campaign-trail-brand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95071dba3172b7f022f69e7b2c7fb818c08f9846%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Demonstrators gather outside of the Trump International Hotel in Washington on 
Wednesday. Photograph: Zach Gibson/AFP/Getty Images 
Washington is not a Republican city. Trump received just 391 votes in the DC 
primary convention and could come third in the city in November’s general 
election. The hotel launch was boycotted by the city’s Democratic mayor and 
local restaurateurs.

But hotels are aimed at visitors. A characterful building on a national 
thoroughfare neglected by commercial developers, the Old Post Office could have 
provided a bit of harmless glitz to a city where opulence typically tends 
toward understatement. Instead, the acres of marble, chintzy carpet and 
gleaming gold taps on the inside feel like any other US luxury hotel, while the 
giant Trump sign on the outside simply invites uncomfortable associations.

How many reporters would have been here for any other hotel launch is hard to 
tell, but the press pack easily exceeded the 225 seats laid out for invited 
guests. Several of these were filled by family members: Melania, Donald Jr, 
Eric and Ivanka.

Officially, it was not a campaign event, but two of the handful of prominent 
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> still prepared to 
be associated with the candidacy were there as well, in the former House 
speaker Newt Gingrich and Alabama senator Jeff Sessions. Gingrich rejected 
criticism that the event was a distraction from the campaign: “That’s because 
they don’t understand the message,” he said, before echoing Trump: “It’s under 
budget and ahead of schedule … it tells you what a Trump administration would 
be like.”

“Washington will never be the same” is the defiant slogan of the hotel’s 
management, which seems determined to milk the waning political connections. 
What John F Kennedy would make of the 713 sq ft room in his name is harder to 
judge.
 