
Happy birthday to the humble kebab. The döner kebab has existed in Turkey for 
centuries, but there it arrives on the table as a heap of sliced meat on a 
plate with rice and vegetable sides. Exactly when, however, some Turkish 
immigrant in Europe had a burst of culinary inspiration, stuffing the meat and 
veg into a pocket of bread, thus transforming it into one of the world’s great 
street food items, is up for debate. Its origin is most often credited to 
either Mehmet Aygün or Kadir Nurman who, in 1971 and 1972 respectively, turned 
this Turkish dish into a street snack in West Berlin, though it is thought that 
the first kebab shop opened in London in 1966, making this its 50th year in 
existence.

In Berlin, where I live, one is never more than a pitta’s throw from a Turkish 
joint serving döner kebab sandwiches – places where the star of the show is a 
cow-sized hunk of meat turning on a spit like a culinary disco ball. The beef 
(or sometimes veal) is shaved off and, along with lettuce, onion, tomato and 
chilli sauce, layered into a pocket of flatbread.

Around the world, the döner kebab is part of that bibulous, 
inhibition-drowning, late-night landscape, functioning more as tummy filler 
than actual taste sensation. The appeal is the ubiquity of the kebab shop – we 
encounter them while stumbling home from a pub, everywhere from Sydney to San 
Francisco, Belfast to Beijing. I know this because I’ve done it often on my own 
travels.

I doubt kebabs will ever get stuffed with foie gras or sprinkled with truffles

But after sampling the kebab while sober, I’ve realised there’s much to 
appreciate about this Turkish-inspired snack. It could be the perfect sandwich: 
the juicy meat brings the savoury umami; the chilli sauce, the spice; the 
tomato offers an acidic touch; the yogurt-garlic sauce adds a creamy aspect; 
and the crisp, toasted bread gives the whole thing a textual crunch that is oh 
so pleasing on the palate.

Not all döners are created equal. Every “best kebab in Berlin” list, for 
example, inevitably includes Imren,Tadim <http://www.tadim-lahmacun.de/> and 
Mustafa’s <http://www.mustafas.de/>. They’re all perfectly fine, but I’ve 
noticed each spot does one thing really well, each different from the others: 
Imren’s main attraction is the flavourful beef; Tadim is great for its toasted, 
fresh bread; and people wait in line for 45 minutes at Mustafa’s for its crisp, 
fresh veg. I often fantasise about concocting a döner using the best of these 
three spots, thus creating a kind of supreme döner kebab, a sandwich so good it 
almost seems mythical.

Like many great street food dishes, the döner kebab was born of larger forces 
in the world, particularly immigration traced back to post-Second World War 
Europe. In Germany, for example, Turks were invited to begastarbeiter – guest 
workers – when thewirtschaftswunder, the economic miracle, called for 
labourers. Tens of thousands came. But as the economy soured in the 1970s, many 
recently laid-off Turks opened kebab shops.

Its rise tells us something about our globalised foodways and, in particular, 
about how Europe’s demographics have shifted in the past 50 years (and its 
population’s general acceptance of those changes). Today in Europe there are 
more than 200,000 people working in the kebab industry, grossing €3.5bn 
annually. Organisations such as the Association of Turkish Döner Manufacturers 
in Europe have sprung up to promote the dish and advocate for its workers. The 
kebab is now serious business.

And yet the perfect kebab still eluded me. But then I’d heard whispers about a 
place out on the border of Prenzlauer Berg and Friedrichshain called Meraba 
that served an excellent kebab – one with beef sourced from ethically treated, 
free-range cows. Could this be the edible white whale I’d been searching for? I 
had to find out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoner-kebabs-celebration-50-years-berlin-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1869bb1ebb9102db68ee6798526d80fa25d442a%2F0_225_2946_1768%2F2946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doner%20dinner%3A%2050%20years%20of%20the%20kebab&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoner-kebabs-celebration-50-years-berlin-germany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doner%20dinner%3A%2050%20years%20of%20the%20kebab&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoner-kebabs-celebration-50-years-berlin-germany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1869bb1ebb9102db68ee6798526d80fa25d442a%2F0_225_2946_1768%2F2946.jpg>
 Turkish delight: fans line up outside the Doner Kebab House in Wardour Street, 
Soho, London in 1977. Photograph: Maurice Hibberd/Getty Images 
With the sandwich in front of me, its dark fire-roasted meat, its spritely 
bright-green lettuce spilling out beyond the opening of the bread, I picked it 
up and took a bite. It had everything I was looking for in a döner kebab 
sandwich, a mythical golden döner: there was fresh, robust leafy green lettuce 
(not the usual tasteless iceberg variety); crispy bread that was thinner than 
normal thus less intrusive, letting the other ingredients emerge; and the meat 
exploded with flavour. Moreover, it was thinly sliced and charred to a crisp, a 
quality one rarely finds in cooked döner meat.

The sauces further emboldened the sandwich: spicy chilli, creamy garlic sauce 
and tangy mustard (an unusual but welcome addition), all conspiring to create 
added flavour strata.

I put the kebab down for a second and pondered what was in front of me. My 
quest was complete. The döner kebab will never graduate to the level of 
elevated food the way the hamburger has in the past decade, turning up on the 
menus of Michelin-starred restaurants. I highly doubt it will ever get stuffed 
with foie gras or sprinkled with truffles. But if Meraba’s fresh veggies and 
free range beef stuffed kebab is a harbinger for the future, I think late-night 
drunken eating just got a lot more delicious. And no better time than on the 
anniversary of the planet’s most perfect sandwich.
 