
Australia have secured their place in the 2017 Davis Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/daviscup> World Group with an emphatic 
playoff win over Slovakia in Sydney.

Sam Groth and John Peers beat Andrej Martin and Igor Zelenay 6-4, 6-2, 6-7 
(3-7), 7-6 (7-2) in Saturday’s doubles rubber to give Australia an unassailable 
3-0 lead in the best-of-five-match tie at Olympic Park.

Nick Kyrgios and Bernard Tomic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernard-tomic> both swept to straight-sets 
singles wins on Friday as Australia retained their place in the 16-team World 
Group for the loss of just one set.

Nick Kyrgios gets Australia off to winning start in Davis Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/16/nick-kyrgios-gets-australia-off-to-winning-start-in-davis-cup>
Teaming up for the first time in the competition, Groth and Peers overcame the 
disappointment of squandering a third-set match point to seal the tie after two 
hours and 21 minutes.

The Australians were untouchable on serve, dropping only 18 points in 21 
service games while not facing a single break point all match.

They broke the Slovaks three times to enjoy total control until the visitors 
saved their match point at 5-6 and then stole the third-set tiebreaker to have 
the Australian camp on edge.

But team captain Lleyton Hewitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/lleyton-hewitt> needn’t have worried as 
28-year-old Peers held his nerve to collect his first Davis Cup point for 
Australia.

It was a sweet win for Groth, too, following his shattering doubles loss with 
Hewitt in Australia’s semi-final defeat last year at the hands of Great Britain 
in Glasgow.

Australia’s unbeatable lead renders Sunday’s reverse singles rubbers dead and 
they will be reduced to best-of-three tiebreak sets.

Hoping to win the Davis Cup for the first time since 2003, Australia will 
learn who they face in the first round next year following Tuesday’s draw in 
London.
 