
In the first episode of Planet Earth II 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02544td>, from the basket of a hot-air 
balloon,David Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2016/may/04/attenborough-90-wildlife-legend-top-10-tv-moments>
 promised us new and unparalleled footage of the greatest living treasures of 
the planet. As one of the greatest himself, at 90, it’s hard to imagine anyone 
else who could have pulled in the biggest audience for a natural history 
programme in 15 years – its 9.2 million viewers making it one of the most 
popular shows of 2016.

Its success is hardly surprising; alongside costume drama, this is exactly 
what the BBC does best and where it leaves competitors standing. Attenborough’s 
matchless combination of authority, enthusiasm and mischievous twinkle defy 
imitation; he’s one of the BBC’s greatest assets and they know it, though I 
can’t begin to calculate the insurance costs involved in dangling him in a 
basket over the Himalayas.

But, on his own, even Attenborough is no longer enough; television has moved 
on in the decade since the firstPlanet Earth and, like snow leopards, natural 
history programmes have had to adapt their behaviour to survive.

We, the viewers, are creatures of story and spectacle. We have grown so 
acclimatised to extraordinary wildlife photography that images that would have 
been unthinkable even 10 years ago now appear commonplace. High-definition 
footage of a komodo dragon so close you can see the bubbles in its bloody 
saliva? Meh. Snow leopards whose every eyelash you can count? Seen ’em. What we 
demand is drama. We want storylines, with narrative tension and characters we 
can empathise with, even if those characters have feathers or scales.

The technological developments that make the series so visually stunning have 
helped here; smaller, lighter cameras and HD formats can bring us closer to the 
animals, giving us an unprecedented intimacy with their world. But it’s not 
enough to see never-before-recorded images of chinstrap penguins on the remote 
Zavodovski Island. To hold our attention, the producers must give us a penguin 
family, the mother anxiously scanning the crowds of fathers returning from the 
sea, her two adorably fluffy chicks straining plaintively towards her, cheeping 
with hungry desperation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdrama-tension-david-attenborough-planet-earth-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe296c1c5a7a77dcfe5d2753db719d22ec33a9c03%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drama%20and%20tension%20help%20Attenborough%E2%80%99s%20Planet%20Earth%20II%20show%20nature%E2%80%99s%20glory%20%7C%20Stephanie%20Merritt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdrama-tension-david-attenborough-planet-earth-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drama%20and%20tension%20help%20Attenborough%E2%80%99s%20Planet%20Earth%20II%20show%20nature%E2%80%99s%20glory%20%7C%20Stephanie%20Merritt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdrama-tension-david-attenborough-planet-earth-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe296c1c5a7a77dcfe5d2753db719d22ec33a9c03%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Chinstrap penguins on the remote Zavodovski Island in the South Atlantic, one 
of the world’s largest penguin colonies. 
Cut to Dad, battling the wild water, his brave little flippers slithering on 
the cruel rocks as he braces for another wave that might sweep him away for 
good. After the cliffs, he must engage in single combat with a giant skua and 
even then he faces one final challenge: how to find his family among so many 
thousands? As any child who has watchedHappy Feet  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/dec/08/2>will tell you, every penguin 
pair has its unique song; sure enough, our hero makes out the voice of his mate 
through the din and waddles towards it, to arrive bruised and bleeding just in 
time to save the babies. Phew!

Or so we’re told. You and I have no idea if we were watching the same penguins 
in each shot (they all look kind of similar) or whether that little vignette 
was cleverly cut together from footage of a hundred different penguins; the 
point is that it doesn’t matter. We cared about that penguin family, even if 
they were a construct of an editor’s skill, and through them we could admire 
the tenacity of the species.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2F150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=150%20years%20of%20global%20warming%20in%20a%20minute-long%20symphony%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2F150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=150%20years%20of%20global%20warming%20in%20a%20minute-long%20symphony%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2F150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video&media=>
150 years of global warming in a minute-long symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/18/150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video>
The penguins exemplified, in miniature, a perfect story arc, such as you’ll 
find described in every screenwriting masterclass: the hero wants something (in 
this case fish for his family); there are obstacles in his way; he overcomes 
the obstacles and is finally reunited with the woman he loves. Is it 
anthropomorphising the natural world? Yes, to an extent, and it works 
brilliantly, because humans engage through story and character. It’s especially 
effective with cute animals that share traits we can recognise.

Look at the lonely albatross, which pairs for life and must wait months for 
his mate to return during the breeding season. Close-ups of his face as he 
glances around to no avail, with Attenborough’s voiceover saying: “No, that’s 
not her”, as if articulating the albatross’s fretful thoughts, cause us to read 
the bird’s expression as anxious, even though he only has one expression. 
“There are three million birds on the island, but only one matters to him,” 
Attenborough says, with just the right amount of tremor in his voice. It’s a 
romance now – and how we cheer when the tardy mate turns up and they dance!

It’s not far-fetched to suggest that the producers have taken notes from 
cinema and television drama. The programme’s sumptuous soundtrack is the work 
of Hollywood composerHans Zimmer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/07/hans-zimmer-review-film-score-composer-gladiator-interstellar-wembley-arena-london>
and it’s used to magnificent effect, whether building tension in chase scenes 
or tugging at heartstrings when a fledgling dies.

It might be argued that the music itself contributes an element of emotional 
manipulation that has no place in a factual programme, but that too would be 
missing the point;Planet Earth is not merely documentary, it is glorious, 
cinematic spectacle.

Last week, the show found itself under fire after some viewers complained that 
a “rape scene” involving snow leopards was “too brutal” (who are these people? 
What are they watching the rest of the year?). One producer acknowledged that 
the programme was now expected to compete with the likes ofGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/aug/01/game-of-thrones-finale-hbo>
 and needed to take the audience on an emotional journey; another expressed 
frustration that people didn’t have a better understanding of nature and 
biology.

So which is it? Can viewers really be blamed for projecting human values on to 
footage of snow leopards mating, when the programme makers have encouraged 
precisely this notion of emotional drama?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdrama-tension-david-attenborough-planet-earth-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe004a51a295d80f4efc09934d553919525ba0dc0%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drama%20and%20tension%20help%20Attenborough%E2%80%99s%20Planet%20Earth%20II%20show%20nature%E2%80%99s%20glory%20%7C%20Stephanie%20Merritt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdrama-tension-david-attenborough-planet-earth-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drama%20and%20tension%20help%20Attenborough%E2%80%99s%20Planet%20Earth%20II%20show%20nature%E2%80%99s%20glory%20%7C%20Stephanie%20Merritt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdrama-tension-david-attenborough-planet-earth-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe004a51a295d80f4efc09934d553919525ba0dc0%2F120_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Galapagos racer snakes watch for emerging marine iguana hatchlings in episode 
one. 
Perhaps the producers don’t know themselves. They framed a scene in which a 
baby marine iguana is pursued by racer snakes as a white-knuckle chase between 
a plucky underdog and a gang of thugs, so that the audience applauds when the 
little fellow slips their slithery clutches at the 11th hour. That’s not 
strictly biology; the snakes are not “baddies”, they’re just being snakes. It’s 
damned exciting telly though.

But for anyone who feels that kind of editing is verging on dishonest, there’s 
always the behind-the-scenes “Diaries” after each episode to tell us about the 
2,089 gruelling days of filming involved. I love the Diaries, but I can’t deny 
that watching a freezing man shivering for hours in a tent spattered with 
penguin guano lacks the panache of the slick, edited narrative.

Planet Earth II may be a reinvention of the format for the box-set generation, 
but it’s all the more gripping for that. And perhaps a more emotional 
engagement with the natural world is what’s needed if we’re to recognise, as 
Attenborough reminds us, just how fragile and precious our extraordinary planet 
is now.

Stephanie Merritt, under the pseudonym of SJ Parris, is the author of a series 
of historical thrillers
 