
On a recent Thursday night at trendy West Hollywood vegan outpost Gracias 
Madres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/03/vegan-restaurant-meat-eating-owners-cafe-gratitude-california>
, bartenders served up cocktails, including George Clooney’s Casamigos tequila, 
cocoa and … pea milk.

Yes, pea milk, a liquid derived from yellow split peas, is the latest 
non-dairy milk to hit grocery store shelves. It joins hemp milk, brown rice 
milk and cashew drinks on the growing list of other alternatives in the now 
booming business of dairy alternatives. Non-dairy milk sales rose 9% in 2015 to 
$1.9bn, while dairy milk sales fell 7% in 2015 to $17.8bn and are expected to 
drop another 11% through 2020, according to a study released in April by market 
research firmMintel 
<http://www.mintel.com/press-centre/food-and-drink/us-sales-of-dairy-milk-turn-sour-as-non-dairy-milk-sales-grow-9-in-2015>
.

To stand out in this increasingly crowded market, Ripple, the pea milk 
purveyor, isn’t shying away from grandiose claims. “Drinking Ripple is an easy 
way to lower your carbon footprint,” its website boasts. Ripple also takes aim 
at competitors, particularly almond milk. “Unlike almonds, which require lots 
of water; or cattle, which contribute to deforestation and greenhouse gas 
emissions; peas have a small environmental footprint,” thewebsite 
<http://ripplefoods.com/healthy-environment/> states. “Yellow peas grow in 
areas that receive lots of rain, so they need little or no irrigation.”


In a world of plant-based, organic, non-GMO, non-dairy, gluten-free milk, can 
merely drinking a product save the planet? Or is it just greenwashing?

In Ripple’s case, the answer is a little bit of both. For instance, amid its 
eco-friendly marketing, company’swebsite <http://ripplefoods.com/> fails to 
mention its peas are from France.

“We just couldn’t find good quality peas in North America,” co-founder Neil 
Renninger told the Guardian. The peas, supplied by French company Roquette, are 
transported to Rock City, Illinois, for processing in a facility that makes soy 
milk, he said. That a company that prides itself on being environmentally 
friendly, shipping its main ingredient thousands of miles on a barge would seem 
to go against its principles.

“The problem I have with claims about sustainability like [Ripple’s], they 
don’t empower the consumer. They actually tend to disempower the consumer,” 
said David A Cleveland, an environmental studies professor at theUniversity of 
California Santa Barbara <http://www.es.ucsb.edu/faculty/cleveland/> who 
specializes in food miles. “They make a lot of one-off claims: ‘Our product has 
eight grams of protein.’ Well, so does soy milk. It’s advertising, not 
transparency.”


But the issue of internationally transported peas doesn’t deter Ripple’s 
investors. It’s raised at least $13.6m mostly from “impact funds” focused on 
sustainability, an investor said. Catha Groot, a director at Eagle Cliff 
Partners, says sustainability is the first screening for the fund’s 
investments, which are typically $500,000 to $2m in early stages. Admitting 
that the transatlantic supply is not ideal, she compares pea milk to the 
cricket industry, in which her firm is also considering an investment.

“A lot of startups are thinking of producing food out of crickets as a 
sustainable source of protein. But something like 95% of crickets are grown in 
Thailand right now,” Groot said. “In certain cases I think you start by 
creating a market and by creating a market, producers can justify getting going 
in the US or somewhere that makes more sense.”

Ripple maintains that transport by cargo ships from Europe to Newark, New 
Jersey, then by rail to Chicago, and then by trucks from Chicago to Rock City, 
uses lower carbon emissions than the most likely scenario of trucking almonds 
from California to Chicago, where Ripple says most almond milk is processed, a 
company spokeswoman wrote in an email. In addition, according to a recent story 
in Mashable, the company isalso looking 
<http://mashable.com/2016/04/20/ripple-pea-milk/> to find a domestic farm 
source.

But that may be misleading, says Cleveland, who recently embarked on a study 
comparing the carbon footprint of plant-based milks but stopped when he 
realized it was impossible to compare disparate products and processes.

“Basically Ripple’s whole promotion seems to be cherry-picking facts to 
distract people from looking at the big picture,” he said. “They don’t talk 
about the impact of cane sugar, sunflower oil or algal oil, which are also 
ingredients of the pea milk. What is the processing? If we want to talk about 
sustainability, companies need to be transparent. There’s a lot of variation 
out there – all peas aren’t made the same. What’s required are verified data on 
the impacts of the entire life cycle of the actual ingredients in their 
products, not generic statements. People need to be treated like they’re 
intelligent so they can actually make decisions.”

For its part, the almond industry has weathered harsh criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2015/oct/21/almond-milk-quite-good-for-you-very-bad-for-the-planet>
 in recent years for requiring as much as as much as 1.1 gallons of water to 
grow an almond, especially as California endured anepic drought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/14/alarm-almond-farmers-drain-california-dry>
 in the last few years. As almond prices rose, some farmers looked to cash in 
and boosted their crops.

Califia Farms, a beverage company that produces almond milk and also uses 
yellow split peas from Canada, CEO and co-founder Greg Steltenpohl told the 
Guardian. “The problem is you can’t bounce back and forth between how much it 
costs in water to grow a pea versus the water and energy component of a 
finished drink,” he said, taking issue with Ripple’s almond milk numbers. 
“People either need to rely on one convention and have transparency with it or 
put the claims on really bigger differences. Our position is that it’s less 
than dairy milk.”

Cleveland agrees. Despite the disparities in measuring the environmental cost 
of almonds, peas, hemp or soy, Cleveland agrees with Steltenpohl and Ripple 
about one thing: all of the plant-based beverages are much better for the 
planet than dairy milk from cows, which produces copious amounts of methane.

In any case, the quibbling about sustainability may be moot. At the end of the 
day, milk drinkers don’t choose based on carbon footprints, says Mintel’s 
Sisel. “Taste trumps everything.”

• The headline of this article was amended on 25 May 2016 to clarify that 
Ripple ships its peas from France via barge, not plane.
 