
Vertigo-inducing viewing platforms, island-hopping bridges, and some of the 
funkiest toilet facilities in the northern hemisphere: these are just a sample 
of the design flourishes that Norway’sNational Tourist Routes programme 
<http://www.nasjonaleturistveger.no/en> (NTR) has introduced across the country 
over the past 15 years. Add to this the fact that the roads programme has been 
a great incubator for Norway’s young, vibrant architectural scene – which is 
respected for its daring and imagination across Europe – and for anyone heading 
north this summer, with design leanings or simply curious, a road trip beckons.

This is a far cry from the NTR’s beginnings. The first pilot project by the 
then young – and today highly respected – firm ofJensen & Skodvin Architects 
<http://www.jsa.no/> (JSA) was completed in western Norway in 1997. Aimed at 
drawing tourists into the stunning, if rarely visited, landscape through 
appealing roadside architecture, a full programme was subsequently launched, 
with 18 routes across Norway’s south, its coastal regions and the far north 
eventually chosen in 2004. The pieces were primarily architectural, though in 
places, art installations and sculptures were also introduced, and by the end 
of the decade a host of impressive works were adding roadside lustre to the 
grandeur of Norway’s geography. A programme of rest stops, viewing platforms, 
bridges, walkways and restaurants was rolled out, with some jaw-dropping 
moments such as Tommie Wilhelmsen and Todd Saunders’ Aurland lookout.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7de9ef45cf1201b94bb2696261d80f2f5f93610e%2F0_0_3842_2306%2F3842.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Driven%20to%20distraction%3A%20the%20Norway%20road%20trip%20where%20cool%20design%20meets%20dramatic%20scenery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Driven%20to%20distraction%3A%20the%20Norway%20road%20trip%20where%20cool%20design%20meets%20dramatic%20scenery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7de9ef45cf1201b94bb2696261d80f2f5f93610e%2F0_0_3842_2306%2F3842.jpg>
 Atlantic Ocean Road, on the Atlantic route. Photograph: Alamy 
Prior to the programme the roads were in remote and sparsely populated parts 
of the country and only lightly used, all but empty for mile upon mile. But 
with the gradual creation of NTR’s network, traffic has increased, with 
tourists arriving from all over the world.

The routes still number 18, but other buildings and features have been added, 
with a tranche of new projects opening over summer 2016. These include the 
by-now familiar fare of hiking paths, rest areas, toilets and viewing platforms 
mainly in the south of the country, such as atSkjervsfossen, Hardanger 
<http://www.nasjonaleturistveger.no/en/nye-skjervsfossen-opning-20.mai-2016%281%29>
, designed by Fortunen Architects and opened in May. More dramatically, Code 
Arkitektur has just completed an ambitious viewing point with the concrete ramp 
jutting over the vast Utsikten valley on the Gaularfjellet route. There are new 
artists’ works as well, such as Jan Freuchen’scolumnar sculpture installation, 
which marks a walk at Vevang 
<http://www.nasjonaleturistveger.no/no/presse/nyheter/atlanterhavsvegen-stemte-ja-til-kunstverk-p%C3%A5-vevang>
, on the Atlantic Road route.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68cd006150b0be8d4af4f22b4b7735dace9e1bc4%2F0_65_1157_694%2F1157.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Driven%20to%20distraction%3A%20the%20Norway%20road%20trip%20where%20cool%20design%20meets%20dramatic%20scenery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Driven%20to%20distraction%3A%20the%20Norway%20road%20trip%20where%20cool%20design%20meets%20dramatic%20scenery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68cd006150b0be8d4af4f22b4b7735dace9e1bc4%2F0_65_1157_694%2F1157.jpg>
 Rest stop area above the Utsikten valley, on the Gaularfjellet route 
More viewing platforms, walkways and rest rooms are due to open around the 
country in the next year, and the programme now has its own showcase, theTravel 
Museum <http://www.reiselivsmuseum.no/> in Balestrand.

The most eagerly awaited of these new projects is the Allmannajuvet Zinc Mine 
Museum 
<http://uk.phaidon.com/agenda/architecture/articles/2015/february/17/peter-zumthors-tourism-designs-for-an-old-zinc-mine/>
 in western Norway’s Sauda municipality, designed by cult Swiss architect Peter 
Zumthor. On the edge of a steep ravine, the small museum will draw fans of 
architecture, as well as general tourists, when it opens in September.

These current projects mark the end of the NTR’s first cycle, which began in 
2004, but already the programme has instigated a fresh 10-year cycle, with 
ambitious plans. Eight finalist practices, whittled down from over 300 
applications, are preparing designs that will be rolled out in the coming 
years. They include a new wave of internationally recognised young Norwegian 
studios, such as Trondheim’sTYIN Tegnestue <http://www.tyinarchitects.com/> – 
the only Scandinavian practice invited to this years’ Venice Biennale - and
Rever og Drage <http://www.reverdrage.no/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F384b79b81f6fda006966040810bcd3f872aa24d2%2F0_0_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Driven%20to%20distraction%3A%20the%20Norway%20road%20trip%20where%20cool%20design%20meets%20dramatic%20scenery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Driven%20to%20distraction%3A%20the%20Norway%20road%20trip%20where%20cool%20design%20meets%20dramatic%20scenery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F384b79b81f6fda006966040810bcd3f872aa24d2%2F0_0_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Viewing point on the Geiranger route. Photograph: Øyvind Heen 
My own experience of the tourist routes was during a recent visit to the 
western county of Møre og Romsdal, when I took in theGeiranger 
<http://www.nasjonaleturistveger.no/en/routes/geiranger-trollstigen> and 
Atlantic Road routes. I travelled up into the Trollstigen (the Trolls’ path) 
and on to the Geiranger pass route. Beginning as a relatively tranquil valley 
road, this soon morphed into a switchback climb through a giddy series of 
hairpin bends to the Trollstigen viewing point, complemented by a sharp-angled, 
glacier-like restaurant and rest rooms, by Oslo office Reilf Ramstad.

A few miles further along the Geiranger road were the Gudbrandsjuvet bridge 
and cafe and, five minute’s walk away is theJuvet Landscape Hotel 
<http://www.juvet.com/the-juvet-hotel/the-hotel>, a series of delicately 
positioned micro-huts, all slatted timber and glass, half-hidden within the 
pine-heavy, moss-encrusted rock hillsides. It’s by JSA, which describes this 
atmospheric work as “topographic sustainability”, and whose story continues to 
shadow the roads programme. It has a new events building at Juvet, a variation 
on the Norwegian log cabin, and last year overhauled theSognefjellshytta 
<http://www.sognefjellet.no/> restaurant and roadside ski lodge at the highest 
point on the Sognefjellet route, 1,400 metres above sea level in a lattice of 
timber and glass.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f5cd436e879a3a75a1c18301c55f609e0e442d4%2F0_370_4878_2927%2F4878.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Driven%20to%20distraction%3A%20the%20Norway%20road%20trip%20where%20cool%20design%20meets%20dramatic%20scenery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Driven%20to%20distraction%3A%20the%20Norway%20road%20trip%20where%20cool%20design%20meets%20dramatic%20scenery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Farchitecture-norway-road-trip-national-tourist-routes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f5cd436e879a3a75a1c18301c55f609e0e442d4%2F0_370_4878_2927%2F4878.jpg>
 Juvet Landscape Hotel. Photograph: Alamy 
By way of contrast, and less than a couple of hours away, is the Atlantic 
Ocean Road, which includes a dramatic string of bridges leapfrogging across the 
Hustadvika islands. As with the interior’s roads, these eight swooping and 
curving bridges are impressive feats of engineering, creating a necklace 
connecting to the mainland peninsula. Fully exposed to the elements, this is a 
wild part of the coast on a stormy day. But the day I went the sun was high and 
the wind was still. We stopped at another recently completed building, a rather 
drab and dark restaurant and toilet built into the side of a low grassy ridge 
on tiny Elshuysoya island, with almost no sunlight inside.

After this brief stop I could understand reports of disappointment at recent 
projects, including this latest one. Still, if the second-cycle architects just 
beginning are given the space to deliver, they could take the programme down 
new and exciting roads. One thing’s for sure, the landscape and elements are on 
their side.

Oliver Lowenstein edits the cultural magazine Fourth Door Review 
<http://www.fourthdoor.org/wp/>
 