
Drive, baby, drive - that was the message from chancellor Philip Hammond’s 
autumn budget statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/key-points-autumn-statement-at-a-glance>
, with more money paving the way to new roads and a freeze on fuel tax.

The problem is the UK already has an air pollution crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/23/uk-has-second-highest-number-of-deaths-from-no2-pollution-in-europe>
 that causes tens of thousands of early deaths – more traffic will only make it 
worse. Furthermore,rising transport emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/30/uk-lacks-policies-to-meet-more-than-half-its-carbon-emissions-cuts-report>
 are one of the biggest obstacles to the nation meeting its legal targets for 
cutting carbon emissions.

But then neither climate change or the environment merited a single mention in 
Hammond’s speech. Nor did green energy, support for which is set to fall off a 
cliff in 2021, or energy efficiency measures for the UK’s many leaky homes.

The chancellor extolled the benefits of certainty 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammonds-speech>
 to business and Britain’s expertise in “disruptive technologies”, but these 
claims will feel hollow to those trying to build a clean, green economy fit for 
the 21st century.

Just a year ago, as foreign secretary, Hammond made a powerful speech saying 
climate action was essential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2015/nov/13/tories-push-for-climate-change-action-abroad-but-back-fossil-fuels-at-home>
 and good for the economy. Now, it seems, the trolls of Treasury appear to have 
brainwashed him back into 20th-century thinking where clean economic growth was 
merely nice to have if possible, not vital for long-term success.

It is true that through the exhaust fumes you can glimpse some green shoots. 
By 2021, Hammond promised £150m to support low emission buses and taxis and 
£80m for electric car charging points. Another £450m is to be spent improving 
rail services, though unlike fuel taxes, rail ticket prices will be going up.

But the £1.3bn for roads and the fuel tax freeze, which will cost £845m, 
leaves the green transport measures looking feeble in comparison, particularly 
given the£15bn for roads pledged in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/reality-check/2014/dec/01/breaking-down-government-road-programme>
 and recentcar tax changes that cut the incentives to buy clean vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/08/budget-2015-osborne-unveils-green-car-tax-overhaul-to-fund-roadbuilding>
, with the proceeds spent on yet more roads.

The Treasury idea that drivers won’t accept action to cut pollution, revealed 
in a recent high court case, is nonsense. Drivers are among the most exposed to 
the toxic fumes and anRAC poll last week 
<http://www.rac.co.uk/press-centre#/pressreleases/motorists-strongly-supportive-of-efforts-to-tackle-air-quality-including-bans-for-the-most-polluting-vehicles-1652883>
 showed a strong majority – 66% – of motorists want tougher action to cut 
pollution in the worst areas. Bus services have also crashed, according to
recent data from the Local Government Association 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/web/guest/media-releases/-/journal_content/56/10180/8040405/NEWS>
, falling 40% in rural areas and 25% in urban areas in the last decade.

Hammond also announced that the carbon tax on emissions from power stations 
will remain at its current level. But that’s the least he could have done, 
given that the government hasjust pledged to phase out all coal power by 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/britains-last-coal-power-plants-to-close-by-2025>
.

He also said tax breaks for the UK oil and gas tax industry planned by his 
predecessor remain in place, meaning taxpayers remain on course to be
subsidising the industry to the tune of £1bn to drill for fossil fuels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/16/budget-north-sea-oil-price-plunge-burden-on-taxpayers>
.

The chancellor stated his ambition on Wednesday to ambition “to build a 
country that works for everyone”. Without the clean air, clean transport, clean 
energy and most of all the clean jobs that the low carbon economy can provide, 
he is set to fail.
 