
Duncan Druce, who has died aged 76, was an exceptional musician whose gifts as 
composer, string player, musicologist, teacher and writer fed into each other 
and ran deep. He was of a naturally quiet demeanour, but is likely to be 
remembered for a big project: his imaginative reconstruction and completion of 
the Requiem Mass left unfinished by Mozart when he died in 1791.

As a violinist in the early concerts of the Yorkshire Baroque Soloists 
<http://www.yorkshirebaroquesoloists.org.uk/>, the period instrument ensemble 
founded by Peter Seymour, Duncan was invited to undertake the project for the 
1984 York festival. Attempting a completed Requiem using the fragments and 
instructions that Mozart had reportedly bequeathed to Franz Süssmayr, his not 
greatly gifted pupil, was a challenging task because it required passages of 
new composition as if looking through Mozart’s eyes. Yet when Roger Norrington 
and the London Classical Players took it to the BBC Promenade Concerts in 1991, 
the performance and subsequent recording were acclaimed.Stanley Sadie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/mar/23/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
 in Gramophone found Duncan’s version “substantial and pretty convincing, 
without going outside Mozart’s normal language ... The shaping of the movements 
is impressive, done by someone who is clearly a composer himself.” In 1993 the 
publisher Novello included Duncan’s completion of Mozart’s noble torso as part 
ofa critical edition that he made of the whole work 
<http://www.musicsalesclassical.com/composer/work/14341>.

At the Proms <https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms> performance, Duncan was 
reluctantly brought forward from the violins to share in the applause. 
Norrington’s vigorous semaphoring up to the dome of the Albert Hall and down 
again to the slight figure next to him was as if insisting we should recognise 
that something special had descended from on high. “I don’t think anyone knew 
what on earth I was standing there for,” Duncan said, “but it was an 
interesting experience.” Pressed as to what Mozart might have thought, Duncan 
felt sure there would have been criticisms but maybe acknowledgment that “this 
isn’t too bad ... The man can at least write decent counterpoint.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLUhbxvaTqQ8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLUhbxvaTqQ8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLUhbxvaTqQ8&media=>
 The Benedictus from Mozart’s Requiem, completed by Duncan Druce 
Born in Nantwich, Cheshire, Duncan was a Yorkshireman by adoption and choice, 
his parents, Robert, a bacteriologist, and Katy (nee Chesters) having moved to 
Leeds when he was eight. I first knew him when we were undergraduates at 
Cambridge – Duncan at King’s College, I nearby at Clare. I was always a willing 
pianist partner to his violin and viola playing. Required to submit a quartet 
movement composed in the style of Mozart for his bachelor’s degree, Duncan 
wrote a complete quartet and graduated with a double first in 1960.

He went on to take a master’s degree at the University of Leeds in 1965 and 
for a short while was a lecturer there. From that same year we were colleagues 
as producers in the old music division of the BBC – in the days of the Third 
Programme – though he resigned after three years when the demands on him as a 
freelance performer made the job impractical. Noticed first of all as a 
quick-change artist on violin and viola in Schoenberg’s Pierrot Lunaire, he was 
a founder member of the Pierrot Players, the group directed jointly by Peter 
Maxwell Davies and Harrison Birtwistle. Along with the cellistJennifer Ward 
Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/11/jennifer-ward-clarke> and 
clarinettistAlan Hacker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/may/03/alan-hacker>, he progressed from 
there to the Fires of London, the group directed by Max alone that had a longer 
life and went everywhere, and all three of them developed a complementary 
interest in period instruments. In the 1960s Duncan also played with Alexander 
Goehr’s Music Theatre Ensemble.

Duncan became expert on the baroque violin; other ensembles he played with 
includedChristopher Hogwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/24/christopher-hogwood>’s Academy 
of Ancient Music, the Music Party, the Parley of Instruments and the orchestra 
formed for the annualEnglish Haydn festival <http://englishhaydn.com/> at 
Bridgnorth, Shropshire. Another of Duncan’s enthusiasms was for the beautiful 
viola d’amore, the early instrument no one had bothered with for many years, 
and he composed pieces for it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW6rjiAUErhw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW6rjiAUErhw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW6rjiAUErhw&media=>
 Duncan Druce discussing his work as a composer in an interview for the 
University of Huddersfield in 2013 
Enrolling for another master’s degree at York University (1984-86), he 
presented a thesis on the music of southern India, after a field trip there. 
You were never sure where his enthusiasms might pop up next. His other Mozart 
reconstructions included two substantial movements for clarinet and string 
quartet, and for clarinet, basset-horn and string trio, respectively, which 
Alan Hacker recorded. Alongside Mozart and Haydn there was always the music of 
eastern Europe, especially of Romania and Hungary – and Duncan knew every note 
of Bartók. The playing styles and personalities of the violinists Georges 
Enescu and Jozsef Szigeti were an especial preoccupation, principally through 
their recordings, but he listened to everybody, wherever they came from, with 
the keenest of ears for developing performance traditions down to the present 
day.The reviewing he did for Gramophone 
<http://www.gramophone.co.uk/classical-music-news/duncan-druce-composer-performer-and-gramophone-critic-has-died>
 from 1997 onwards, mostly of violinists and string quartets, was unsurpassed 
for its quiet authority and generosity.

From 1978 until 1991 he was senior lecturer at Leeds University’s Bretton Hall 
College. In its lively music department his activities included producing 
editions of early baroque music, often from original sources, for immediate 
practical use. He loved the 17th century, he told me, almost above all others, 
though it did not confine him. From 2010 a two-year research fellowship at 
Leeds enabled him to study 19th-century editions of baroque violin music and in 
particular those of Bach. He was also a part-time lecturer in composition at 
Huddersfield University, which awarded him an honorary doctorate in 2013.

Duncan was my oldest and closest musical friend, a practitioner of astonishing 
insightat ease, it seemed, in the language of sound 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Fe-qPBEDTw>, able to offer a musical solution 
to any problem. Above all, he wasa composer of serious ambition 
<http://www.duncandruce.org.uk/>: among his output are five string quartets 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qLiSp9iVGQ>, a Viola Concerto (2007) and a 
substantial String Quintet (1991). He also wrote admired new works for old 
instruments: Henry Vaughan settings and a Fantasia for the viol consort 
Fretwork, and for the baroque flute, harpsichord and bass viol of Trio Aporia, 
a work entitled Coulicam Revisited, inspired by a movement from one of Rameau’s 
Pièces de Clavecin en Concert.

Duncan married Clare Spalding in 1964. She survives him, together with their 
daughters, Alison and Emily, four grandchildren and a great-grandson, and his 
sister, Cathy.

• Robert Duncan Druce, composer, string player and musicologist, born 23 May 
1939; died 13 October 2015
 