
Dutch inventors have unveiled what they called the world’s first giant outside 
air vacuum cleaner – a large purifying system intended to filter out toxic tiny 
particles from the atmosphere surrounding the machine.


“It’s a large industrial filter about eight metres long, made of steel ... 
placed basically on top of buildings and it works like a big vacuum cleaner,” 
said Henk Boersen, a spokesman for the Envinity Group which unveiled the system 
in Amsterdam.

Air pollution more deadly in Africa than malnutrition or dirty water, study 
warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/20/air-pollution-deadlier-africa-than-dirty-water-or-malnutrition-oecd>
The system is said to be able to suck in air from a 300-metre radius – and 
from up to seven kilometres (more than four miles) upwards. It could treat some 
800,000 cubic metres of air an hour, filtering out 100% of fine particles and 
95% percent of ultra-fine particles, the company said, referring to tests 
carried out by the Energy Research Centre of theNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> (ECN) on its prototype.

“A large column of air will pass through the filter and come out clear,” 
Boersen told AFP on Tuesday, speaking on the sidelines of a major two-day 
offshore energy conference in Amsterdam.

Fine particles are caused by emissions from burning wood and other fuels as 
well as industrial combustion, and have “adverse effects on health”, according 
to the European Environment Agency.

About 90% of EU residents are exposed to levels of such particles – which can 
be carcinogenic – above those recommended by the World Health Organisation.

As for ultra-fine particles, they are released by emissions from vehicles as 
well as aeroplanes, according to Envinity, and can “damage the nervous system, 
including brain cells, and also cause infections”.

China tops WHO list for deadly outdoor air pollution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/27/more-than-million-died-due-air-pollution-china-one-year>
Governments, businesses and airports were already interested in the project, 
Boersen said.

Another air-purifying system called the Smog Free Tower was installed in 
Beijing in September and launched by the Dutch artist Daan Roosegaarde.

Using patented ozone-free ion technology, it is said to clean up to 30,000 
cubic metres of air an hour as it blows past the tower, collecting more than 
75% of the harmful particles, according to Studio Roosegaarde.
 