
MÜLLER CORNER

It being the middle of an international break with not a lot going on, the 
Fiver has decided to embark on the unique media wheeze of taking some 
reasonably banal comments made by a mild-mannered footballer, blowing them 
slightly out of proportion and then sanctimoniously tut-tutting said player for 
his arrogance. Today, Germany’s Thomas Müller is the man who has fallen under 
our judgmental gaze for having the audacity to wonder why his team should have 
to bother playing the likes of San Marino. A predictably one-sided World Cup 
qualifier between the two sides ended in an 8-0 win for the world champions 
over the weekend, prompting Herr Müller to ponder the point of it all ... much 
like the Fiver does every moment of its waking life.

“Matches like the one against San Marino have nothing to do with professional 
football,” he moaned after his side had swatted aside the part-timers of the 
mountainous microstate in Serravalle. “I do not understand the meaning of games 
such as these, more so with such a busy schedule.” Now while the Fiver is 
prepared to concede that it can kind of see where Müller is coming from on this 
one, it could be argued that, if nothing else, games such as these could at 
least be treated as timely confidence-boosters for players enduring 
uncharacteristic goal droughts in their domestic leagues. The kind of player, 
for example, who has failed to score in any of his eight Bundesliga appearances 
this season, and might relish the opportunity to get his eye for goal back in 
by filling his boots in the inevitable slaughter of San Marino. As luck would 
have it, Müller is one such player and the Fiver can’t help but feel that his 
conspicuous absence from a scoresheet featuring eight German goals may have 
contributed to his slightly sniffy post-match comments.

World Cup 2018 qualifiers: 10 talking points from the latest matches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/14/world-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points>
Notably, the German did concede that, while such games are rather a chore for 
his team, they are a very big deal indeed for minnows such as San Marino, 
Gibraltar and Scotland. However, he also believes such mismatches could expose 
footballing thoroughbreds, such as himself, to unnecessary injury risks when 
they are forced to go toe-to-toe with part-time cloggers. He is not the first 
to question the relevance of such cannon fodder. Many before him have wondered 
if we might not be better served by banishing tiny nations to the early stages 
of some sort of pre-qualifying qualifying jamboree, from which just one or two
would emerge dancing celebratory jigs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4VnKQVXtFfo> after earning the right to get 
tonked 8-0 by the big boys.

Needless to say, this elitist nonsense has incurred the wrath of the San 
Marinese, with one blazer making the decidedly salient point that Germany don’t 
actually “own” football. In a lengthy rebuttal of Müller’s comments, Alan 
Gasperoni also said that games against the World Cup holders provide 
much-needed revenue for teams such as San Marino and are a source of great 
pride for those who participate. Mercifully, he stopped just short of 
name-checking a certain dictator most Germans would rather forget when telling 
Müller that “history has taught you that ‘bullying’ is not always a guarantee 
of victory”. Gasperoni finished up his impressive tirade by making the 
irrefutable point that, while their national team is very good at football, 
Germany is ultimately a country populated by people who wear “white socks under 
their sandals”. Somebody summon the fire service quick sharp, because Thomas 
Müller just got burned.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“I got a red card for no reason, I don’t know why. The referee says I started 
the whole thing, but I was the only one ending on the floor, so how could I 
have started it?” – Bosnia’s Edin Dzekopleads innocence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/edin-dzeko-sent-off-pulling-shorts-down-bosnia-greece-world-cup-qualifier>
 after finding a novel way to get sent off against Greece, by yanking down 
Kyriakos Papadopoulos’s kecks.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fearning-the-right-to-get-tonked-8-0-by-the-big-boys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd0cfd1e8950648e0f1c4ed7470c15b47fb28923%2F171_26_2092_1255%2F2092.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Earning%20the%20right%20to%20get%20tonked%208-0%20by%20the%20big%20boys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fearning-the-right-to-get-tonked-8-0-by-the-big-boys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Earning%20the%20right%20to%20get%20tonked%208-0%20by%20the%20big%20boys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fearning-the-right-to-get-tonked-8-0-by-the-big-boys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd0cfd1e8950648e0f1c4ed7470c15b47fb28923%2F171_26_2092_1255%2F2092.jpg>
 Cheeky. 
FIVER LETTERS

“I very nearly laughed out loud at Dale Sellers’ joke about USA! USA!! USA!!! 
playing Mexico (Friday’s letters), an event that is as rare as, well, something 
that is very, very rare indeed. The fact that he did not win letter o’ the day 
leads me to the sad conclusion that vote rigging has now reached the echelons 
of Fiver Towers” – Robert Darby (and no other readers who could expect a legal 
beat-down if we could be bothered).

“Well, thanks for nothing. After years of suffering through my regular 
tea-timeish dose of nothingness my pulse raced at the thought of finally 
finding something of interest. How great, I thought, finally acknowledgement of 
lower league football, a chance to read about the manager of my beloved 
Southend United. With a thankful heart I embarked upon your latest missive only 
to wonder, ‘What’s this? There’s no mention of Southend here? I have been lied 
to and misled’. I blame you entirely. How could you title your email ‘Manifest 
averageatbestness; and orange glow’ and not expect us to think it is going to 
be about Phil Brown?” – Sam Carpenter.

“Hmmm. A team for Trump? Probably not Taxpayers FC, I mused. However, on 
further musing …” – Mike Dunton.

“I understand Diego Garcia’s logic (Friday’s Fiver letters), but if Trump were 
to favour Manchester United, it surely is more due to his resemblance to their 
current manager, who has gotten a job he long coveted yet seems utterly 
miserable. A glance at the tables shows that a wish to retreat from foreign 
entanglements is another thing they have in common” – Christopher Smith.

“Re: Jeremy Foxon’s musing about what Donald Trump’s favourite English 
football team might be, may I suggest Blackpool. A club governed by an 
autocratic family who remained steadfastly unconcerned about the protests of 
the plebs who support it as it slips into ruins, I feel Trump would find much 
to admire. Oh, and they’re also called the tangerines …” – Daniel Doody.

“I see the Welsh FA backtracked over the wearing of poppy armbands as they 
were put off by the thought of paying a financial penalty to Fifa. Couldn’t 
they have just worn them and then asked Gareth Bale to dip into his newly 
massive pockets to pay any fine?After all, he is still one of the lads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/09/gareth-bale-wales-150m-deal-joe-ledley-serbia>
” – Will Laidlaw.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
letter o’the day is Sam Carpenter, who receives a copy of Football Manager 2017 
<http://www.footballmanager.com/games/football-manager-2017> from those good 
people at Football Manager Towers, and it’s out now! We’ve got plenty more 
copies to give away, so if you want one, keep the letters coming.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email – is expensive, but supporting us isn’t. If you 
value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING

Join AC Jimbo and co for the latest thrilling instalment of Football Weekly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2016/nov/14/england-see-off-sorry-scotland-football-weekly>
.

BITS AND BOBS

An annoying bout of minor issue-knack has led to Wayne Rooney being  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/wayne-rooney-injury-doubt-england-spain-friendly>
labelled a doubt to start England’s 2-1 meaningless friendly defeat by Spain on 
Tuesday.


Bastian Schweinsteiger says he is fit and ready if Manchester United need him. 
In other news, Granny Fiver says she is fit and ready if Brad Pitt needs her.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fearning-the-right-to-get-tonked-8-0-by-the-big-boys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d225b2ad3f5bd52d716cc068afa5abacd9ec264%2F0_260_2853_1712%2F2853.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Earning%20the%20right%20to%20get%20tonked%208-0%20by%20the%20big%20boys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fearning-the-right-to-get-tonked-8-0-by-the-big-boys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Earning%20the%20right%20to%20get%20tonked%208-0%20by%20the%20big%20boys&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fearning-the-right-to-get-tonked-8-0-by-the-big-boys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d225b2ad3f5bd52d716cc068afa5abacd9ec264%2F0_260_2853_1712%2F2853.jpg>
 Fit and ready, right. Photograph: Matthew Peters/Man Utd via Getty Images 
Sorry about this. It’s still international fortnight. 


As part of some advertising gimmick or other Borussia Dortmund have confirmed 
that Usain Bolt will indeed train with the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/usain-bolt-borussia-dortmund-training>
. “It’s no joke,” kerchinged a club suit. “Our coach Thomas Tuchel likes the 
idea as well. Of course, he won’t visit us in an important week with [Big Cup] 
matches, but maybe in the pre-season.”


Frank Lampard will have more time to focus on being the next Roald Dahl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/apr/01/review-frankies-magic-football-frank-lampard>
 after announcing that he is todo one from New York City FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/frank-lampard-to-depart-new-york-city-fc-as-contract-exp>
.

Roy Carroll, 86, has been plucked from the bingo hall to sit on the bench for 
Norn Iron 1-0 in their match against Croatia.

Nearly there. 

And after scoring a hat-trick on his Germany debut against Thomas Müller’s 
favourite team, Serge Gnabry has admitted he thought his call-up was a prank. 
“The coach called me up but I had to think about it for a bit whether it was 
true or not,” he honked. “There are so many hoax calls from radio shows and I 
really did not want to be a victim of that.”

STILL WANT MORE?

Is Gareth Southgate the best man for England? Are Wales already doomed in 
their quest to reach the World Cup? And should Didier Deschamps build his 
France team around Paul Pogba?Those questions and seven more are answered by 
International Football Clairvoyant Daniel Harris in the latest round of World 
Cup qualifying talking points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/14/world-cup-2018-qualifiers-10-talking-points>
.

“José Mourinho’s an attacking coach; what he’s not is a kamikaze: he doesn’t 
have us playing like mad men,”says Ander Herrera in this red-hot chat with Sid 
Lowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/13/ander-herrera-spain-debut-england-wembley>
.

From Pickford to Pedro and Allen to Amrabat, Paul Doyle picks out the Premier 
League’s most improved XI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/14/premier-league-players-most-improved-pickford-pedro-chelsea>
.

Ben Fisher was on hand to watch the Posh defeat the Paupers yesterday and 
concludes thatBolton have much to do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/nov/14/peterborough-bolton-wanderers-darren-ferguson>
 if they are to make a Championship return despite being a point off automatic 
promotion.

Roald “Kniksen” Jensen – aka The Nordic Garrincha – had earned 25 
international caps before he was old enough to vote but few football fans know 
about his magical, unfulfilled talent.Until now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/14/roald-kniksen-jensen-football-genius-norway-hearts-scotland>
.

At 5ft 6in Pedro Garay was an unlikely choice for a bodyguard but the Cuban 
refugee was trusted with minding Pelé during the Brazilian’s time at New York 
Cosmos.Michael Lewis recalls a story of handcuffs, pitch invasions and 
“jackass” photographers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/14/pele-bodyguard-new-york-cosmos-nasl>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>

‘THE TYPE OF MEMORY THAT TURNS YOUR BONES TO GLASS’
 