
Last year, America ate its way through 693m pieces of candy branded to 
celebrateEaster <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/easter> – more 
specifically, 693,393,389 pieces, or two for every man, woman and child in the 
country.

That makes Easter the US’s biggest candy season. According to data provided to 
the Guardian byNielsen <http://www.nielsen.com/us/en.html>, a market research 
company, 2015 saw $1.2bn worth of spending.

For the past five years, more units of Easter-branded candy have been sold 
than candy sold to celebrate Christmas (480m units in 2015), Valentine’s Day 
(277m) or Halloween (187m).

What exactly is a unit of candy? Nielsen finds it hard to specify, since it 
can be just about anything – the company’s data is based on reported candy 
sales from grocery stores, drug stores, mass merchandisers, convenience stores 
and military commissaries.

Helpfully, though, Nielsen also has data looking at pounds of candy (chocolate 
and non-chocolate) sold each week of the year. I’ve usedpopulation data 
<http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml> from the Census 
Bureau to adjust those numbers as pounds per person.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fdatablog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Feaster-american-candy-sales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d09fe31c3e699c17fa8b8b096c6a371cf1e1e5f%2F0_0_3600_2100%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Easter%3A%20America's%20biggest%20candy%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fdatablog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Feaster-american-candy-sales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Easter%3A%20America%27s%20biggest%20candy%20season&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fdatablog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F26%2Feaster-american-candy-sales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d09fe31c3e699c17fa8b8b096c6a371cf1e1e5f%2F0_0_3600_2100%2F3600.jpg>
 US candy consumption. Photograph: The Guardian 
In an average week, each person in America buys 0.2lb of candy – roughly 
equivalent to tworegular size <http://www.mms.com/us/nutrition> bags of M&Ms, 
America’sbest-selling 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/ss/09/10/1021_americas_25_top_selling_candies/26.htm> 
candy in 2012. (Remember, per capita numbers always divide between everyone in 
the country – that includes babies who haven’t tasted solids yet).

In the two weeks before and during Easter in 2015, Americans consumed 0.8lb of 
candy each. But as you can see in the chart, in terms of pounds per person, 
peak chocolate week is undoubtedly Halloween.

All together, 4bn pounds of candy were sold last year - the same weight as 
half a millionlarge male <http://animals.sandiegozoo.org/animals/hippo> hippos. 
 