
The European Central Bank’s (ECB) quantitative easing programme is 
systematically investing billions of euros in the oil, gas and auto industries, 
according to a new analysis.

The ECB has already purchased €46bn (£39bn) of corporate bonds since last June 
in a bid to boost flagging eurozone growth rates, a figure that some analysts
expect to 
<https://insights.abnamro.nl/en/2016/11/euro-corporate-watch-ecb-will-need-to-buy-more-in-primary/>
 rise to €125bn 
<https://insights.abnamro.nl/en/2016/11/euro-corporate-watch-ecb-will-need-to-buy-more-in-primary/>
 by next September. On Thursdaythe bank said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/ecb-surprises-markets-by-scaling-back-qe>
 it would extend the scheme until 2018.

But an EU pledge to cut its carbon emissions by at least 80% by mid-century 
could be undermined by the asset purchasing scheme, according to investments 
revealed in an analysis of the bank’s international security identification 
numbers (ISINs) by campaign group CorporateEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> Observatory.

These show that the bank has made 11 separate bond purchases from Shell, 16 
from the Italian oil company Eni, seven from Total, and six each from Repsol 
and OMV.

In Italy, gas utilities account for 68% of securities transactions bought with 
QE money, and in Spain the figure is 53%.

The ECB says that it cannot reveal the value of individual bond purchases 
without creating a market distortion. Bank sources confirmed that they were 
aware of all the ISIN numbers.

“We have a monetary policy objective with our programme and that, for us, is 
the prevailing reasoning,” one source told the Guardian.

Unlike the European Investment Bank (EIB) or European Bank of Reconstruction 
and Development (EBRD), the ECB is not obliged to consider the effect that its 
investments may have on climate change.

But the shadow climate minister, Barry Gardiner, told the Guardian: “The 
European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> should be aligned 
with Europe’s industrial strategy and energy policy. By signing up to the Paris 
agreement, the EU has committed to create a net zero carbon economy in the 
second half of the century.

“Therefore the investments that the ECB supports should not undermine Europe’s 
central policy thrust to transition its economy to one powered by clean energy.”

Dr Simon Zadek, the co-director of the UN environment programme’s inquiry into 
the design of a sustainable financial system, said: “In 2016, it is no longer 
acceptable to have a monetary policy that is misaligned with long-term policy 
objectives whether these concern growth, climate change, or other aspects of 
sustainable development.

“The ECB should take the opportunity of its QE program to explain how its 
actions align with Europe’s climate commitments, and then move to correct any 
imbalances.”

ECB sources say that as an independent central bank, no change to the current 
QE policy could come from any other source than the bank’s decision-making 
bodies.


At present, the ECB coordinates bond-buys by national central banks in 
eurozone countries, under a corporate securities purchasing programme (CSPP).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fecbs-quantitative-easing-programme-investing-billions-in-fossil-fuels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cb6ea3a903525898cf7003d822e96232a3fdbb7%2F0_0_3000_1990%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ECB's%20quantitative%20easing%20programme%20investing%20billions%20in%20fossil%20fuels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fecbs-quantitative-easing-programme-investing-billions-in-fossil-fuels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ECB%27s%20quantitative%20easing%20programme%20investing%20billions%20in%20fossil%20fuels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fecbs-quantitative-easing-programme-investing-billions-in-fossil-fuels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cb6ea3a903525898cf7003d822e96232a3fdbb7%2F0_0_3000_1990%2F3000.jpg>
 The ECB building in Frankfurt, Germany. The bank has made bond purchases from 
Shell, Eni, Total, and Repsol among others. Photograph: Hannelore 
Foerster/Getty Images 
Purchases are often carried out in line with national priorities. The 
Bundesbank’s most frequent securities acquisitions were in car industry 
flagships Daimler and BMW (15 times each), and in VW (7 times).



The ECB has also purchased bonds in Estonia’s Eesti Energia, which invests 
heavily in north American tar sands operations, and in the Austrian gaming 
corporation, Novomatic.

An ECB spokesman disagreed that oil, gas and auto investments are 
over-represented in its asset purchases and said the “ holdings of bonds issued 
by different economic sectors are broadly in line with those of the eligible 
universe”.

Kenneth Haar, who authored the analysis for the Corporate Europe Observatory , 
said: “Whichever way you look at it, this investment pattern cannot be 
justified. We should be looking for a public investment policy that puts 
combating climate change and creating jobs first, not mindlessly throwing 
public money into the coffers of Big Oil and car makers.


“It would have made so much more sense to use these billions of euros to 
create employment in environmentally sustainable sectors instead.”
 