
The European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> has cut interest 
rates across the eurozone to zero as it unveiled an unprecedented package of 
growth-boosting measures against the backdrop of a fragile global economy.



Amid growing concerns of a fresh economic crash, the eurozone’s central bank 
surprised financial markets by cutting interest rates in the region to an 
all-time low, expanding its money printing programme and reducing a key bank 
deposit rate further into negative territory.

The ECB chief, Mario Draghi <http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/mario-draghi>
, implied interest rates would stay “very low” for at least another year and 
predicted the region would remain mired in negative inflation for months to 
come. But he played down speculation that interest rates could be cut even 
further.


ECB stimulus hint steadies markets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/ecb-interest-rate-hold-steadies-markets>
 “From today’s perspective and taking into account the support of our measures 
to growth and inflation, we don’t anticipate that it will be necessary to 
reduce rates further. Of course, new facts can change the situation and the 
outlook,” he told a news conference.

The Frankfurt-based institution hopes its latest barrage of measures will get 
money into the financial system by discouraging banks from holding on to 
deposits. The expectation is that financial institutions will instead lend out 
money as cheaply as possible to businesses and households.
Eurozone GDP and inflation 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/03/eurozone/giv-27167gKU9PmtW8Lim/>
In the UK, ministers campaigning for the country to stay in the EU will be 
hoping the latest package of ECB support will ward off a fresh crisis in the 
eurozone, because financial turmoil could undermine their case ahead of June’s 
referendum.

The measures went well beyond what investors had been expecting and led to 
wild swings on already febrile financial markets. The euro initially plunged as 
record low interest rates were announced, before bouncing back as Draghi 
implied this was the lowest the central bank would go on borrowing costs.

Going further than economists had expected, the ECB reduced the eurozone’s 
main interest rate from 0.05% to zero, also cut its two other interest rates, 
expanded its quantitative easing (QE) programme and announced new ultra-cheap, 
four-year loans to banks, allowing them to borrow from the ECB at negative 
interest rates.


On stock markets, share prices were boosted when the rate cuts were announced 
but gains were cut as Draghi suggested there was no additional help to come.

How the ECB is trying to revive the eurozone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/how-european-central-bank-ecb-trying-revive-eurozone>
“The ECB attempted to exceed market expectations with a strong set of 
non-conventional monetary policy measures but then disappointed the market on 
forward guidance around further interest rate reductions – effectively 
suggesting that interest rates had reached their nadir,” said Marilyn Watson at 
fund manager BlackRock.


As expected by markets, the ECB cut its deposit rate by 10 basis points, 
further into negative territory to -0.4%. The latest cut in the deposit rate 
means the ECB will be charging banks more to hold their money overnight, with 
the aim of encouraging them to lend it to businesses. The marginal lending 
rate, paid by banks to borrow from the ECB overnight, was cut from 0.3% to to 
0.25%.


The ECB expanded its QE programme to €80bn (£61bn) a month, up from €60bn. 
Under QE, the central bank pumps money into the eurozone by buying bonds off 
financial institutions in the expectation that they will reinvest the proceeds 
elsewhere in the European economy. The QE programme will now include buying 
bonds issued by companies and not just by financial institutions.

Draghi and his fellow policymakers had come under growing pressure to increase 
support for the eurozone’s economy afterthe single-currency bloc slipped back 
into negative inflation in February 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/2016/feb/29/negative-inflation-ecb-under-pressure-eurozone-support>
.


The ECB chief used a news conference to insist the region was not in full-on, 
Japan-style deflation and to rebuff growing fears that central banks have run 
out of ammunition to fight sluggish economic growth and revive price rises. 
Negative inflation is viewed as economically dangerous because falling prices 
can create a downward spiral of economic growth, by dissuading businesses and 
consumers from spending in the expectation that prices will fall further.


Without Thursday’s measures, the eurozone would have faced “disastrous 
deflation”, Draghi added.

The ECB is predicting inflation in the eurozone will be just 0.1% this year, 
1.3% in 2017 and 1.6% in 2018 – all under its target for inflation, close to 
but below 2%.

Economists are becoming increasingly sceptical of the power of monetary policy 
as central banks around the world resort to increasingly unconventional 
measures to shore up their economies.

ECB can only buy time, not solve eurozone growth woes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/ecb-can-only-buy-time-not-solve-eurozone-growth-woes-draghi>
“Having mislaid his bazooka in December, Mario Draghi has returned to the fray 
firing a blunderbuss,” said Simon Ward, chief economist at Henderson Global 
Investors. “While superficially impressive, this scattershot approach will 
probably have limited impact on monetary conditions and the economic outlook.”

For their part, central bankers have become increasingly frustrated with the 
failure of governments to push through economic reforms, eight years on from 
the global financial crisis. Draghi echoed recent comments by his UK 
counterpart, the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, thatministers cannot 
leave central banks to do all the work on driving the economic recovery 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/2016/feb/26/bank-of-england-chief-accuses-g20-of-failing-to-enact-reforms-to-boost-growth>
.

Draghi said: “In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy 
measures, other policy areas must contribute decisively.”


The ECB chief cited a host of risks to economic growth from stumbling emerging 
economies, volatile financial markets and the slow pace of structural reforms.


Draghi’s comments reflected evidence that “the effectiveness of monetary 
policy is clearly diminishing”, said Alasdair Cavalla at the consultancy the 
Centre forEconomics <http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/economics> and 
Business Research.


“Draghi threw down the gauntlet to fiscal policymakers today, arguing for 
infrastructure spending while lowering the ECB’s own growth forecasts,” said 
Cavalla.

Kipper Williams on ECB cutting eurozone interest rate to zero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/picture/2016/mar/10/kipper-williams-on-ecb-cutting-eurozone-interest-rate-to-zero>
Some analysts welcomed the announcement of ultra-cheap loans to banks, hoping 
they could mitigate the impact of ultra-low interest rates, which create 
difficulties for commercial banks by making it harder for them to lend 
profitably.

“The icing on the cake was the announcement of a new, longer-term bank lending 
programme,” said Barbara Teixeira Araujo, an economist at Moody’s Analytics.

Negative rates on these new loans to banks would “partially compensate the 
extra costs related to the further cut in deposit rates, easing worries about 
negative interest rates cutting into banks’ profitability and potentially 
hurting the banking system”, she added.


But analysts at the consultancy Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> were less sanguine about the 
overall ECB package: “There is no guarantee that its latest ‘bazooka’ will be 
any more effective than previous ones in securing the strong and sustained 
growth required to eliminate the threat of deflation in the currency union and 
allow the peripheral countries to tackle their debt problems. The ECB has 
belatedly delivered, but it can’t work miracles.”
 