
Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> (ECB), has urged 
the British government to disclose more information about its plans to leave 
the EU.

He told the European parliament’s committee on economic and monetary affairs 
that theUK should address the uncertainty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/23/brexit-uncertainty-could-hit-investment-in-uk-warns-german-car-chief>
 over how Brexit will play out.

Draghi said Britain would bear the brunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/hard-brexit-would-damage-almost-every-sector-of-uk-economy>
 of the economic damage if Brexit created a UK economy with lower migration and 
weaker growth in trade and investment.

He told MEPs: “We are looking for a concept by the UK government where it 
would share its views and plans with its own citizens, and see what they say 
about that, before we can actually express our views on this.”

The ECB president said it was not yet possible to say whether Brexit would 
cost jobs in the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/17/banks-could-move-assets-out-of-uk-by-2017-if-eu-passport-is-lost>
 or mean that London-basedbanks lost their passporting rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/20/passporting-rights-brexit-uk-firms-fca-eu>
 to offer services across the EU.


Asked about the consequences of the vote to leave the EU, Draghi said the only 
answer to many questions was “we don’t know”.

“And the reason we don’t know is we have to see exactly how the final shape of 
the negotiations will be and how long they will last. It’s pretty clear that 
the longer they last, the bigger the uncertainty,” he said.

Draghi predicted that Brexit would raise about questions about eurozone 
sovereignty. Last year,the ECB lost a legal fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/04/george-osborne-wins-clearing-house-ruling-against-ecb>
 to have the clearing of euro-denominated securities moved from London to the 
eurozone, and Draghi suggested that legislators might want to consider changing 
the law.

“If, in the long run, the risk of a less open UK economy in terms of trade, 
migration and foreign direct investment were to materialise, there would be a 
negative impact on innovation and competition, and thus, productivity and 
potential output,” he said. “Such developments would first and foremost weigh 
on the UKeconomy.”

Bank of England prepares to protect City firms from hard Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/bank-of-england-prepares-to-protect-city-firms-from-hard-brexit>
At the weekend, it emerged that the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, had 
held talks with senior City figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/bank-of-england-prepares-to-protect-city-firms-from-hard-brexit>
about negotiating a “transitional arrangement” to protect financial companies 
from the dangers of suddenly losing fullmembership of the single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/uk-government-faces-legal-challenge-over-single-market>
.

Paresh Davdra, the chief executive of foreign exchange firm RationalFX, said 
central bankers were becoming frustrated that elected politicians were not 
pulling their weight.

“Draghi’s comments likely reflect a frustration that Carney will be able to 
relate to, in which central banks have to fulfil certain roles that 
policymakers traditionally undertook in order to keep the economy stable,” 
Davdra said.

“Draghi‘s comments on Brexit further acknowledge this, in his call for the 
prime minister, Theresa May, to share more about the Brexit strategy, days 
after it was revealed Carney was involved in contingency planning in the case 
of ‘hard Brexit’.”
 