
Soaring house prices have put the spotlight on some of Australia’s economic 
soothsayers.

At the start of last year, the common view among economists was that house 
prices would stabilise in Sydney and Melbourne by the end of 2016. Some even 
predicted prices would suffer a significant correction, falling by up to 7% in
Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>.

But figures show the opposite happened. 

According to CoreLogic 
<http://corelogic.com.au/news/capital-city-dwelling-values-surge-10-9-higher-over-the-2016-calendar-year>
, dwelling values rose staggeringly last year, by more than 15% and 13% 
respectively in Sydney and Melbourne, continuing the fast pace of price growth 
since the global financial crisis. It means dwelling values have almost doubled 
since the GFC in Sydney, rising 97.5% since January 2009, while in Melbourne 
they have risen 83.5%.

Economics 101: house prices are surging because of low supply | Stephen 
Koukoulas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/economics-101-house-prices-are-surging-because-of-low-supply>
“Sydneysiders saw dwelling values increase by approximately $10,000 per month 
over the past year, creating a significant boost in wealth for home owners,” 
Tim Lawless from CoreLogic said. “At the same time we’ve seen mounting 
affordability challenges for aspiring home owners.”

How did economists underestimate such strong price growth? Saul Eslake, who 
thought dwelling values would barely rise inSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> or Melbourne in 2016, said 
he did not foresee a number of things.

He did not think the Reserve Bank would keep cutting interest rates last year. 
But the RBA cut rates twice, to a historic-low 1.5%, after ultra-low inflation
caught it by surprise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/06/reserve-bank-slashes-inflation-forecasts-casting-doubt-on-budget-figures>
 in March. That had helped to boost house prices, Eslake said.

He also did not predict population growth would be so high, particularly in 
Victoria. Figures showAustralia’s population rose 337,800 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/3101.0Main%20Features2Jun%202016?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=3101.0&issue=Jun%202016&num=&view=>
 in the 12 months to 30 June, the highest annual figure since the September 
quarter of 2014, while net overseas migration occurred at a 
higher-than-expected level, at 183,000 people for the 12 months to 30 June. 
Victoria and NSWabsorbed nearly all of that net overseas migration 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/3101.0Main%20Features2Jun%202016?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=3101.0&issue=Jun%202016&num=&view=>
.

Eslake said he also believed measures by the Australian Prudential Regulation 
Authority to rein in lending activity was going to have a greater impact than 
they did. And in the world of politics, he thought the Turnbull government 
would have to curb negative gearing or the capital gains tax discount last 
year, given how much political pressure it was facing. But the governmentruled 
out any changes in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/24/michaelia-cash-confirms-government-wont-change-negative-gearing>
.

Stephen Koukoulas, from Market Economics, predicted house prices would fall 
sharply in Sydney (-6%) and Melbourne (-7%) last year. He says he made similar 
miscalculations.

He did not think the RBA would cut rates; he believed population growth, and 
net overseas migration, would not be as strong as they had been in previous 
years; he also believed the investor market was going to cool thanks to 
regulatory changes implemented the year before. “And there was a slight cooling 
in investor activity until the middle of the year ... but it didn’t remain that 
way,” Koukoulas said.

The Reserve Bank is now warning conditions in the established housing market 
have strengthened in recent months. “In Sydney and Melbourne, housing price 
inflation had picked up and auction clearance rates were at high levels,” said 
theRBA’s 6 December board meeting minutes 
<http://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2016/2016-12-06.html>.

CoreLogic data shows average dwelling values in Australia’s eight major cities 
rose 10.9% overall last year, supported by strong increases in Hobart (11.2%) 
and Canberra (9.3%). But dwelling values did fall in Perth, down 4.3%, as the 
Western Australia’s economic downturn hit the city hard.

“Those regional areas with intrinsic ties to the mining and resources sector 
have continued to record weaker housing market conditions since the end of the 
mining infrastructure boom, with Perth and Darwin recording the weakest housing 
market conditions across the capital cities,” Lawless said.

“Since values peaked in these markets during 2014, values have fallen by a 
cumulative 7.9% in Perth and 5.9% in Darwin.”

 