
The US is not the only western nation to be undergoing political ructions over 
the faltering post-crisis recovery. New counter-establishment parties have 
emerged in several countries and, as in the UK, people have voted for dramatic 
change. Meanwhile, there’s a growing sense in developed economies that workers 
have yet to benefit from the recovery or rising globalisation.

Germany


Germany’s economy has largely outperformed the wider eurozone in recent years. 
Its unemployment rate is low and youth unemployment is the lowest in EU. But 
not everyone feels they are getting the benefits of Germany’s stand-out 
performance. Wage growth has been relatively modest, and anger has intensified 
recently over meagre returns on savings as the European Central Bank cut key 
interest rates into negative territory. That has exacerbated grievances some 
Germans have long held over the euro, a union they feel benefits poorer 
countries more than their own.

Animosity towards the single currency was behind the founding of the populist 
Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) party in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/19/frauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview>
. The party has since shifted to the right and enjoyed gains in regional 
elections by playing on fears over immigration and chancellor Angela Merkel’s 
policy on refugees.

UK

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a3de008ddaa1dba66f08daf695ae39407b9ebc5%2F0_221_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Economic%20woes%20create%20anti-establishment%20movements%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Economic%20woes%20create%20anti-establishment%20movements%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a3de008ddaa1dba66f08daf695ae39407b9ebc5%2F0_221_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Zero-hours contracts have boosted the UK’s employment rates. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
After a prolonged squeeze on household incomes in the wake of the financial 
crisis and spending cuts, June’sBrexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
 was widely seen as being as much about frustration with the establishment as a 
decision to leave the EU. Ministers have repeatedly hailed Britain’s rising 
employment and relatively strong economic growth, but a quick look behind the 
headline figures explains why such boasts have been met with disbelief by many. 
Employment is up, but a significant driver of this gain has been 
self-employment and other forms of insecure work such as zero-hours contracts, 
and employers have continued to rely on low-paid labour rather than investing 
to grow. A recent study by the Trades Union Congress,the umbrella body for 
British unions, foundBritain suffered a bigger fall in real wages since the 
financial crisis than any other advanced country apart from Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/27/uk-joins-greece-at-bottom-of-wage-growth-league-tuc-oecd>
.

France

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a8daab149992ed3104290e48a76acb4eadbd9a9%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Economic%20woes%20create%20anti-establishment%20movements%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Economic%20woes%20create%20anti-establishment%20movements%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a8daab149992ed3104290e48a76acb4eadbd9a9%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Marine Le Pen has seen support grow with anti-globalisation and anti-euro 
feeling. Photograph: Christophe Ena/AP 
Years on from the financial crisis, many French people feel they are not 
sharing in the recovery.François Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande> has come under fire for 
his handling of the economy and is France’sleast popular president on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/08/hollande-sets-out-stall-for-french-elections-with-attack-on-identity-politics>
. Unemployment remains above 10%, one of the highest rates in the EU. Youth 
unemployment is higher still, at 24%. The rebound in economic growth has been 
lacklustre.

Many feel that globalisation is bringing more costs than benefits for France. 
Anti-globalisation and anti-euro sentiments have combined with fears over 
terrorism and immigration to drive up support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/across-europe-distrust-of-mainstream-political-parties-is-on-the-rise>
 for Marine Le Pen’s far-right Front National. Le Pen is seen as likely to 
reach the run-off in next year’s presidential elections but, like her father in 
2002, is expected to be defeated.

Italy

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c0e6b33b6344a0410238fff8caceb6ce449ab7f%2F0_204_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Economic%20woes%20create%20anti-establishment%20movements%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Economic%20woes%20create%20anti-establishment%20movements%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c0e6b33b6344a0410238fff8caceb6ce449ab7f%2F0_204_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
 Italy’s Matteo Renzi hopes the country can be reformed if he win next month’s 
referendum. Photograph: Pacific Pres/REX/Shutterstock 
Economic growth has been consistently disappointing in Italy and a succession 
of coalition governments has failed to push through reforms to help adapt the 
economy to a changing world. The International Monetary Fund warned recently 
thatthe economy may not fully recover until the mid-2020s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/11/imf-warns-italy-of-two-decade-long-recession>
. Scope for Matteo Renzi’s centre-left government to use tax cuts or increases 
in public spending to boost growth has been limited by low productivity, high 
unemployment and rising national debt.

The country goes to the polls next month in a referendum on changes to its 
constitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/could-italys-renzi-be-next-victim-of-an-unwanted-referendum>
 thatRenzi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-renzi> and his allies 
argue will make the country easier to govern and reform. Similar to the Brexit 
vote in the UK, the referendum is being seen as a way for Italians to voice 
their general discontent with the establishment and the sluggish economy.

A defeat for the prime minister could pave the way to a national election, 
with gains expected for comedian Beppe Grillo’s anti-establishment Five Star 
Movement. Another populist force is the rightwing Northern League. It began as 
a party that argued for a separation of rich northern Italy from the poor 
south, but its focus has shifted to immigration.

Russia

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf10782903fb50426177e166680736eb00d350f5%2F0_237_3372_2023%2F3372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Economic%20woes%20create%20anti-establishment%20movements%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Economic%20woes%20create%20anti-establishment%20movements%20around%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Feconomic-woe-trump-style-movements-created-worldwide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf10782903fb50426177e166680736eb00d350f5%2F0_237_3372_2023%2F3372.jpg>
 Poverty in Russia is at a nine-year high as low oil prices hit the economy.
 Photograph: TASS / Barcroft Images 
Russia’s economy has been ravaged by recession and it is expected to shrink 
again this year, returning to only modest growth in 2017. The slump, 
intensified by western sanctions and low oil prices, haspushed Russia’s poverty 
rate to a nine-year high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/22/millions-more-russians-living-in-poverty-as-economic-crisis-bites>
. TheWorld Bank expects it to rise further, with more than 20 million people, 
out of a population of some 140 million, living below the poverty line 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-worldbank-russia-economy-idUSKCN0X31SS>.

The blow to energy-dependent Russia from global oil prices almost halving has 
limited the help it can give any part of the economy. But there is a feeling 
among many workers that their lives have become bleaker as high inflation 
erodes household incomes, while companies fared better thanks to state support 
and a weak rouble.

This squeeze on the working classes has not manifested itself in the kind of 
new populist movements seen in EU countries. Russia expert Charles Movit at 
consultancy IHSEconomics <https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> says: 
“The media is totally controlled by the state in Russia and the tradition of 
strong leaders is ingrained. [President Vladimir] Putin himself is very 
popular, the government less so and the opposition is very weak.”
 