
Politicians around the world risk giving more traction to nationalistic 
movements if they continue to ignore the growing numbers of workers getting a 
“raw deal” from globalisation, the head of the UN’s labour agency has warned.

The director general of the International Labour Organization 
<http://www.ilo.org/global/lang--en/index.htm> (ILO), Guy Ryder, described 
Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election and the UK’s vote for 
Brexit as “the revolt of the dispossessed” and gave a damning assessment of the 
establishment’s failure to offer an alternative to protectionism.

British-born Ryder said governments had been too quick to focus on headline 
figures that flattered the state of labour markets since the global financial 
crisis. In so doing they had failed to scratch below the surface into a world of
zero-hours contracts <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/zero-hours-contracts>
, underemployment and unreliable incomes, he said, as the ILO released research 
showing a rise in such non-standard forms of employment.

“The societies we all live in are distributing the benefits of globalisation 
and economic processes extraordinarily unfairly and people think they are 
getting a raw deal,” Ryder told the Guardian.

Speaking days after Trump stunned the world with his victory over Hillary 
Clinton, the ILO chief highlighted the common ground between the Republican 
candidate’s supporters and those who voted for the UK to leave the EU.

 “It is the people who feel they haven’t benefited from globalisation and from 
the EU, from the way things are organised. This is the revolt of the 
dispossessed in that regard,” he said.

“And the point here is that feeling, that frustration, that disillusionment, I 
think is very much generated from people’s experience of work. Their exclusion 
from work, or their insertion in labour markets in conditions, which they find 
unacceptable.”

Neoliberalism: the deep story that lies beneath Donald Trump’s triumph | 
George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/neoliberalsim-donald-trump-george-monbiot>
The ILO’s mandate centres on ensuring what it calls “decent work”. But based 
on its own findings, the UN agency is facing an uphill battle. Casual forms of 
work more common in the developing world are being replicated in advanced 
economies –the “gig economy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/the-gig-economy> – as on-demand services 
such as Uber and Deliveroo grow.


The ILO report published on Monday 
<http://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_534122/lang--en/index.htm>
 finds temporary work, agency work, precarious self-employment and other 
non-standard forms of employment have become more widespread.

On the ground, that translates into downward pressure on earnings, unreliable 
working hours and lower access to workplace benefits. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/19/most-of-the-worlds-workers-have-insecure-jobs-ilo-report-reveals>

It comes back to the “raw deal” that Ryder talks about.

 “If you count somebody on a zero-hours contract as being in work that helps 
the headline figures. If you look at their life you know that it is not the 
type of quality, decent work that I think we are all pursuing,” says Ryder, who 
has headed the ILO since 2012, having started his career at the TUC in Britain.

“People want to know how it can be different and the fact of the matter is, it 
can be different but it requires us to put the world of work and these tough 
labour market issues back on the table from which I think they have been 
unwisely removed by policymakers in recent years.”

His comments reflect the tendency among ministers to focus on record 
employment levels 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/employment-stays-at-record-high-with-318-million-people-in-work>
 and falling unemployment, while largely ignoring thatwages have stagnated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/27/uk-joins-greece-at-bottom-of-wage-growth-league-tuc-oecd>
,people have felt pressured into self-employment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/self-employed-earn-less-than-2001-hit-welfare-cuts>
 and millions say theywant to work more hours than they can get 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/datasets/underemploymentandoveremploymentemp16>
.

Ryder believes the UK’s vote to leave the EU should be a wake-up call. 

“If you take Brexit vote as a faithful reflection of the mood of people, it is 
not an expression of contentment and satisfaction with a full employment, ‘I’m 
doing well, I’m getting ahead’, workforce. The message is: ‘We are living this 
and it doesn’t feel very nice,’” he says.

Again, there are parallels with the US where ILO researchers found 10% of the 
workforce had irregular and on-call work schedules, with the lowest-income 
workers the hardest hit.

The agency wants old systems brought up to date to reflect today’s world of 
work.

Its recommendations for improving the quality of non-standard employment 
include plugging regulatory gaps to ensure workers are treated equally whatever 
type of contract they have. The ILO also wants to see minimum guaranteed hours, 
better social protection and stronger collective bargaining. That includes 
expanding unions to represent the growing number of workers in non-standard 
forms of employment.

We are living in a depression - that's why Trump took the White House
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/nov/13/donald-trump-product-of-new-economic-depression>
Ryder also stresses the need for more equal treatment of migrant workers. “If 
you take seriously the enforcement of minimum conditions, if you take seriously 
the notion of equal treatment ... you disarm and detoxify the labour market 
worries about undercutting local workers and at the same time you do the right 
thing by migrant workers.”

The ILO director concedes his agency is asking for a lot. But failure to act 
will leave voters looking to the “wrong place” for solutions, he says. That 
warning echoesgrowing concerns that the nationalist sentiment that boosted 
Trump will also come to the fore at upcoming votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/12/elections-eu-donald-trump-brexit-italy-referendum>
 in Italy, France, the Netherlands and Germany.

“In generic terms, I think people think they have a binary choice in life at 
the moment,” says Ryder. The options were “more of the same” with an acceptance 
that inequality would rise further or “defensive, protectionist, nationalistic” 
movements rejecting the status quo.

“We have to construct something which is different from both of those two 
poles and to demonstrate, or to convince people, that there are different ways. 
That we can manage our labour markets,” he says.

“But middle ground between the two binary options requires the hard work of 
doing some fairly hard engineering of labour markets.”

Furthermore, the establishment must work hard to regain people’s trust, he 
adds. “People are not necessarily looking to the established institutions or 
political parties or international organisations, of which I include the ILO, 
in the belief that we have credible responses. So we have to up our game in 
that regard.”

Ryder has just been given the backing of his agency to do just that. Last week 
the director general was re-elected for a second term with support from all 
three branches of the tripartite agency: workers’ representatives, employers 
and governments.

Alongside curbing the rise in insecure jobs and the ILO’s work on tackling 
child labour and forced labour, Ryder is also pushing the agency to anticipate 
future trends.

He’s right, the economy is sick – and businesses like Trump’s are part of the 
disease | Mariana Mazzucato
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/trump-us-economy-sick-businesses-like-his-value-creation>
He believes the big drivers of change are technology, globalisation, 
demographics and the need to align jobs and job creation with fighting climate 
change. All are being explored under a “future of work” programme marking the 
ILO’s centenary in 2019.

So for an agency that has been through the second world war, the cold war, the 
fall of communism and the rise of globalisation, the focus now shifts to 
robots, global warming and the gig economy. But the motivation remains the same 
and as the world digests the latest political shock, it is perhaps unsurprising 
that Ryder highlights the ILO’s roots.

“Our historic mandate, and it came after the first world war, is based on the 
notion that if you want to preserve peace and stability in the world, you have 
to promote social justice and that has to begin in the world of work.”
 