
Edin Dzeko had the bare cheek to pull down an opposing player’s shorts in a 
bizarre twist to his country’s match with Greece on Sunday night, but the
Bosnia-Herzegovina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bosnia-herzegovina> 
captain ended up seeing red when he was subsequently sent off.
Andy Ha (@_AndyHa) 
Dzeko's red card offence against Greece was pretty special. 
pic.twitter.com/9vXUoonmoO <https://t.co/9vXUoonmoO>
 <https://twitter.com/_AndyHa/status/797924665884741632> November 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/_AndyHa/status/797924665884741632> 
The incident, in the last 10 minutes of the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifier when 
Dzeko’s team were leading 1-0, started when the former Manchester City player, 
now at Roma, went down under a challenge from Sokratis Papastathopoulos just 
outside the opponents’ penalty area. The Greek’s shorts were pulled down as he 
attempted to wrestle the ball out of Dzeko’s grasp, resulting in an altercation 
involving most of the players from both sides as well as both teams’ technical 
staff.

Edin Dzeko double takes Roma above Napoli in race for second
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/napoli-roma-serie-a-match-report>
Dzeko, who was already on a yellow card, was sent off by the referee, Jonas 
Eriksson, while Kyriakos Papadopoulos was given a straight red for pushing in 
the skirmishes after the initial incident.Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/greece> went on to get an equaliser in 
injury time with both teams reduced to 10 men.

“I got a red card for no reason, I don’t know why,” Dzeko said afterwards. 
“The referee says I started the whole thing, but I was the only one ending on 
the floor, so how could I have started it?

He added: “I feel like losing 3-0. Greece didn’t deserve this point. They 
didn’t even deserve a 1-0 loss, they deserved to lose 4-0.”

This article was amended on 15 November 2016. An earlier version incorrectly 
said it was Kyriakos Papadopoulos who had his shorts pulled down.
 