
Mobile phone company EE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/everything-everywhere> has been fined 
£2.7m by Ofcom for overcharging tens of thousands of customers.


EE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/everything-everywhere> is owned by 
telecoms giant BT, which acquired the mobile operator last year in a £12.5bn 
deal.

Customers who called the company’s 150 customer services number while roaming 
within the EU were incorrectly charged as if they had called the US.

Related: New BT service could end nuisance phone calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/16/bt-says-new-service-could-block-up-to-30m-nuisance-calls-a-week>

Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> said the mistake saw customers 
charged £1.20 per minute, instead of 19p per minute. As a result, at least 
32,145 customers were overcharged about £245,700 in total.

It added that EE wrongly decided it could not identify the people it 
overcharged and was proposing to give their money to charity, which would have 
left them out of pocket.

In another breach, despite making it free to call or text the 150 number from 
within the EU from 18 November 2015, EE continued to bill 7,674 customers up 
until 11 January 2016.


Proceeds of the fine will be passed on to the Treasury. 

Ofcom said the penalty reflects a 10% reduction in light of EE’s agreement to 
enter into a formal settlement and its admission of full responsibility for the 
breaches.

While the majority of customers have now been refunded, EE was unable to 
identify at least 6,905 customers, who have been left around £60,000 out of 
pocket.

The company has made a donation of just under £62,000 to charity in lieu of 
the payments owed to these customers.

However, Ofcom is requiring EE to make further attempts to trace and refund 
every customer who was overcharged.


An EE spokesman said: “We accept these findings and apologise unreservedly to 
those customers affected by these technical billing issues between 2014 and 
2015.

“We have put measures in place to prevent this from happening again, and have 
contacted the majority of customers to apologise and provide a full refund.

“For those customers that we could not identify, we donated the remaining 
excess fees to charitable causes in line with Ofcom’s guidelines. 

“Following Ofcom’s findings, we have made a number of additional improvements 
to our systems and policies to allow us to better support our customers in the 
rare occasion that billing issues do occur.”

 