
The denouement of the 2016 election came on Monday, as electors in all 50 
states and the District of Columbia formally electedDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> as president of the United 
States.

'Faithless electors' explain their last-ditch attempt to stop Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/electoral-college-faithless-electors-donald-trump>
An effort by anti-Trump activists, who had urged electors to back efforts led 
by celebrities and academics to cast their ballots at variance with election 
results to keep Trump from reaching the necessary 270 electoral votes, came to 
practically nothing. With counts still ongoing in California and Texas, the 
number of electoral college members who attempted to cast a protest vote was 
likely to reach at least nine.

In some state capitals, proceedings were met with protests. 


More than 200 demonstrators were on the steps of Pennsylvania’s capitol in 
Harrisburg on Monday morning, waving signs and chanting in chilly, 25F(-4C) 
weather. They chanted “No Trump, no KKK, no fascist USA!” and “No treason, no 
Trump!”

Several dozen protesters gathered outside South Carolina’s statehouse in 
Columbia, waving signs with messages imploring electors not to back the 
president-elect.

Vermont was the first state to report the results of its vote. As expected, 
all three electors voted for Clinton. Arkansas, Mississippi, Oklahoma, 
Tennessee, West Virginia and South Carolina followed for Trump, and Delaware 
for Clinton as the totals started to mount.


After a Hawaiian elector cast a vote for Bernie Sanders, the total was Trump 
with 304 votes and Clinton with 227. It takes 270 electoral college votes to 
win the presidency. Texas put Trump over the top, despite two Republican 
electors casting protest votes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&media=>
How does the US electoral college work? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/how-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Republican electors said they had been deluged with emails, phone calls and 
letters urging them not to support Trump. Many emails were part of coordinated 
campaigns.


“The letters are actually quite sad,” Lee Green, a Republican elector from 
North Carolina, told the Associated Press. “They are generally freaked out. 
They honestly believe the propaganda. They believe our nation is being taken 
over by a dark and malevolent force.”

The Guardian spoke to six so-called “faithless electors” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/electoral-college-faithless-electors-donald-trump>
 who intended to change their vote, all but one of them Democrats. The sole 
Republican, Christopher Suprun of Texas, said: “Since I announced my intention 
to vote according to my conscience, I have received about half a dozen death 
threats against me and my family.

“More happily, a person I’ve known for years who traces his ancestry back to 
the American revolution told me he thinks his forebears would have been proud 
of what I’m doing, which made me feel pretty good.”

Wirt A Yerger Jr, a Republican elector in Mississippi, said: “I have gotten 
several thousand emails asking me not to vote for Trump. I threw them all away.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Felectoral-college-votes-donald-trump-electors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff85a914416340bf4bb9df79415a4b09b022a471b%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Electoral%20college%20formally%20elects%20Donald%20Trump%20as%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Felectoral-college-votes-donald-trump-electors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Electoral%20college%20formally%20elects%20Donald%20Trump%20as%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Felectoral-college-votes-donald-trump-electors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff85a914416340bf4bb9df79415a4b09b022a471b%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Arizona electoral college members cast their ballots for President-elect 
Donald Trump at the capitol in Phoenix. All 11 Arizona members cast their votes 
for Trump. Photograph: Matt York/AP 
A joint session of Congress is scheduled for 6 January to certify the results 
of the electoral college vote, with Vice-President Joe Biden presiding as 
president of the Senate. Once the result is certified, the winner will be sworn 
in on 20 January.

Electoral college revolt fails to stop Trump but lands democratic blow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/electoral-college-revolt-faithless-electors-analysis>
“When the founders of our country created [the electoral college] 200-plus 
years ago, they didn’t have confidence in the average white man who had 
property, because that’s who got to vote,” Shawn Terris, a Democratic elector 
from Ventura, California, told the AP.

“It just seems so undemocratic to me that people other than the voters get to 
choose who leads the country.”

In Minnesota, won by Clinton, a Democrat 
<https://twitter.com/DylanWohlenhaus/status/810919688775536640> who did not 
intend to vote for Clintonwas replaced 
<https://twitter.com/mpoppel/status/810921820484411392>. The elector in 
question was a delegate for Sanders at the Democratic national convention in 
Philadelphia in July.

David Bright, a Democratic elector from Maine, said on his Facebook page he 
had voted for Sanders, because his vote would not have helped Clinton win the 
presidency.


“I cast my electoral college vote for Bernie Sanders today to let those new 
voters who were inspired by him know that some of us did hear them, did listen 
to them, do respect them and understand their disappointment,” he wrote.

His vote was however ruled improper, and switched to Clinton.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.
 