
I hope Ian Jack (The Last Night of the Proms never, never shall be hijacked by 
Brexiteers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/10/last-night-of-the-proms-jingoistic-ironic-brexit-royal-albert-hall>
, 10 September) was as moved as I was to see those European flags being waved 
among the union jacks at the Royal Albert Hall on Saturday, though alas no such 
shows of good thinking were to be seen at the outside jamborees in Glasgow, 
Cardiff, Belfast and London.

He is of course right about the self-mockery involved. And it was good to see 
the star tenor soloist,Juan Diego Florez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/04/facing-the-music-tenor-juan-diego-florez>
, dressed in a splendid costume as much Peruvian as English to render Arne’s 
Rule, Britannia! But I do think that Jack, and maybe the Proms organisers, are 
a little unfair to Elgar. He really cannot be blamed for the “imperial 
triumphalism” of Land of Hope and Glory. What he actually wrote was the ironic 
first of his six Pomp and Circumstance marches. The later addition of the 
ludicrous words, taking over the glorious tune, was not Elgar’s fault. Those 
planning the 2017 Proms might like to consider the words. The plea to make 
Britain “mightier yet” may be in the minds of Foxes and Farages, but even they 
should at least have doubts about ever widening of the nation’s borders. 
Whatever Brexit may mean, the retreat from Europe – and whatever influence the 
Brits used to have in neighbouring countries – demands drawing in, not 
expansion.
Sean Day-Lewis
Colyton, Devon

• Unlike my own husband (who made a similar observation during the Last Night 
of the Proms), your correspondent (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/11/lazy-liam-fox-and-knavish-tricks-at-the-last-night-of-the-proms>
, 12 September) sadly did not have the benefit of the smug advice of his wife, 
delighted to be able to put her 50-year-old A-level Spanish certificate to good 
use. “Guantánamera” means “female from Guantánamo” – as opposed to 
“Guantánmero”, of course! Pedantic? Yo?
Christine Lock
(Northwick Park College of Technology, 1965-67), Wokingham

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 