
Outside my window of my apartment in Los Angeles is the spectacular Walt 
Disney Hall. I’m soon to be making my debut there with the wonderfulLos Angeles 
Philharmonic <http://www.laphil.com/>, conducting them in Tchaikovsky’s 
Nutcracker. And I can’t help thinking back over the last two years and of the 
roller-coaster ride my life has been since winning the Flick-LSO conducting 
competition, and of further back, to my earliest thoughts of wanting to be a 
conductor.

The seed was planted when I first went to a classical concert in Hong Kong, 
where I grew up. I was in primary school and was taken to an educational 
concert with theHong Kong Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.hkphil.org/eng/home/index.jsp>. The conductor explained we were 
going to hear Holst’sPlanets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/01/from-the-classical-archive-holst-conducts-planets-review-1920>
 and Stravinsky’sThe Rite of Spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/29/stravinsky-rite-of-spring> and 
talked briefly about the works. I was fascinated by this figure – everything 
happened when he started waving his hands. It seemed to me like magic. Just 
like the sorcerer’s apprentice in Disney’s Fantasia, everyone was under his 
spell and followed his magic wand. I thought: “I want to make magic like that 
person.”

Elim Chan wins 2014 Donatella Flick LSO Conducting Competition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/09/elim-chin-wins-2014-donatella-flick-lso-conducting-competition>
I learned to play piano and cello, and singing was an integral part of my 
childhood. But I didn’t pursue music professionally right away when I went to 
university in the US. For a long time I had two dreams – one was to be a 
conductor, and the other was to be a forensic detective. I love the process of 
looking deeper to uncover the truth about something. As a detective you have to 
examine a crime scene and try to work out what happened: that feels in many 
ways similar to being a conductor. Most of the time when you’re working on a 
score you can’t talk to the composer so you have to figure out for yourself 
what he or she meant, you have to make your own road map, and to look at 
traces, hints and history to piece together an understanding of the work in 
front of you.

Conducting <https://www.theguardian.com/music/conducting> was always something 
I dreamed of doing, but for a while I ignored my dreams. Many people told me in 
both loud and soft ways that it is a very difficult and lonely path, especially 
for a petite, young woman, and for a while I was too fearful to trust my gut 
feeling that I could and should be a conductor. I see my role as a conduit for 
the music and people, and there isn’t a better feeling of satisfaction when I 
can facilitate the music-making process, inspire the musicians to perform at 
their best and get the audience to experience something meaningful. Music seems 
to me a kind of magic – without words it effectively and unmistakably 
communicates to us all about beauty, love, nature, mankind, power, terror, 
wrath, nostalgia, struggle, despair, hope ... Sometimes I envisage myself as a 
prism in which music and the musicians are like the ray of white light that 
goes through one end of me, and I refract and transmit all that energy to the 
audience through a colourful and vivid performance.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLOU__M8MAdM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLOU__M8MAdM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLOU__M8MAdM&media=>
Finding myself in the final, facing the orchestra was terrifying … I wanted to 
impress them, but didn't know what to say

Winning the Donatella Flick LSO conducting competition has meant that I got to 
spend almost every day with theLondon Symphony Orchestra <http://lso.co.uk/> as 
their assistant conductor for the 2015-16 season. It’s a fantastic orchestra, 
but what makes it so really special is how genuinely friendly and kind the 
musicians are. Finding myself, two years, ago, in the competition’s final round 
and faced for the first time with the actual orchestra was an amazing and 
terrifying moment. I wanted to impress them, but I also didn’t know what to say 
to them! Then one of the musicians came up and told me simply to trust the 
orchestra, that they were there to make music and help me. Those words of 
encouragement released me from all my fears and allowed me to be myself and 
enjoy every minute with the orchestra.

Winning the competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/09/elim-chin-wins-2014-donatella-flick-lso-conducting-competition>
 and working with the LSO has given me so many opportunities to learn and grow 
professionally, to forge relationships and develop further opportunities and 
projects from these new relationships. Over this two years, I’ve assisted in 
daily rehearsals, conducted the LSO in concert at the Barbican,premiered works 
by young composers and worked with hundreds of children and young people in 
education concerts. Sir Antonio Pappano, who has a close relationship with LSO, 
and who I have assisted on several occasions, gave me some advice that I’ve 
found very helpful. He told me that the ego can be very destructive to 
music-making, that serving the music and being humble will go a long way. Now, 
as I move on, I am building new relationships with other orchestras that I 
guest conduct, and I am beyond delighted to have been appointedchief conductor 
of the NorrlandsOperan 
<http://www.harrisonparrott.com/news/norrlandsoperan-appoints-elim-chan-chief-conductor>
 in Umeå, Sweden, where I will be conducting both symphonic concerts and opera. 
Much as I also enjoy guest-conducting, I am looking forward to the challenge of 
building up an orchestra, spending quality time with musicians to create 
something permanent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Felim-chan-conductor-donatella-flick-lso-conducting-competition-i-wanted-to-make-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb824b4ea88810e18696b02f0696b9d0168a75350%2F0_187_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elim%20Chan%20on%20becoming%20a%20conductor%3A%20'I%20wanted%20to%20make%20magic'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Felim-chan-conductor-donatella-flick-lso-conducting-competition-i-wanted-to-make-magic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elim%20Chan%20on%20becoming%20a%20conductor%3A%20%27I%20wanted%20to%20make%20magic%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Felim-chan-conductor-donatella-flick-lso-conducting-competition-i-wanted-to-make-magic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb824b4ea88810e18696b02f0696b9d0168a75350%2F0_187_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
 Elim Chan conducts at the Lucerne festival. Photograph: Patrick Hürlimann 
I don’t make the sound; I facilitate the music-making process and inspire the 
musicians to perform at their best.

Conducting is a fascinating career. Most people think of it as one full of 
glamour, money and glory. Maybe that’s true for a very few who have reached the 
very top of the profession, but to get there takes relentless hard work, 
discipline, confidence and persistence, in addition to God-given charisma and 
innate musicality. As a conductor, I also have to find a way to bring everyone 
together and make music with one another. I don’t make the sound; I facilitate 
the music-making process and inspire the musicians to perform at their best.

My core priorities have always been and will always be the music and the 
audience, and I think audiences over the past two years have come to see me 
simply as Elim, rather than under the labels “Asian” or “female conductor”. 
When I won in 2014, being the first female winner in the competition’s history 
wasn’t something that came into my mind straight away. But, of course, lots of 
press coverage focused on my gender. Undoubtedly it’s a huge honour, and I am 
glad that I can say that I have broken a glass ceiling. I’m only where I am 
today because of such inspirational women – conductors such asMarin Alsop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/sep/06/marin-alsop-proms-classical-sexist>
, JoAnn Falletta andSusanna Mälkki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/27/facing-the-music-conductor-susanna-malkki>
 who have forged their way into the male-dominated business and made it easier 
for me and my colleagues today.

Mirga takes the baton: the CBSO music director on her new job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/14/mirga-grazinyte-tyla-takes-baton-cbso-music-director-new-job>
The gender issue is complex, and the classical music world has come a long way 
– I am thrilled to be riding on a trend of promoting and celebrating female 
artists in these recent years. Yet in the midst of this, I have felt there to 
be at times an imbalance of focus on my gender over my whole identity as a 
musician. I do not want to be given any special treatment because I am a woman. 
I do not want my gender, my femininity, to become a crutch of my own. It’s 
important that we all keep asking questions and challenging the status quo. I 
am proud of being a woman conductor, but I want to take the next step and go 
beyond any tags and be seen and valued as the same as my male colleagues.


Being a woman is an essential part of who I am, but it’s not all of who I am 
and all that has shaped me. Every male and female artist has a unique story to 
tell, and I want mine to be heard and respected as I offer the whole package of 
what I have and what I can bring to the podium.


 * The final of the 2016 Donatella Flick LSO conducting competition 
<http://lso.co.uk/lso-discovery/donatella-flick-lso-conducting-competition.html>
 isThursday 17 November at the Barbican, London 
<http://lso.co.uk/whats-on/icalrepeat.detail/2016/11/17/551/-/donatella-flick-lso-conducting-competition-final.html>
.
 