
Let bygones be bygones? Not if Elizabeth Warren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/elizabeth-warren> has anything to say 
about it.

This past week marked the eighth anniversary of the bankruptcy filing of 
Lehman Brothers <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lehmanbrothers> – and the 
near collapse of the entire US financial system. And Warren, the crusading 
Democratic senator from Massachusetts, still hopes to bring some of the 
individuals responsible for the debacle to justice.

 When the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (FCIC) wrapped up its work 
investigating the causes of the cataclysm, it referred nine individuals to the 
justice department, noting commission members believed they had identified 
serious violations of securities laws or other offenses.

Why don’t bankers go to jail? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Jill 
Treanor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/07/why-not-imprison-bankers-google>
 Warren wants to know 
<http://www.warren.senate.gov/files/documents/2016-9-15_Referral_DOJ_IG_letter.pdf>
 why the justice department has been twiddling its thumbs for eight years, 
while citizens’ confidence in both government and the financial system dwindles.

 She points out that of the nine individuals named referred for possible 
prosecution, only one has ever faced any penalties. Even then, when the 
Securities and Exchange Commission fined former Fannie Mae CEO Daniel Mudd for 
misleading investors about the degree to which the mortgage funding entity was 
at risk of collapsing due its exposure to risky mortgages,it was Fannie Mae 
itself that wrote the $100,000 check on Mudd’s behalf 
<http://fortune.com/2016/08/24/sec-fannie-mae-settlement/>, to a special US 
Treasury account that accepts “gifts”.

 Thanks to the National Archives, we know the identities of the other 
individuals the FCIC panel referred to the DoJ to be considered for criminal 
charges. Among the most notable figures is Robert Rubin, the former treasury 
secretary who oversaw Wall Street’s deregulation and has held top jobs at two 
of the biggest beneficiaries of that move, Goldman Sachs and Citigroup.

Rubin, the FCIC members suggested, may have been responsible – together with 
fellow top Citigroup management – for keeping the value of the mortgage 
securities that were stuck on the bank’s balance sheet and for which they 
couldn’t find buyers, inflated. That meant they could hide the extent to which 
Citi was exposed to subprime mortgages, declaring at one point it was 76% lower 
than the actual levels. That may rise to the level of fraud.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fus-money-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Felizabeth-warren-financial-crash-letter-doj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dd9b5d7165dd8d54612b2eb248ee18de9a4d281%2F0_117_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elizabeth%20Warren%20is%20still%20mad%20about%20the%20financial%20crash%2C%20and%20we%20should%20be%20too&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fus-money-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Felizabeth-warren-financial-crash-letter-doj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elizabeth%20Warren%20is%20still%20mad%20about%20the%20financial%20crash%2C%20and%20we%20should%20be%20too&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fus-money-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Felizabeth-warren-financial-crash-letter-doj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dd9b5d7165dd8d54612b2eb248ee18de9a4d281%2F0_117_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 Former treasury secretary Robert Rubin in 1998. Photograph: Ken Cedeno/REUTERS 
Another name on the list is that of Charles Prince, Citi’s CEO, who achieved 
fame/infamy for his comment that “as long as the music is playing, you’ve got 
to get up and dance”. At the FCIC hearings,he tried to argue 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/news/money/chuck-prince-quote-citi-dancing-crisis-worsened-haunts-panel-inquiry-article-1.165694>
 that no individual bank had the power to stop the madness that led up to the 
financial crisis: as long as his competitors kept making more reckless loans, 
he had no choice but to follow suit – and keep dancing.

The problem is that whining that “well, Joey was doing it, too, and he made me 
do it” is the kind of excuse that goes out of fashion by the time you’re a 
teenager. It’s inappropriate in a middle-schooler, much less a middle-aged man.

And yet, as Elizabeth Warren points out, the DoJ has been sitting on a list of 
middle-aged bankers for several years now. It’s unclear to what extent any 
wrongdoing can still be prosecuted, given that the statute of limitations will 
apply to many of these cases.

But at the very least, the DoJ can explain why they failed to act, as she has 
requested.

True, financial crimes can be tough to prosecute: the issues are complex and 
lend themselves to finger-pointing, with everyone pointing to someone else as 
the culprit.

And some of the trials that have taken place haven’t had results that would 
necessarily have encouraged the DoJ. Most recently, several the traders accused 
of being involved in rigging the key Libor interest rate, affecting the cost of 
trillions of dollars of loans, mortgages and other financial deals, and who 
were known by names like “Lord Libor” and “Big Nose”,were acquitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/29/serious-office-back-in-the-dock-after-libor-acquittals>
 in trials. ASwiss private banker 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-ubs-ag-banking-weil-idUSKBN0IN26820141104> 
was acquitted of helping his US clients duck taxes in a Miami trial.

In one of a handful of cases directly linked to the financial crisis itself, 
the managers of a Bear Stearns hedge fund that collapsed in 2007 after 
investing in subprime mortgage securities were accused of securities fraud. It 
was supposed to be an easy win for prosecutors in the immediate aftermath of 
the crisis, butjurors acquitted the two men in late 2009 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/11/11/business/11bear.html?_r=0>. In fact, one of 
the only major courtroom victories came in 2013, when “the fabulous Fab”, aka 
former Goldman Sachs trader Fabrice Tourre, wasfound liable by a federal jury 
<http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/05/27/former-goldman-trader-tourre-says-he-will-not-appeal/>
 for defrauding investors in a mortgage deal that made hedge fund managers who 
took the other side of the deal a lot of money – but cost the investors 
millions.

But this was a civil, not a criminal case, and Tourre had to pay monetary 
damages, not spend any time in jail. Goldman Sachs, too, forked over $550m to 
settle related charges, neither admitting nor denying any wrongdoing in the 
matter, a phrase calculated to drive Warren and all of Wall Street’s other 
critics around the bend. No one has gone to jail.

Perhaps this would matter a little less – a little, a very little – if Wall 
Street’s arrogance had been dimmed by the events of 2008. Or if it the Libor 
trading scandal hadn’t flared up, or if JP Morgan Chase hadn’t experienced the
London Whale derivative trading losses 
<http://money.cnn.com/2013/09/19/investing/jpmorgan-london-whale-fine/>, the 
latter ultimately costing the bank $6bn. In neither case has anyone been 
marched off to jail. Two of the colleagues of Bruno Iksil, the derivatives 
trader who orchestrated the trades – the “whale” in question – have beencharged 
with criminal conspiracy 
<http://money.cnn.com/2013/08/14/investing/jpmorgan-london-whale/index.html?iid=EL>
, but haven’t set foot in the US to face those offenses.

Meanwhile, Iksil resurfaced and in true whale-like fashion, made a big splash 
earlier this year by objecting to his moniker. He also insisted, ina letter 
sent to Bloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-02-23/jpmorgan-s-london-whale-surfaces-to-say-12-loss-not-his-fault>
, that his managers told him what to do; that it was a bank-designed strategy 
that ran amok. “The losses … were not the actions of one person acting in an 
unauthorized manner,” he wrote. “My role was to execute a trading strategy that 
had been initiated, approved, mandated and monitored” by bank management.

In other words, if we want to comfort ourselves by thinking of Iksil and 
others like him as rogues, we’re demented.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fus-money-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Felizabeth-warren-financial-crash-letter-doj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faae315bb633c56a1d2d554f274c05aca25f4b99c%2F0_22_4003_2402%2F4003.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elizabeth%20Warren%20is%20still%20mad%20about%20the%20financial%20crash%2C%20and%20we%20should%20be%20too&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fus-money-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Felizabeth-warren-financial-crash-letter-doj%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elizabeth%20Warren%20is%20still%20mad%20about%20the%20financial%20crash%2C%20and%20we%20should%20be%20too&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fus-money-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Felizabeth-warren-financial-crash-letter-doj%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faae315bb633c56a1d2d554f274c05aca25f4b99c%2F0_22_4003_2402%2F4003.jpg>
 Ex-Goldman Sachs trader Fabrice Tourre had to pay monetary damages, but did 
not spend any time in jail. Photograph: Richard Drew/AP 
That’s something to ponder now as we read the headlines about the revelations 
at Wells Fargo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/08/wells-fargo-settlement-illegal-sales-accounts>
, where some 5,300 middle-ranking and junior employees were fired for opening 
sham accounts in the name of existing customers. The employees met the bank’s 
sales targets and their own productivity targets; the customers didn’t have a 
clue about what was going on until they realized they were hit with a fee for 
an account they hadn’t opened, or saw their credit was downgraded for some 
unknown reason.

The good news is that the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau exists; stopped 
this and collected a penalty.

But Carrie Tolstedt, who ran the consumer banking division that was busy doing 
all this, will walk away with $124.5m in pay, while being called a “
standard-bearer for our culture 
<http://fortune.com/2016/09/12/wells-fargo-cfpb-carrie-tolstedt/>” by John 
Stumpff, the bank’s CEO.

Thankfully, federal prosecutors are already looking at Wells Fargo’s sales 
practices – but the investigation can’t stop at the lower level.

At some point, the cultural standard bearers – the bosses – the people who put 
in place trading strategies and policies that others implement – will have to 
do more than simply sign the checks made payable to the SEC and other 
regulators.

From dipping into their own (very, very healthy) bank accounts, to defending 
their actions in a civil or criminal court, it’s time to hold top managers 
accountable for what happens within their firms. They can’t just scoop up the 
profits and pretend they don’t know the risks that the institution is running 
to generate those returns, or ignore the possibility that earning them required 
abusing the trust of clients, or even putting the financial system at risk.

The events of eight years ago remind us what happened when Rubin, Prince, and 
others forgot. It’s time to rally behind Warren and demand an accounting for 
those events, so that we have a precedent for holding Stumpff responsible for 
what just took place atWells Fargo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/wells-fargo>.

Never again.
 