
If you love someone, you make them pancakes. If you really love them, you make 
them waffles.

This was one of the many things I learned from watching too much American TV 
while growing up. Most of my ideas about how families should behave came from 
sitcoms and romcoms, these wonderful places filled with cheesecake and hugs and 
beautiful people in cosy knitwear. Alone, after school on the sofa, in our 
north Oxford house, eating doorsteps of bread and jam, I gazed on these other 
homes with their huge fridges and ready supply of fresh, zesty orange juice. 
And waffles!

“I promised the kids I’d make ‘em waffles,” said Nancy, stricken with cancer, 
on Thirtysomething. These, I gathered, were not like the savoury frozen potato 
waffles our busy mother sometimes bought to indulge me (much as I relished 
those for tea, with a fried egg and ketchup). These TV waffles sounded like 
airy rectangles of home.

Recipes for breakfast waffles and French toast | Baking the seasons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/19/breakfast-waffles-recipe-panettone-french-toast-claire-ptak-baking-the-seasons>
By the time that I had my first child, aged 25, my head was crammed with 
celluloid dreams of nurturing someone through food. I aspired to be Dustin 
Hoffman making french toast with his child in Kramer vs Kramer. Or Susan 
Sarandon in Stepmom, whose commitment to motherhood is so great that she’d 
sooner forego a vital oncology appointment than miss “spaghetti and meatball 
night”. I was nostalgic for homes I’d never had. I yearned to give my son the 
kind of milk-and-cookies upbringing I knew from The Cosby Show.

It goes without saying that the reality of feeding our children was different. 
Disappointingly, I wanted the children to eat something besides milk and 
cookies. At mealtimes, as one child or the other spat out vegetables or 
grumbled about spice, I lacked the saintliness – or knitwear – of Susan 
Sarandon. But still, at the back of my mind, there has always been a 
toasty-warm screen home, where you can make someone feel loved through food. I 
come closest to reaching this feeling of providing nurture when I make almond 
waffles, first borrowed from an American friend, but since adapted.

In our family, these waffles have healed many wounds. To me, they are a 
high-protein snack and not too sugary as things go. To the children, they are a 
vanilla-scented treat. Everyone – for once – is reconciled.

Almond waffles

A child who eats a few of these will have consumed half an egg and the 
equivalent of a handful of almonds. These waffles are high in calcium, protein 
and fat. I notice that on the mornings I make these, my seven-year-old is not 
quite so rabidly hungry at the school gates when I pick him up. If you don’t 
have a waffle maker, copy Marge Simpson (in Treehouse of Horror VII) and make 
square pancakes instead, cooking for 1-2 minutes a side in a hot pan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbee-wilson-almond-waffles-recipe-1980s-sitcoms-taste-of-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c66281446742c4a0052d92c42e706a4cacc8574%2F0_0_4176_2740%2F4176.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Embrace%20the%2080s%20with%20this%20almond%20waffle%20recipe%20%7C%20A%20taste%20of%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbee-wilson-almond-waffles-recipe-1980s-sitcoms-taste-of-home%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Embrace%20the%2080s%20with%20this%20almond%20waffle%20recipe%20%7C%20A%20taste%20of%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fbee-wilson-almond-waffles-recipe-1980s-sitcoms-taste-of-home%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c66281446742c4a0052d92c42e706a4cacc8574%2F0_0_4176_2740%2F4176.jpg>
 Great healer: Bee Wilson’s waffles. Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 
Serves 4
80g unsalted butter, melted
20g caster sugar
2 large eggs
100g plain flour (I’ve made it with gluten-free flour for coeliac friends and 
it works fine)
80g ground almonds
1 tsp baking powder
170ml whole milk (or almond or coconut milk if you’d rather)
1 tsp vanilla essence

1 Preheat the waffle maker. Put all the ingredients in a jug and blitz with a 
hand-held blender. Make the waffles as per the instructions for your machine. 
Be careful not to overfill, or you get a batter volcano. I find 2-3 minutes 
about right, or until they are golden and crisp.

2 Serve with maple syrup (or honey). In a sitcom, you’d offer a generous 
jugful, but I measure out a little dipping pot per child to stop them drenching 
half a bottle on a single waffle. We have fruit too: whatever’s in the fruit 
bowl, sliced.

 * Bee Wilson is a food journalist and author. He latest book, This is Not a 
Diet Book, is out now (Fourth Estate £6.99).  