
Living as I do in Venice, I have always thought it a shame that relatively few 
among its daily invasion of tourists make it as far as the next-door region of 
Emilia-Romagna. It easily matches the attractions of more celebrated Tuscany 
and Lombardy and offers temptingly affordable options for eating out and 
accommodation.

Emilia-Romagna stretches from the wetlands of the Po delta down to the beach 
resorts of the Adriatic coast, and across fertile plains where the signature 
ingredients of Italian cuisine are produced. This is the ultimate foodie 
destination, where travellers can organise a whole gourmet tour around artisan 
producers ofprosciutto crudo and mortadella, intense balsamic vinegar and 
Italy’s king of cheeses, parmesan. And in between eating and drinking, the 
magnificent cities of Bologna, Parma, Ferrara and Ravenna boast sumptuous 
Renaissance palaces, frescoed medieval and Romanesque churches, and unique 
Byzantine artworks which can all usually be enjoyed without queues or crowds.

Parma
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432830822987%2F5aff04b0-34c1-401a-b8ae-1bd10691738e-2060x1505.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432830822987%2F5aff04b0-34c1-401a-b8ae-1bd10691738e-2060x1505.jpeg>
 The octagonal medieval baptistery in the Piazza Duomo, Parma. Photograph: Alamy
The must-see food producers are in the surrounding countryside, but the 
splendid monuments of Parma are worth a day’s sightseeing, too. Dominating 
Piazza Duomo is the immense Romanesque cathedral, which contains frescoes 
rivalled only by those of the adjoining medieval baptistery, whose bare, 
minimalist exterior contrasts with the incredible colours from 13th and 
14th-century paintings that cover the interior.


Far fewer visitors discover the peaceful 10th-century Monastero di San 
Giovanni, just behind the cathedral, and the vast Palazzo della Pilotta, which 
houses a jewel of baroque architecture, the wooden Teatro Farnese.

South of the city, the Langhirano valley is home to some 500 authorised 
producers of the famousprosciutto crudo di Parma. Most are open to the public 
for tastings and purchases. A guide from one of Parma’s many specialist food 
tours takes me up into the hills toSalumificio Conti (Strada Fontana 2/A, 
Langhirano,contiprosciutti.it <http://www.contiprosciutti.it>), for a 
behind-the-scenes look at the unique salting and ageing process.

Angela Hartnett's Emilia-Romagna: classic dishes, and a festival of porcini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/mar/29/angela-hartnett-emilia-romagna-classic-dishes>
And on the plains north of Parma we visit a cheese-making co-operative, CPL 
Parma, near Baganzola village (Via Puppiola, 15, cplparma.it 
<http://cplparma.it/>) that makes 25 cheeses a day. Individuals can’t visit, 
but as I’m with a guide I get to pull on plastic overalls and follow the whole 
process, from the churning of the milk to tasting cheeses that have been aged 
for 36 months (guided trips fromFood Valley Travel 
<http://www.foodvalleytravel.com/Web/Incoming.aspx?Lang=ITA>, +39 0521 798515).

Hidden away in a Parma backstreet, the raucous Oste Magno 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Oste-Magno/123274064399936> (Borgo Angelo Mazza 
12, +39 0521 232519) is the place to meet a colourful slice of local life and 
taste the surprising wines of the Parma hills, such as a generous €1.30 tumbler 
of sparkling malvasia with a hefty roast pork panino for just €1.50.

The serious eating, though, is further north on the grassy banks of the Po in 
villages such as Zibello, home of the prized, ultra-lean culatello hams. The 
formidable Signora Miriam has presided overTrattoria La Buca di Zibello 
<http://www.trattorialabuca.com/english/dovesiamo.htm> (Via Ghizzi 6, +39 0524 
99214) for 50 years, and most diners simply end up eating what she tells them 
to. She cures her ham in the cellar, and her dish of handmade tagliatelle with 
silky slices of culatello is unforgettable.

Parma has plenty of simple B&Bs such as Pio (doubles from €80, +39 3477 769065,
piorooms.it <http://www.piorooms.it/en/index.html>), but it is worth splashing 
out on a sumptuous suite inPalazzo Dalla Rosa Prati (doubles from €90, suites 
€130, +39 0521 386429,palazzodallarosaprati.it 
<http://www.palazzodallarosaprati.it>) for the view over Piazza Duomo. There is 
a wide choice of rusticagriturismi in the Langhirano valley, and Azienda 
Agricola Cardinali (doubles €70, +39 0521 861465, agricolacardinali.it 
<http://www.agricolacardinali.it>) also has a lively restaurant.

Modena
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432897073495%2Fcfba522f-2701-4182-a3a4-8ff81b5853b5-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432897073495%2Fcfba522f-2701-4182-a3a4-8ff81b5853b5-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The balsamic vinegar is ‘sloshed on’ rather than drizzled at Osteria di 
Rubbaria. Photograph: John Brunton 
Around Modena, visiting a balsamic vinegar acetaia is easily arranged. Daniele 
Bonfatti gives a fascinating free tour of hisAcetaia del Cristo 
<http://www.acetaiadelcristo.it/en/> in San Prospero, 20km north of town, where 
this luscious vinegar is aged in tiny wooden barrels for up to 25 years, and 
there are a number of “celebrity barrels” reserved for the likes of Michael 
Douglas. The vineyards around here are where Lambrusco is made, a light fizzy 
red wine ideal with the region’s rich cuisine. Quality has improved from the 
days when Lambrusco was the typical trattoria tipple, and in nearby Nonantola,
Cantina Gavioli <http://www.gaviolivini.com/> (gaviolivini.com 
<http://www.gaviolivini.com>) has tastings and an extensive museum on the 
history of local winemaking and agriculture.

At Modena’s Osteria Francescana <http://www.osteriafrancescana.it/index.php> 
(tasting menus from €170, Via Stella 22, +39 059 223912), chef Massimo Bottura 
is snapping at the heels of Noma with third place in theWorld’s 50 Best 
Restaurants list 
<http://www.theworlds50best.com/list/1-50-winners/osteria-francescana>. But I 
am just as happy driving a few miles out of town to Nonantola and the venerable
Osteria di Rubbiara <http://www.acetaiapedroni.it/en/storia/> (Via Risaia 4, 
+39 059 549019). Here, the delightfully grumpy 80-year-old Italo Pedroni makes 
perhaps one of Italy’s finest balsamic vinegars and, in his Osteria, he 
theatrically sloshes it – no wimpish drizzling here – over plump tortelloni 
stuffed with ricotta. The never-ending €35 menu stretches over plates piled 
with guinea fowl then roast pork, chocolate cake and ice-cream.

Nearby, surrounded by its own vineyards, is the Garuti family’s agriturismo 
(doubles from €70, +39 059 902021,garutivini.it <http://garutivini.it/it/home/>
), where guests are invited up to theacetaia to taste balsamic vinegar, and to 
the winery where the family make a dozen Lambrusco vintages.

Bologna
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432834112443%2F8214dc6c-07ea-4d9f-b197-47a87cc2f976-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432834112443%2F8214dc6c-07ea-4d9f-b197-47a87cc2f976-1020x612.jpeg>
 A room at Hotel Touring, Bologna 
Bologna is the undisputed food capital of Italy, but to work up an appetite 
there are plenty of sights to visit, beginning with an arduous climb up 498 
steps to the top of the 100-metre Torre Asinelli, a 12th-century skyscraper. 
One reason Bologna is so lively is its huge student population: its university 
is the oldest in the world, dating back to 1088. Visitors are allowed into the 
old university library, where the ceilings are decorated with flamboyant 
frescoes, and into the dramatic 1637 anatomical theatre, where bodies used to 
be dissected.

The city is criss-crossed by some 50km of portici, stately arcades lined with 
cafes, bars and boutiques. Portico Cavour is for those looking for designer 
labels, while the Portico Nanni is the place to browse for Italian cookbooks.

Bologna is trattoria heaven, with huge portions of classic cucina casalinga 
(home cooking), such as handmade tagliatelle smothered withragù bolognese that 
has simmered for hours, or tiny tortellini floating in a capon broth. I like 
the cheap and cheerfulTrattoria Danio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/nov/22/10-best-budget-eats-bologna> 
(Via San Felice 50, +39 051 555202), where a three-course lunch costs €12.50. 
Even at the more elegantRistorante Biagi <http://www.ristorantebiagi.it/> (Via 
Savenella 9/a, +39 051 4070049), where Signora Dina Carbone has been cooking 
for 50 years, an exquisite dish oftortellini in brodo costs €13.

The choice of wine at the modern Enoteca Italiana 
<http://www.enotecaitaliana.it/chi-siamo.tab.it.aspx> (Via Marsala 2/b +39 051 
235989) is exceptional – it has more than 600 bottles, but I prefer the 
spit-and-sawdustOsteria del Sole <http://www.osteriadelsole.it/> (Vicolo 
Ranocchi 1/d, +39 347 9680171), which has been serving for 450 years, close to 
the medieval Mercato di Mezzo.

The Bologna hotel scene is not brilliant, but Hotel Touring (doubles from 
€110, +39 051 584305,hoteltouring.it <http://www.hoteltouring.it>) is a small 
family-owned property with a great rooftop terrace, while atB&B Benelli 
(doubles from €70, +39 051 252138,bb-benelli.it <http://www.bb-benelli.it>) 
Signora Roberta lets a spacious guest room in her flat and has lots of tips.

Ferrara
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432834395545%2Fe1941894-0c0b-4cb7-ac36-dfb3a91ac55d-1020x765.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432834395545%2Fe1941894-0c0b-4cb7-ac36-dfb3a91ac55d-1020x765.jpeg>
 The terrace at B&B Locanda Borgonuovo, Ferrara 
If Bologna is refreshingly untouristy, nearby Ferrara is really off the beaten 
track. The colossal Castello Estense dominates the town with its well-preserved 
Renaissancepalazzi and one of Europe’s oldest Jewish ghettoes, but I also adore 
the Palazzo dei Diamanti, which hosts major modern art shows, featuring artists 
such as Picasso and Giorgio de Chirico.

And Ferrara takes the gold medal for ancient hostelries: Al Brindisi 
<http://www.albrindisi.net/> (Via degli Adelardi 11, +39 0532 471225), dating 
back to 1435, is in the Guinness Book of Records as the world’s oldest wine 
bar. I tried a rare natural wine, Mentuni dell’Emilia, from a vineyard on 
nearby seaflats. A great eat-in deli isCusina e Butega 
<http://www.cusinaebutega.com/> (Corso Porto Reno 26, +39 0532 209174), serving 
the speciality salama da sugo, a rich cooked pork sausage with mashed potatoes 
that the waiter described as Ferrara’s haggis.

Ferrara’s Hotel Annunziata (doubles from €99, +39 0532 201111, annunziata.it 
<http://www.annunziata.it/en/>) has been renovated as a hip designer address, 
and is located in front of Estense Castle. There’s a friendly welcome just 
round the corner in B&BLocanda Borgonuovo (doubles from €80, +39 0532 211100, 
borgonuovo.com <http://www.borgonuovo.com/joomla/index.php>), in a former 
convent.

Ravenna and the Adriatic Coast
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432831154670%2F9d28d2f2-d0e6-4bec-bb7d-cc34f561403a-2060x1371.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432831154670%2F9d28d2f2-d0e6-4bec-bb7d-cc34f561403a-2060x1371.jpeg>
 Traditional boats at the Museo della Marineria, Cesenatico. Photograph: Katja 
Kreder/awl-images.com/Getty Images/AWL Images RM 
The Romagna riviera runs along the sandy beaches of the Adriatic for around 70 
miles, from Cattolica in the south, up to the Po delta on the Veneto border. 
It’s good to start in Ravenna, once capital of the western Roman empire, today 
a sleepy provincial town with eight Unesco world heritage sites of exceptional 
Byzantine mosaics. TheBasilica di San Vitale is the one must-see that tour 
buses all stop at, but Ravenna is worth an overnight stay. With a free bike 
from thetourist office 
<http://www.turismo.ra.it/eng/Travel/Getting-around/Rentals/C%27entro-in-bici>, 
it’s a fine cycle out of town to the tiny village ofClasse, dominated by the 
immense Basilica di Sant’Apollinare, with its glittering Byzantine art. Back in 
Ravenna, mosaics are very much a living heritage, with numerous contemporary 
ateliers such asMarco De Luca at EmmeDi on Via Salara (marcodeluca-mosaici.com 
<http://www.marcodeluca-mosaici.com/>).

Down the coast at Cervia, the most southerly section of the Po Delta nature 
reserve includes some ancient Etruscan salt flats, where a subtle, perfumed 
salt is still made by hand. Then, before the brash resorts around Rimini, the 
little unspoilt port ofCesenatico makes a nice stop. Cycling fans head straight 
for the museum on Via Cecchini dedicated to the town’s most famous son, Tour de 
France and Giro d’Italia winner Marco Pantani. A picturesque canal in the 
centre is alive with traditional wooden fishing boats, from which the day’s 
catch is unloaded straight into the busypescheria (market).

Rimini, Riccione and Cattolica, with miles of sandy beaches, bars, nightclubs 
and 1970s hotels, are the quintessential Italian holiday resort, part Costa 
Brava, part Ibiza, and not to everyone’s taste, particularly in the summer 
holiday season. Better to head up into the hills to discover quiet medieval 
hamlets like fortifiedMontegridolfo, a 50-minute drive from Rimini.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432899074459%2F183d655a-14ef-4b1d-b755-a00f689ea73f-2060x808.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emilia-Romagna%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F30%2Fitaly-emilia-romagna-bologna-parma-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432899074459%2F183d655a-14ef-4b1d-b755-a00f689ea73f-2060x808.jpeg>
 Nave gaze … the Basilica of Sant’Apollinare in Classe. Photograph: Alamy 
Housed in a 15th-century frescoed palace, Ravenna’s Ca’ de Vèn (Via Ricci 24, 
cadeven.it <http://www.cadeven.it>) is one of the most beautiful wine bars I 
have seen, showcasing 80 wines from the region: light fruity pignoletto, albana 
whites and the rustic, potent burson red. A €4 glass is accompanied by a plate 
of local snacks, such as freshly bakedpiadina (flatbread) with chicken liver 
and prosciutto. The big name chef in Cesenatico is Stefano Bartolini, a star of 
the Slow Food movement. While his chicLa Buca restaurant has a Michelin star, 
prices are more reasonable next door at the casualOsteria del Gran Fritto 
<http://www.stefanobartolini.com/osteria-del-gran-fritto/> (Corso Garibaldi 41, 
+39 0547 82474), which serves gourmet streetfood dishes such as a panino with 
mackerel and pea purée, and octopus and parsley potato salad.

10 of the best country hotels in Italy with great food
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/09/italy-hotels-great-food-agriturismo>
Those who go to Rimini should avoid the beach bars and book a table at 
renowned seafood trattoriaLa Marianna 
<http://www.osteriadeborg.it/marianna/ambiente.php> (Via Tiberlo 19, +39 
0541/22530) in the historic Borgo San Giuliano neighbourhood, immortalised by 
Federico Fellini in his 1973 film Amarcord. Its speciality is chewypassatelli, 
pasta made from parmesan, egg and breadcrumbs, topped with baby calamari, 
tomato and spinach (€12).

Set in a grand mansion in the heart of Ravenna, M club (doubles from €80, +39 
333 955 6466,m-club.it <http://www.m-club.it>) is a chic B&B with six plush 
rooms. Cesenatico also has a couple of cosy B&Bs around its canal.Casadodici 
(doubles from €89, +39 0547 401709,casadodeci.com <http://www.casadodici.com>) 
is a much better bet than the modern hotels at the celebrity beach of nearby 
Milano Marittimo (yes, the name means Milan-on-Sea). Lost in the rolling hills 
that look down on Rimini, a fortress castle atop Montegridolfo calledPalazzo 
Viviani has been renovated by fashion designer Alberta Feretti 
<http://www.albertaferretti.com/gb> (doubles from €92, +39 0541 855350, 
montegridolfo.com <http://www.palazzoviviani.com>).

• Car hire was provided by carrentals.co.uk <http://www.carrentals.co.uk/>; 
rentals from Bologna airport start at around £50 a week for a small car. Easyjet
 <http://www.easyjet.com/en/> flies to Bologna from Gatwick from £73 return. 
Ryanair <http://www.ryanair.com/>flies from Bristol, Edinburgh, Stansted and 
Manchester from £50 return. More information fromemiliaromagnaturismo.it 
<http://www.emiliaromagnaturismo.com/en?set_language=en>
 