
Emmanuel Adebayor <https://www.theguardian.com/football/emmanuel-adebayor> has 
hit out at French club Lyon and accused them of a “ridiculous excuse” for 
deciding not to sign him.

Emmanuel Adebayor – a stubborn foe but loyal to those who stand by him
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/19/xx> 
The Ligue 1 club had been considering a move for the 32-year-old free agent 
and Adebayor met with Bruno Genesio on Friday, after the coach’s pre-match 
press conference in which he said the striker “could indeed” sign, only to then 
pull out of any deal because of the veteran forward’s participation in the
Africa Cup of Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> 
with Togo and his ineligibility for the Champions League.

The former Arsenal, Manchester City and Tottenham Hotspur striker has hit back 
and told L’Equipe: “They said that? That’s nonsense. They came to me after we 
had qualified [for the Africa Cup of Nations].

“They knew I was going to play. If they start looking for such excuses, they 
will kill themselves. I’m the captain of my country, so how could I not go? 
What if a Frenchman refused to play in the Euros?”

Adebayor told the newspaper that terms had been agreed on Tuesday. “I arrived 
on Friday morning to speak to the coach,” he added. “I thought it was just a 
medical then to sign. The coach asked me surprising questions. He wanted to 
know if I was married, if I had a kid.

“I’ve been playing at the highest level for 15 years and I have worked with 
some of the best coaches in the world – Arsène Wenger, José Mourinho, Didier 
Deschamps, Roberto Mancini. He asked me why it didn’t work at Crystal Palace. I 
told him that I’ve always played for teams aiming for the English title or a 
European title. It’s the first time I’ve been in a team battling relegation and 
the play didn’t suit me.

“I think the Champions League win against [Dinamo] Zagreb changed things. 
There’s a little disappointment obviously because I really liked Lyon, like I 
said to the coach. If they didn’t want me, why did they make a ridiculous 
excuse? But I’m stronger than that in my head.I could have died in 2010 so 
nothing can touch me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/08/togo-football-team-ambushed-angola>
today. I will move on to something else, even if this was a really funny 
chapter.”

Adebayor began his senior career in Ligue 1 with Metz and Monaco before 
spending a decade in the Premier League with Arsenal, Manchester City, 
Tottenham and Crystal Palace. While at City, he spent the second half of the 
2010-11 season on loan at Real Madrid.
 