
Since 2012, I have studied the China-Africa illegal elephant ivory trade, 
which was the subject of my master’s research at the Yale School of Forestry & 
Environmental Studies. I remember that when I started my studies, there was 
much contention over the problem of ivory trafficking.


While NGOs and media organisations attributed elephant poaching to Chinese 
demand for ivory, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/06/chinese-demand-for-ivory-is-devastating-tanzanias-elephant-population>
 Chinese authorities generally accused international groups of using 
unsubstantiated, exaggerated information to blame China. Participation from 
Chinese society was also very limited. Indeed, when I returned to do field work 
in the summer of 2013, the majority of Chinese conservationists, let alone the 
media and the general public, had little knowledge about the country’s ivory 
trade and its impact on African elephants.

Aiming to help provide a more comprehensive and contextual understanding of 
the illicit ivory trade, I examined the trends and drivers of China’s legal, 
illegal and “grey” – antique auctions of uncertain legality – ivory markets and 
analysed the complex social and policymaking processes around the issue.My 
research showed <https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Yufang_Gao2> an 
intercultural collision over the framing of the twin problems of elephant 
poaching and ivory trafficking, as well as what to do about them. The 
claim-and-counterclaim dynamics reflected different perspectives, values, modes 
of cognitive and practical problem solving, and fundamentally, a deep 
underlying mistrust among stakeholders. I have since been calling for more 
effective arenas and means for improving cross-cultural understanding, and a 
broad coalition for elephant conservation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvulcan-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fending-illegal-ivory-trade-china-ban-holistic-african-elephants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa17f4abf07cccd7806cfbc9e54830fa713283c8f%2F14_0_4320_2592%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ending%20the%20illegal%20ivory%20trade%20in%20China%20requires%20a%20holistic%20approach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvulcan-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fending-illegal-ivory-trade-china-ban-holistic-african-elephants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ending%20the%20illegal%20ivory%20trade%20in%20China%20requires%20a%20holistic%20approach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvulcan-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fending-illegal-ivory-trade-china-ban-holistic-african-elephants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa17f4abf07cccd7806cfbc9e54830fa713283c8f%2F14_0_4320_2592%2F4320.jpg>
 Gao Yufang. Photograph: Robert Sutcliffe 
Tremendous changes have taken place over the past few years. We have seen 
increasing participation and collaboration from communities in China and 
African countries; we have seen significant commitment from top government 
officials setting the issue high on the agenda; we have also seen many 
initiatives and programmes in progress, aimed at increasing information 
sharing, stakeholder engagement, and public education. All these are positive 
trends that should be identified and reinforced.

In one of my research papers, I unveiled that there were three different 
perspectives in China; “pro-trade”, “anti-illegal trade” and “anti-all trade”. 
Each of these standpoints shaped the identities, demands, and expectations of 
their holders. I concluded that up to 2013, the “anti-illegal trade” and 
“pro-trade” perspectives had dominated public discourse and policy, while the 
“anti-all-trade” was an emerging viewpoint that was gaining momentum. I wrote 
that “as internal and external pressures keep raising the stakes, it is not 
impossible that the central Chinese government will respond to the public 
request (a ban on domestic ivory trade) and take the ivory issue as an 
opportunity to address other concerns.” I think this remains relevant today.


Economically, China’s ivory industry is tiny, and culturally, the appreciation 
of ivory – which is predominantly used for carving rather than traditional 
Chinese medicine – is not as ingrained as beliefs in the healing properties of
rhino horns and tiger bones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/03/china-tiger-farms-wildlife-trade>
. It is likely that the intensive NGO campaigns and resulting diplomatic 
pressures have enhanced the Chinese government’s concern about its global 
reputation and other national interests of higher priorities. This empowers the 
anti-trade groups and leads to policy change. The commitment from top leaders 
is key to facilitating these changes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvulcan-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fending-illegal-ivory-trade-china-ban-holistic-african-elephants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8253673ab43a75ad64c253d6f3716fd91194c813%2F0_2_5229_3137%2F5229.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ending%20the%20illegal%20ivory%20trade%20in%20China%20requires%20a%20holistic%20approach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvulcan-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fending-illegal-ivory-trade-china-ban-holistic-african-elephants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ending%20the%20illegal%20ivory%20trade%20in%20China%20requires%20a%20holistic%20approach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvulcan-partner-zone%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fending-illegal-ivory-trade-china-ban-holistic-african-elephants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8253673ab43a75ad64c253d6f3716fd91194c813%2F0_2_5229_3137%2F5229.jpg>
 “The future of African elephants is in the hands of every individual.” 
Photograph: Denis Farrell/AP 
I believe a ban on commercial ivory trading is a significant step forward, but 
it is not enough to effectively combat ivory trafficking. Wildlife conservation 
laws and regulations in China are generally well designed with rather stringent 
guidelines, but they tend to suffer from inadequate implementation. Poor law 
enforcement is often due to unclear authorisation and accountability, 
ineffective coordination between the various agencies involved, and a lack of 
capable personnel on the ground. Regulating domestic ivory markets involves the 
commerce, public security, customs and forestry departments. It is vital to 
tackle the illegal trade in physical and online markets through effective 
multi-agency cooperation, regulation, and monitoring.


It should be noted that under the newly-announced law, ivory objects deemed as 
“cultural relics” are allowed to be auctioned, and current owners of legal 
ivory products can transfer them as gifts — these and other potential loopholes 
should be carefully regulated. Furthermore, during the grace period before the 
planned ban comes into effect, the markets should be closely monitored and 
overseen to avoid any notable changes in consumer behaviour.

Lastly, it is necessary to take a comprehensive course of action. This means 
encouraging market investigation and research, public awareness, changes in 
consumer behaviour, concrete and practical regulations, the allocation of 
necessary resources for implementation, enforcement and judiciary, and policy 
evaluation and adjustment.

China alone cannot save the African elephants. A long-term solution to 
elephant conservation requires concerted action and collaboration from all 
countries involved and addressing all the threats towards elephants, which go 
far beyond illegal ivory trade. The future of African elephants is in the hands 
of every individual who wants to see the joy and wonder of coexisting with 
wildlife last far into the future.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Vulcan 
<http://www.vulcan.com/areas-of-practice/philanthropy>, a sponsor of the 
Guardian’s Global Development Professionals Network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global-development-professionals-network>.


 