
The volume of coal used across the world fell for the second year running in 
2015 and is set to stay below peak levels in 2016, reported the International
Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Agency (IEA).

The influential thinktank – an autonomous Paris-based organisation – has 
downgraded its medium-term coal market forecast for the fifth year in a row and 
expects demand to plateau until 2021, but not fall fast enough to align with 
the international goal of holding global warming below 2C.

China will be critical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/19/chinas-coal-burning-in-significant-decline-figures-show>
, as the consumer of half the world’s coal. There remains “a large degree of 
uncertainty” around its trajectory, said Keisuke Sadamori, director of energy 
markets at IEA.

Last year’s historic climate deal in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
 put the writing on the wall for fossil fuels, the biggest source of greenhouse 
gases. Yet a shift away from the most polluting fuel – coal – in the US and 
Europe is being matched by an energy boom in emerging Asian economies.

UK must move now on carbon capture to save consumers billions, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/12/uk-must-move-now-on-carbon-capture-to-save-consumers-billions-says-report>
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> is starting to ease off on the 
heavy industry that drove its rapid wealth creation and environmental 
destruction in the past decade, shifting to service sectors. Meanwhile, it is 
exporting coal power technology to Asian neighbours, Africa, some poorer 
European countries and even the US.

The one technology that could potentially throw the sector a green lifeline – 
carbon capture and storage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/12/uk-must-move-now-on-carbon-capture-to-save-consumers-billions-says-report>
 (CCS) – is stalling, the IEA warned on Monday.

Four pilot projects to pump greenhouse gas emissions from burning coal 
underground are collectively storing 8m tonnes of carbon dioxide a year. Total 
coal emissions are 1,500 times that.

Investment decisions for the schemes in operation were taken years ago. No new 
projects have got the green light since 2014.

“One year after the Paris agreement, we don’t see progress on carbon capture 
and storage, despite the fact CCS is crucial to achieving the 2C target,” said 
Sadamori.

The coal market report was prepared with input from the Coal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coal> Industry Advisory Board, which 
includes mining majors like Peabody and Glencore.

As such, the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis (IEEFA) 
noted it painted a rosier picture for the industry than the IEA’s latest world 
energy outlook, which highlighted pressures on coal from energy efficiency, 
renewables and policy measures.

Donald Trump supports 'clean coal' – but does it really have a future?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/04/trump-supports-clean-coal-but-does-it-really-have-a-future>
Sadamori acknowledged that the IEA did not predict the structural decline of 
coal in China. Two years ago, it was still expecting growth. “At the time, 
Chinese demand growth was continuing rather robustly, so we didn’t anticipate 
the Chinese demand development,” he said in a press call.

In its 2015 report, the Agency outlined a scenario 
<http://www.climatechangenews.com/2015/12/18/iea-global-coal-use-flatlining-on-weak-chinese-demand/>
 under which Chinese coal use had already peaked, although it was not taken as 
the central case.

Even with its tendency to see upsides for miners, the IEA expects the recent 
revival in coal prices to be short-lived.

In the US, the world’s third largest coal market, there was a massive 15% drop 
in consumption in 2015. While the report does not directly address the impacts 
ofDonald Trump’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/04/trump-supports-clean-coal-but-does-it-really-have-a-future>
 to the US presidency, it highlights market factors driving coal off the system.

For all Trump’s promise to put miners back to work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/trumps-economic-policies-protectionism-low-taxes-and-coal-mines>
, those economic trends are not expected to change.
 