
Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> suppliers, business 
groups and consumers have joined in an unlikely coalition to warn that a 
failure to provide climate policy certainty would cost all Australians and lead 
to higher costs.

Eighteen organisations as diverse as the Business Council of Australia, the 
Australian Conservation Foundation, the Australian Aluminium Council, Energy 
Networks Australia and St Vincent de Paul called on the Turnbull government to 
ensure energy markets remained reliable and affordable during decarbonisation.

“All sides of politics and all levels of government share responsibility for 
the current state of our energy systems – and for taking action with the energy 
industry and its customers to improve it,” the statement said. “A collective 
failure to act would come at a cost to all Australians.”

On climate policy and power prices Turnbull is talking rubbish. Here are some 
facts | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/09/on-climate-policy-and-power-prices-turnbull-is-talking-rubbish-here-are-some-facts>
One week after the energy minister, Josh Frydenberg, ruled out an emissions 
intensity scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/06/josh-frydenberg-backtracks-on-emissions-trading-comments>
 due to pressure from the backbench, the joint statement calls on the Turnbull 
government to assess all policy options during its 2017 climate policy review.

“The status quo of policy uncertainty, lack of coordination and unreformed 
markets is increasing costs, undermining investment and worsening reliability 
risks,” the joint statement said.


“This impacts all Australians, including vulnerable low-income households, 
workers, regional communities and trade-exposed industries.”

Consensus is building outside the government for a no-holds barred review of 
climate policy to move the country on from Tony Abbott’s climate policy of 
Direct Action.

“Energy has been a source of advantage for our industries and prosperity for 
our household,” the statement says.

“It should become so again even as Australian governments, businesses and 
communities deliver our national contribution to the global net zero emissions 
goal of the Paris climate agreement.

“Much depends on the success of two closely connected policy processes. The 
2017 climate change review should assess all policy options and provide advice 
to government.”

The joint statement comes on the eve of an energy ministers meeting in 
Melbourne on Wednesday – the final meeting for the year.


While the Frydenberg last week said an emissions intensity scheme for the 
electricity sector was under consideration, he subsequently backtracked after 
pushback from Tony Abbott, defence industry minister Christopher Pyne, 
backbench environment committee chair Craig Kelly and Cory Bernardi.

The prime minister backed in his energy minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/07/australia-malcolm-turnbull-rules-out-carbon-tax-or-emissions-trading>
, suggesting the Coalition would not increase a carbon tax or emissions trading 
scheme – support for which led him to lose the Liberal leadership in 2009 to 
Tony Abbott.


But later in the week, a report by Australia’s chief scientist, Alan Finkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/finkel-review-criticises-climate-policy-chaos-and-points-to-need-for-emissions-trading>
 said that investment in the electricity sector had stalled because of “policy 
instability and uncertainty”.


Finkel warned that current federal climate policy would not allow Australia to 
meet its emissions reduction targets under the Paris agreement.

The chief scientist will update the energy ministers’ meeting on Wednesday.

“An update from Australia’s chief scientist Dr Alan Finkel will provide 
ministers with an insight into some of the challenges and possible solutions he 
has gained on his recent work on the issues of energy security,” Frydenberg 
said.

“Ministers will also discuss the outcomes of two reviews designed to 
streamline the approval process for new interconnectors and to ensure consumers 
aren’t paying more than necessary for their network costs as a result of the 
limited merits review process.”

The signatories to the statement said Finkel’s preliminary report correctly 
noted that many of the technological, economic and consumer trends transforming 
our energy systems were irreversible.

“Policy and market designs need to evolve if investors are to deliver the 
energy services Australians require at a price they can afford,” the statement 
says.

On climate change and the economy, we're trapped in an idiotic netherworld | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/dec/11/on-climate-change-and-the-economy-were-trapped-in-an-idiotic-netherworld>
“A raft of reforms are needed to encourage and support flexibility throughout 
the system.”

But Frydenberg said Australians expected access to reliable and affordable 
electricity.

 “We are working through Coag to ensure the lights stay on and that power 
prices remain low,” he said. “This task, however, is being made more difficult 
by states putting in place unrealistic renewable energy targets which will 
inevitably put energy security at risk and drive up power prices.”

The federal Coalition has been critical of South Australia’s renewable energy 
targets after the statewide blackouts.

Last week, the South Australian premier Jay Weatherill said the states could 
go it alone on a carbon trading scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/08/south-australia-says-states-could-go-it-alone-after-turnbull-rules-out-carbon-tax>
 if the federal government failed to show leadership.

The signatories to the statement are: the Australian Aluminium Council, the 
Australian Conservation Foundation, the Australian Council of Social Services, 
the Australian Council of Trade Unions, the Australian Energy Council, The 
Australian Industry Group, the Australian Steel Institute, the Business Council 
of Australia, the Cement Industry Federation, the Clean Energy Council, Energy 
Consumers Australia, the Energy Efficiency Council, Energy Networks Australia, 
Energy Users Association of Australia, the Investor Group on Climate Change, 
the St Vincent de Paul Society National Council, The Climate Institute and the 
World Wildlife Fund Australia.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fobama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20complicated%20legacy%20on%20climate%20change%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fobama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20complicated%20legacy%20on%20climate%20change%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fobama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video&media=>
Obama’s complicated legacy on climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/nov/30/obama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video> 