
The British conductor Martyn Brabbins is to take over as the new music director
 
<https://www.eno.org/news/martyn-brabbins-new-music-director-english-national-opera/>
 of the English National Opera, in the latest attempt to revivethe beleaguered 
company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/03/eno-english-national-opera-new-year-offstage-turmoil>
.

Brabbins follows Mark Wigglesworth, who resigned dramatically in March over 
radical cuts being implemented across the ENO, saying the company was “evolving 
into something I do not recognise”.

Brabbins is the first big appointment by the ENO’s new artistic director, 
Daniel Kramer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/05/english-national-operas-new-artistic-director-promises-to-heal-the-trauma>
 since he began in the role in August, and who many have hoped will bring 
stability to the organisation, which has lurched from crisis to crisis over the 
past two years. At the heart of its ongoing problems has been the need to cut 
spending after theArts Council reduced its grant by £5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/12/english-national-opera-funding-arts-council-england-special-measures>
.

The music director role is a big step up for Brabbins, who regularly conducts 
top international orchestras, including the Netherlands’ Royal Concertgebouw, 
the Tokyo Metropolitan and Berlin’s Deutsche Sinfonie Orchester this season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fenglish-national-opera-appoints-martyn-brabbins-music-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F608d87e200082bda5266e60f50ed546942ee3d49%2F0_139_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=English%20National%20Opera%20names%20Martyn%20Brabbins%20as%20music%20director&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fenglish-national-opera-appoints-martyn-brabbins-music-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=English%20National%20Opera%20names%20Martyn%20Brabbins%20as%20music%20director&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fenglish-national-opera-appoints-martyn-brabbins-music-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F608d87e200082bda5266e60f50ed546942ee3d49%2F0_139_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
 The Pilgrim’s Progress by Vaughan Williams, conducted by Martyn Brabbins at 
the London Coliseum in 2012 Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
He also spent 11 years as the associate principal conductor of the BBC 
Scottish Symphony Orchestra and was the artistic director of the Cheltenham 
International festival of music between 2005 and 2007. Brabbins’s most recent 
work with the ENO was a performance of Vaughan Williams’sThe Pilgrim’s Progress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/nov/05/pilgrims-progress-eno-vaughan-williams>
 in 2012.

Brabbins will hold the role until 2020, and will conduct his first opera as 
part of the 2017-18 season.

Wigglesworth, Brabbins’s respected predecessor, had been in his position for 
less than a year when he abruptly resigned in March. He had presented 
colleagues and the ENO board with suggestions to cut costs, especially for 
productions, but they were not implemented and he took issue with the decision 
to make the season “part-time”.

In a leaked letter to the musicians, Wigglesworth said that “as hard as I have 
tried to argue to maintain what I believe to be the fundamental pillars of our 
identity, I have failed to persuade others of this necessity”.

Brabbins admitted that Wigglesworth was a “tough act to follow”, but said he 
felt “incredibly honoured to have been invited to join ENO and to become a part 
of this treasured British musical company”.

He added: “It is quite an act to follow, and in a tough financial climate, but 
I am determined that ENO will continue to produce stimulating operatic 
performances of the highest musical quality at theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Coliseum.”

As part of its cost-saving measures, the ENO will stage eight rather than 11 
productions next season. Highlights will include the world premiere of a new 
opera by Ryan Wigglesworth, a version of Shakespeare’s The Winter’s Tale, with 
which the actor Rory Kinnear will make his directorial debut.
 