
The people of England should be offered their own parliament in a referendum 
to overcome the “democratic deficit” with the rest of the United Kingdom, the 
former shadow education secretaryTristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt> has said.

A referendum would allow England to experience the same kind of “democratic 
awakening” that has occurred inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, which has held three referendums on 
its constitutional future since 1979.

In a speech to the Centre for English Identity and Politics at Winchester 
University on Thursday, Hunt will say: “Nobody who campaigned in Scotlandduring 
the referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence-blog/live/2014/sep/18/scottish-referendum-results-live-coverage-of-the-independence-vote>
 could fail to be shaped by the experience. It was to reconnect with the power 
and wonder of democracy, to see an entire nation debate and debate again its 
culture, its identity and every single aspect of its future.

“I want that for England. I want the English to experience the same kind of 
democratic awakening as we have seen in Scotland.”

Hunt, who returned to the backbenches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/15/stoke-on-trent-microcosm-labour-soul-jeremy-corbyn>
 after the election of Jeremy Corbyn as Labour leader, is seeking to explore 
fresh ideas to revive the party’s appeal to voters on the centre ground. The 
historian, who has written about the English civil war, believes that Labour 
needs to reconnect with English voters amid signs that the party has failed to 
respond to the growing sense of an English identity.

“Our sense of Englishness matters to us more and more, and the Labour party 
has fallen on the wrong side of that cultural divide,” Hunt will say as he 
cites research by the Labour MP and intellectual Jon Cruddas whoargues that 
socially conservative voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/27/the-cost-of-diversity-and-community-cohesion>
 are the most likely to have deserted Labour.

Hunt will add: “They value home, family and their country. They feel their 
cultural identity is under threat. They yearn for a sense of belonging and 
national renewal. Tradition, rules and social order are important to them. And, 
tragically, they feel thatLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
no longer represents them, or understands their lives. In short, they felt we 
didn’t value England, and we’re not on the side of the English.”

Hunt will say that Labour’s planned constitutional convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/19/labour-ed-miliband-constitutional-convention>
 should argue for a referendum on whether to establish an English parliament.

“My instinct is that we need a proper English parliament. But some prefer 
regional assemblies, and the jury is still out on the newEnglish votes for 
English laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2015/oct/22/mps-to-debate-english-votes-for-english-laws-plans-politics-live>
 settlement. But these are complex issues and no one can claim to have all the 
answers – so we should put all three on a ballot and let the English people 
decide. Because it is only through the big, broad, inclusive debate a 
referendum brings that we will arrive at the constitutional settlement both 
Britain and England need to thrive.”

Hunt’s calls for an English parliament puts him outside the current Labour 
mainstream.

Gordon Brown argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/17/united-kingdom-english-votes-english-laws-ukip>
 before the last election that Westminster acts as both a parliament for 
England and the United Kingdom. The former prime minister, who rejected the 
Tory mechanism for creating English votes for English laws, said that English 
MPs should bear in mind their overwhelming strength at Westminster.

“It follows that the rules needed to respect and reassure the minorities, who 
might always be outvoted, have to be different from those needed to uphold the 
majority,” Brown said as he pointed out that English MPs account for 533 out of 
650 because England makes up 84% of the UK population.
 