
Last week English National Opera advertised for an artistic director. 
Applications close on Wednesday. Get your skates on if you have a “broadly 
ranging knowledge of opera” and can “lead an artistic vision”. Headhunters are 
not known for their prose. I hope this lax job description does not reflect the 
sharp thinking of Cressida Pollock, ENO chief executive, or Mark Wigglesworth, 
music director, in their search for the missing part of their triumvirate. This 
is the job John Berry, working with a different team and structure,left last 
summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/10/john-berry-steps-down-from-english-national-opera>
.

“Deep” rather than “broad” experience of opera might help, together with a 
thorough grasp of music (a word not used in the brief). It is vital for ENO’s 
newcomer to understand with ears and gut, not just because the music department 
has to plead why a regular chorus and orchestra are essential; why a work may 
need extra rehearsal time; why singers need vocal support from a set design or, 
when singing upside down from the flies, must be able to see the conductor. The 
rumour mill assumes that a choice has been made. This is the last chance for a 
maverick to jump in. Expect an announcement soon.

One aspect of opera not easily comprehended, particularly by anyone who 
assumes mistakes of casting or concept are made out of carelessness, is the 
degree to which everything changes in the adrenaline-charged moment of 
performance. A first night is the start of a production’s life not the finish. 
A revival can transform a good original to an evening of genius. This is the 
case with the five-star revival of Mozart’sMagic Flute directed by Simon 
McBurney – busy witha new show at the Barbican 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=18001>, too, this week. 
An outstanding cast is led by Allan Clayton, an ideal, agile and poetic Tamino, 
and Peter Coleman-Wright, a charmingly grizzled Papageno who sparks tears of 
joy. Reisha Adams, replacing an indisposed Lucy Crowe as Pamina, displayed 
verve and confidence. The reading is zany, ingenious and radical. Of the many
Magic Flutes I have seen, this gets closest to the work’s dark core. 
Wigglesworth, chorus and orchestra, raised above the pit, are superb.

Of the many Magic Flutes I have seen, this gets closest to the work’s dark core

I could say more. Instead I will use this space to write about ENO, a company 
I support without reservation. London is a music capital of the world. It is 
unimaginable for it not to have two major opera houses.Wigglesworth’s arrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/jan/23/english-national-opera-edward-gardner-mark-wigglesworth>
, last year, signals a commitment to the highest musical standards. He has
spoken out for his musicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/mark-wigglesworth-eno-needs-to-innovate-to-survive-not-reduce>
, as he must in a time of crisis, calling for innovation not depletion. He is, 
however, treading a fine line between loyalty and dissent. This week, ENO’s 
chorus threatened tostrike over a proposed 25% pay cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/english-national-opera-choristers-strike-vote>
. There has been confusion here, with erroneous comparison with the NHS. It is 
not a cut in pay for the same work but – a vital distinction – a reduction from 
a 12-month to a nine-month contract. It would mean a clear break in the summer 
when the season is closed. Singers would be free to seek freelance work, 
including one-off summer events in which ENO itself is involved, for which they 
would be paid extra. I checked this with Pollock last week who confirmed this 
was the proposal. The chorus would still exist, coherent and strong for nine 
months. So far no decision has been made about ENO’s fine orchestra, also at 
risk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fenglish-national-opera-cuts-magic-flute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6964fb52e30f8b65d603cd950180b090b179eb9%2F0_309_4298_2579%2F4298.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ENO%20in%20crisis%3A%20who%20can%20keep%20the%20magic%20alive%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fenglish-national-opera-cuts-magic-flute%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ENO%20in%20crisis%3A%20who%20can%20keep%20the%20magic%20alive%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fenglish-national-opera-cuts-magic-flute%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6964fb52e30f8b65d603cd950180b090b179eb9%2F0_309_4298_2579%2F4298.jpg>
 ‘An outstanding cast’: Allan Clayton (Tamino) and Peter Coleman-Wright 
(Papageno) in The Magic Flute. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Observer 
This loss of guaranteed income would be tough for every chorus member. 
Campaigning to save a full-time job is a natural instinct. We would all do it. 
Anyone who has heard these outstanding singers in full, loyal, committed force 
surely feels devastated at the prospect of any dismantling. They work hideously 
long hours, commit complex music, text and movement to memory in their own 
time, and switch fluently from one opera to another, rehearsal to show, morning 
to night, day to day. This is an exhausting skill, a matchless talent, their 
arrival on stage often the most thrilling moment in an opera. Say “ENO 
Mastersingers” to me and I think only of their glorious, heartfelt outpourings.

At the same time, if a reduced chorus contract could contribute a substantial 
“many hundreds of thousands of pounds” (Pollock confirmed this estimate to me 
last week) towards the £5m which Arts Council England has said must be saved, 
normal rules no longer apply. Next year’s season, to be announced shortly, will 
have far fewer performances, intended as a temporary cost-cutting measure until 
funding is restored. The logic for shorter contracts, for the immediate future, 
is hard to refute. These are desperate times. Other moves will include 
decamping to smaller venues and letting the Coliseum out commercially for quick 
revenue. Administrative staff, tireless and unseen, who keep the theatre 
running, have also faced heavy cuts.

If these combined actions ensure a return to normal funding after 2017, the 
result will not be a catastrophe but a life-saver.Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> is still a relative bargain: for 
roughly the cost of a medium-sized house in south London (I am in one as I 
write), or a moderate footballer, one philanthropist’s cheque could save the 
chorus. For the price of a star striker’s little toenail, if you are lucky, 
that generous donor would solve the entire shortfall. Having learned some hard 
lessons, and scrutinised every aspect of its endeavour, the company could then 
recover its ACE funding and move forward.  

This time, unless every penny of that £5m is saved, there will be no English 
National Opera

Over the past 35 years, ENO has rarely been solvent. Despite much finger 
pointing, the causes are too complex to lay at the feet of individuals, recent 
or past. Margaret Thatcher’sslashing of arts subsidy in the 1980s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/apr/11/thatcher-and-the-arts> (yes, we 
can blame her) was a first blow, together with a global financial crisis and a 
diminution in corporate giving. Yes, ENO ticket prices have been too high. They 
are being reined in, not a moment too soon. Not all productions have worked, 
ever the case in an ambitious, innovative opera house. Every decade, ENO has 
been saved by an Arts Council England bailout. Times have hardened. ACE is 
behaving with an obduracy close to philistinism. A body designed to give and 
support now too often cuts to chastise. This time, unless every penny of that 
£5m is saved, there will be no English National Opera. I do not envy Cressida 
Pollock. It requires the wisdom of Solomon to work out how cutting one of the 
finest opera choruses, and possibly an orchestra too, can conceivably be the 
only honourable deed.
 