
Though being immaculately restored by the government, the colonial streets and 
squares of Old Havana until recently lacked a certain buzz. But thanks to a 
recent law that allows more Cubans to run their own businesses, and hot 
properties in the historic quarter now available to rent from the state, a new 
wave of self-employed Cubans are opening cafes, shops, restaurants and stylish 
rental apartments. These openings have accelerated recently, andOld Havana 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/204>, a Unesco world heritage site, is now 
lively and resurgent.

“I’m very happy to see the renaissance of Old Havana,” says Lea Díaz Ramírez, 
whose new deluxe rental apartment,Suite Havana <http://www.suitehavana.com/>, 
sits just off handsome Calle Mercaderes. “But, above all, I’m happy to see so 
many intelligent entrepreneurs realising their dreams. This is only the 
beginning.”

Among top new addresses is funky O’Reilly 304 
<https://www.facebook.com/Orreily304>, offering gin cocktails and great ceviche 
under the gaze of a pop-arty portrait of Amy Winehouse by owner José Carlos 
Imperatori, andEl Chanchullero <http://www.el-chanchullero.com/>, a tapas bar 
serving skewered shrimps, overlooking the under-restoration Plaza del Cristo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fold-havana-cuba-entrepreneurs-new-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417786363413%2Fb800b655-29d2-40b4-a500-4c6655d4aedc-1020x704.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Entrepreneurs%20bring%20new%20life%20to%20Old%20Havana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fold-havana-cuba-entrepreneurs-new-law%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Entrepreneurs%20bring%20new%20life%20to%20Old%20Havana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fold-havana-cuba-entrepreneurs-new-law%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417786363413%2Fb800b655-29d2-40b4-a500-4c6655d4aedc-1020x704.jpeg>
 Dulcería Bianchini 
A light, budget lunch – something of a rarity in Cuba – can also be found at 
cuteDulcería Bianchini <http://www.dulceria-bianchini.com/>, close to the 
cathedral, which bakes bite-size quiches. Less light, but still wholesome,Café 
Oasis Nelva 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Oasis-Nelva/344102259004692?hc_location=timeline>
 delivers savoury crepes on a mezzanine above a pretty flower shop.

Cubans are ever-entrepreneurial, and dual-purpose enterprises are in vogue. At 
Piscolabis <http://piscolabishabana.com/?lang=en>, after browsing gifts in the 
light-filled store, visitors savour coffee by the window. And atJacqueline 
Fumero <http://www.jacquelinefumero.com/index.php>, a cafe-cum-boutique on tiny 
Plazuela del Angel, Death by Chocolate ice-cream shakes give clothes shoppers a 
sugar fix.

Around the corner, Havana’s barber-in-chief, Gilberto Valladares, runs hair 
salon Arte Corte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/feb/21/cuba-havana-day-spa-break>, 
decorated with vintage barbers’ equipment. This place has been instrumental in 
the rejuvenation of this northern corner of Old Havana.
 The view from Azucar!!! Photograph: Claire Boobbyer 
Another vibrant Old Havana square is the stunning Plaza Vieja. Earlier this 
year,Café Bohemia <http://www.havanabohemia.com/> – a deli inside the 
18th-century-frescoed Palacio del Conde Lombillo – opened, offering paninis and 
cocktails. Opposite (above the alfresco, state-run Café El Escorial) is a new, 
stylish tapas bar,Azucar!!! (yes, three exclamation marks!), serving passion 
fruit daiquiris under elegant half-moon windows on its balcony; a new, 
1950s-style bar is to open shortly.

On another fringe of Old Havana is the vast former shopping mall Manzana de 
Gómez (built in the early 20th century), which is due to open as a state-run 
hotel, under Kempinski management, in 2016.

Meanwhile, as well as Suite Havana <http://www.suitehavana.com/>, more small 
deluxe accommodation can be found:La Maison <http://lamaisoncuba.com/> is 
artfully decorated with Spanish colonial furniture. And last month saw the 
opening ofCasa Alta, a stylish but affordable B&B with five en suite rooms 
(£19-25 a night, Calle San Ignacio 412 e/Sol y Muralla, +53 53 07 02 20)... 
that is, if you’ve got time to sleep now that newly revived Old Havana has so 
many temptations.
 