
On 9 September 1963, 70 years after it was written, Erik Satie’s Vexations was 
given its world premiere before a gathering of off-Broadway actors and artists 
at the Pocket theatre in Manhattan. The work is no more than half a page long, 
and yet the composer indicates that its curiously angular motif – melancholic 
yet deadpan, ecclesiastical yet demonic, strangely lacking direction – should 
be repeated 840 times: “One would have to prepare oneself in advance,” he 
warns. It took John Cage and his relay team of pianists, including John Cale 
who would later co-found the Velvet Underground, 18 hours and 40 minutes to 
perform the musical marathon from start to finish, playing continuously from 
6pm until lunchtime the following day. Patience was rewarded: those who 
attended were refunded five cents of their $5 dollar ticket for every 20 
minutes they stayed, with a bonus foranyone who crossed the finish line 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TYHIqMmtS-0>. Only one man did; another, as it 
finished, called out “encore”.

It is typical of Satie, one of music’s great ironists, that a work that would 
become so significant was probably never intended for performance, and 
characteristic, too, of the Zen Buddhist Cage that he should immerse himself in 
Satie’s mystical sounds and silence over such an expansive stretch of time. 
(Pianists who have attempted too many repetitions have complained of 
hallucinations, evil thoughts and an alarming inability to remember the 
melody.) ButVexations is more than just a joke that was never designed to be 
told: its revival marked a growing appreciation of Satie’s music, as a new 
generation of composers in the US woke up to the bold invention with which so 
much of his music sparks.

Pianists who attempted too many repetitions have complained of hallucinations 
and an inability to remember the melody

Satie is the maverick who invented “furniture music”, sounds that were 
designed to be heard but not listened to, long before Muzak was branded and 
sold. He created one of the earliest examples of “prepared piano”, fixing 
sheets of paper between the strings so as to alter the way it sounds. The 
unperformable directions on his scores – “open your head”, “be invisible for a 
moment” – mark them out as a precursor to conceptual art.Vexations, too, offers 
the earliest use of extended repetition in a piano piece, pre-empting the phase 
loops of Steve Reich, the arpeggios of Philip Glass and dancing melodic 
fragments of Terry Riley. “It’s not a question of Satie’s relevance,” Cage 
famously declared. “He’s indispensable.”

As concerts take place across the UK to celebrate his 150th anniversary, it is 
possible to more fully appreciate the visionary qualities of Satie’s work. 
There will be aSatie cabaret presented by Alistair McGowan 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ejd8gw> at this year’s Proms and, alongside a 
recital of Vexations 
<http://www.cheltenhamfestivals.com/music/news-2/2016/06/vexations-a-call-for-pianists/>
, given by a relay of 35 pianists over an anticipated 22 hours, visitors to 
Cheltenham festival next month will be able to hear Pascal Rogé, one of the 
leading interpreters of his piano music, explore the impact Satie had on the 
composers around him. His programme, with his partner Ami Rogé, includes pieces 
by Debussy and Ravel – who both helped to promote his work – as well as 
atmospheric miniatures of a younger generation of composers, such as Auric, 
Tailleferre and Poulenc, who admired his music’s cool, ironic detachment. 
Meanwhile, Christina McMaster’s multimedia piano recital celebrates the way in 
which Satie worked closely with visual artists, fromMan Ray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2012/sep/20/man-ray-portraits-in-pictures>
 toBraque <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/braque> to Picasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/pablo-picasso>. Her use of film is a 
reminder that he was in the first wave of composers who matched music to image, 
tailoring a score for René Clair’s 1925 surrealist filmEntr’Acte 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mpr8mXcX80Q>, which featured Duchamp playing 
chess with Man Ray.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmpr8mXcX80Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmpr8mXcX80Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dmpr8mXcX80Q&media=>
 René Clair’s 1925 surrealist filmEntr’Acte. 
One can only imagine that Satie would have been delighted – and, in the case of
Vexations, amused – by the attention now devoted to his works. Born into a poor 
and difficult childhood in the Normandy harbour town of Honfleur, he would 
always be an outsider. The Paris Conservatoire to which he was enrolled by his 
stepmother, herself a pianist, became for him “a sort of local penitentiary” 
during his teens; he left with no qualifications and a reputation for being 
lazy. He signed up for military service in 1886 and dropped out within the same 
year. Immersing himself in the bohemian life of Montmartre, he became linked 
with the popular music scene and eked out a living as an accompanist, playing 
at the Chat Noir cabaret. Always on the periphery, and forever out of money, he 
later downgraded from the cramped room in which he lived to the less 
fashionable Parisian suburb of Arcueil, where he holed up in isolation and 
squalor – no visitors set foot in the room during the near-30 years he lived 
there.

Erik Satie: a life less ordinary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/01/erik-satie-a-life-less-ordinary> 
Much has been made of the eccentricities of this flâneur, who was always seen 
in a grey velvet suit, and yet underlying Satie’s music is his serious desire 
to create something new. You can hear it in his popular piano pieces: the 
haunting scales and rhythms of the Trois Gnossiennes written under the spell of 
Romanian folk music, and the meditative world ofGymnopédies, where, as in a 
cubist painting, motifs are “seen” from all sides. At a time when French 
composers were looking to escape the shadows of Wagner’s epic Romanticism, the 
French composer’s stripped-back mechanical sound, inspired by the humble barrel 
organ, offered a radically simple approach. “Satie showed imagination, he was 
more daring than Debussy and he pushed him,” explains Rogé. “If Debussy had 
stayed with the pattern of music he was writing [before the 1890s], he would 
not be considered ‘the great Debussy’.”

Debussy helped to draw public attention to Satie, orchestrating two of his 
Gymnopédies, yet Satie had to wait until much later in life to attain celebrity 
status. While still earning a living writing salon dances and popular cabaret 
songs, and after suffering a creative crisis, he enrolled himself at the Schola 
Cantorum in Paris at the age of 39. Rather than finding him validation, his 
studies seem to have fuelled his hatred of convention – it’s with more than a 
hint of bitterness that he claims to put “everything I know about Boredom” into 
the Bach chorale of his masterfulSports et Divertissements piano pieces. But 
notoriety led to asuccès de scandale and when it came it came with a bang in 
Parade, his surreal, one-act circus ballet for Diaghilev. Into the orchestral 
score, which featured jazz and cabaret tunes, were thrown typewriters, sirens 
and a pistol – just the kind of noises a wartime audience would normally pay 
not to hear. With its rigid cubist costumes by Picasso – which restricted 
Massine’s choreography – and a promotional push from Cocteau, it was 
provocative enough to secure Satie’s position at the vanguard of modernism.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdBhjGIdL5cM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdBhjGIdL5cM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdBhjGIdL5cM&media=>
 An excerpt fromVexations by Erik Satie. 
Yet Satie was continually frustrated in his attempts to be accepted as an 
artist in high society France – his failure to establish himself at the 
prestigious Académie des Beaux-Arts, to which Debussy had won a scholarship, 
only compounded his resentment. Was this treatment by the cultural elite fair? 
Certainly his determination to antagonise his audience in his late ballets did 
little to endear him to the critics, but the fierce criticism he received in 
Paris was also a sign of things to come. Pierre Boulez would later poke fun at 
Satie’s lack of craft, while composer Jean Barraqué – another proponent of 
12-tone music – would deride Satie as “an accomplished musical illiterate … who 
found that his friendship with Debussy was an unhoped-for opportunity to loiter 
in the corridors of history”. According to Pascal Rogé, the snobbery shows no 
sign of abating. “Satie has always been treated unfairly – especially in France 
where he is considered a clown,” he says. “It’s funny how the French have much 
more respect for Berg and Schoenberg than Satie. People still look down on him 
as if to say, ‘This is not music, it’s not serious.’”

Underlying this criticism is the great battle that gathered momentum after the 
second world war: on the one side, those avant-garde composers, such as 
Messiaen and Boulez, who embraced the complexity of serialism; and on the 
other, Cage and his minimalist followers, who harked after music of simpler 
means. As minimalism crossed the Atlantic, so interest in Satie’s music grew in 
Britain. Gavin Bryars, who performedVexations with Christopher Hobbs in 1971, 
studied the French composer’s harmonies in detail and drew on them in his work; 
Howard Skempton, too, started sculpting hypnotic Satiesque miniatures. Brian 
Eno directly answered Satie’s call for “music that would be a part of the 
surrounding noises” in his ambient Music for Airports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/m83-anthony-gonzalez-top-five-electronic-albums-tangerine-dream-snthesisers>
. And even after minimalism outgrew its origins, the composers associated with 
repetitive means continued to pay tribute – you’ll find Satie echoing in the 
melancholic atmospheres of Arvo Pärt’sFür Alina, in John Adams’s Gymnopédies
-inspired piano concertoCentury Rolls and the folkish piano miniatures of 
Ludovico Einaudi, not to mention the electronic music of Aphex Twin. At 150 
years old, the French composer is both everywhere and absent.

• Cheltenham music festival takes place from 1 to 17 July. 
cheltenhamfestivals.com/music 
<http://www.cheltenhamfestivals.com/music/whats-on/2016/satie-and-multimedia/>. 
A Satie cabaret is on 1 August at Cadogan Hall, London SW1.bbc.co.uk/proms 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ejd8gw>.
 