
With a graceless leap I plunged from the safety of the boat into San Francisco 
Bay, cursing myself for the foolhardiness of willingly reconstructing the most 
infamous and desperate prison escape in history. Alcatraz loomed large above as 
I bobbed up and down in the cold swell, and the city seemed impossibly hard to 
reach under my own steam.

What is with our enduring fascination with Alcatraz? Why has “The Rock”, which 
once housed the most reluctant of recalcitrant prisoners, become one of the 
biggest tourist attractions in America and also a bright flame to brainless 
moths like me who cannot resist an irrational adventure challenge?
 The pull of the Rock … swimmers during a November crossing. Photograph: Vivek 
Khanzode 
The escape mythology survives but anyone can try to educate their guesses on 
the 1962 mystery by having a go at the swim

That challenge – attempted by thousands every year – is to try and swim the 
one and a half miles of frigid water from the island back into San Francisco. 
It’s partly Clint Eastwood’s fault. His 1979 film Escape From Alcatraz 
presented inconclusive conclusions on one of the island’s enduring mysteries. 
It told the true story of three men, Frank Morris and brothers Clarence and 
John Anglin, who made it out of the prison in June 1962 and were never seen 
again. Nobody knows for sure whether they made good their escape or drowned in 
the attempt. True stories like that, and other, embellished, tales of 
man-eating sharks and killer currents spread by prison guards as a deterrent, 
contributed to the mythology of unassailable Alcatraz and the impossible swim.

More than half a century later much of the mythology survives, but anyone can 
try to educate their guesses on the 1962 mystery by having a go at the swim. 
It’s not an altogether accurate reconstruction – the majority of modern 
volunteer escapees are usually armed with a wetsuit, months of training, and a 
carb-loaded breakfast, and all of them have the advantage of a guide who knows 
how to swim the bay better than anyone.
 Swimming guide Mike explains details of the route. Photograph: Vivek Khanzode 
Pedro Ordenes <https://waterworldswim.com/member/pedro/> is the head coach and 
founder of Water World Swim, which organises escorted monthly crossings. He has 
swum it himself a remarkable 979 times.

“Alcatraz is a big draw because it’s very challenging,” he says. “Years ago, 
people believed it wasn’t possible to swim it, and there was nobody to learn 
how the currents work. I started helping people when I moved here 26 years ago 
and it’s grown into more than I was expecting.”

I met Pedro and his team at 6.30am beside their boat in Fisherman’s Wharf – 
ordinarily an area of San Francisco groaning under the weight of tourists and 
tourism traders – but eerily still in the darkness of this early Saturday 
morning.

Our briefing focused primarily on the swim route – it’s about a mile and a 
half back into Aquatic Park, the swimmer-safe harbour and beach at the far end 
of Fisherman’s Wharf, but it’s the cold water and the infamous tides that 
provide the real challenge.
 The San Francisco skyline. Photograph: Alamy 
“We will be swimming at ebb tide,” said the coach, Mike. “So that means the 
currents are heading back out towards the Golden Gate bridge and through to the 
ocean. We don’t want anyone starting their holiday in Hawaii a few weeks early, 
so listen up.”

As I swam, I saw either the Golden Gate or Oakland Bay ​bridges looming above 
the low swell

We approached the island in the boat as the morning sun cloaked the prison in 
a welcoming orange glow. Before jumping in we were advised to aim for theSS 
Jeremiah O’Brien <http://www.ssjeremiahobrien.org/>, a survivor of the D-day 
landings and now a museum ship (adults $20, children 5-16, $10). If we swam in 
that direction, Mike assured us the current would pull us to the right and 
towards the narrow entrance of Aquatic Park.

Five and a half decades earlier, Morris and the Anglin brothers had launched a 
crude raft made of stitched-together raincoats in silence and darkness, but 
recreating their epic struggle for our own amusement, we would have the benefit 
of a beautiful clear morning and a flotilla of paddleboarders and dinghies at a 
ratio of one guide per swimmer.

Fog and choppy seas had been forecast but neither materialised, and as I swam 
and raised my head to breathe on each side, I saw either the Golden Gate or 
Oakland Bay bridges looming above the low swell. Beneath me, I could see 
nothing beyond my own arms.
 The shore thing … Graham after completing his swim. Photograph: Vivek Khanzode
The tumultuous tide, as the Pacific Ocean forces itself in and out of a gap a 
mile wide, constantly churns sand and sediment, and visibility is never good. 
It was just as well. Visiting theAquarium of the Bay 
<https://www.aquariumofthebay.org/> (adults $24.95, children 4-12, $14.95) the 
previous day was a mistake. Sharks are the apex predators in the bay. Leopard 
and sevengills are the most numerous, but both species are allegedly bottom 
feeders and scared of humans. Of far greater concern was the video of a great 
white right next to a tourist boat beside Alcatraz the previous October.

Apparently, they rarely come into the bay, preferring the deeper, saltier 
waters on the far side of the bridge. I checked the map. Alcatraz to the bridge 
is less than three miles, a 10-minute swim for a great white.

It doesn’t do to dwell on such matters, and in any case the intensity of 
effort required to fight through the heavier tide in the second half of the 
swim ensured my mind didn’t wander too far from the thrill of inching closer to 
completing an Alcatraz escape. It’s an unpredictable mass of water, even for 
someone who has swum it 979 times.
 Swimmers emerge from San Francisco Bay. Photograph: Alamy 
“The bay is always different, every single day,” reflected Pedro when we 
finished. “You swim Alcatraz, it can be the best day of your life, or it can be 
the worst day.”

I grazed the sand of Aquatic Park after 44 minutes and stood up, a little 
dizzy in the push and pull of the waves but happy and proud. Later, as we 
replenished with Irish coffees in theBuena Vista cafe 
<http://www.thebuenavista.com/home/home.html>, on the corner of Hyde and Beach 
streets, thoughts turned to June 1962, and the events that have inspired films, 
books and swimmers ever since.

Part of the mental torture of Alcatraz for the prisoners was the fact that 
when the wind blew in the right direction, they could hear all the sounds of 
one of the most entertaining cities on the planet. The desire to rejoin the 
real world was all-consuming, and in all probability it cost those three men 
their lives. For the rest of us, recreating their swim is far from life or 
death, but it’s certainly life affirming.

• Flights to San Francisco were provided by Aer Lingus 
<https://www.aerlingus.com/html/en-US/home.html>, which operates a daily 
year-round service from Dublin direct to San Francisco, flying up to seven 
times per week. Each-way fares start from €375. Aer Lingus passengers can clear 
US customs at Dublin and Shannon airport, ensuring a speedier arrival in the US.
Accommodation was provided by theQueen Anne Hotel <http://www.queenanne.com/> 
(doubles from $149 B&B).Monthly Alcatraz swim from $205 registration fee, ($149 
for members).Water World Swim 
<https://waterworldswim.com/swims-events/alcatraz-crossings/> organises 
monthly, supervised Alcatraz swims among other challenges and trips
 