
Plans for independent checks of how much pollution new cars emit are being 
killed off by EU member states, according to leaked documents seen by the 
Guardian.

After the Dieselgate scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/25/vw-emissions-scandal-seven-days>
, the European commission proposed empowering its respected science wing, the
Joint Research Centre <https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/en>, to inspect vehicles 
separately from national authorities, which arepaid by the car manufacturers 
they regulate 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/04/22/uk-vehicle-regulator-to-increase-industry-funding-as-budget-is-slashed/>
.

But an EU pledge to “organise and carry out” emissions tests has been deleted 
from a draft regulation, which will be discussed by EU ministers this week in 
Brussels.

European commission warned of car emissions test cheating, five years before 
VW scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/20/european-commission-warned-car-maker-suspected-cheating-five-years-vw-scandal>
 Julia Poliscanova, a spokeswoman for the green campaign group, Transport and 
Environment, said: “There is a Mexican standoff going on, with governments 
afraid to act against their own fraudulent carmakers for fear it will put their 
domestic industry at a competitive disadvantage.

“This scandalous stalemate results from national governments prioritising the 
interests of domestic carmakers above citizens’ need to breathe clean air. 
National vehicle regulators inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> have been captured by the car 
industry.”

Millions of polluting cars remain on European roads, despite research showing 
<https://www.transportenvironment.org/sites/te/files/publications/2016_09_Dieselgate_report_who_what_how_FINAL_0.pdf>
 that they emit three times the current standard for nitrogen oxide pollution, 
when driven in real world situations. Last week, the European Environment Agency
increased its estimate of premature deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/23/uk-has-second-highest-number-of-deaths-from-no2-pollution-in-europe>
 caused by air pollution in Europe each year to 467,000.

 Since the VW emissions scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-timeline-events>
 broke a year ago, many VW group cars fitted with illegal software have been 
recalled in Europe, and 660,000 vehicles from Renault, Fiat, Opel and Mercedes 
could be voluntarily recalled, if their owners request it.

 But no other action has been taken to fix the millions of excessively 
polluting vehicles on the continent’s roads, 69% of which were sold in the UK, 
Germany, France and Italy.

Diesel cars' emissions far higher on road than in lab, tests show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/21/all-top-selling-cars-break-emissions-limits-in-real-world-tests>
 France is the only one of these countries to support independent emissions 
tests in meetings of the relevant EU working party, according to T&E.

Modest requirements for the EU to monitor national emissions tests and ensure 
that regulators are consistently applying rules have also been watered down in 
the draft regulations’ text.

 Europe’s car regulations have historically provided a global benchmark for 
best emissions practice, everywhere except North America and Japan. But after 
the VW scandal, countries such as China have begun realigning their systems 
with US testing norms, according to the International Council on Clean 
Transportation, which first revealed the Dieselgate story.

 A final decision on the new European emissions testing regime is expected in 
February.
 