
More than 75,000 people have signed an EU staff petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/for-strong-exemplary-measures-to-be-taken-against-jm-barroso-for-joining-goldman-sachs-international>
 calling on former European commission president José Manuel Barroso to forfeit 
his pension for bringing the European Union into disrepute by joining Goldman 
Sachs.

The petition, organised by a small group of EU officials, accuses Barroso of 
“irresponsible” and “morally reprehensible behaviour” forjoining the American 
investment bank. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/08/jose-manuel-barroso-to-become-next-head-of-goldman-sachs-international>
 Although Barroso is not the first former ex-commissioner to join Goldman, his 
appointment has sparked anger among rank-and-file staff, who have highlighted 
the bank’s role inmis-selling sub-prime mortgages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/11/goldman-sachs-2008-financial-crisis-mortagage-backed-securities>
, as well as lending money to the Greek government before the country’s debt 
disaster exploded.


In a scathing denunciation of their former boss, the officials describe the 
Goldman job as “a disastrous symbol” for the EU and “a gift horse for 
europhobes”. “It is a further example of the irresponsible revolving-door 
practices, which are highly damaging to the EU institutions and, even if not 
illegal, morally reprehensible.”


José Manuel Barroso to become chairman of Goldman Sachs International
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/08/jose-manuel-barroso-to-become-next-head-of-goldman-sachs-international>
Organisers plan to present the petition to the current leaders of the EU 
institutions at the end of September.


Separately a staff union, which claims 2,000 members, has written to the 
current European commission president,Jean-Claude Juncker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jean-claude-juncker>, to criticise the 
appointment, which they say “can only provide further ammunition for populist 
and extremist europhobe propaganda”.


Georges Vlandas, president of the Union for Unity, told the Guardian that when 
the political future of the EU was in question, senior officials had a 
responsibility to set an example on ethical behaviour.


An organiser of the separate staff petition echoed this view. “We are going 
through a different and dangerous period in the European project and the level 
of concern among EU officials is quite high. Part of it is about their job, but 
part of it is about the [future of the] whole project,” said the official, who 
asked to remain anonymous.

Barroso, a Maoist as a student, who went on to become a centre-right prime 
minister of Portugal,started at Goldman Sachs in July to advise the bank’s 
clients on the Brexit fallout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/08/jose-manuel-barroso-to-become-next-head-of-goldman-sachs-international>
.

He left the commission in November 2014, after a tumultuous decade in charge, 
when the EU faced the storms of the eurozone debt crisis and a rising tide of 
euroscepticism.


Ex-European commissioners must inform the EU executive of any new position for 
up to 18 months after they step down. Barroso took up the post atGoldman Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> 20 months after leaving the 
commission.

Organisers say it is impossible to tell how many of the signatories work for 
the EU institutions, as anyone can sign theChange.org petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/for-strong-exemplary-measures-to-be-taken-against-jm-barroso-for-joining-goldman-sachs-international>
. But it has clearly attracted many more people than the 46,000 EU civil 
servants who work in Brussels, Luxembourg and national capitals.

A small group of EU officials launched the petition, because they were 
disappointed with the muted response from the current EU hierarchy, a second 
organiser told the Guardian. “We had this gut feeling that what Barroso did was 
wrong and that it was the job of President Juncker to condemn him forcefully,” 
he said. “But there was a clear attempt to make this a non-issue.”


When Barroso’s appointment became known, a commission spokesperson said the 
former president had not broken any rules.

Juncker later told the Belgian newspaper Le Soir that he would not join 
Goldman Sachs, but declined to condemn his predecessor more forcefully, noting 
that it was an individual choice.

But the Goldman job caused outrage in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, where the Socialist government is 
under pressure from the far-right leader Marine Le Pen. She described Barroso’s 
move as “not surprising”, because “the EU serves big finance, not the people”.

France’s Europe minister, Harlem Désir, has said the “scandalous” move showed 
the EU’s conflict of interest rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/13/france-former-european-commission-boss-goldman-sachs-job>
 needed to be tightened.

The EU staff believe Barroso is in breach of the EU treaties, which state that 
an ex-commissioner must act with “integrity and discretion” when it comes to 
taking positions after they leave office. Unlike the commission’s code of 
conduct for top officials, there is no time limit on the treaty obligation.

They want the commission or EU member states to refer the case to the European 
court of justice, which has the power to remove EU pensions.


A commission spokeswoman declined to comment on the petition until it was 
formally lodged at Brussels HQ. She said: “When it comes to avoiding potential 
conflicts of interest of former members of the college [of commissioners], the 
commission has strict rules in place – especially compared with many member 
states and other international organisations.”


A Goldman Sachs spokesman said Barroso would not be making any comment. “We 
follow strict rules set by our global regulators in the hiring of 
ex-governmental officials. José Manuel took the role after an 18-month 
restriction period following the end of his term at theEuropean commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>, a longer period than 
that imposed by most European institutions.”


He added: “José Manuel’s experience and advice in this time of uncertainty 
will be extremely valuable to our clients and their reaction to his appointment 
at Goldman Sachs has been very encouraging.”


The bank also defended its Greek currency swaps “as entirely legitimate debt 
management transactions” that were in line with EU rules.
 