
The euro may not exist in 10 years’ time if Paris and Berlin fail to bolster 
the single currency union,French presidential candidate Emmanuel Macron  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/emmanuel-macron-outsider-bid-french-presidential-race-election>
has said, adding that the current system benefits Germany at the expense of 
weaker member states.


 Macron was economy minister under Socialist President François Hollande until 
he resigned this year to create his own political movement and stand as an 
independent candidate in this year’s presidential election.

So what's the big idea, European Union?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/so-whats-the-big-idea-european-union>
 “The truth is that we must collectively recognise that the euro is incomplete 
and cannot last without major reforms,” Macron said in a speech at the Humboldt 
University in Berlin.

Speaking in English, he added: “It has not provided Europe with full 
international sovereignty against the dollar on its rules. It has not provided
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> with a natural 
convergence between the different member states.”

France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> must implement labour market 
reforms and revamp its education system to revive growth, while Germany must 
accept that more investment instead of austerity can boost growth across the 
eurozone area, the centrist politician said.

 “The dysfunctioning of the euro is of good use to Germany, I have to say,” 
said Macron, adding that a lack of trust between France and Germany was 
blocking major reforms that would increase solidarity among the 19 members of 
the eurozone.

 “The euro is a weak Deutsche Mark,” said Macron. “The status quo is 
synonymous, in 10 years’ time, with the dismantling of the euro.”

 He proposed the creation of a eurozone budget to finance growth-oriented 
investments and to extend financial assistance to struggling member states.

 However, this would be anathema to the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and 
finance minister Wolfgang Schaeuble, whose conservatives face an election this 
year and have faced domestic resistance to bailouts for Greece by hawks who say 
such payments turn the euro zone into a “transfer union”.

 Macron spoke after the co-leader of Germany’s far-right Alternative for 
Germany (AfD) party earlier told Reuters the eurozone should be split into two 
with a strong cluster around Germany and a weak cluster including France.

Macron, a rare advocate in France of deeper European integration, has taken 
the unusual step of encouraging supporters to cheer theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> at political rallies in contrast with 
other politicians who often rail against “Brussels”.

 Macron, 39, has enjoyed a boost in recent polls, which show him cementing his 
position as the presidential election’s “third man” and within a whisker of 
reaching the crucial second round runoff to be held in May.

 An opinion poll last week showed conservative candidate Francois Fillon’s 
lead in France’s presidential election race had narrowed, with both Macron and 
far-right leaderMarine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/07/marine-le-pen-front-national-revamp-french-presidential-election>
 gaining on the former prime minister.
 