
Top European central bankers have warned against politicians interfering in 
monetary policy, amid intense scrutiny of Mark Carney’s interest-rate strategy 
following the Brexit vote.

Andreas Dombret, who sits on the board of the German Bundesbank, told an 
audience of bankers in London that it was “time for a friendly reminder that 
central bank independence is not debatable”.

He was speaking just days after Carney, governor of the Bank of England, had 
said he was “not going to take instruction on our policies from the political 
side” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/14/prices-to-continue-rising-warns-bank-of-england-governor>
.

The governor made his remarks after the prime minister, Theresa May, told 
Conservative party conference that “ordinary working-class people” were being 
hurt by low interest rates as well as the electronic money printing exercise 
known as quantitative easing.


Bank of England rebuts May and Hague's attacks on quantitative easing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/19/bank-of-england-rebuts-may-and-hagues-attacks-on-quantitative-easing>
Hours after Dombret delivered his wide-ranging speech  
<https://www.bba.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/20161020-BBA-Conference-Rede-Flie%C3%9Ftext-ver2.pdf>
to the British Bankers’ Association, Mario Draghi, president of the European 
Central Bank, was asked about May’s remarks as he announced the bank’s latest 
monetary policy for the eurozone.

Draghi said he did not feel central bank independence was threatened and 
rebutted May’s criticism about the impact. “No, I don’t feel threatened. 
Neither is the independence of monetary policy by the governing council 
threatened,” said Draghi. The cause of inequality was not monetary policy but 
unemployment, he said.

The former foreign secretary William Hague also waded into the debate about 
low interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/18/william-hague-attacks-bank-of-england-over-ultra-low-interest-rates>
, writing in the Daily Telegraph on Tuesday that savers were finding it 
“impossible to earn a worthwhile return”. Lord Hague added: “Unless [central 
banks] change course soon they will find their independence increasingly under 
attack.”

 Dombret said politicians had removed themselves from monetary policy for 
“very good” reasons.

“Experience shows that political influence over central banks always leads 
into disorder. At the end of the day, independent central banks best guarantee 
price stability. Calling central bank independence into question, even only 
implicitly, can confuse markets as well as the public about who is in charge 
when it comes to monetary policy and supervisory decisions.

“Nevertheless, we have seen some criticism of central banks and their policies 
from politicians lately. This concerned, for example, the handling of Brexit, 
as well as conducting monetary policy and setting interest rates more 
generally.”

Dombret played down the impact of Brexit on the financial system. “Brexit and 
its possible repercussions for the City of London are unlikely to be an issue 
for financial stability or the financing of the EU’s real economy,” he said.

France’s ambassador to the UK, Sylvie Bermann, told the conference that Paris 
was ready to welcome banking business, as Anthony Browne, chief executive of 
the British Bankers’ Association,warned that banks 
<https://www.bba.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/20161018-international-banking-conference-speech.pdf>
 were getting ready to move. “Their hands are poised quivering over the 
relocate button, with the first movements expected in the coming months,” 
Browne said.

May has said she intends to trigger article 50 – the formal mechanism that 
starts the two-year negotiating period to leave the EU – in March. However, the 
Conservative MP Dominic Grieve, a former attorney general, told bankers that 
this timetable was optimistic as a legal challenge to Brexit could make it 
necessary for parliament to debate the UK’s exit terms.
 