
Speculation is growing that the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> could take action 
to stimulate the eurozone economy after official figures showed an easing in 
underlying inflation last month.

Pressure on the ECB increased when the European commission’s statistical 
agency,Eurostat <http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat>, published figures that showed 
core inflation in July was lower than in same month last year, despite 
aggressive action by the Frankfurt-based bank over the past 18 months.

Weak eurozone inflation raises prospect of ECB action - business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/aug/31/eurozone-inflation-to-offer-clues-on-ecbs-next-move-business-live>
With concerns that the eurozone recovery was losing momentum, Eurostat said 
the headline rate of inflation remained unchanged at 0.2% in August. Core, or 
underlying inflation, which excludes energy, goods, alcohol and tobacco, fell 
from 0.9% in July to 0.8%.

Separate Eurostat data showed that eurozone unemployment was unchanged at 
10.1% in July, the latest month for which figures are available for all 19 
countries that use the euro. The jobless rate in the eurozone has fallen from 
10.8% over the past year, but financial markets had been expecting the 
reduction to continue to 10% last month.

The ECB has been using negative interest rates and quantitative easing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/22/what-is-quantitative-easing> 
in an attempt to increase activity and push inflation back towards its target 
of just below 2%.

Analysts said the inflation and unemployment figures would be discussed when 
the ECB meets to discuss policy options next week.

Stephen Brown of consultancy Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> said: “The unchanged headline 
inflation rate in August highlights the fact that price pressures in the 
eurozone remain weak and boosts the case for more monetary easing from the ECB.

“With [the] survey data also pointing to a marked slowdown in growth ahead, 
there is a strong case for the ECB to announce further policy easing. This 
could come as soon as the bank’s meeting next week.”

Bert Colijn of ING Bank said he did not expect action from the ECB next week, 
but that the central bank would be concerned by the weakness of underlying 
inflationary pressure.


“The fact that core inflation is now lower than it was a year ago will be 
alarming to ECB governing council members, especially as economic activity 
seems to be slowing further in the third quarter on political and economic 
uncertainty,” he said.
 