
A draft European parliament inquiry into the dieselgate scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/25/vw-emissions-scandal-seven-days>
 has found the European commission guilty of maladministration for failing to 
act quickly enough on evidence that defeat devices were being used to game 
emissions tests.

The commission ignored evidence of emissions test cheating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/20/european-commission-warned-car-maker-suspected-cheating-five-years-vw-scandal>
 from its own science body, the Joint Research Centre (JRC), partly out of a 
desire to “avoid placing burdens on industry”, according to the draft report 
seen by the Guardian.

Brussels should have alerted EU states to the suspicions of its scientists and 
requested information on steps being taken to deal with vehicles that emitted 
more nitrogen oxide (NOx 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/23/diesel-cars-pollution-limits-nox-emissions>
) in real-world situations than in tests. But it did not.

Related: Dieselgate: EC begins legal action against UK and other EU nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/dieselgate-ec-legal-action-eu-uk-germany-spain-emissions>

“Dieselgate would not have happened if our national governments and the 
European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> had 
acted on their legal and administrative responsibilities,” said Gerben-Jan 
Gerbrandy, the inquiry’s co-author.

“Our investigation points out that unnecessary delays in decision-making, 
negligence and maladministration have contributed to making this fraud 
possible,” he said.

The Guardian has learned that Antonio Tajani, the centre-right European 
People’s party (EPP)nominee for president of the European parliament 
<http://www.eppgroup.eu/press-release/Antonio-Tajani-elected-as-EPP-Group-nominee-for-EP-President>
 in 2017, could be personally censured in amendments to the report, due to be 
debated early next year.
 Antonio Tajani, the European People’s party nominee for president of the 
European parliament, will be personally censured in amendments to the report. 
Photograph: Patrick Seeger/EPA 
Tajani, a former spokesman to Silvio Berlusconi, was the EU’s industry 
commissioner between 2009 and 2014. Some believe MEPs could say that during 
that time he failed to respond to pressure from the EU’s environment wing to 
act on the gathering scandal.

Bas Eickhout, a Green MEP, said: “I would find it very strange if the 
parliament, having concluded that there was maladministration, then allowed one 
of the responsible commissioners to become its president. If our amendment is 
passed, it will mean that Tajani’s candidature is unacceptable.”

Other planned amendments will call for a beefed-up, Europe-wide market 
surveillance authority, and surprise tests of cars already on the road. The 
measures could be added to legislation due to come before parliament this term.

The draft dieselgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/dieselgate-ec-legal-action-eu-uk-germany-spain-emissions>
 report was written as a consensus document and recommends an internal EU 
inquiry to examine why the JRC’s detection of possible defeat devices in 2012 
were not acted upon.

It also advocates putting air quality and car emissions under the control of 
one commissioner – instead of being split between two at present – and calls 
for a renewed focus on potential fraud by manufacturers ofother consumer 
products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/01/samsung-tvs-appear-more-energy-efficient-in-tests-than-in-real-life>
.

The commission will not respond to the parliamentary report until it is 
formally released next month. But one EU source said: “Car manufacturers have 
an obligation to comply with the law. And national authorities and technical 
services must enforce the ban.

“We are following national authorities’ policing and enforcement of EU rules 
in the automobile sector very closely and have launched a number of 
infringement procedures in the area.”

Related: Will real-world emissions tests clean up diesel cars? | Karl Mathiesen
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/22/will-real-world-emissions-tests-clean-up-diesel-cars>

The commission recently began legal action against several countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/dieselgate-ec-legal-action-eu-uk-germany-spain-emissions>
, including the UK, for failing to set up penalty systems to deter violations 
of emissions law in a move that won the current industry commissioner, Elżbieta 
Bieńkowska, grudging respect from Green MEPs.

Despite the VW scandal, 27 of the EU’s 28 states have taken neither financial 
nor legal action against car manufacturers, nor made mandatory recalls or 
retrofits of vehicles, nor withdrawn type approvals.

Sweden, the sole exception, began running an in-service test programme before 
it became an EU member <https://euobserver.com/nordic/135759> in 1995.

France, Italy and Spain were spotlighted by the report for delaying real-world 
driving emissions standards and pushing for less stringent testing methods.

The dieselgate report condemned what it said was a standard reliance by 
national regulators on tests provided by car manufacturers’ certified 
laboratories that created potential conflict of interests.

Gerbrandy said: “Governments disregarded their legal duty to monitor and 
enforce the ban on defeat devices. There seems to be a blind trust in the good 
intentions of car manufacturers, especially when they have production plants in 
the country concerned. It is even more disturbing that a year after the 
dieselgate scandal very little has actually changed.”

On Tuesday, the EU’s technical committee on motor vehicles will vote on a 
commission proposal to extend real-world driving emissions (RDE) legislation to 
particulates. However this would still allow car manufacturersto overshoot the 
limit by 50% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/24/petrol-cars-allowed-to-exceed-pollution-limits-by-50-under-draft-eu-laws>
.
 