
Tomorrow’s release of the midyear economic and fiscal outlook (Myefo) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/18/mathias-cormann-says-budget-surplus-by-2020-was-a-projection-not-policy>
 traditionally marks the end of the economic year but the latest unemployment 
figures released on Thursday were the best summary of the year – and also 
provided the biggest danger for the government in 2017.

For a government that shouted “jobs and growth” throughout the election and 
has continued the mantra ever since, the lack of both suggests a decided 
failure.

Earlier this month we saw that the GDP in September fell 0.5% – only the 
fourth such decline in 25 years. And Scott Morrison is fortunate that we don’t 
pay as much attention to the GDP per capita measure because, once you strip out 
population growth, Australia’s economy fell by 0.8% – the second-worst fall in 
a quarter of a century.

Mathias Cormann says budget surplus by 2020 was a projection, not policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/18/mathias-cormann-says-budget-surplus-by-2020-was-a-projection-not-policy>
Given the LNP has now been in power for more than three years, it is getting 
rather tough to lay the blame on the previous government.


Thursday’s unemployment figures also gave Morrison little Christmas cheer. 
While the unemployment rate of 5.6% in trend terms remains historically solid, 
the actual growth of jobs is rather anaemic.

In the past 12 months, only 87,000 new jobs were added. But while that growth 
is the worst for two years, the real carnage is on the full-time job front. 
There are now 51,000 fewer people employed full-time than there was a year ago 
and November marked the first time since February 2014 that full-time 
employment for both men and women was lower than it had been a year earlier.

Most of the damage has been inflicted on young people. Full-time employment 
for 15 to 19-year-olds dropped by 15% in the past year and by 6% for 20 to 
24-year-olds. There are now fewer of each age group working full-time than ever 
before.

Only 39% of people aged 20-24 now work full-time – down from 44% when the LNP 
won the 2013 election and well down on the 54% employed full-time before the 
global financial crisis.

This is not so much Morrison’s fault but it highlights the major issue he will 
face in the new year. Full-time work did grow for the prime aged workers – but 
only just. In the decade before the GFC full-time employment for 25 to 
64-year-olds grew on average each year by nearly 2%; it now hasn’t grown 
consistently above that level for five years.

Little wonder that the Myefo figures are expected to show some degradation of 
revenue.

The May budget predicted employment growth of 1.75% in 2016-17 – and yet since 
June employment has only grown by 0.1%. The budget predicted wages growth of 
2.5% – well above the current rate of 1.8%. Throw in falling full-time 
employment and you have a strong chance of income tax revenue – which makes up 
just over half of all tax revenue – being lower than expected.

Malcolm Turnbull interview: Trump can boost case for business tax cuts in 
Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/17/malcolm-turnbull-interview-trump-can-boost-case-for-business-tax-cuts-in-australia>
Morrison should, however, gain some respite due to climbing iron ore and coal 
prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/16/scott-morrison-and-the-budget-just-got-lucky-with-the-price-of-coal>
. The budget forecast iron ore to be worth US$55 a tonne – currently it is 
trading near US$80/tonne, which should provide a large boost to company tax 
revenue.

But too often we get trapped into thinking that such revenue boost, or the 
size of the budget deficit, is the marker for the performance of the economy.

And while the Myefo numbers might see the rating agencies cut our AAA credit 
rating, even were they to keep the rating stable, the real issue for the 
treasurer and the government in 2017 will remain as they are now – weak growth 
of investment and jobs flowing into weak wages growth, which is in turn seeing 
weak growth of consumer spending.

For Morrison and Turnbull the answer thus far has been company tax cuts, 
despite the Treasury’s own modelling showing that the benefits of those cuts 
only kicks in after large businesses get their tax cut – something that won’t 
happen till 2023.

But for both there are other difficulties ahead – in the form of the orange 
sphere of uncertainty that is Donald Trump.

Markets have already begun predicting Trump’s impact on the world economy. US 
Treasury bond yields have jumped, indicating an expected increase in inflation 
that will see the US federal reserve raise rates (as they did this week). This 
has caused the interest the Australian government has to pay on its debt to 
increase but has also seen the value of our dollar fall – something that is 
good for exports.

But right now everyone is guessing what Trump will do. A quick recap of his 
statements reveals him uncommitted to anything he has previously said.

Mathias Cormann’s justification for the $4bn tax cuts is economic snake oil | 
Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/13/mathias-cormanns-justification-for-the-4bn-tax-cuts-is-economic-snake-oil>
His plans for a massive infrastructure boost, which are behind the rise in 
inflation expectations, are unlikely to occur given the appointment to his 
cabinet of men opposes to such stimulus measures. Trump is, for example, 
considering appointing Larry Kudlow to chair the White House Council of 
Economic Advisers. Kudlow is an avowed supply-side economist who believes 
completely in tax cuts and who abhors stimulus spending.

Similarly, although Trump campaigned against the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a 
majority of his cabinet are in favour of the TPP. While it would remain a 
surprise for Trump to approve the trade agreement, it would not be beyond the 
realms of possibly for him to do so and claim he had actually negotiated “the 
best deal”.

In such a case expect the government to continue to overhype the benefits of 
such trade deals combined with company tax cuts as the path to economic 
salvation.

But should job growth remain weak, it would also not be a surprise to see the 
government discover the benefits of pumping the economy with stimulus spending. 
Morrison already paved the way this weekwith his appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/dec/15/good-debt-hopefully-this-means-the-end-of-the-dumbest-economic-narrative-of-our-times>
 to ratings agencies of the need for some form of “good debt”.

For while voters might forgive a loss of a AAA credit rating, or even a slight 
increase in the budget deficit, should job growth – and especially full-time 
work – remain as absent during 2017 as it was in 2016, they will squarely blame 
those in charge.
 