
Since election day, the public rejection of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and his politics has been 
vast. Now, as the reality of his impending presidency settles in, those of us 
who reject the racist, misogynist, anti-environmentalist agenda he promises to 
usher in are left with one, glaring course of action: we have to organize and 
mobilize.

Trump could reverse 'dramatic' progress on clean energy, experts fear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/clean-energy-donald-trump-climate-policies-reversals>
When it comes to climate change, Trump wants to slash EPA funding 
<https://theintercept.com/2016/11/14/slashed-budgets-and-toxic-chemicals-planning-for-environmental-carnage-under-donald-trumps-epa/>
,withdraw from 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-looking-at-quickest-way-to-quit-paris-climate-agreement-says-report>
 the Paris Climate Agreement, stop funding clean energy research and expand 
fossil fuel extraction on federal lands, including doubling down on coal. He is 
surrounding himself with fossil fuel industry insiders, likeMyron Ebell 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/12/science/myron-ebell-trump-epa.html> and 
Harold Hamm 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/trump-serves-a-slice-of-hard-boiled-hamm/>, who 
want to roll back the hard-won gains made under the Obama Administration.

But US election results don’t change the science or the reality of climate 
change. So here’s how we need to work together to minimize the potential 
climate impacts of a Trump presidency.


First, Barack Obama is still in office, and there is still time to make 
progress for people and the planet. He could begin by suspending the permits 
for the construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline and ordering a full 
Environmental Impact Study with comprehensive tribal consultation. Stopping the 
pipeline is an unprecedented rallying point for indigenous people across the 
country, who are calling on the US government to observe its own treaties and 
the rights and sovereignty of native communities.

But it would also eliminate a transport option for fracked oil from the Bakken 
shale, which the world simply does not need. Oil markets already have plenty of 
supply, the oil would greatly contribute to climate change when we know we need 
to be transitioning to a renewables-based economy, and the only people who 
would benefit work in the fossil fuel industry. You can call on the president 
to act quickly by joining the millions who have signed apetition 
<https://secure3.convio.net/gpeace/site/Advocacy?cmd=display&page=UserAction&id=2027>
, coming out to one ofthese solidarity events 
<https://actionnetwork.org/event_campaigns/nov-15-nodapl-day-of-action-at-army-corps-of-engineers?referrer=greenpeace-usa>
 on 15 November or, if you can find the time or resources,donating  
<http://standwithstandingrock.net/donate/>to or even joining  
<http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/how-greenpeace-is-showing-up-as-an-ally-in-the-dakota-access-pipeline-fight/>
the water protectors at Standing Rock.

Second, we need to build more local democratic power for the climate movement. 
States and even municipalities can have a lot of sway over the direction 
America goes. For instance, aballot initiative 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/3-reasons-vote-no-colorados-amendment-71/> that 
won in Colorado on election day, sponsored by the oil and gas industry and 
funded by millions of its dollars, enacted a statewide policy that will 
drastically limit citizens’ power to democratically regulate or ban fracking in 
their towns.

Americans concerned with protecting themselves and future generations from the 
worst effects of climate change must push back against these efforts, drafting, 
campaigning for and organizing around legislation and local lawmakers who will 
stand up to the oil and gas industry. And we must actively oppose those who 
don’t.

In the aftermath of the election, local movement power in our communities is 
going to be critical. Volunteer, start initiatives,find meetings 
<https://greenwire.greenpeace.org/usa/en/> and get to know organizers and 
activists near you. Find reasons to interact face to face with allies. Check in 
with neighbors and friends, ask how they are doing and how you can support 
them. Or make a donation to an organization you care about.

Where democracy has been usurped by industry influence and Trumpist politics, 
we are going to have to be creative and courageous with our minds, time, and 
bodies. If Trump’s administration makes good on its threats to boost 
destructive sectors like coal, oil and gas, the climate movement will need to 
peacefully but significantly escalate its resistance. There will be no shortage 
of ways to get involved, including nonviolent direct action and civil 
disobedience against infrastructure and the leasing programs of the Department 
of Interior.

I take hope from remembering that the fight for climate justice is global. The 
momentum Obama gave us may drop off, but many other nations are still leading. 
Private sector giants – from Apple, to Tesla, to Ikea – are building successful 
businesses around renewable energy.Cities across the US 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/12/03/fact-sheet-16-us-communities-recognized-climate-action-champions-leaders>
 and all over the world are independently stepping up to become climate 
champions.

Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> and the big, 
beautiful, global climate movement will not stop fighting for our collective 
future. We’ll protest peacefully, empowered by millions, and we’ll do our part 
to build a stronger, intersectional progressive movement that will be here to 
lead when Trumpism fails to deliver.

Whatever comes next, it’s vital to acknowledge that Trump’s election has 
millions of people justifiably feeling scared for their physical safety and 
future. He and his surrogates spent months threatening immigrants, women, 
people of color, Muslims and the differently-abled community, among many 
others. We must all begin by re-committing ourselves to protecting and caring 
for each other, especially by rallying behind the groups and communities 
targeted by Trumpism.

We are going to get through this. Through courage, action and persistence we 
will win in the long term for people and the planet. It’s a scary time for all 
of us, but that’s all the more reason to do this together.
 