
Morgan Schneiderlin has said he is aiming to overtake Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> with his new club 
Everton and that José Mourinho was reluctant to sanction his departure from Old 
Trafford.

The France international joined Everton for an initial £20m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/morgan-schneiderlin-joins-everton-manchester-united>
 rising to £24m on Thursday having failed to secure a regular starting role at 
United. Schneiderlin admits he “didn’t arrive in the best time in Manchester 
United’s history” with criticism arising from a style of play under Louis van 
Gaal that “wasn’t very attractive”. Despite leaving Old Trafford on good terms, 
however, the 27-year-old is determined to overturn a nine-point deficit on his 
former club this season and eventually lead Everton into the Champions League.

Ronald Koeman faces up to Everton’s future after dealing with his past
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/ronald-koeman-everton-future-dealing-with-past>
“It is an honour to have played for Manchester United and it is on my CV,” 
Schneiderlin said. “Now I just want to have big ambition with Everton and 
overtake Manchester United, that is my aim. I believeEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> can reach the Champions League 
because they buy some good players in the transfer market. They have good 
project and the team that is already here – Lukaku, Barkley, Coleman, Gueye, 
Baines – is very good already. I think this team can do it for sure. You see 
Leicester winning the Premier League last year so of course we can do the 
Champions League.”

The former Southampton midfielder played only 11 minutes of Premier League 
football under Mourinho over three brief substitute appearances but insisted he 
had no issues with the United manager.

Schneiderlin explained: “It was his choice. He said he liked me as a player 
and as a person and that he had nothing to reproach me for but he had to make 
choices. He chose other ones than me and it is as simple as that. He liked me 
as a players and he wanted me to stay but he understood that I was frustrated.”
 