
Everton are close to completing a move for the Algeria striker Ishak Belfodil 
after agreeing a £10.4m fee with Standard Liège. Steve Walsh, Everton’s 
director of football, has already signedAdemola Lookman from Charlton for £10m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/everton-announce-signing-of-ademola-lookman-charlton-athletic>
 in this window and is also set to complete the transfer of Morgan Schneiderlin 
from Manchester Unitedfor an initial £22m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/everton-morgan-schneiderlin-manchester-united-bid>
 after he arrived for a medical on Wednesday.

But after a £15m bid for Atlanta’s Ivory Coast midfielder Franck Kessié was 
rejected on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/everton-franck-kessie-atalanta-bid-rejected>
, Everton now look set to add to their squad with the arrival of the player, 
who is 25 on Thursday, who was born in Algeria but began his professional 
career at Lyon after a spell at Paris Saint-Germain.

Belfodil has scored 10 goals in 21 matches for his Belgian side this season 
after joining last summer from Baniyas Club in Abu Dhabi following difficult 
spells at Parma and Internazionale, the latter a club he made just 10 
appearances for despite signing for around £5m in July 2013. A former France 
youth international, he was purchased by Parma for the second time in 2014 but 
scored just one goal in 23 appearances before terminating his contract when the 
club was hit by financial difficulties.

Despite signing a two-year contract with Baniyas, Belfodil was offered to 
several clubs in England and France last summer before eventually joining 
Standard. He has since become a regular under Aleksandar Jankovic, who replaced 
Yannick Ferrera as coach in September.

Under contract until 2018, it is understood that Everton’s original offer of 
£8.5m was rejected last week but an agreement was reached on Tuesday which is 
expected to see him sign a three-year deal. Walsh, who left the Premier League 
champions, Leicester, in the summer to take up his new post, is believed to 
have a strong relationship with Belfodil’s agent, who also represents Riyad 
Mahrez.

After Everton’s defeat to Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/everton-leicester-city-fa-cup-match-report>
 in the FA Cup third round at the weekend, Ronald Koeman appeared frustrated 
with the lack of new arrivals and the manager admitted he hoped the poor 
performance would “open their eyes”. “Maybe we will get further on our 
improvement as a team,” he said. “That is really what the team needs. That is 
all about what happens this month. I have that in mind and the board knows 
because we spoke together about what we and the team needs. That is the job of 
Steve Walsh.”
Transfers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/atoms/2016/12/transfer-window/transfers/embed/index.html?limit=6&league=all&currency=pounds>
Belfodil is currently training at Standard’s winter camp in Spain but is 
expected to fly to Merseyside to discuss personal terms in the next 48 hours, 
having not been selected by Algeria for the Africa Cup of Nations.
 