
Nils Pratley (PM needs to stand firm on executive pay ratios, 29 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/nov/28/theresa-may-should-stick-to-her-guns-over-pay-ratios>
) alerts us to the fact that directors are already lobbying hard to water down 
Theresa May’s early proposal to shed light on employee pay ratios. May was 
unrelenting in her support for the austerity policies imposed by her government 
since 2010 and the havoc they have created for the most vulnerable and 
disadvantaged in our in our society. Now’s the time for her to do what she said 
she would do.

What’s the risk in making companies publish details of every employee’s terms 
and contracts of employment, pension contributions, share options, severance 
terms, expense account arrangements, perks etc? Not all boardrooms are full of 
self-serving, me-first executives. However, many are. It was the boards of our 
leading banks and financial institutions – working hand in glove with some of 
the most unsavoury characters in the business world – who created the problems 
we are facing today. It’s time for business leaders to stand up and be counted. 
How many can truly say that their employees are fairly treated?
David Beswick
Harrogate, North Yorkshire

• As regards worker representation on boards, “We are not going to make it 
happen,” Greg Clark told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, adding that the 
government did not want to “overturn what has been a successful system which 
has had the confidence of business around the world”. Success for whom or what, 
one should ask; it certainly has not been good for the workers, whom the 
government supposedly represents – democracy does not include votes from 
self-serving legal entities. We also should consider its success in Germany and 
other European countries.
Robert Sherman
Barrister and accredited mediator, London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 