
If, like me, you are old enough, and committed enough, to have seen Jimi 
Hendrix <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jimi-hendrix> play live more than 
once, then you'll know the significance of September 18 1970. It was 30 years 
ago on Monday that Jimi was found dead by his girlfriend, Monika Dannemann, in 
their London flat.

If, unlike me, you are one of the world's richest men, then you might indulge 
one of your adolescent interests in middle-age with a few spare bob that you 
have in the bank, and create what must be one of the most extraordinary museums 
in the world.

That, at least, is what Paul Allen, co-founder of Microsoft, and his partner 
Joe Patton, have done in creating the Experience Music Project. Designed by 
Canadian architect Frank Gehry, the building looks like half a dozen balls of 
brightly-coloured Playdough shaped by a giant's hands, with a few broken guitar 
fretboards thrown on the top for good measure.

Straddling the Seattle monorail, which clatters between the Seattle Center and 
the downtown Westlake Center (an early prototype for the ubiquitous shopping 
mall), the Project opened in June and demonstrates what can be achieved by a 
consuming passion and seemingly-unlimited resources.

Seattle is an appropriate setting for such an imaginative and ambitious 
project. The home of Starbucks, Boeing and Microsoft and the setting for 
Frasier and Free Willy, it has become the most desirable alternative location 
for Californians fed up with increasing pollution. It was also the birthplace 
of one James Marshall Hendrix on November 27 1942.

Not surprisingly then, large portions of the museum are devoted to Hendrix's 
life, work and ideas. On entering, you are equipped with a shoulder-slung 
guide, consisting of a CD-Rom player and a hand-held LCD display and keypad 
which you point at exhibits to hear more information about them through the 
headphone set. As my 11-year-old son discovered, this is enough to sustain the 
interest of those who have never even heard of Jimi Hendrix.

The state-of-the-art guide is handed to you in the main entrance area, which 
is called the Sky Church, a name coined by Jimi to describe an area where 
people come together to share a sense of communion through music. It is a 
performance area capable of holding 650 people with the largest indoor LCD 
screen in the world.

One whole gallery is devoted to artefacts associated with his band, the Jimi 
Hendrix Experience, including Jimi's favourite guitar, the white Fender 
Stratocaster he played at Woodstock, Noel Redding's bass, and Mitch Mitchell's 
drum-kit.

The only exhibit visitors have any hope of physically touching is the guitar 
and, if like me you are over 6ft tall, you can just reach over the plexiglass 
barrier and touch it. As I discovered, this immediately sets off the alarm, but 
if you stay cool and pretend it has nothing to do with you, then you should get 
away with it. In any event, I know Jimi would have approved.

In another gallery covering the history of rock music, a stage outfit worn by 
Janis Joplin is on display, along with one of Elvis's leather biking jackets. 
All of this raises questions about the concept of a museum like this - rock 
music is, after all, about living now and to hell with the future or the past. 
However, the Experience Project is redeemed by the interactive elements, where 
it is possible to try to create your own music.

In the Sound Lab you can learn the basics of playing the drums, keyboards, 
guitar and bass, or jam in soundproof booths with your family, friends, or 
other visitors.

Those with a more egotistical streak can go on stage at a virtual concert with 
a full set of stadium rock equipment, bright lights, smoke machines and 
thousands of screaming virtual fans.

The Project also features a new twist on the simulator ride, where you can go 
on the Artist's Journey through a variety of musical experiences. The first of 
these, Funk Blast, is, not surprisingly, a journey through the world of funk 
music. You begin by watching a short video describing the basics of funk, 
before moving up a ramp around a giant multi-coloured boot signed by funk stars 
and surrounded by video screens preparing you for your ride.

The ride is a standard flight simulator with a very non-standard visual 
experience that takes you through tunnels of funk, on stage, and out into the 
street with a range of ridiculously dressed musicians. You come to the end by 
almost disappearing down the gap between James Brown's front teeth.

There's no doubt that this is a museum with a difference, and whether or not 
you are a fan of Jimi Hendrix, it more than deserves a visit for the 
imagination that has gone into it. Be warned, however, that some 
preciously-held beliefs might be shattered. I always thought Purple Haze was a 
song about a psychedelic drug experience, but driving around I realised that it 
refers to the lavender farms that abound in the Seattle area and advertise 
their purple haze on roadside billboards.

You can also visit Jimi's grave in Greenwood Memor ial Park, Renton, a suburb 
of Seattle, which you can reach in half an hour by car. Some 50,000 people a 
year make the pilgrimage, many taking rubbings of Jimi's modest grave stone.

 For details of the Experience Music Project <http://www.emplive.com>, call 
001 206 233 3989 - adults $19.95, over 65s and 13-17s $15.95, 7-12 s $14.95, 6 
and under free.

 What else to do

 Americans of all generations frequently use three adjectives - "awesome", 
"really neat", and "cool" - to describe things they like. So the following 
Seattle attractions are grouped under these headings.

 Awesome:  Mount Rainier, a 14,400ft volcano, is visible to the south of 
Seattle about 80 days a year, and its appearance constantly changes. For a 
better view of the volcano, and of the spectacular Seattle skyline, take a 
return trip (30 minutes each way) on the Washington State Ferry from pier 52 on 
the waterfront to Bainbridge Island. A return ticket costs $6.50 per car and 
driver, and $3.70 per person, 30% reduction for 5-18s, under 5s go free.

Mount St Helens, which exploded in 1980, is about 100 miles south. You can 
visit both mountains in a day. The devastated area around Mt St Helens is only 
just beginning to regenerate, so you are still able to get an idea of the power 
of the explosion. There is a $10 fee to enter either of these national parks.

The Olympic National Park, to the west, includes the Hoh rainforest with giant 
trees and mosses, and the Pacific wilderness beaches, where you might spot 
seals, sea otters and, in spring and autumn, migrating grey whales. In winter, 
you can ski on Hurricane Ridge. Again there is a $10 entrance fee.

More information about all three parks is available on the National Park 
Service <http://www.nps.gov> website.

If you fancy fishing for salmon from Westport, try booking with Deep Sea 
Charters <http://www.oceansportfishing.com>, (001 360 268 9300)

From the San Juan Islands to the north, you are almost certain to see killer 
whales. Three pods are resident all year round. You can go direct from Seattle 
to Friday Harbour on San Juan Island, or, if you drive to Bainbridge Island and 
then go via Port Townsend to Whidbey Island, you can cross the spectacular 
Deception Pass.

The San Juan Islands were the setting for the book Snow Falling on Cedars and 
for the films Free Willy and Practical Magic. Check ferry times withWashington 
State Ferries <http://www.wsdot.wa.gov/ferries> (001 206 464 6400). 

 Really neat: Pike Place Market <http://www.pikeplacemarket.org>, in downtown 
Seattle, is famous for the stalls where the traders throw fish and chorus in 
operatic style if you have the courage to buy anything. The Athenian Inn, 
located in the market, is one of Seattle's oldest places to eat.

In the Seattle Center, the Space Needle <http://www.spaceneedle.com> (001 206 
905 2100), adults $11, over 65s $9, 5-12, $5, under 5s free) provides 
spectacular views of the city and surrounding area. You can almost see the 
houseboat from Sleepless in Seattle.

Also in the Seattle Center is the International Fountain. Make sure you visit 
on a hot day, unless you don't mind getting cold and wet. Even grandparents 
can't resist running the gauntlet of the fountain, which sleeps for a few 
minutes before bursting into life in response to music by Bach or Kurt Cobain.

The Seattle Center <http://www.seattlecenter.com>, built to house the 1962 
World Fair, contains much more. Details on 001 206 684 7200.

 Cool:  Nordstrom is a department store for serious shoppers, or those who 
just want to know what real service is. You can walk up Pine Street from Pike 
Place Market to 5th Avenue, or get the monorail from the Seattle Center. There 
are many other wonderful shops.

The Gorge is a natural amphitheatre that has become a semi-permanent outdoor 
rock venue . It operates June-September. Located in the town of George, about 
100 miles east of Seattle, you can lie back and spot meteorites while listening 
to the likes of Bob Dylan, Jimmy Page and the Black Crowes, Sting, Steely Dan, 
The Who and Neil Young. Events are advertised in the Seattle Weekly, a free 
local newspaper, orwww.barstop.com/gorge <http://www.barstop.com/gorge>.

The practicals

Northwest Airlines (0870 507407) flies to Seattle via Detroit from £332 return 
plus taxes. British Airways (0345 222111) flies direct from £321pp plus £57 
taxes.
 