
Martin Glenn, the Football Association’s chief executive officer, has admitted 
his organisation will effectively be powerless to stop World Cup expansion, 
despite reservations over Fifa president Gianni Infantino’sblueprint for a 
48-team tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/fifa-president-gianni-infantino-world-cup-proposals>
 from 2026, which will be voted on this Tuesday.

Glenn said: “I can’t influence Fifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa>
. My No1 focus is how do we make England equipped to qualify and ultimately win 
tournaments, that’s all I care about. I can’t influence Fifa; we’re one voice 
out of 211 [national associations].

“Our preference would be to keep the tournament smaller, because there’s a 
quality factor here, but we’ll try to influence the shape of it. Everyone has a 
vote and the smaller countries understandably want to be part of the 
competition.

José Mourinho voices his support for 48-team World Cup finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/jose-mourinho-48-team-world-cup-finals-fifa>
“The Premier League is hugely popular around the world, you can trust English 
football and that does give us influence, but we’re one vote out of 211. The 
arrogance of ‘We’re the FA, we invented the game and we’ll take the ball home 
if we don’t get our way’ – that doesn’t work.”

Glenn confirmed Fifa are reviewing plans for 16 groups of three teams, leading 
to a 32-team knockout round – with any group stage draws to be decided by 
penalty shootout.

He added: “The key thing is how do you accommodate any changes in the most 
effective way for the teams, and also for the fans?”

Glenn’s comments came as Conmebol vice-president Laureano González claimed 
that Fifa has proposed merging the North and South American qualifiers as part 
of its plans to expand the 2026World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fworld-cup-expansion-to-48-teams-from-2026-confirmed-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20Cup%20expansion%20to%2048%20teams%20from%202026%20confirmed%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fworld-cup-expansion-to-48-teams-from-2026-confirmed-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20Cup%20expansion%20to%2048%20teams%20from%202026%20confirmed%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fworld-cup-expansion-to-48-teams-from-2026-confirmed-video-report&media=>
World Cup expansion to 48 teams from 2026 confirmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/10/world-cup-expansion-to-48-teams-from-2026-confirmed-video-report>
González, who is also the Venezuelan Football Federation president, told 
sports newspaper Meridiano that the idea for the merger had come from Fifa 
presidentGianni Infantino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gianni-infantino>.

Said & Done: Sick China; Captain Fiasco; and the real Mike Dean
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/said-and-done-football-diary-china-uli-hoeness-transfers>
He said: “There is a suggestion from Gianni Infantino to unify the Conmebol 
and Concacaf qualifiers. This would have support if they gave us more places. 
At the moment, we have seven between the two confederations, plus two half 
places.

“If this went up to 14, similar to what Europe has for more or less the same 
number of teams, the idea would catch on.”

Conmebol represents South America, and currently has four-and-a-half World Cup 
places. Concacaf, which represents North and Central America as well as the 
Caribbean, has 35 members but only three-and-a-half places. Uefa currently has 
13 places for 55 teams, plus one for the 2018 World Cup hosts Russia.

Concacaf is also a leading contender to host the 2026 World Cup, possibly with 
a joint bid involving at least two of United States, Canada and Mexico. Fifa 
could not immediately be reached for comment.
 