
The moon <https://www.theguardian.com/science/moon> is bombarded by so much 
space rock that its surface gets a complete facelift every 81,000 years, 
according to a study of Nasa data.


This churn – affecting the top 2cm (nearly an inch) of mostly loose moon dust 
– happens 100 times more frequently than previously thought, scientists have 
reported.

The study also estimates that asteroids and comets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/31/water-inside-moon-mostly-from-asteroids-study-suggests>
 crashing into the moon create on average 180 new craters at least 10 metres 
(33ft) in diameter every year.

The findings, published in Nature, come from “before and after” pictures taken 
by Nasa’s Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter spacecraft, which has been mapping the 
moon since 2009.

By comparing images of the same area at regular intervals, a team of 
scientists led by Emerson Speyerer from Arizona State University in Tempe was 
able to tally the number of new craters and extrapolate to the entire surface 
of the moon.

Is a moon village the next step for space exploration? ESA's chief thinks so
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/23/is-a-moon-village-the-next-step-for-space-exploration-esas-chief-thinks-so>
“We detected 222 new impact craters and found 33% more craters with a diameter 
of at least 10m than predicted” by earlier models, the researchers concluded.

The scientists also found thousands of subtler disturbances on the surface, 
which they described as “scars” from smaller secondary impacts that – over 
thousands of years – churned up the top layer of the moon without creating 
craters.

Earth is also constantly pelted by asteroids and meteors but is protected by a 
thick atmosphere.

More than 100 tonnes of dust and sand-sized particles rain down on the planet 
every day. But even those up to 25m across (80ft) usually explode and 
disintegrate in the upper layers of our atmosphere, causing little or no 
damage, according to Nasa.

The moon has next to no atmosphere – only contains about 100 molecules of 
gases and elements per cubic centimetre.

Earth’s atmosphere at sea level, by contrast, has about 100 billion billion 
molecules per cubic centimetre.
 