
Vinyl or digital? 

Digital. I am so happy to have access to long-lost singers and historic 
recordings on various platforms. John Charles Thomas, the American baritone 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sBen5Tt2IOs>, is now easily accessible to all. 
I love searching out repertoire that is suited for my voice, and sharing it 
with audiences. I am excited that people all over the world can share concerts 
and performances. Now, if we could just make sure that performing artists get 
their fair due in exploitation rights...?

What was the first record or cd you bought? 

The first record I was given was Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau’s Schubert Die 
Schöne Müllerin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rpISxQcXwZs> it was a life 
changer. The first records Ibought were Monty Python’s Flying Circus, then 
Genesis.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ZwD45tOnaY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ZwD45tOnaY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1ZwD45tOnaY&media=>
What’s your musical guilty pleasure? 

Anything choral 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Faure-Requiem-Choir-College-Cambridge/dp/B00L5J4Q5K> 
or a capella. It was my musical upbringing and I love to luxuriate in the 
harmony of blended human voices.

If you had time learn a new instrument, what would it be? 

I definitely would love time to improve my piano playing. I am so envious of 
the pianists that can play songs and lieder so beautifully. It would also allow 
me to learn my singing music much more quickly.

Did you ever consider a career outside of music? Doing what? 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuYiokai3FW4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuYiokai3FW4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuYiokai3FW4&media=>
At school in Canada, my parallel love was science and I might have been a vet. 
My fascination with the natural world continues, and I can still imagine myself 
in the medical profession. I am not sure I would have been any good at it, so I 
am happy that music became the career focus. The science community did not 
suffer as a result. With John Adams’s Dr Atomic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/feb/28/doctor-atomic-coliseum-john-adams>
 my life joined up briefly again.

Where is the most unusual place you’ve performed? 

For a BBC documentary Holocaust Memorial, I sang in the hospital block at 
Auschwitz <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0LhEYIQLCoU>. It was the hardest 
thing I have ever had to do. I sang a couple of lines from Wagner’s Die 
Meistersinger 
<https://www.facebook.com/OfficialGeraldFinley/videos/787910177898651> at the 
summit of Kilimanjaro climbing for@HelpMusiciansUK 
<https://twitter.com/HelpMusiciansUK>. Not really a performance, but it froze 
the guides who had helped me climb.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1veNfYeiohw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1veNfYeiohw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1veNfYeiohw&media=>
What’s been your most memorable live music experience as an audience member? 

The performance of Stockhausen’s Donnerstag aus Licht at the Royal Opera in 
September 1985. Electronics, wandering trumpet player in the auditorium; it was 
really the total modern opera experience.

We’re giving you a time machine: what period, or moment in musical history, 
would you travel to and why?

I would love to travel to the time when Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert and Haydn 
were the heroes of the day, 1790-1810, what a time to be in Vienna!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacing-the-music-bass-baritone-gerald-finley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae053d44e03849088ad609337a825c03c26a0a93%2F0_249_3792_2276%2F3792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Gerald%20Finley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacing-the-music-bass-baritone-gerald-finley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Gerald%20Finley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacing-the-music-bass-baritone-gerald-finley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae053d44e03849088ad609337a825c03c26a0a93%2F0_249_3792_2276%2F3792.jpg>
 Gerald Finley as Count Almaviva (with Camilla Tilling as Susanna) in Mozart’s 
Nozze Di Figaro at the Royal Opera House, 2014. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for 
the Guardian 
What - in your opinion - is the best new piece written in the past 50 years? 

Yikes, to think that Benjamin Britten is almost out of that 50 year period! 
Since then... I have such fondness for the music ofKaija Saariaho 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TrXaWt0UJ5Y> and also John Adams 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uYiokai3FW4&index=1&list=RDuYiokai3FW4>, both 
have written wonderfully soul-searching and beautiful music. There’s been 
wonderful pieces, too, from Mark Anthony Turnage, Einojuhani Rautavaara, John 
Rutter, Thomas Adès, George Benjamin, Oliver Knussen: how amazing is the music 
being produced today!

What was the last piece of music you danced to? 

I danced in my kitchen to Tom Chaplin’s latest solo song Hardened Heart 
<http://www.tomchaplinmusic.com/music/> on Radio 2, in front of my 15-month-old 
daughter. She laughed.

What’s the most overrated classical work? - ie is there a warhorse whose 
appeal you really don’t relate to?

Tchaikovsky’s 1812 Overture. I played the clarinet in my school band and we 
played it at every concert. I was in front of the bass drum, and every time I 
hear it now I want to shut my ears from the remembered pain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacing-the-music-bass-baritone-gerald-finley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0f9d909f03136c63a972d94e6a8c9102d1ae96d%2F405_143_1146_2806%2F1146.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Gerald%20Finley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacing-the-music-bass-baritone-gerald-finley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Gerald%20Finley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffacing-the-music-bass-baritone-gerald-finley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0f9d909f03136c63a972d94e6a8c9102d1ae96d%2F405_143_1146_2806%2F1146.jpg>
 ‘It would be fun to hook with Lady Gaga - she knows how to wear opera 
costumes!’ Photograph: Marc Piasecki/GC Images 
Which non-classical musician would you like to work with? 

I already have: when Paul McCartney wrote his Liverpool Oratorio 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U79XYlLEkQk>, I was part of the working 
ensemble. Linda even made us some veggie meals between sessions. It would be 
fun to hook up with Lady Gaga, she already knows how to wear opera costumes!

What do you sing in the shower? 

Excerpts from whichever concert or opera that I recently finished performing; 
it is almost a cool-down for my brain and soul.

Gerald Finley <http://www.geraldfinley.com/> gives the UK premiere of Kaija 
Saariaho <http://saariaho.org/>’s song cycle True Fire with the BBC Symphony 
Orchestra at the Barbican, London on 15 December 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/emcj5v>.
 