
Vinyl or digital? 

Vinyl. I love technology, and I’m always buying the latest computers and 
gadgets, but I don’t consider myself an audiophile. Perhaps it’s just 
nostalgia, but I enjoy the warmer sound you get from old records. Occasionally, 
I bring out my 78 record player and listen to the crackly records of Caruso and 
Fritz Kreisler that my teacherJosef Gingold 
<https://www.violin.org/josef-gingold> gave me when I was a kid.

What was the first record you bought? 

The first recording I remember buying was a cassette tape of Jascha Heifetz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/apr/19/artsfeatures1> playing the 
Wieniawski <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henryk_Wieniawski> second violin 
concerto. I would listen to it at summer camp under my bedcovers after lights 
out. The first CD I bought wasMozart’s Requiem performed by Neville Marriner 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YaH3zI0bYkM> and the Academy of St Martin in 
the Fields (withIleana Cotrubaș, Helen Watts, Robert Tear and John Shirley-Quirk
 
<https://www.discogs.com/Mozart-Ileana-Cotrubas-Helen-Watts-Robert-Tear-John-Shirley-Quirk-Academy-And-Chorus-Of-St-Martin-In/master/649112>
). My first CD player had an alarm clock, and I set it to wake me up every day 
to this recording. My family thought it was a bit morbid, but I found it an 
inspiring way to start the morning!

What was the last piece of music you bought? 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db5VqyCQV1Tg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db5VqyCQV1Tg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Db5VqyCQV1Tg&media=>
Last week I saw Hamilton on Broadway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/20/lin-manuel-miranda-musicals-hamilton-broadway-disney-hiphop>
 – the tickets were a birthday present. I was sceptical about it because of all 
the hype, and felt sure it must be overrated. But I was blown away by the 
music, the choreography, the story, and I was amazed by the originality of the 
production. I had to buy aCD of the cast recording 
<https://www.amazon.com/Hamilton-Original-Broadway-Recording-Explicit/dp/B0135P6PZA/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1471378611&sr=8-1&keywords=hamilton+soundtrack+vinyl>
.

What’s your musical guilty pleasure? 

Genesis – my favourite rock band as a teenager. When I’m in my car, I love 
cranking up the volume toSupper’s Ready 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gx6S32thDNw>, or Lamb Lies Down on Broadway 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=slAxR8S5iW4> with Peter Gabriel. <> Come to 
think of it, why should I feel guilty about this? It’s great music!

I am still annoyed with my parents for not giving me piano lessons as a child

If you had time learn a new instrument, what would it be? 

The piano. I am still annoyed with my parents for not giving me piano lessons 
when I was a child. I guess because my sister played the piano they thought it 
was only right to let that be her thing.

Did you ever consider a career outside of music? 


I love science, particularly physics, and I am also fascinated with molecular 
biology. I can imagine being some sort of scientist or medical researcher, and 
I’d crave something that involves discovery and invention. Luckily for me, 
music, in its own way, has both of those things.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7lo8sTmUx08&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7lo8sTmUx08>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7lo8sTmUx08&media=>
What single thing would improve the classical concert? 

I like it when there is less of a barrier between the artist and the audience. 
That’s why I enjoy performing or listening to chamber music in someone’s home. 
Performers could speak to audiences more, perhaps explain his or her unique 
take on the music – particularly if it’s a work the audience might not be 
familiar with. Presenters should keep experimenting with new ways to reach 
younger people – shorter concerts, “jeans concerts”, unconventional venues, etc 
– without diluting or dumbing down the music.

It may be the most popular piece of classical music of all time, but I think 
Beethoven’s Fifth is underrated

If you had to pick one work to introduce someone to classical music, what 
would it be?

Just one? There are so many pieces that would hook someone who is unfamiliar 
with classical music. The most obvious answer might be the best: Beethoven’s 
Fifth Symphony. It grabs you from the opening bar and never lets go. It may be 
the most popular piece of classical music ever, but the last time I directed 
the piece with the Academy of St Martin in the Fields, I thought afterwards 
that it is actually underrated.

What’s the most overrated classical work? 

Although Ravel is one of my favourite composers, and the piece is a masterful 
exercise in orchestration, I could live the rest of my life without hearing the 
Bolero again.

Which non-classical musician would you like to work with? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Ffacing-the-music-violinist-joshua-bell-academy-of-st-martin-in-the-fields-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3d1fe8b0aea53902855f83a6ed02f5d82017fae%2F176_85_2784_1671%2F2784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Joshua%20Bell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Ffacing-the-music-violinist-joshua-bell-academy-of-st-martin-in-the-fields-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Joshua%20Bell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Ffacing-the-music-violinist-joshua-bell-academy-of-st-martin-in-the-fields-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3d1fe8b0aea53902855f83a6ed02f5d82017fae%2F176_85_2784_1671%2F2784.jpg>
 Hamilton creator Lin-Manuel Miranda, foreground, during his final performance 
of his musical on Broadway. Photograph: Evan Agostini/Invision/AP 
Well, since I’m fresh off of seeing Hamilton on Broadway, I’m wondering if 
there is some way I could collaborate withLin-Manuel Miranda 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lin-Manuel_Miranda>. He is a genius.

What or where is the most unusual place or venue you’ve performed? 

I was scheduled to play a recital in Washington DC, but a blizzard caused a 
power outage in the concert hall and the show was cancelled. I had been at the 
venue practising. I left the building, thinking that I now had the night off, 
and encountered about 50 people in the lobby who had made it there through two 
feet of snow. One lady walked for three hours only to find out the concert was 
cancelled. So I played for them right there in the dark, just on violin because 
there was no piano in the lobby. It was my most appreciative audience ever.

We’re giving you a time machine: which period or moment in musical history 
would you travel to and why?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Ffacing-the-music-violinist-joshua-bell-academy-of-st-martin-in-the-fields-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11fcd1f864aedbd6008905d30a01af16af0dcb8a%2F0_0_2746_2745%2F2746.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Joshua%20Bell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Ffacing-the-music-violinist-joshua-bell-academy-of-st-martin-in-the-fields-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Joshua%20Bell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Ffacing-the-music-violinist-joshua-bell-academy-of-st-martin-in-the-fields-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11fcd1f864aedbd6008905d30a01af16af0dcb8a%2F0_0_2746_2745%2F2746.jpg>
 An undated portrait of Beethoven. Photograph: De Agostini/Getty Images 
My first idea would be to travel to ancient Rome. We know that they had music 
then, but what exactly did it sound like? Today we can only speculate. Or, if I 
had to choose a particular day, perhaps I would travel to 22 December 1808 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beethoven_concert_of_22_December_1808>. I would 
get to hear, in a single concert, the premieres of Beethoven’s Fifth and Sixth 
Symphonies with the composer himself conducting. (Did he really follow his 
metronome markings?) As a bonus, I would get to hear a solo improvisation by 
Beethoven and also witness him play his Fourth Piano Concerto – my favourite – 
in its first public performance. Apparently, many in attendance that night did 
think that the four-hour concert was too long, but I wouldn’t mind.

 * Joshua Bell <http://joshuabell.com/> is music director of Academy of St 
Martin in the Fields. He performs and directs Mendelssohn’s Violin Concerto in 
E Minor with the ASMF on19 January at Cadogan Hall 
<http://www.asmf.org/whats-on/joshua-bell-cadogan-hall/>, London.
 