
Vinyl or digital? 

Both.

What was the first record or cd you bought? 

Murray Perahia’s first recording 
<https://www.discogs.com/Perahia-Schumann-Davidsb%C3%BCndlert%C3%A4nze-Op-6-Fantasiest%C3%BCcke-Op-12/release/3930454>
 for Columbia, Schumann’s Fantasiestücke and Davidsbündlertänze.

What’s your musical guilty pleasure? 

Listening to recordings with my wife.

If you had six months free to learn a new instrument, what would it be? 

The theremin. An early electronic instrument with a remarkable sound and 
history <http://www.wnyc.org/story/short-history-e-z-pass/>. 

Did you ever consider a career outside of music? Doing what? 

Yes. As a neuroscientist or anthropologist. These are professions that I see 
on a continuum with music, as explorations of the very structures that make 
music so powerful. Neuroscience is the examination of the structures that shape 
our minds, and anthropology is the study of the slight differences in values 
that determine what we call a community or society. Music works across these 
spheres: it locates a particular state of mind, joining listeners together into 
a community of shared experience.

What single thing would improve the format of the classical concert? 

Breaking through the divide between stage and audience. We should find a way 
to acknowledge the common purpose that links the audience and performers: the 
desire to reach a different perspective from the one we had prior to our 
engagement with music.

If you had to pick one work to introduce someone to the wonders of classical 
music, what would it be?

Schubert’s Piano Trio in E Flat, performed by Casals, Horszowski, and 
Schneider. Their recording was my favourite thing to listen to when I was 12.

What’s the most unusual place you’ve performed? 

In the Kalahari desert in Namibia. Watch The Music of Strangers 
<http://themusicofstrangers.film/see-the-film> for a glimpse of me with the 
bushmen there.

We’re giving you a time machine: what period, or moment in musical history, 
would you travel to and why?

I would travel 100 years into the future and then return to the present. It 
might give me a chance to make better decisions.

Imagine you’re a festival director with unlimited resources. What would you 
programme for your opening event?

I would commission a piece that that involved everybody in the community. It 
would include all generations, amateurs, professionals, non-musicians. Each 
person would find his or her own expressive voice and join together into a 
coherent narrative.

What do you sing in the shower? 

Anything that I do in the shower is great.

The Music of Strangers: Yo-Yo Ma and the Silk Road Ensemble is in selected UK 
cinemas from 18 November.Watch the trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=26Ofj4hOVpA>
 