
What’s the most unusual place you’ve ever performed?

About a month ago in Holland with a youth orchestra, in the middle of an 
aquarium in a zoo. It was surreal.

What single thing would improve the format of the classical concert?


Letting people bring in alcoholic drinks. You can bring drinks into other 
types of concerts and gigs, but the majority of classical music concerts don’t 
allow it. More should.

What’s your musical guilty pleasure? 


I live in Berlin which is famous for its techno clubs and my girlfriend and I 
love going – it’s great to get into another zone in those places. I also like 
slipping away secretly into the back rehearsal room of another colleague and 
listening to choirs. It’s great just to listen to music and not be really 
active without thinking of work, it feels like a safe haven when you’re working 
hard, like a different part of my brain is being used.

What was the first record or cd you bought? 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkbxtYqA6ypM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkbxtYqA6ypM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkbxtYqA6ypM&media=>
Miles Davis’ Kind Of Blue when I was about 12. It was a gold CD limited 
edition with extra features so it felt even more special. The fact I didn’t 
have my own CD player was a small snag; my brother and dad had one, so I could 
only listen to it at certain times of the day.

How do you listen to music?


Two ways mostly: with a computer plugged into monitors in a music studio, so 
that it’s with good quality sound. I also listen to vinyl through a good 
quality hifi setup. If I listen to music on foot, it would be on a decent set 
of over-ear monitor headphones, I have a trusty set of Bowers and Wilkins P7s 
and they’re a really good pair of headphones.

What was the last piece of music you bought? 


Some Quincy Jones stuff as part of my work preparing for his prom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/23/quincy-jones-prom-review-laura-mvula-jacob-collier-royal-albert-hall-london>
. I downloaded hissoundtrack to the 1965 film Mirage 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U2LlBj2mYhE>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0g0R3skcTDQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0g0R3skcTDQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0g0R3skcTDQ&media=>
If you found yourself with six months free to learn a new instrument, what 
would it be?

If I could I’d be a monster on analogue modelling synths 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analog_modeling_synthesizer>, I’d want to learn 
everything about them, learn how to play them super fast, to learn how to be a 
total ninja on them. I’d want to know how to approach synthesisers the way I 
approach orchestras. TheMoog sub 37 
<https://www.moogmusic.com/products/phattys/sub-37> would be a good example.

Did you ever consider a career outside of music? Doing what?

I wanted to be a stunt man until I realised you need to be proficient in 
several martial arts, gymnastics and acrobatics, and all I had was proficiency 
in doing stupid things, I was pretty young!

If you had to pick one work to introduce someone to the wonders of classical 
music, what would it be?

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLeOpqIEDUak&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLeOpqIEDUak>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLeOpqIEDUak&media=>
It would be the first movement of Shostakovich’s tenth symphony. It’s just 
amazing. It starts with a long double-bass part and challenges the listener to 
engage for 20 minutes on one thread. It’s a genius demonstration of how simple 
classical music can be, it’s just based on a tiny idea.

What’s the most overrated classical work? - ie is there a warhorse whose 
appeal you really don’t relate to?

Anything by Bruckner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/01/sex-death-dissonance-anton-bruckner-concertgebouw-orchestra>
, I can’t stand it! I’ll probably get trashed by my friends for saying this.

Quincy Jones Prom review – heartfelt tribute to a great musician's 
extraordinary legacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/23/quincy-jones-prom-review-laura-mvula-jacob-collier-royal-albert-hall-london>
What do you sing in the shower?

Normally I start singing or whistling something I’m working on that day or 
related to someone I’m working with. So this morning it was our rehearsal 
version of Wanna be startin’ somethin’ for the Quincy Jones prom, so this 
morning it was Michael Jackson.

It’s late, you’ve had a few beers, you’re in a Karaoke bar. What do you choose 
to sing?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuPudE8nDog0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuPudE8nDog0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuPudE8nDog0&media=>
I was wedding singer for 10 years when I was a student, to earn money to pay 
the rent, so it would he something I used to sing. Something likeHard to handle 
by Otis Redding <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1ZxN9iQM7OY>, or Human 
League’s Don’t You Want me Baby. My wedding band and I – who are the rhythm 
section of theHeritage Orchestra <http://www.theheritageorchestra.com/> – are 
reuniting for one night only for (Heritage Orchestra co-founder) Chris 
Wheeler’s wedding in September, it will be like old times!

•Jules Buckley conducts the late-night prom with Kamasi Washington on 30 August
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ejqv2m>. 
 