
How do you mostly listen to music? 

On an iPhone with headphones, taking a walk.

What was the first ever record/CD you bought? 

Mozart Quintet for Piano and Winds 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3zxqpLEQcp0>, only because my well-worn 
cassette tape had finally broken. Records were on the way out.

What was the last piece of music you bought? 

Ravel playing his piano music on piano roll 
<http://www.maurice-ravel.net/pianorolls.htm>. I’m conducting an arrangement 
for orchestra of hisOiseaux Tristes in the BBC Proms 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ef3zc8> – it’s extraordinary to hear a composer’s 
intentions – even if his piano playing evidently wasn’t that great.

What’s your musical guilty pleasure? 

Deloris’s chase scene from Sister Act 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gMuG05nO1H0>. Occasionally it comes up in 
public on iPod shuffle and people are like: “What on earth is this?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Ffacing-the-music-conductor-nicholas-collon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436176717143%2F38451cf7-1bdb-4a9e-9ecb-d43d8860970a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Nicholas%20Collon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Ffacing-the-music-conductor-nicholas-collon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Nicholas%20Collon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Ffacing-the-music-conductor-nicholas-collon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F6%2F1436176717143%2F38451cf7-1bdb-4a9e-9ecb-d43d8860970a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Collon conducting the Aurora Orchestra. Photograph: Simon Weir/Aurora Orch 
If you found yourself with six months free to learn a new instrument, what 
would you choose?

The horn or bassoon. I doubt I’d achieve much in six months, but it would be 
fun to have a go.

Is applauding between movements acceptable?

Acceptable to whom? Composer, performer or other audience members? It’s never 
bothered me.

What’s been your most memorable live music experience as an audience member? 

I used to go to lots of Proms as a teenager, but a standout was the Berlin 
Philharmonic with the Rite of Spring under Simon Rattle, back in 2003, once 
everyone had got overthe mobile phone incident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/quiz/2014/jul/17/bbc-proms-2014-weird-wonderful-moments-quiz>
 …

We’re giving you a time machine: what period, or moment in musical history, 
would you travel back (or forward) to, and why?

It would be pretty amazing to watch Mozart perform his piano concertos, but 
given the opportunity, I couldn’t resist going forward 150 years. What kind of 
music will be written? Who would the audiences be? What would people think of 
our current canonic composers, such asAdès 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yyud1KJBBWg> and John Adams 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=evYLx9lgfoU>? Will there be period instrument 
orchestras performing Ligeti, playing on “old” instruments from the 20th 
century?

Do you enjoy musicals? Do you have a favourite? 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw40ushYAaYA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw40ushYAaYA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw40ushYAaYA&media=>
Love them. I’m slightly obsessed by Gene Kelly, and end up watching things 
like Singin’ in the Rain all the time with my two-year-old. OtherwiseSondheim 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iamM_Qe7nbw>, Bernstein 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qy6wo2wpT2k> etc.

Which conductor or performer of yesteryear do you most wish you could have 
worked with?

Dinu Lipatti  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_2UvDOGo3qI>– an extraordinary 
pianist whose life was cut tragically short. It would be a dream to accompany 
him in a Chopin or Grieg concerto.


What is the best new piece written in the past 50 years? 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPg7VKAaxn1s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPg7VKAaxn1s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPg7VKAaxn1s&media=>
Ligeti’s Chamber Concerto distills all his most extraordinary and innovative 
techniques into a 20-minute classic. It manages to look forward and backwards 
in time, and is incredibly challenging, while being absolutely playable.

Which non-classical musician would you love to work with? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Ffacing-the-music-conductor-nicholas-collon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435942179107%2F4e8da14b-98f3-414d-b6e4-e72f74fe739e-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Nicholas%20Collon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Ffacing-the-music-conductor-nicholas-collon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Nicholas%20Collon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F06%2Ffacing-the-music-conductor-nicholas-collon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F3%2F1435942179107%2F4e8da14b-98f3-414d-b6e4-e72f74fe739e-1360x2040.jpeg>
Beyoncé <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce>. She’s a phenomenon. I’m 
sure we would come up with a cracking event, and if nothing else, she’d sell 
more tickets than I usually do.

Imagine you’re a festival director here in London with unlimited resources. 
What would you programme – or commission – for your opening event?

I’d petition someone to close off all the roads in central London and persuade 
everyone in the city to learn an enormous new piece that we perform together. 
Loads of singing, lots of movement, 7/8 bars. May as well think big.

What do you sing in the shower? 

It’s usually a bath, I’m afraid. At the moment, it’s Anna Meredith 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xo97ztKppIw>’s new piece, Smatter Hauler, 
which I’m trying to memorise for the BBC Proms.

It’s late, you’ve had a few beers, you’re in a karaoke bar. What do you choose 
to sing?

Bohemian Rhapsody – safe in the knowledge that I’m at least marginally better 
than Kanye West <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lmiqd9Dc3Fg>. 

Aurora Orchestra releases its second album, Insomnia, on Warner Classics 
<http://www.warnerclassics.com/shop/4572556,0825646082230/aurora-orchestra-insomnia>
 on 31 July. Nicholas Collon conducts the Aurora at the Proms onSunday 2 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/events/performers/120> and the BBC Philharmonic on 
Friday 7 August <http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/events/performers/120>.
 