
What was the first record you bought? 

Keith Jarrett: The Köln Concert. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/jan/31/50-great-moments-jazz-keith-jarrett>
 I must have been about 12. The music didn’t point to one particular musical 
genre and I was fascinated. Jarrett was writing his own language, defining what 
would become his grammar. My composition teacherClaude Lenners 
<http://www.composers21.com/compdocs/lennersc.htm> says that the 20th is the 
century where the musical grammar became particular to each and every composer 
(as opposed to the idea of common practice – the period between the start and 
end of thetonal system <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tonality>). Perhaps, 
then, the 21st is the century were musical styles blend, borrow from each 
other, and ultimately become irrelevant. Or maybe we have to come up with a new 
series of labels or genres: acid classical, acoustic disco, dixieland techno … 
? I don’t see the point. Let the music speak for itself.

What was the last piece of music you bought? 

The score of Bach’s St Matthew’s Passion <https://vimeo.com/164091083>. I’m 
doing a version for solo piano of the opening,Kommt, Ihr Töchter, Helft Mir 
Klagen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6As1Pvz-mHs>. When I play the piano I 
usually play Bach. He never wrote for the piano explicitly, he wrote for the 
keyboard – “clavier” – and rarely called for a specific instrument such as a 
cembalo (harpischord) or organ. I like his idea of universal transcendental 
instrumental music very much. It’s probably why Bach’s music works so well on 
the piano – and on the synthesiser, too, asWendy Carlos 
<http://www.wendycarlos.com/> showed in the 60s. The piano is massive, but 
Bach’s music is refined, polyphonic and contrapuntal, so the main challenge to 
play Bach’s big works on the piano is to tame the beast. Except when you play 
the St Matthew Passion!

How do you mostly listen to music?


I used my iPod a lot, especially when I was running, but I lost it and now I 
prefer to listen to the music of the city.


If you found yourself with six months free to learn a new instrument, which 
would it be?


I would take a course in audio engineering, taking my inspiration from 
visionary pianistGlenn Gould 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/sep/20/glenn-gould-wilfully-idiotic-genius>
, who gave up live performances and turned to his second instrument: the 
studio. He redefined pianism.


The format of the classical concert is essentially the same today as it was in 
1816. We can change it. Let us

Did you ever consider a career outside of music? Doing what?

As a boy, I started to think about the possibility of becoming a librarian … 
or an astronaut. But I soon realised there were quite a few risks linked to the 
latter, and so veered more towards being an astrophysicist. I always had a 
passion for books, and for the stars. Music is related to both, I feel.

What single thing would improve the format of the classical concert?

The lighting, the seating, the programming, the pricing, the repertoire, the 
locations – wait, that’s six things already. The point is, the format of the 
classical concert is essentially the same today as it was in 1816. We can 
change it. Let us.

If you had to pick one work to introduce someone to the wonders of classical 
music, what would it be?

 The idea of introducing a new audience to classical music cannot and should 
not be patronising, or elitist. People respond better to things they already 
know. So I’d choose a piece that the person would recognise. Perhaps aSatie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/25/erik-satie-vexations-furniture-music>
Gymnopédie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S-Xm7s9eGxU>. And perhaps the 
beautiful,recently released recording of Tamar Halperin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/24/the-satie-album-cd-tamar-halperin-review-mixed-birthday-tribute>
, where she reimagines and reorchestrates the music of Satie. He managed to 
create electronic moods with acoustic instruments. He was, arguably, the first 
ambient composer.

Which conductor or performer of the past would you like to have worked with?

Ferruccio Busoni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/30/busoni-late-piano-music-review>. 
I would love to perform hisFantasia Contrappuntistica 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/album/ferruccio-busoni-fantasia/id153976663> or 
perform his Piano Concerto under his baton. And hear his insights about these 
works. They are monumental.


What’s been your most memorable live music experience as an audience member?

 Watch video for Zawinul Syndicate 
I’m undecided between the two following: An open-air show of Joe Zawinul 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joe_Zawinul> and his Syndicate in Barcelona in 
2005, and the complete works of Xenakis by New York-based French pianistMarc 
Ponthus <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marc_Ponthus> in 2000.

Music is communication, and it is politics, too. Without the audience, 
performers and composers do not exist.

We’re giving you a time machine: what period or moment in musical history 
would you travel to and why?

I am quite curious about the Roman empire, and also of where we are heading 
in, say, 200 years’ time, but I would remain here and now. I like my age. It is 
a time of global difficulties, not without dangers, especially now that we are 
on the brink of fascism, globally. But it is the time I am most informed and 
interested about, and it is now that I feel I have a word to say. Music is 
communication, and it is politics, too. Without the audience, performers and 
composers do not exist.

What’s the most unusual place you’ve performed?


The Jeita Grotto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/sep/02/jeita-grotto-lebanon-near-beiruit>
 outside Beirut, Lebanon. Stalactites and stalagmites, plus a five-second 
reverb. It was a unique experience.

What do you sing in the shower?

 Watch the video for Rémi: La Totomobile 
Usually my kids’ songs from school. The last hit at home was Rémi, La 
Totomobile. The children’s songs become so omnipresent that you end up singing 
them even in your sleep.

What is the best new piece written in the past 50 years?


John Cage’s 4’33’’ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JTEFKFiXSx4>. Wait, that 
was written in 1952. But there are two subsequent versions of the piece, and 
the last one was written in 1989, so that’s OK …

It’s late, you’ve had a few beers, you’re in a karaoke bar. What do you choose 
to sing?


Madonna’s Vogue <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GuJQSAiODqI>. With the whole 
choreography, no kidding.


 * Francesco Tristano <http://www.francescotristano.com/> appears at the EFG 
London jazz festival with the BBC Concert Orchestra on 19 November 
<http://efglondonjazzfestival.org.uk/events/info/bbc-concert-orchestra-with-francesco-tristano>
 performing the UK premiere of his piano concerto, Island Nation, and Bach’s 
Piano Concerto in D minor.
 