
What was the first record or CD you bought?

Actually I bought three at once, when I was seven. It must have been a bumper 
birthday! They wereAbba Arrival 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arrival_(ABBA_album)>, an LP of JS Bach’s organ 
music 
<https://library.stanford.edu/music/notable-collections-and-acquisitions/organ-works-johann-sebastian-bach>
 and Tomita’sThe Engulfed Cathedral 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fYBTefxI1t4>. I wanted to kiss Agnetha, play 
the organ in any gothic cathedral, and own a brace of Moog synthesisers. I had 
ambition.

What’s your musical guilty pleasure?

Conducting the Swedish Radio Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YrpWBgB6oz8> in The Legend of Zelda 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YrpWBgB6oz8>. The Swedes are awesome for 
pretty much any music I might play with them, but this is something that gives 
us all a bit of a rush.

If you had time learn a new instrument, what would it be?

The bass oboe.

If you had to pick one work to introduce someone to the wonders of classical 
music, what would it be?

Arnold Schoenberg’s Verklärte Nacht 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Verkl%C3%A4rte_Nacht> (Transfigured Night), 
because it has the bracing energy of a cliffhanger, poised on the very last 
rocky outcrop of romanticism, ready to plunge into a new music freefall – the 
uprush of atonality. Also, because it is about boy-meets-girl and the sweet 
torture of first love/angst. It’s one of the most groin-churningly beautiful 
and savage pieces of music ever written. Incidentally it’s also the first work 
I conducted with a professional orchestra, when I was starting out. The whole 
experience of that music and those musicians was so seismically exciting for 
me, I got the trembles, lost control of my baton and stuck it in my eye.

What single thing would improve the format of the classical concert?

Firstly I want to see true inclusivity, by which in the first instance I mean 
a genuine mix on stage of able-bodied and disabled, black, white and everything 
in between – not through tokenism but sheer bloody talent.
 Charles Hazlewood conducts Glass’s “Heroes” Symphony at 2016’s Glastonbury 
festival. Photograph: Ekaterina Panikanova for The Guardian 
Secondly, the genuine desire of every artist on that stage to engage and 
embrace the audience, through the music. Whatever music it is, however 
difficult it is, any worthwhile music will speak to any audience if the 
intention is right. It is all about a mindset of sharing, not showing. Music is 
communication, an act of love, not a display.

What or where is the most unusual place you’ve performed?

Three recent situations: improvising with 40 musicians packed into a fleet of 
hot air balloons, about 500 metres up; performing Beethoven’s Seventh Symphony 
with Copenhagen Philharmonic, the orchestra spread out in a giant circle 30 
metres wide inside an old Carlsberg warehouse in Copenhagen; and headlining the 
Park stage at Glastonbury 2016 with my orchestra Army of Generals, featuring 
members of the British Paraorchestra, playing Philip Glass’s “Heroes” Symphony 
to a rapt and mud-encrusted crowd of 20,000.

What’s been your most memorable live music experience as an audience member?

Watching Valery Gergiev and the Mariinsky Orchestra in St Petersburg playing 
Shostakovich’s 10th Symphony. There was blood on the floor, the walls and the 
ceiling. In a good way.

What was the last piece of music you danced to?

A salsa marathon in Bogotá, Colombia.

With a time machine? I'd go to Vienna 1791 with the best doctor money could 
buy, find Mozart and reverse his ill health

We’re giving you a time machine: what period, or moment in musical history, 
would you travel to and why?

To Vienna, August 1791, armed with a suitcase of cash and accompanied by the 
best 21st-century doctor money could buy. We’d find Mozart, reverse his ill 
health and give him enough money to be extravagantly comfortable for a long 
life as the world’s greatest composer and number one ecstatic human being.

What’s the most overrated classical work? – ie is there a warhorse whose 
appeal you really don’t relate to?

Anything by Johann Strauss, father or son. Those polkas, waltzes and marches 
are about as satisfying as eating 200 packets of Haribo Sour Suckers.

Which non-classical musician would you like to work with?

Mica Levi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/12/mica-levi-of-michachu-and-the-shapes>
 orYoussou N’Dour <https://www.theguardian.com/music/youssou-n-dour>.

It’s late, you’ve had a few beers, you’re in a Karaoke bar. What do you choose 
to sing?

Lee Hazlewood’s Dark in my Heart <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YJkYGAaP8wc>

•Charles Hazlewood and his orchestra, Army of Generals 
<http://www.charleshazlewood.com/army-of-generals/> featuring members of the 
British Paraorchestra <http://paraorchestra.com>, perform Philip Glass’s 
“Heroes” and Low Symphonies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/25/philip-glass-on-david-bowie-he-was-a-master-unto-himself>
 in a tribute to David Bowie atColston Hall, Bristol 
<http://www.colstonhall.org/shows/charles-hazlewood-army-generals/> (10 
December),Royal Concert Hall, Nottingham 
<https://trch.co.uk/whats-on/celebration-david-bowie/> (12 December) and De La 
Warr Pavilion, Bexhill-on-Sea <https://www.dlwp.com/event/david-bowie/> (14 
December).

 