
How do you listen to music most often?

On the radio. I like the serendipity.

What was the last piece of music you bought? 

Margaret Price singing Liszt La tombe et la rose  
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/album/liszt-3-petrarch-sonnets-lieder/id471753573>
which I’m learning for my upcomingWigmore Hall recital 
<https://wigmore-hall.org.uk/whats-on/liszt-debussy-and-hahn-201510261300>. 
Totes gorge.

What’s your musical guilty pleasure?

I have a penchant for borderline cheesy rock: The Darkness 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sRYNYb30nxU>, Queen & Guns n Roses. Usually on 
the stereo with my cleaning pinny on.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRbm6GXllBiw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRbm6GXllBiw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRbm6GXllBiw&media=>
If you found yourself with six months free to learn a new instrument, what 
would you choose?

French horn. I love the sound and am fascinated by all that hand shape action. 
I might even try outthe baroque version <http://www.baroque-music.com/horn.html>
. No valves. Hardcore.

Is applauding between movements acceptable?

It disrupts the flow of the musical ideas, but I would never want someone to 
feel embarrassed about doing what is essentially a kind act of appreciation. We 
can either accept it as a flipside to getting more of the so-called uninitiated 
into the concert hall (which is a very good thing), or we can always ask the 
audience explicitly not to applaud [between movements] in the programme, or 
even – dare I say – talk to them. I usually say that if they enjoyed it, could 
they save the applause until the end of the group of songs as it gives me 
longer to pass the hat around.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIpGB8mwgTu0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIpGB8mwgTu0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIpGB8mwgTu0&media=>
What single thing would improve the format of the classical concert?

Strip-searching all concert goers for mobile phones before entering the hall. 
Ok, maybe that’s a bit harsh, but if we could somehow have some kind of 
electromagnetic web that stopped the dratted things from working that would be 
great. It’s not just the ringtones but now all the people filming. You look out 
to an audience of red dots and flashes which is a total infringement of the 
moment and very distracting. It stifles my ability to create.

What’s been your most memorable live music experience as an audience member?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Ffacing-the-music-elizabeth-watts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443789361886%2F6d4cf551-b58e-4486-ba78-d7ab616f70ea-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Elizabeth%20Watts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Ffacing-the-music-elizabeth-watts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Facing%20the%20music%3A%20Elizabeth%20Watts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Ffacing-the-music-elizabeth-watts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F2%2F1443789361886%2F6d4cf551-b58e-4486-ba78-d7ab616f70ea-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Grimes on the beach - part of the 2013 Aldeburgh festival. Photograph: 
REX/Alastair Muir 
Grimes on the beach at Aldeburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/interactive/2013/jun/17/peter-grimes-on-the-beach-aldeburgh-britten-audio-slideshow>
. I am a proud East Anglian (a Norwich gal or a singing Canary as I like to 
say) and love Britten. Hearing the Sea Interludes with the actual sea lapping 
at the set was total magic.

What was the first ever record/cd you bought? 

Especially For You by Kylie & Jason 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pOpdzS0CY8M>. It was on vinyl if that makes it 
any cooler.

Do you enjoy musicals? Do you have a favourite?

I love them, especially the old ones. My husband and I are desperate to do 
Eliza and Higgins in My Fair Lady together. No one says “Move yer bloomin’ arse 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5abYYX-irqE>” quite like I do.

I’d love to re-record Barcelona with Adam Lambert and Queen. Must. Make. This. 
Happen.

How many recordings of the Beethoven Symphonies do you own? Do you have a 
favourite?

I worked in a record shop for a couple of years and got to put on the stereo 
whatever I liked in my classical bat cave. I worked my way through a few 
interpretations and came away with theRattle/Vienna Phil  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/mar/14/classicalmusicandopera.artsfeatures1>
version of the complete Beethoven Symphonies. It’s fabulously exciting.

Which conductor of yester-year do you most wish you could have worked with?

Tricky, but probably Carlos Kleiber. I hear people quoting him all the time 
about singers, and I love hisTraviata on disc 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7LSJ-UsauQE>.

Which non-classical musician would you love to work with?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do8Eg-mWdDLc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do8Eg-mWdDLc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do8Eg-mWdDLc&media=>
I’d love to re-record Barcelona with Adam Lambert and Queen. Must. Make. This. 
Happen.

Imagine you’re a festival director here in London with unlimited resources. 
What would you programme - or commission - for your opening event?

I really want to direct Turandot done in a big top, perhaps in Hyde Park. I’d 
train up a tonne of kids in circus skills and also use performers from the 
homeless charityStreetwise Opera <http://streetwiseopera.org/>. I’d create an 
“immersive” show where it started from the moment you arrived at the big top, 
with everyone around you in on this weird world. I might even sing Liù too.

What do you sing in the shower? 

Stuff I make up. Wattsy’s Water Music I suppose. 

Elizabeth Watts’ Con Eco D’Amore - a collection of rare arias and cantatas by 
Alessandro Scarlatti, is released by Harmonia Mundi on 2 October 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/music/dp/B00YTATRU6/ref=sr_1_3?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1442927557&sr=1-3&keywords=elizabeth+watts>
. She gives recitals with Julius Drake at Ripon Cathedral (12 October), 
Holywell Music Room, Oxford (20 October), Holkham Hall, Norfolk (23 October) 
and Wigmore Hall, London (1pm, 26 October, broadcast live on radio 3).Details 
of all live dates here <http://elizabethwattssoprano.com/?post_type=event>. 

 