
What was the last piece of music you bought?


The new album by Andé Somby, Yoiking With the Winged Ones 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yoiking_with_the_Winged_Ones>. He’s appearing at 
Tectonics in Glasgow 
<http://www.tectonicsfestival.com/glasgow/performers/ande-somby> and Oslo this 
year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsVEHIR0HzpA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsVEHIR0HzpA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsVEHIR0HzpA&media=>
What’s your musical guilty pleasure?

Sometimes I like listening to disco, or New Wave stuff such as Roxy Music. But 
I listen to so much music I don’t really feel that anything is a guilty 
pleasure.

How do you listen to music most often?

CDs in the car, vinyl records at home, and on my headphones when travelling. 
But family life means I don’t listen as much at home any more.

Applause between movements has always been part of the response between the 
audience and the musicians

What was the first record or CD you bought?

When I was 13 and I lived in Munich there was a great CD store off 
Marianneplatz, and they’d let you listen to anything. I first heard Tristan and 
Wozzeck there, which my parents then bought for me. The first thing I bought 
with my own money though was Bach Sonatas & Partitas for solo violin.

Is applauding between movements acceptable?


Sure. It happens more and more but I don’t find it a problem. Mozart used to 
write to his father telling him about the applause he’d get in the middle of a 
symphony. It’s always been part of the response between the audience and the 
musicians. Mobile phones are more of a problem for me than an audience voicing 
its excitement.

What single thing would improve the format of the classical concert?

I’m kind of traditional, but one thing that I do hate is when there’s too much 
light on the audience and they want to read the programme notes. If people want 
to read about the music they can do it before the concert, after it, or at the 
break, but they should be listening during the performance. I like it quite 
dark in the hall, like a theatre.

What’s been your most memorable live music experience as an audience member?

I remember going to seeing Christa Ludwig doing Winterreise in New York. I was 
13 and didn’t know the piece well - it was the first time I’d heard it all the 
way through. It was at Carnegie Hall with James Levine at the piano. It was 
just amazing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fdai.ly%2Fxka7f1&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fdai.ly%2Fxka7f1> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fdai.ly%2Fxka7f1&media=>
We’re giving you a time machine: what period, or moment in musical history, 
would you travel to and why?

The premiere of Monteverdi’s Orfeo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jul/27/classicalmusicandopera>. The 
initial beginning of opera is so far from us, it’s so unknown. There are so few 
documents about it, no pictures, nothing. To be there and discover what it was 
like would be incredible.

If you found yourself with six months free to learn a new instrument, what 
would you choose?

Percussion. Perhaps Indian drumming.

Do you enjoy musicals? Do you have a favourite?

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSHFXEPYU0FQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSHFXEPYU0FQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSHFXEPYU0FQ&media=>
No, it’s so loud with the PA and I don’t like those amplified voices. I’m more 
into Kurt Weill, which is where musicals came from; those witty, powerful 
texts, and that distilled music which is both simple and complex. I’m doing the
Seven Deadly Sins later in the year with the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e99gwh>.

Which conductor or performer of yester-year do you most wish you could have 
worked with?

Artur Schnabel. For me his Beethoven Piano Sonatas are just unequalled, 
they’re really vibrant and free. He’s using tempo in an interesting way, 
there’s lots of rubato and this strong feeling of structure. Doing a Beethoven 
or Brahms piano concerto with him would have been incredible.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCpiPHjSRUOg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCpiPHjSRUOg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCpiPHjSRUOg&media=>
 Schnabel plays Beethoven. 
What, in your opinion, is the most overrated classical piece?

I used to avoid doing Shostakovich Five as I thought it was overrated – and 
then I did it and just loved it! It’s not the same, but in a funny way I think 
Mahler is being played too much. I love his work but it’s over-programmed.

Which non-classical musician would you love to work with?

Diamanda Gallas <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f0AIjnQ8t30> or Brian Wilson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OZ2RJwTwbzg>.

Imagine you’re a festival director here in London with unlimited resources. 
What would you programme - or commission - for your opening event?

I’m kind of doing that with the Tectonics festivals around the world – but not 
with unlimited resources! I’d love to do a new large-scale opera or a vocal 
piece that blends lots of genres, such as folk music, improvised and electronic 
music, and which uses a brand new text. Something that would also use 
multi-media, professional and non-professional artists so that it’s community 
based as well. And to be staged somewhere that makes an innovative use of space.

It’s late, you’ve had a few beers, you’re in a Karaoke bar. What do you choose 
to sing?

Probably some Israeli songs from the 80s. Something like Svika Pick.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuuyS84Av27U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuuyS84Av27U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuuyS84Av27U&media=>
Tectonics festival <http://www.tectonicsfestival.com/glasgow/>, curated by 
Ilan Volkov, is at City Halls, Glasgow on 7 and 8 May.
 