
The California-based husband and wife founders of celebrity-endorsed vegan 
restaurant group Cafe Gratitude say they have received death threats after it 
was revealed last week that they are raising, slaughtering and eating animals 
on their farm north of San Francisco.

Matthew and Terces Engelhart, both in their sixties, who opened the first Cafe 
Gratitude in 2004 and whose celebrity followers have included Gwyneth Paltrow, 
Beyoncé and Sacha Baron Cohen, countered the firestorm of criticism with a 
defense of the “regenerative agriculture” methods they now use on their Be Love 
Farm in Vacaville, calling it a personal choice made in the privacy of their 
home.

You can't be 'a little bit vegan'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/03/being-a-little-bit-vegan-is-completely-oxymoronic>
“We started to observe nature and what we saw is that nature doesn’t exist 
without animals,” Matthew Engelhart told the Hollywood Reporter last week after 
animal rights activists dug up and circulated blog entries from spring 2015 
from the farm’s website, including photos of a freezer full of pastured beef, 
jars of gravy and Matthew enjoying a hamburger, with posts on their 
“transition” into meat products after nearly 40 years of vegetarianism.

“People have taken up the mob mentality,” he opined, after protesters gathered 
outside their restaurants holding signs such as “no animal is grateful to die”, 
started aFacebook boycott page 
<https://www.facebook.com/Boycott-Cafe-Gratitude-and-Gracias-Madre-159330514465477/>
 and frantically posted one-star Yelp reviews.

“Cows make an extreme sacrifice for humanity but that is their position in 
God’s plan as food for the predators,” Matthew Engelhart added in a statement 
about their decision. “We can be part of that sacrament.”
 Terces Engelhart tends to the animals at Be Love Farm in this photograph from 
April 2011. The farm supplies produce to the Engelharts’ restaurants. 
Photograph: Adithya Sambamurthy for the Guardian 
But purist vegans who patronized the several southern California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> branches of the cafe, despite 
or perhaps because of its irritatingly named “affirmation” dishes such the 
“accepting” sushi bowl and the “grateful” kale salad, will not be assuaged so 
easily. “Fxxxing HYPOCRITES!!!! Hope they will be FLAME BURNED and eaten by 
Meat Eaters,” screams one post on the Facebook boycott page. “They are duping 
vegans to support their animal killings,” says another.

The Engelharts spawned an entire industry with a carefully marketed message of 
peace, love and sharing, which includes a sister vegan Mexican restaurant, 
Gracias Madre, in San Francisco and Los Angeles.

The couple have written several books, including Sacred Commerce: Business as 
a Path of Awakening and Kindred Spirit: Fulfilling Love’s Promise. Their 
personal website is namedEternal Presence 
<http://www.eternal-presence.com/about/> and references the board game they 
created in 2004, called The Abounding River Board Game, which was on every 
table in their San Francisco flagship; and which they said would train players 
to embrace “an unfamiliar view of Being Abundant” and develop a “spiritual 
foundation” for looking at money.

A Be Love Farm blogpost <http://www.belovefarm.com/blog/> from February last 
year highlights the “big week” when they transitioned into meat products.

“That transition is happening deep within our beings, we know it is a 
necessary and important part of our growth as well as the sustainability of our 
farm ... as we open our hearts further to the presence of love ... ” The page 
features photos of their new beef products alongside a bucolic shot of their 
cows “sitting down chewing their cud in the warm Spring breeze”.
The couple are no strangers to controversy. 

Eating too much red meat ‘can age the body’, researchers claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/28/eating-too-much-red-meat-can-age-the-body-researchers-claim>
In 2011, they cited a series of “aggressive lawsuits” by disgruntled employees 
as the reason forhaving to close or sell 
<http://insidescoopsf.sfgate.com/blog/2011/11/29/cafe-gratitude-announces-the-closure-of-all-its-northern-california-outposts/>
 their eight Cafe Gratitude restaurants in the Bay Area. The lawsuits 
challenged the restaurants’ tip-pooling practices and alleged unpaid overtime 
wages. At the time they wrote on their Facebook page that it would cost too 
much to defend themselves in court.

Another lawsuit was filed by an employee, alleging he was fired after refusing 
to attend the controversial San Francisco-based Landmark Forum self-improvement 
course and an offshoot of Werner Erhard’s self-realization program.

In the end, the Engelhart’s settled, selling or giving some of the restaurants 
to family members, including Terces’ son by a previous marriage, Matthew, who 
works at the LA restaurant. The couple reportedly met at a Landmark Forum 
seminar after Terces (which is “secret” spelled backwards) had fled a 
conventional life in Santa Cruz with her IBM manager husband and children, 
selling all their belongings and loading up an RV and hitting the road, 
reportedly heading for Durango, Colorado.

That was in 1992. Her daughter Mollie from that marriage now runs a vegan beer 
garden in LA 
<http://www.mnn.com/food/beverages/blogs/woody-harrelson-co-owns-the-world-s-first-organic-vegan-beer-garden>
, with business partner and actor Woody Harrelson, as well as KindKreme, a 
vegan ice cream parlour.

LA-based activist Mary Cummins, founder of Animal Advocates, claims that the 
Engelharts have been influenced by the controversial views of Allan Savory, the 
Zimbabwean ecologist and author of Holistic Management, which advocates using 
livestock on grasslands as the only way to reverse climate change and avoid 
widespread destruction of these lands. (The idea has its detractors –George 
Monbiot in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/georgemonbiot/2014/aug/04/eat-more-meat-and-save-the-world-the-latest-implausible-farming-miracle>
 – and supporters –Hunter Lovins also in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/aug/19/grazing-livestock-climate-change-george-monbiot-allan-savory>
.)

Meantime, none of this seems likely to mollify the outraged vegans and it is 
unclear how this will affect the Engelhart empire, which serves 28,000 meals a 
day and offers an array of events and packages for families and corporations 
alike on their Be Love farm. Whether parents will still want their kids to pet 
Carmella and Cinnamon, two of their cows, after learning about the freezer full 
of meat is unclear.


 * This article was updated on 6 May to change a reference to Werner Erhard’s 
self-realization program
 