
It’s been nearly five years since Planet Mu’s Mike Paradinas compiled Bangs & 
Works <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Z3GZnN_VTk>, plucking his favourite 
footwork tracks from Chicago’s South Side via YouTube for worldwide 
appreciation.Footwork music  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/may/27/footwork-street-dance-chicago>
and the competitive dancing with which it’s intertwined seem alien compared to 
the city’s other musical exports such as house and the hip-hop of Kanye West. 
The genre grew from speedy, repetitive ghetto house in the late 1990s and early 
2000s, yet it also borrows from drum’n’bass with its double-time clave 
triplets, syncopated toms and huge sub-bass.


 RP Boo (aka 43-year-old Kavain Space) is credited as footwork’s pioneer. In 
April, Planet Mu released Classics Vol 1, a compilation including many of Boo’s 
earliest recordings, including Baby Come On from 1997. Hot on its heels comes 
Fingers, Bank Pads & Shoe Prints, which mixes his nascent footwork with new 
material.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Ffancy-footwork-how-chicagos-juke-scene-found-its-feet-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F29%2F1435601307019%2F1a05d4a8-21e0-47ae-a6c8-65a58edbb3eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fancy%20footwork%3A%20how%20Chicago's%20juke%20scene%20found%20its%20feet%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Ffancy-footwork-how-chicagos-juke-scene-found-its-feet-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fancy%20footwork%3A%20how%20Chicago%27s%20juke%20scene%20found%20its%20feet%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Ffancy-footwork-how-chicagos-juke-scene-found-its-feet-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F29%2F1435601307019%2F1a05d4a8-21e0-47ae-a6c8-65a58edbb3eb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fancy footwork: RP Boo in full flow. Photograph: William Glasspiegel 
“It packs good energy,” says Boo, as we sit under the vaulted ceiling of the 
Chicago Cultural Center, a 19th-century beaux-arts library downtown. Paradinas 
discovered some of the album tracks in Boo’s online mixes, choosing ones that 
were especially battle-oriented.

RP Boo: Fingers, Bank Pads and Shoe Prints review – forward-looking footwork 
followup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/25/rp-boo-fingers-bank-pads-and-shoe-prints-review-footwork>
“That’s what was kind of missing in previous footwork albums,” Boo explains. 
“The battles and the intensity and the energy that he [Paradinas] felt, so 
that’s what we’re trying to target now.” On Finish Line D’jayz, the taunt 
“Mother-fuck your favorite DJ!” loops as intricate drum patterns shift. Asked 
if he’s calling anyone out or merely seeking to inspire dancers, Boo replies: 
“It’s a tactic to get them fired up. That’s the whole purpose. This is about 
them listening and becoming a part of it. Back years ago, they used to do diss 
tracks, but for me to do a diss track you would have to do something that was 
out of the ordinary for me to just come at you.”

Since leaving a job at the home-improvement store Lowe’s just two years ago, 
RP Boo has been touring the world, spinning in the UK, Japan, Poland, Spain, 
Denmark and the Netherlands. “The scene has made a shift change. It got quiet 
in Chicago, but it grew tremendously outside of Chicago and worldwide,” says 
Boo.

Nowadays Boo gets inspiration from more than just dancers. “I get more of my 
inspiration by listening to music … because I know where the dancers [are] at 
right now,” says Boo. “It’s not aboutthe battles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/06/how-to-dance-footwork> no more. 
They want to be on stage to showcase, so it’s all about what can I bring and 
give new to them, because they’re fast learners now.”

RP Boo is encouraged by footwork’s worldwide appeal. “When I seen it coming 
from Poland, that was amazing,” he enthuses. Boo’s vision of the future is 
“seeing more people worldwide getting out and being able to stand in the middle 
of the crowd and just jump up and down, but then hit that switch at any given 
moment and bust a footwork move and have it down pat, then jump back out and 
enjoy the music”.

But the scene was dealt a huge blow when arguably its most recognisable figure 
– DJ Rashad –died suddenly at the age of 34 in April 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/08/dj-rashad-died-drug-overdose-autopsy-confirms>
, six months after releasing his critically acclaimed album Double Cup for 
Hyperdub. DJ Taye says Rashad’s death left a void. “The void is there, but it 
just feels timeless,” he said. “I just feel like he will just be here forever, 
his soul will be here forever.” Rashad’s presence in the scene is still felt, 
so much so that everyone speaks about him in the present tense.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Ffancy-footwork-how-chicagos-juke-scene-found-its-feet-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F29%2F1435595485182%2Fc87ef8d4-047c-4ddd-b302-9b72f1a9cb11-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fancy%20footwork%3A%20how%20Chicago's%20juke%20scene%20found%20its%20feet%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Ffancy-footwork-how-chicagos-juke-scene-found-its-feet-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fancy%20footwork%3A%20how%20Chicago%27s%20juke%20scene%20found%20its%20feet%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Ffancy-footwork-how-chicagos-juke-scene-found-its-feet-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F29%2F1435595485182%2Fc87ef8d4-047c-4ddd-b302-9b72f1a9cb11-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Thirty-three revolutions per minute: DJ Spinn. Photograph: Ashes57 
Childhood friend DJ Spinn, who, with Rashad, was one of the Teklife crew’s 
founding members, is working on his first album now. I met Spinn in the lobby 
of an apartment building near the University of Chicago. Asked if he feels any 
pressure to change his music to appeal to a European audience, Spinn explains: 
“I’ve got more pressure making an album better than Double Cup. I don’t even 
want to think about it in that fashion, but me and Rashad know that’s just how 
it goes, we’ve got to make albums better than our last project.”

It’s a big gumbo pot of music right now, and that’s what’s real interesting 
about everything and the future
DJ Spinn 
 “Right now I feel there’s really no genres,” Spinn elaborates. “Everything’s 
blending with each other – hip-hop and dance music and EDM and funk and R&B – 
it’s a big gumbo pot of music right now, and that’s what’s real interesting 
about everything and the future of what we’re going to do.”

An R&B collaboration between Jessy Lanza, DJ Spinn and Taso, You Never Show 
Your Love, is due out on Hyperdub in late July, followed by a new EP, Off That 
Loud, in September. Spinn describes the latter as “Four little joints from me, 
Rashad and Danny Brown – a ‘Dubby’ joint, that’s a big one right now for us. 
I’ve got just some classic footwork on there and some trappy, chanty stuff – 
just some party stuff.”

Spinn’s work-in-progress album for Hyperdub is tentatively titled 420 Vision. 
Asked for his inspiration, Spinn laughs: “[It’s] all about medicinal, 
recreational and being positive. It’s really about positivity, though. My 
vision is that I see in a different way now from before because I ain’t 
tripping off of the old stuff and all of the demons.”

The demons he’s referring to are the violence that has made Chicago a city 
known more for its high rate of gang violence and murders than its rich musical 
history.

“We want to get our city out of the negative light,” says Spinn. “So much 
negative light is being shone. There’s positive light, too, and we want people 
to see that. It’s crazy in the streets, but if you stay determined, you stay 
consistent, and you stay positive, anything can happen. You can make it out of 
any situation.”

As DJ Spinn continues to build Teklife’s legacy, he feels it’s important to 
give back to the scene. “It’s all about us helping each other get to that next 
step. If we make those opportunities for us, I feel we could definitely spread 
that out, and we could see a bigger re-emergence of the scene in Chicago, like 
on some Beat Street-type stuff,” Spinn explains. “That’s what I want to see … 
footwork crews. I want more DJs, I want more producers to be out here.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Ffancy-footwork-how-chicagos-juke-scene-found-its-feet-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F29%2F1435595266280%2F0425bd38-a05b-4b6e-afc5-1a3d53356cd4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fancy%20footwork%3A%20how%20Chicago's%20juke%20scene%20found%20its%20feet%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Ffancy-footwork-how-chicagos-juke-scene-found-its-feet-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fancy%20footwork%3A%20how%20Chicago%27s%20juke%20scene%20found%20its%20feet%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F30%2Ffancy-footwork-how-chicagos-juke-scene-found-its-feet-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F29%2F1435595266280%2F0425bd38-a05b-4b6e-afc5-1a3d53356cd4-1020x612.jpeg>
 DJ Taye, Teklife’s youngest member. Photograph: Matthew Aviginone/Hyperdub 
 At 20, DJ Taye is the youngest member of Teklife. He began making rap beats 
at the age of 12, then began dancing and composing footwork at the age of 14. 
At 16, he tested out his music at a Ghettoteknitianz battle and was invited by 
Spinn and Rashad to join what would later become Teklife. Taye self-released 
over 60 tracks on Bandcamp before signing to Hyperdub. His first EP, Break It 
Down, is due out in September.

I Skyped with Taye while he was touring in Belgrade with Serbian Teklife 
members Jackie Dagger and Feloneezy, holding his phone selfie-style in what 
appeared to be a surreally creepy hotel corridor. When Taye first heard 
footwork, he was surprised it wasn’t bigger in Chicago. “Why is this music not 
mainstream, why is it not being showcased?” Taye asked. “It’s just so unique. 
I’ve never heard anything like it once I heard tracks.”

Most Chicago youths Taye’s age see footwork as the past, preferring to listen 
to drill music or pop radio. “It just seems like Chicago is the only place 
that’s not really trying to embrace it,” Taye admits.

Jlin: Dark Energy review – footwork star pushing the genre forward
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/16/jlin-dark-energy-review> 
Jlin (27-year-old Jerrilynn Patton) is one of footwork’s emerging talents. She 
was born and raised in Gary, Indiana, about 30 miles from downtown Chicago. For 
the past three years she’s had a day job in portable annealing, driving a 
tractor at a steel mill.

While Jlin grew up listening to jazz, R&B and classical music at home, she was 
drawn to footwork online in the early 2000s. “MySpace helped a lot, and [social 
media streaming site] Imeem at that time, because people were uploading the 
tracks that you could listen to,” she recalls. She also watched online videos 
from Wala Cam. “They were displaying and showcasing and battling … It was like 
a soap opera for me.”

Asked what initially appealed to her about footwork, Jlin immediately 
responds: “The music and the matching of the movement – how well-synced it was. 
It’s almost like the interchanging of two energies, the dance and the sound, 
the frequency and vibration. Just constant exchange, constant exchange.”

It’s like distant family coming together to find out now who you are
Jlin 
Before long Jlin began crafting her own tracks, drawing on a wide variety of 
influences. The first composition on her recent album Dark Energy for Planet Mu 
was inspired by an entire day watching Alvin Ailey performances. “I studied the 
way they moved, everything. I just looked, and then the next day Black Ballet 
started coming together, started forming,” she explains. “It started making 
sense.”

The process of putting the album together involved trial and error, but 
especially risk. “Failing is important. You have to fail. A lot of people, they 
look at you where you are. So many people want that instant gratification of 
what they think success is, but in actuality, your failure is more important 
than your success,” Jlin reveals. “I know it’s going to sound really, really 
crazy, but I have this analogy of jumping off of a cliff, of not being afraid 
to jump, but you voluntarily take a leap, not knowing what the outcome is … I 
am in complete freefall right now.”

Late last year, Jlin’s music provided the soundtrack for a Rick Owens’s 
fashion show in Paris. In August she makes her debut as a live proposition at 
MoMA PS1 in New York City, then in October she is off to the Unsound Festival 
in Kraków, Poland.

Jlin isn’t surprised by footwork’s success overseas. “It’s time for the arts 
to come together. It’s all very related. It got separated when you started 
categorising,” Jlin explains. “It’s like distant family coming together to find 
out now who you are.”

Like RP Boo, DJ Spinn, and DJ Taye, Jlin sees no sign of footwork slowing its 
progression. Asked if she thinks about dancers when she is composing, she 
admits, “It depends. I used to all of the time, but now sometimes that’s not 
even the focus … I really go for impact.” Footwork’s impact is being felt from 
Chicago to Belgrade.

 * RP Boo’s Fingers, Bank Pads & Shoe Prints is out now on Planet Mu; DJ 
Spinn, Taso and Jessy Lanza’s You Never Show Your Love is out 24 July on 
Hyperdub  