
Modern farming has been devastating for most wild plants, from herbicides, 
fertilisers, drainage, and much more – but it doesn’t have to be that way. Mike 
and Nick Kettlewell farm some 400 acres in the Oxfordshire Cotswolds and have 
left wildflower margins beside fields and planted small copses.

They have converted arable land to grassland to encourage wild flowers to 
return, such asbee orchids <http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/bee-orchid> 
and cowslips. Hedges are cut every three years and grow tall, rich in flowers 
and fruit, and new hedges planted with traditional species such as wild pear 
and crab apple.

Wild flower meadows burst into life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/25/wild-flower-meadows-spring-plantwatch>
Vine House Farm 
<http://www.wildlifebcn.org/how-you-can-help/fundraise-us/vine-house-farm> in 
the fenlands of Lincolnshire is an oasis of wild plants in a desert of 
intensive agriculture. Farmer Nicholas Watts was shocked at the numbers of 
birds that had disappeared on his land, so he planted native hedgerows. “Where 
possible we have planted two hedges, side by side, about ten yards apart, thus 
creating a fantastic wildlife corridor,” he said.

He stopped filling in dykes, hugely important for plants and wildlife, and 
field margins were left untouched to encourage arable weeds such asfat hen 
<http://www.ukwildflowers.com/Web_pages/chenopodium_album_fat_hen.htm>, willow 
weed andknotgrass <http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/knotgrass>. But the 
single biggest factor that boosted plant life was organic farming – herbicides 
had drastically reduced the number and diversity of both plants and insects.

In the Dales of Yorkshire, Lower Winskill Farm <http://www.lowerwinskill.co.uk>
 brought the return of typical meadow flowers by carefully controlling when the 
pastures are grazed. And on the Isle of Mull, an overgrazed farm cut the 
numbers of sheep and brought in a small herd of Aberdeen Angus cattle, all of 
which helped the return of wild flowers, including 15 species of orchids.
 