
Whether you’re handmaking products or want to start a new line of clothes or 
accessories, finding the right factory for your business is essential for 
success.

When you start a creative business, one of the last things on your mind is 
logistics. Your head is too full of colours, designs, mood boards and ideas to 
spare much room for the less exciting stuff. But, as everyone knows deep down, 
the boring bits are what keeps a business thriving. And when it comes to 
clothes, accessories or anything related to fashion, nailing your production 
process might not be the most glamorous task, but it’s certainly the most 
vital. Here are the steps to follow to find the right factory for you:

1. Work out what you want that factory to do

Do you want a factory to simply assemble materials you’ve bought to a pattern 
you’ve designed, or do you want it to source materials, create a pattern and 
assemble it all from your sketch? If it’s the former, choose a factory that 
does CMT (cut-measure-trim), and if it’s the latter, choose FPP (full package 
production). FPP is inevitably more expensive, but can be the right choice for 
a designer with little or no garment-making or pattern-cutting skills. CMT 
tends to work best for designers who already have a line of products and have 
been making them from their kitchen table.

2. Do incredibly thorough research

Getting recommendations from your friends, peers or network is the best way to 
find a good-quality, reliable factory. Alas, the best factories are so highly 
prized that many designers are loath to share their contacts. Get what you can 
from them; even knowing the city that they produce in can help you narrow your 
search, as you might find a district that specialises in what you do. 
Alternatively, visit dedicated manufacturing websites that can help you filter 
results. In the UK,Let’s Make It Here <http://www.letsmakeithere.org/> is a 
database of manufacturers that you can search by category, keyword or location, 
while in the USMaker’s Row <http://makersrow.com/> can help. Visit local 
manufacturing trade shows too; theDISC Manufacturers’ Trade Show 
<http://www.fashion-manufacturing.com/tradeshow/> is held twice a year in 
London.

3. Short-list, and start local

After doing your research you will inevitably have a huge list of potential 
factories to work with all around the world. Unless you have an endless supply 
of cash, you won’t be able to sample with all of them, so you need to cut your 
list down. The best production managers suggest you try and keep it as local to 
you as possible, as this eliminates overseas shipping logistics and customs 
issues. Also, it means you are closer to the factory and can do first visits, 
second visits and quality control more easily. For less experienced designers 
it can also offer peace of mind – being closer to where your product is being 
made makes you feel more in control of your business. Cost is a factor, of 
course, and especially in the UK and US, prices are higher because of minimum 
wages, strict legal requirements and other factors. How important this is to 
you is something only you can decide, but it’s worth noting that many British 
brands, such as Marks and Spencer, arereturning to the UK for their 
manufacturing 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/8c37ac3a-2946-11e4-8b81-00144feabdc0.html#slide0>.

Location isn’t the only thing to consider, however. Your perfect factory will 
have experience of producing the types of clothing and garments you want made, 
using the materials you want to make them with. Check which areas it 
specialises in – bags, womenswear etc – and what machinery it has. (The more 
clued up you are about the procedures needed to make your products, the easier 
this latter part will be.) You’ll also need to know about minimums: how many 
products you will have to order to secure a relationship, schedules and pricing.

4. Pay them a visit

After you’ve found out all the above, a visit is the next step - and it’s 
vital you do this. Even if you’ve met the manager at a trade show and seen 
samples of their work or exchanged a hundred emails, you won’t get a true sense 
of the place until you step through the door. And your request will be 
expected; it’s usual for designers to inspect the factories they’ll be working 
with and the request demonstrates to the manager that you are professional, 
experienced and you understand the process. On this visit, be sure to discuss 
prices, schedules and minimums. Ahead of time you should have an understanding 
of how much you want to pay and how much they’d like to charge, and this is the 
time to negotiate.

Read more stories like this


Ten ways to make better business decisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2014/sep/02/ten-ways-make-better-business-decisions>


Introducing new products - the business benefits of diversifying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2014/aug/15/small-business-benefits-diversifying>

The steps small businesses should take when chasing debt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2014/aug/28/small-businesses-chasing-debt>

Perri Lewis is content director at Mastered <https://www.mastered.com/>, an 
online education platform. Mastered is hosting afree masterclass in garment 
manufacturing <https://www.mastered.com/live_lessons/10> on Tuesday 23 
September.

This content has been sponsored by E.ON, whose brand it displays. All content 
is editorially independent.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 