
Shortly before nine on a bright autumn morning in Berlin, Geoffrey Kiprono 
Mutai <http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/kenya/geoffrey-kiprono-mutai-240907> 
prepared to run a marathon faster than any human being – even he – had run 
before. It was a wild, audacious proposition, to propel one’s body to such a 
ragged extreme, and he felt the walls of his quest closing in on him.

Mutai is 170cm tall and weighs 57kg. He has a wide, expressive face, with a 
high forehead, elfin ears and long, gleaming teeth. Most often, you find him 
amiable, amused, desirous of news and gossip, a flashy smile close by. But now 
he looked as vulnerable as a foundling.

There were two dozen professional athletes on either side of him on the start 
line, and around 41,000 runners behind. Penned together, they bobbed and lilted 
like a gentle sea against a harbour wall. Mutai said his habitual prayers – for 
clemency, for strength and courage, for his stringy legs, veterans of tens of 
thousands of miles of training, to carry him another 26 miles and 385 yards.

The official marathon world record on that September morning in 2012 was two 
hours, three minutes, 38 seconds, set the previous year in Berlin byPatrick 
Makau <http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/kenya/patrick-makau-musyoki-224348> of 
Kenya. But Mutai was not interested in 2:03:38. Although he made no 
announcement of his intentions, he wished not only to break Makau’s world 
record, but to annihilate it.

His grievance stretched back to eighteen months before, when he had won the 
2011 Boston marathon in an astonishing 2:03:02 – a course record by nearly 
three minutes. But it wouldn’t stand as an official world record: despite being 
the oldest continuously contested marathon in the world, Boston does not count 
for world record purposes. (A world record must be run on a looped course, with 
the start and finish separated by no more than 50% of the 42.2km distance; the 
net downhill must be no greater than one metre per kilometre.) Mutai believed 
something precious had been stolen from him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D03RwjAuJpTY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D03RwjAuJpTY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D03RwjAuJpTY&media=>
 Dennis Kimetto posts a world-record time in Berlin, in 2014. 
As he stood at the head of the vast herd, high banks of loudspeakers began to 
play the kind of jangling electronic string music you hear in game shows. Over 
these shifting arpeggios came the sound of a stout man with a microphone, 
counting down the final seconds before the gun. “Ten!” he shouted, in English. 
“Nine! Eight! Seven…” Mutai stood still, his chest pushed forward in 
anticipation of movement.

***

For the past two decades, athletes from Kenya and Ethiopia have utterly 
dominated the professional marathon. In the Nandi Hills of Kenya, or on the 
training trails of Addis Ababa, athletes know each other not just by name but 
by personal best. That guy is a two‑oh-eight. This one is a two‑oh-five.

Just how low will those numbers fall? Right now, the world record for the 
marathon is 2:02:57, set byDennis Kimetto 
<http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/kenya/dennis-kipruto-kimetto-265313> of Kenya in 
Berlin last year. Is a sub-two-hour marathon possible? In 1986, a medical 
student calledMike Joyner 
<http://www.mayo.edu/research/faculty/joyner-michael-j-m-d/bio-00078027> began 
considering this question. He’d been working on papers that investigated how 
measures such as lactate threshold, running economy and lung capacity (all of 
which have a limiting effect on running speed and endurance) related to 
athletic performance. What would it be possible for a human being to run, he 
wondered, if he had the best possible physiological values? If his heart and 
lungs and legs were the strongest and most efficient they could be? He drew up 
a model and came to a surprisingly specific number. Given ideal conditions, and 
the ideal runner, Joyner concluded that the best time in which a marathon could 
be completed was one hour, 57 minutes, 58 seconds.

How to run a marathon in your mind: 12 tips for winning the mental fight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2015/apr/16/how-to-run-a-marathon-12-tips-mental-fight>
He wrote up his findings and eventually his paper 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2022559>, peer-reviewed and rubber-stamped, 
appeared in the Journal of Applied Physiology in 1991. At the time, the world’s 
fastest marathon was 2:06:50, and the two-hour mark existed only at the far 
reaches of the imagination: the Narnia of distance running. But Joyner’s paper 
became the seminal document in the debate. He is now a professor of 
anaesthesiology and has been working at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, 
Minnesota, since 1987, on a wide range of topics, from gene studies to 
cardiovascular disease; but none of his work has stuck to him as much as his 
famous 1991 paper.

Why does it matter whether the sub-two-hour marathon is possible? And, if it 
is possible, what will it mean when the first 1:59:59 marathon is run? At one 
level, the achievement will signify nothing. The marathon length is a scruffy 
figure, fixed by the Olympic Committee only in 1921, to match the course of the 
1908 London Olympic marathon, which was itself designed to accommodate the 
peculiar viewing demands of the British royal family. (The royals wished to see 
the race start underneath a terrace at Windsor Castle, so their children could 
watch; for their benefit, the race was also stretched at the other end to 
include a full lap of the old White City stadium.) Why should we care if some 
extraordinary person can run this arbitrary distance in just over, or just 
under, two hours?

In Kenya, athletes know each other not just by names but by personal bests: 
'He's a two-oh-eight. He's a two-oh-five'

Nobody finds the marathon easy – even professionals, especially professionals. 
The distance is democratic. It has become an event against which hordes of 
people – fat people, thin people, people crooked by time and people sprightly 
as foals, rich people and people in need – test themselves. There are now more 
than 500 marathons all over the world, and more competitors than at any time in 
the history of the sport.

The two-hour debate is irresistible. It arises every time a man breaks the 
marathon world record. In 2003, the KenyanPaul Tergat 
<http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/kenya/paul-tergat-9745> crested the tape at the 
Berlin marathon in 2:04:55. (Before that race, only “world bests” were 
recognised. Tergat’s time, which crushedKhalid Khannouchi 
<http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/united-states/khalid-khannouchi-133584>’s 
17-month-old world best by 43 seconds, was the first ratified marathon “world 
record”.) At the post-race press conference, Tergat was asked the question: 
could someone break the two-hour barrier? “I believe records are set to be 
broken, and to fall lower is possible,” he said. “But what remains impossible 
is running a marathon in under two hours.” He smiled, and added: “Maybe time 
will chide me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435075576027%2Fad78db57-68a1-4edd-be54-9de2a91fbfea-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fast%20times%3A%20what%20will%20it%20take%20to%20run%20the%20marathon%20in%20under%20two%20hours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fast%20times%3A%20what%20will%20it%20take%20to%20run%20the%20marathon%20in%20under%20two%20hours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435075576027%2Fad78db57-68a1-4edd-be54-9de2a91fbfea-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Former world record holder Paul Tergat (fourth from left) trains at altitude 
in the Ngong Hills in Kenya, in 2007. Photograph: John Gichigi/Getty Images 
If Tergat was sceptical, you could see why. He was reflecting on the abyss 
into which he had just pushed his own body in order to run 2:04:55. The 
prospect of running a whole five minutes faster than this was unfathomable, too 
much slack for the brain to handle. But nobody was suggesting a 1:59:59 
marathon would be reached in one giant leap. Patrick Makau’s 2011 world record, 
2:03:38, beatHaile Gebrselassie 
<http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/ethiopia/haile-gebrselassie-8774>’s 2:03:59 from 
2008 by 21 seconds, which in turn beat Gebrselassie’s previous best from 2007 
by 27 seconds, which beat Tergat’s landmark of 2:04:55.

Tim Noakes, one of the world’s leading exercise physiologists, and the author 
of the influential bookLore Of Running 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lore-of-running.html>, believes that these 
incremental advances are connected to how the brains of top athletes 
communicate with their bodies. “When you start running,” he says, “you know 
what the world record is, so you don’t have to run 10 minutes faster than the 
world record. Your whole focus is to run one second faster than the world 
record. That’s what your brain is keyed in on. And that programming occurs all 
the time in running and is terribly important.”

The brains of elite athletes are only as obstructive as they are programmed to 
be – as one recent experiment showed. In 2011, Professor Kevin Thompson of the 
University of Northumbria assembled a group of enthusiastic bike riders fora 
laboratory test <http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2011/10/111017075514.htm>
. These cyclists were placed on stationary bikes in front of screens, hooked up 
to oxygen monitors, and asked to race a computer-generated cyclist avatar. Each 
rider had previously set a personal best for a 4,000m time trial on the 
machine. The avatar they were now racing represented that personal best.

'Records are set to be broken,' Tergat said, 'but what remains impossible is 
running a marathon in under two hours'

Or so these guinea pig cyclists thought. In fact, Thompson was lying. He had 
set the avatar to race 2% faster than their personal bests, because he wanted 
to know if an athlete’s body could be tricked into performing better. It was 
his belief that even world-class performers, who thought they were regulating 
their energy output to their absolute maximum, possessed a “reserve” of around 
2% that could be tapped into, given the right motivation (or a little 
deception).

Thompson was right. Almost all the cyclists finished ahead of the avatar.

If the sub-two-hour marathon is reached, it will be in such baby steps – each 
one taken by a member of the tiny, elite fraternity of athletes with the talent 
and industry to inch the sport closer to the impossible marathon, world record 
by world record.

***

Within 5km of the start line in Berlin in 2012, a disaster occurred: the 
display on the pace car froze. It showed 2:50 per kilometre – a two-hour 
marathon pace. In fact, the leading runners were clocking nearly three-minute 
kilometres, which would be good enough only for a 2.06 finish. It was a tiny 
difference, and Mutai and his fellow runners soon understood the problem, but 
the elite marathon is a sport of tiny margins. The fastest times are achieved 
when races are run at an even pace from start to finish, or with a “negative” 
split, with the second half slightly faster than the first. Start the race too 
fast and you’ll kill a record attempt stone dead. Start too slow and you’ll 
have to make up too much ground.

Mutai was now in the second category. He reached halfway in 62:12. By his own 
recollection, it was only then that he seriously considered the scale of the 
challenge confronting him. Having run the first half 42 seconds slower than he 
had hoped, he understood dimly that the sub‑2:03 marathon was gone already. But 
he still believed he had a shot at Makau’s world record of 2:03:38. In order to 
break it, he would need to run the second half of the race in 61:26. Only two 
men in history had run that fast in the second half of a marathon: the Brazilian
Ronaldo da Costa <http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/brazil/ronaldo-da-costa-10416>, 
in Berlin, in 2003, after a sluggish first half; and Mutai himself, in Boston, 
in 2011. The question was: did Mutai have the legs?

In the next 10km, just as the course rose slightly in gradient, he caught 
fire. At 25km, as planned, two “rabbits” (athletes who for reasons of schedule, 
finance or talent are paid a few thousand dollars to run a limited section as 
pacemakers) dropped out, leaving the lead group paced by only one man:Victor 
Kipchirchir <http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/kenya/victor-kipchirchir-lagat-250010>
, a training partner of Mutai.

The pace quickened. Jonathan Maiyo 
<http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/kenya/jonathan-kiplimo-maiyo-234274> felt tight 
and began to weaken. He was soon dropped from the lead group.Geoffrey Kamworor 
<http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/kenya/geoffrey-kipsang-kamworor-262444> also 
failed to respond to the rising pace in his first marathon and lost touch with 
the leaders shortly afterwards. At 30km, the final rabbit, Kipchirchir, made 
his scheduled exit.

Now it was only Mutai and his training partner Dennis Kimetto, head to head 
for the final quarter of the race. As they had done many times together, at an 
altitude of nearly 9,000ft (2,700m) on the rough hills around their base in the 
forests of Kenya, they drove each other on. From 30km to 35km, the pair ran a 
14:18 split, which is absurdly fast. (A whole marathon run at this pace would 
finish in two hours and 40 seconds.)

Mutai's heart pistoned at over 160bpm. His lungs bellowed half a gallon with 
each breath. He took three strides a second

As Mutai led the charge, he dipped his head in trademark fashion and a hint of 
a snarl appeared at the corner of his mouth – a look he refers to as, “Now, 
business.” Within his body, there was a tumult of exertion. His heart pistoned 
at over 160 beats a minute. His lungs bellowed half a gallon with every breath. 
He took three strides a second. In his cells, the complex process powering his 
heart and lungs and legs – the burning and resynthesising of adenosine 
triphosphate – created three times as much heat as energy. And so he was hot, 
too hot. His body, losing around three litres of sweat an hour, grew slick with 
moisture. Lactic acid began to singe his muscles. Everything but his conscious 
mind screamed, “Stop!” And still he ran.

How does it feel to travel so fast, so late in a marathon? Mutai described the 
sensation as “fighting inside”, as if your body is at war with itself. Another 
former runner said it is like putting your hand in a bowl of hot water: you 
have to keep your hand in, while the water just keeps getting hotter and hotter 
– take your hand out and you lose the race.

Mutai is, of course, accustomed to these sensations. He later told me that he 
drew strength from the crowds that lined the roads. He could feel that “people 
love me” and he was determined to repay that affection with a Herculean effort, 
to consciously override the signals his body was sending him. “I sacrificed 
myself,” he remembered.

***

There are many observers who look at the times now being run in the marathon 
with a raised eyebrow. Dope infects almost all professional sports. For every 
athlete who wishes to ascend to the highest plane of competition under his own 
steam, there will always be athletes who desire a short cut. Marathon running 
is no different. (Tom Hicks won the St Louis Olympic marathon jacked up on 
strychnine and brandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/may/30/drugsinsport.olympicgames>, and 
it nearly killed him. That was in 1904.)

There was once an Elysian view of the sport of distance running that wilfully 
exempted east Africans from the temptations of others. Journalists saw the 
humble manner in which Kenyan and Ethiopian runners lived, and concluded that 
cheating in such circumstances simply wasn’t possible. This myth has now been 
exploded. In the past two years, several east African distance runners have 
tested positive for banned performance-enhancing drugs, including steroids and 
the hormone erythropoietin, or EPO, which stimulates red blood cell production 
and the transport of oxygen into the bloodstream.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435077617764%2F7cd59f6f-fe68-4a38-a4f6-3773ae0ec401-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fast%20times%3A%20what%20will%20it%20take%20to%20run%20the%20marathon%20in%20under%20two%20hours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fast%20times%3A%20what%20will%20it%20take%20to%20run%20the%20marathon%20in%20under%20two%20hours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435077617764%2F7cd59f6f-fe68-4a38-a4f6-3773ae0ec401-1020x612.jpeg>
 Urine samples are tested for EPOor the hormone erythropoietin in a Swiss 
laboratory. Photograph: Fabrice Coffrini/AP 
Some of the busted athletes have been well-known figures, but most have been 
nobodies. Three years ago, I sat in the twin room of a four-star hotel in which 
two low-level Kenyan runners were preparing their vests and bibs for the 
following day’s marathon. They wanted to talk to me about drugs, and spoke on 
condition of anonymity. Their personal bests were relatively modest in Kenyan 
terms, and they barely covered their expenses to travel to a race in a bleak 
European capital with only a few thousand euros in prize money. They talked for 
a long time as they sat on their beds, with the burble of the television and 
the sound of rain against the windows in the background.

The two Kenyan runners, whose personal bests were above 2:10, said anything 
below 2:06 was 'suspicious'

The two runners said that, in Kenya, there were “so many bad doctors, you 
can’t count them”. They described a system whereby these “doctors”, who were 
mostly quack pharmacists based in the town of Eldoret, would sell an athlete a 
course of performance-enhancing drugs in exchange for either cash or a share of 
their winnings. The drug in question, although they didn’t name it explicitly, 
seemed to be EPO. (They referred often to a drug for “the blood”.) And the 
relationship between the athlete and the “doctor”, said the two runners, was 
“24/7”: they were always on hand to provide masking agents, should the testers 
come calling.

Most of this information was talked about openly enough, especially among 
European agents and coaches (although before my meeting with the two athletes, 
I had never heard such a detailed description of the process). Some Kenyan 
stars also discussed the problem in a roundabout way. In the narratives of many 
high-profile athletes, doping was seen as something that “lazy” runners did in 
lieu of training. This was a wilfully wrongheaded view. Asthe Tour de France 
scandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2013/jun/28/impossible-to-win-tour-de-france-without-doping-armstrong>
 showed, drugs are used for precisely the opposite reason: to train and race 
harder.

The two athletes in the hotel named almost every star in Kenyan marathon 
running and accused them of doping. The allegations were shocking, though the 
basis for their specific charges seemed thin. They simply didn’t believe it was 
possible to run the spectacular times that had now become commonplace on the 
marathon circuit without illegal assistance. These two runners, who had 
personal bests above 2:10, said anything below 2:06 for a marathon was 
“suspicious”.

One of the runners laughed when I expressed surprise. “You think you can run 
two‑oh-three, only with blood?” he asked. Well, yes, I did think that. I still 
do.

From a layman’s perspective, it’s not obvious what kind of edge EPO would give 
a Kenyan who has already spent his whole life running at altitude. The number 
of red blood cells in his system is already likely to be high, and there is a 
limit to how many a person can have before he or she is at risk of a heart 
attack or stroke. (This dangerous abundance of red blood cells is known in 
medicine as polycythaemia.)

But this apparent common sense is wrong: EPO does help 
altitude-born-and-raised Kenyans.A recent study by the University of Glasgow 
<https://rbgsocialclub.wordpress.com/2012/09/06/kenyas-elite-runners-a-study-on-the-diet-of-african-champions/>
 conducted tests on a group of Scottish runners, and Kenyan athletes from 
running country, and found that their performances benefited equally from a 
course of EPO.

If there were a wonder drug for distance runners, it would be one that aided 
recovery. Marathoners have always logged extraordinary mileage, and their 
biggest problem is staying healthy for races. The “high volume, high intensity” 
philosophy requires a mixture of speedwork sessions lasting an hour or more in 
order to build resistance to a fast race pace, and long runs at a high tempo. 
Being able to complete such punishing sessions day after day is the key to 
staying competitive. So it is in the field of recovery that the marathon is 
most vulnerable to cheating. In theory, athletes could stop taking illicit 
substances weeks before a race, and show up to a marathon clean – with hundreds 
of high-quality, ill-gotten miles in their legs.

Some former runners believe the elite have been doping for years. These views 
come from surprising places. In 1999, for instance, Mo Farah’s coach, Alberto 
Salazar –currently under extreme pressure after the BBC and ProPublica linked 
his athletes to banned substances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/12/ed-warner-uk-athletics-alberto-salazar>
 – gave a presentation to the Duke Conference on Doping in Sport in which he 
made several fascinating remarks, not least this one: “I believe that it is 
currently difficult to be among the top five in the world in any of the 
distance events without using EPO or human growth hormone. While some of the 
top athletes may be clean, so many athletes are running so fast that their 
performances are suspect. This is compounded for me by the fact that the times 
these athletes are running just happen to coincide exactly with what top 
exercise physiologists have calculated taking EPO would produce.”

In 1999, you could have an argument about who the top five distance runners 
were, but there was no doubt about the top two: Haile Gebrselassie of Ethiopia 
andPaul Tergat <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paul-tergat> of Kenya. Was 
Salazar saying he believed they were dopers? (Salazar told me last year that he 
no longer stands by the comments he made in 1999, and that he “did not 
reference the athletes you call out”.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435076491698%2F5c9ef274-31f1-44d7-80ce-5fc7ec548d04-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fast%20times%3A%20what%20will%20it%20take%20to%20run%20the%20marathon%20in%20under%20two%20hours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fast%20times%3A%20what%20will%20it%20take%20to%20run%20the%20marathon%20in%20under%20two%20hours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435076491698%2F5c9ef274-31f1-44d7-80ce-5fc7ec548d04-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In 1999, coach Alberto Salazar (pictured flanked by Galen Rupp and Mo Farah) 
said he thought it ‘difficult’ to be in the top five for any distance event 
without using banned substances. Photograph: Michael Steele/Getty Images 
Salazar has long been the subject of scrutiny about his methods. In 2013, a 
Wall Street Journal investigation into his (and his sponsor Nike’s) 
relationship with a doctor named Jeffrey Brown 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424127887323550604578412913149043072> found 
that many of Salazar’s athletes had been treated by Brown for a syndrome called 
“hypothyroidism”.Galen Rupp 
<http://www.iaaf.org/athletes/united-states/galen-rupp-196507>, Mo Farah’s 
training partner and 10,000m Olympic silver medallist in 2012, was one such 
patient. Treating athletes for hypothyroidism is not illegal, and it’s also not 
clear what kind of benefit it would give an elite runner. (The treatment is a 
synthetic hormone called levothyroxine – not a banned substance, though it has 
been suggested it helps with swift weight loss.) But the very fact that so many 
of Salazar’s charges have been diagnosed with the condition has caused 
suspicion. After Jos Hermens, who manages many of the best east African 
runners, watched his athletes being trounced at the 2012 Olympics by Salazar’s, 
he told a Dutch journalist, “Science has triumphed over nature.”

But what of the supposedly widespread nature of doping in east Africa? Should 
we consider every fast marathon as suspicious? What counts as suspicious? 2:06? 
2:04? 2:02? In 1991, Joyner estimated a physiological ceiling for running a 
marathon: 1:57:58. So what extra time on top of that should we allow today’s 
best runners?

For Kenyan runners, most of whom grew up poor, the prize money for one win can 
change a life

The fastest men fall under the most suspicion, which may not be fair. There is 
as much motivation for a middling talent to dope as there would be for a 
supreme one. This is true particularly for Kenyan runners, almost all of whom 
grew up dirt poor. The prize money for one win, even in a low-grade marathon, 
can change a life.

Geoffrey Mutai <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geoffrey-mutai> has fallen 
under more suspicion than most, because he has run fantastic times in an 
aggressive manner. But in the three years I spent following Mutai, staying in 
his training camp and watching him at home and at races, he was tested many 
times for blood and urine. He has never given a positive test, and I had no 
reason to suspect him of doping.

Troubled by the reputation his country’s runners were attracting, Mutai said 
he wanted more testing, more often, to prove his innocence. “I am clean,” he 
told me. “I want all athletes in Kenya to remain clean. Any time, anywhere, I 
am ready for testing. It gives me pain when people see me run fast and say I 
have used drugs. If I have used them, then God take everything from me – I 
cannot enjoy it.”

You can be sure that if and when a man breaks two hours for the marathon, the 
whiff of disbelief will hang around him every day of his life.

***

At the 35km mark in Berlin, Mutai’s sacrifice appeared to have paid off. 
Despite the botched beginning, both he and Kimetto were now inside world record 
pace. All they had to do was hold on. If they ran a 2:56/km pace for the final 
7.2km of the race – which seemed, given their earlier pace, possible – the 
world record would fall to one or the other.

The path that had led Mutai to this position would have broken lesser men. The 
eldest of 11 children, he had suffered not only deep poverty, but a fractious 
relationship with his father, periods of insecurity about shelter and food, and 
a hair-raising brush with the tribal violence that scarred Kenya after the 
disputed 2007 elections. Before he had become a professional runner, he had 
worked in back-breaking jobs: smashing rocks in a quarry and cutting down 
trees. As a pro, he had run 125 miles a week, up and down hills, at altitude.

Now, here he was, at the quickest marathon in the world, with a chance to 
break the world record. The opportunity might not come around again. The elite 
marathon is a brutal sport. The best runners compete only twice a year at the 
full marathon. There are only a handful of courses, and a handful of days, upon 
which to run fast. This was one of them. He and his training partner, Kimetto, 
were half an hour from glory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435159016241%2F98b53283-2325-4c14-8250-da7b59e38841-2060x759.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fast%20times%3A%20what%20will%20it%20take%20to%20run%20the%20marathon%20in%20under%20two%20hours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fast%20times%3A%20what%20will%20it%20take%20to%20run%20the%20marathon%20in%20under%20two%20hours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F24%2F1435159016241%2F98b53283-2325-4c14-8250-da7b59e38841-2060x759.jpeg>
 The fastest men on Earth: marathon world record holders over the years. 
Photograph: AFP/Getty Images (4); EPA/Getty Images; Reuters 
Perhaps inevitably, they couldn’t do it. The prodigious acceleration just 
after halfway took its toll, and by 40km, slowing markedly, both athletes were 
eight seconds outside world record pace, and spent. Mutai’s right hamstring 
began to tighten. The pain moved to his hip and back. Kimetto – 
high-shouldered, and seemingly in better shape – ran at his back.

Facing the final 2km, the pair ran into the breeze, rather slowly. They seemed 
headed for a very fast time, but not a world record. As Mutai and Kimetto ran 
through the Brandenburg Gate shoulder to shoulder, 400m from the end, the 
spectators raised their voices in anticipation of a sprint finish.

But the kick never came. In a finale in which a burst from either man would 
have sealed the race decisively, Kimetto finished the race as he had run most 
of it: just behind his colleague. Mutai raised his arms weakly as he crossed 
the line in a time of 2:04:15. Seconds later, the two men shared a limp, 
exhausted hug.

Why no sprint? There were half a million reasons why. If Kimetto had beaten 
his training partner, Mutai might have lost the $500,000 World Marathon Majors 
jackpot he was in line to win after his runs in Boston and New York the 
previous year. (Kimetto had no chance of winning that money himself, this being 
his first marathon.) Meanwhile, Kimetto was not just Mutai’s training partner. 
For the previous few years, like many in the village where he trained, he had 
been fed and housed by Mutai. If he had sprinted past his boss under the 
Brandenburg Gate, everyone in that village would have lost.Marathon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/marathon> runners are not just athletes; 
they are economies.

Any kind of arrangement between the two was vehemently denied by the athletes 
themselves, while their manager, Gerard Van de Veen, told journalists, “There 
was no deal.” Mutai told me that he and Kimetto were dog tired: neither man 
could have done anything more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435075026056%2F59462e7b-d1a6-4bd6-a189-4d9a3ca5c1d0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fast%20times%3A%20what%20will%20it%20take%20to%20run%20the%20marathon%20in%20under%20two%20hours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fast%20times%3A%20what%20will%20it%20take%20to%20run%20the%20marathon%20in%20under%20two%20hours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F27%2Fsub-two-hour-marathon-ed-caesar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F23%2F1435075026056%2F59462e7b-d1a6-4bd6-a189-4d9a3ca5c1d0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Geoffrey Mutai and Dennis Kimetto cross the line at the 2012 Berlin marathon, 
during the former’s failed bid to break 2:03. Photograph: Markus Schreiber/AP 
Mutai’s finishing time of 2:04:15 was the fastest that anybody ran in 2012. 
For the second year in a row, he was the quickest marathoner on the planet. 
These statistics brought him little comfort. He signed autographs and smiled 
for photographs, but left Berlin with the sense of an opportunity lost, of a 
tide untaken.

In September 2014, Kimetto returned to Berlin and achieved what Mutai had 
failed to do: he ran the first 2:02 marathon. Kimetto does not have Mutai’s 
grace – his stiff-backed style makes him look haughty and a trifle 
uncomfortable – but his effort was extraordinary, and his finishing time would 
have been science fiction to runners of the 1990s.

The world record is still two minutes and 57 seconds away from the two-hour 
mark. What’s 177 seconds? It’s a pop song, a long commercial break. In marathon 
terms, however, those 177 seconds are a lifetime. A marathon run in two hours 
dead requires an average of 4:35 per mile, or 2:50 per kilometre – nearly a 3% 
improvement. In the abstract, this difference seems trifling. In reality, it’s 
a chasm.

The chasm can be bridged, but it may take a reimagining of the sport to do so. 
What may need to change is not the shape of the athletes’ bodies, but the shape 
of races. If you really wanted to see how fast a man could run 26.2 miles, you 
would take them off the roads and on to a more forgiving surface. You’d allow 
pacemakers to come in and out of the race, right until the finishing line. 
You’d make sure the temperature was very cold, to combat the extreme heat that 
elite marathoners generate, and that the course was flat and entirely sheltered 
from the wind.

The world record is still 2mins 57 seconds away from the two-hour mark. It 
seems trifling, but it's a chasm

Several deep thinkers – including Mutai – have already considered what such a 
race could achieve. It might take a rich man with a flair for publicity 
(Richard Branson, perhaps) or a shoe company with a motive (Adidas, Nike) to 
see it happen. But that’s the way to break two hours. “Organise it like that,” 
Mutai told me, “and people can run crazy times.”

As a species, we are interested in outlandish feats, and our brains cleave to 
landmarks. The two-hour quest has become the sport’s Everest. Those final 177 
seconds will not fall easily. But somewhere there is a runner alive, right now, 
who has glimpsed the mountain top, and who will set his mind upon its conquest.

• This is an edited extract from Two Hours: The Quest To Run The Impossible 
Marathon, by Ed Caesar, published next month by Viking at £16.99. To order a 
copy for £12.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/308004/>, or call 0330 
333 6846. (Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only; phone orders £1.99 minimum 
p&p.)
 