
Efforts to tackle tax abuse and financial crime are at risk of being weakened 
by new European council proposals that would restrict public access to key 
company information, civil society groups have warned.

Only those with a “legitimate interest” should be able to identify a 
beneficial, or true, owner of a company in a European Union member state, 
according toa new draft text 
<http://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-15605-2016-INIT/en/pdf> on the 
EU anti-money-laundering directive.

Previous drafts have stipulated that beneficial ownership information should 
be made available to the public. The new text would allow individual countries 
to decide on their own definition of “legitimate interest”, potentially 
excluding the general public.

There has been growing pressure for EU member states to publish their own 
registers of company beneficial owners after the publication of thePanama Papers
 <https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> earlier this year 
revealed how companies in tax havens can facilitate crime and tax fraud. The UK 
began publishing beneficial ownership data in June.

Chris Taggart, of the financial transparency group OpenCorporates 
<https://opencorporates.com/>, warned that the weakened measures would 
constitute governments returning to “business as usual” less than a year after 
the Panama Papers.

“We have seen the results of disclosing beneficial ownership information 
privately on an honour system and it’s obvious that this hasn’t been good 
enough to fight corruption, tax evasion and other financial crimes,” Taggart 
said.


“The case for a public, open beneficial ownership register is clear: we cannot 
crack down on financial crime if no one is watching.”

Henri Makkonen, an advisor to the Financial Transparency Coalition 
<https://financialtransparency.org/>, described the new text as “a pretty 
horrible compromise”, but said that strong support for greater transparency in 
the European parliament and European commission could result in stronger rules 
being adopted.

Earlier on Tuesday, 80 British MPs backed an amendment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/uk-mps-tax-havens-criminal-finances-bill-overseas-territories>
 that would force the UK’s overseas territories, including the British Virgin 
Islands, to publish data about the beneficial owners of offshore companies.

 