
Markets nowadays are fixated on how high the US Federal Reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve> will raise interest 
rates in the next 12 months. This is dangerously shortsighted: the real concern 
ought to be how far it could cut rates in the next deep recession. Given that 
the Fed may struggle just to get its base interest rate up to 2% over the 
coming year, there will be very little room to cut if a recession hits.

Fed chair Janet Yellen tried to reassure markets in a speech 
<http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20160826a.htm> at the 
end of August, suggesting that a combination of massive government bond 
purchases and forward guidance on interest-rate policy could achieve the same 
stimulus as cutting the overnight rate to minus 6%, were negative interest 
rates possible. She might be right, but most economists are sceptical that the 
Fed’s unconventional policy tools are nearly so effective.

There are other ideas that might be tried. For example, the Fed could follow 
the Bank of Japan’s recent move to target the 10-year interest rate instead of 
the very short-term one it usually focuses on. The idea is that even if very 
short-term interest rates are zero, longer-term rates are still positive. The 
rate on 10-year US Treasury bonds was about 1.8% at the end of October.

Lower interest rates not the demon populists claim | Jeffrey Frankel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/oct/25/lower-interest-rates-not-demon-populist-claims-inequality-government>
That approach might work for a while. But there is also a significant risk 
that it might eventually blow up, just the way pegged exchange rates tend to 
work for a while and then cause a catastrophe. If the Fed could be highly 
credible in its plan to hold down the 10-year interest rate, it could probably 
get away without having to intervene too much in markets, whose participants 
would normally be too scared to fight the world’s most powerful central bank.

But imagine that markets started to have doubts, and that the Fed was forced 
to intervene massively by purchasing a huge percentage of total government 
debt. This would leave the Fed extremely vulnerable to enormous losses should 
global forces suddenly drive up equilibrium interest rates, with the US 
government then compelled to pay much higher interest rates to roll over its 
debt.

The two best ideas for dealing with the zero bound on interest rates seem 
off-limits for the moment. The optimal approach would be to implement all of 
the various legal, tax, and institutional changes needed to take interest rates 
significantly negative, thereby eliminating the zero bound. This requires 
preventing people from responding by hoarding paper currency; but, as I have
explained recently <http://www.kennethrogoff.com/>, this is not so difficult. 
True, early experimentation with negative interest-rate policy in Japan and 
Europe has caused some disenchantment. But the shortcomings there mostly 
reflect the fact that central banks cannot by themselves implement the 
necessary policies to make a negative interest rate policy fully effective.

The other approach, first analysed by Fed economists in the mid-1990s, would 
be to raise the target inflation rate from 2% to 4%. The idea is that this 
would eventually raise the profile of all interest rates by two percentage 
points, thereby leaving that much extra room to cut.

Several central banks, including the Fed, have considered moving to a higher 
inflation target. But such a move has several significant drawbacks. The main 
problem is that a shift of this magnitude risks undermining hard-won central 
bank credibility; after all, central banks have been promising to deliver 2% 
inflation for a couple of decades now, and that level is deeply embedded in 
long-term financial contracts.

Moreover, as was true during the 2008 financial crisis, simply being able to 
take interest rates 2% lower probably might not be enough. In fact,many 
estimates <http://www.kennethrogoff.com/> suggest that the Fed might well have 
liked to cut rates 4% or 5% more than it did, but could not go lower once the 
interest rate hit zero.

A third shortcoming is that, after an adjustment period, wages and contracts 
are more likely to adjust more frequently than they would with a 2% inflation 
target, making monetary policy less effective. And, finally, higher inflation 
causes distortions to relative prices and to the tax system – distortions that 
have potentially significant costs, and not just in recessions.

If ideas like negative interest rates and higher inflation targets sound 
dangerously radical, well, radical is relative. Unless central banks figure out 
a convincing way to address their paralysis at the zero bound, there is likely 
to be a continuing barrage of outside-the-box proposals that are far more 
radical. For example, the University of California at Berkeley economist Barry 
Eichengreen hasargued 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/protectionism-geopolitical-problems-by-barry-eichengreen-2016-07?barrier=true>
 that protectionism can be a helpful way to create inflation when central banks 
are stuck at the zero bound. Several economists, includingLawrence Summers 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/columnist/lawrence-h--summers> and Paul 
Krugman, have warned that structural reform to increase productivity might be 
counterproductive when central banks are paralysed, precisely because it lowers 
prices.

Of course, there is always fiscal policy to provide economic stimulus. But it 
is extremely undesirable for government spending to have to be as volatile as 
it would be if it had to cover for the ineffectiveness of monetary policy.

There may not be enough time before the next deep recession to lay the 
groundwork for effective negative-interest-rate policy or to phase in a higher 
inflation target. But that is no excuse for not starting to look hard at these 
options, especially if the alternatives are likely to be far more problematic.

 * Kenneth Rogoff is professor of economics and public policy at Harvard 
University and recipient of the 2011 Deutsche Bank Prize in Financial Economics

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>, 2016

 