
There are two ways for governments to ensure the safety of cyclists. The first 
option, adopted by civilised countries, is to build bicycle-friendly 
infrastructure, to enact legislation that favours sustainable modes of 
transport, to design cities that focus on humans first and motor vehicles last.

This inevitably leads to favourable outcomes for all citizens – fewer cars on 
the road; better public transport; the empowerment of children who can cycle to 
school instead of being chaperoned by parents; clean air from a decrease in 
vehicle emissions, and better health outcomes for those who choose to cycle 
instead of drive. No longer are roads a battleground between cyclists and 
frustrated motorists. When infrastructure is built that creates a safe haven 
for cyclists, we see children, women, old people ... everyone riding a bicycle. 
You only need to look to the Scandinavian countries and the Netherlands as 
positive examples of what can be achieved when governments choose to focus on 
human-centred outcomes.

NSW police launch investigation ​​after officer ​allegedly pushes cyclist off 
bike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/14/nsw-police-launch-investigation-after-officer-allegedly-pushes-cyclist-off-bike>
There is however another way to keep cyclists safe. It’s to get them off our 
roads, footpaths and cycle lanes entirely. This can perhaps be achieved through 
enacting legislation that penalises cyclists with massive fines for minor 
traffic infringements such as not wearing a helmet or cycling without a bell 
attached to the handlebars.

Governments can also rip up existing infrastructure  
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/cyclists-protest-removal-of-cycleway-in-sydney-cbd-20150726-gikyjn.html>
and force cyclists on to traffic-clogged roads. They can allow the police force 
to target minor infringements by cyclists, rather than focus on motorists who 
speed, text while driving or drive under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In 
short, a government can create an environment where the cyclist is seen as an 
unwanted guest on our roads, rather than as a husband, wife, mother, daughter, 
son commuting to work or school.

To the best of my knowledge, this bold experiment is only occurring in one 
place on earth: New South Wales. Evidence of the success of this bastard of a 
policy was provided recentlywhen figures were released by the NSW government 
that appear to show a decline in participation rates of cycling in Sydney 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/heavy-fines-and-stalled-bike-paths-blamed-for-drop-in-sydney-cycling-rates-20161118-gssg8b.html>
. It’s thought the decline is due to two factors: the increase in fines for 
minor infringements and a lack of cycling infrastructure in Sydney.

Of course what these figures don’t show is how each cyclist has chosen to 
replace their bicycle trip. No doubt, most now drive to work or the shops, 
joining the ever-increasing traffic queues. Or they hop on our failing public 
transport network and sweat it out with the rest of us.

Can you blame them for discarding the bike when even the legendary Tour de 
France winnerCadel Evans says Sydney 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/books/even-tour-de-france-winner-cadel-evans-finds-cycling-in-sydney-too-intimidating-20161117-gss316.html>
 is one of only two cities in the world where he would not ride on the roads? 
That he wouldtravel interstate to train on his bicycle rather than risk it on 
our roads? 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/books/even-tour-de-france-winner-cadel-evans-finds-cycling-in-sydney-too-intimidating-20161117-gss316.html>

Evans told Fairfax Media that while he would normally encourage people to take 
up cycling, when it comes toSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> he’s not sure because of 
the aggression on the roads and the poor infrastructure.

“I encourage people to ride for the health benefits or for one car less on the 
road but because of this problem, I don’t want to encourage someone to ride and 
then they go out and get hit by a car,” he said.

The metre matters rule will save cyclists' lives, but of course it will be met 
with bile | Steven Herrick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/22/of-course-sensible-legislation-to-save-cyclists-lives-will-be-met-with-bile>
And what the figures also don’t show is the damage this legislation is doing 
to Sydney’s reputation as a welcoming destination for tourists. Will the steady 
tide of young foreign backpackers choose more bicycle-friendly cities such as 
Brisbane or Melbourne in which to spend their hard-earned cash? At least in 
those places they can buy a drink after midnight as well.

I imagine the state’s roads minister, Duncan Gay, will soon smugly announce a 
decrease in the fatality rates of cyclists and point to his legislation as the 
reason for this drop, rather than the fact that there are fewer cyclists to 
kill. In the past seven months since enacting the new “safe cycling” laws, the 
government has gained awindfall of $1.3m in fines from cycling misdemeanours 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/13-million-in-cycle-fines-in-first-months-of-new-laws-dwarf-penalties-for-motorists-20161117-gss4kr.html>
. If the minister was serious about keeping cyclists safe, he would use this 
money in an advertising campaign promoting the “one-metre” passing laws. Or he 
would direct the police to focus on motorists who flout this law. A pitiful 15 
fines have been issued to motorists for breaking the one-metre passing law 
since its inception in March, reaping just under $5,000. Surely this is 
evidence of the government’s true agenda – to rid the streets of cyclists 
rather than create a safe environment for them.

Meanwhile, the number of motorists killed in accidents this year has increased 
by a whopping 10% on figures from 2015 
<http://roadsafety.transport.nsw.gov.au/statistics/>. I hear no call from Gay 
for a fourfold increase in traffic fines, no suggestion that police should 
direct their attention away from targeting cyclists to motorists and certainly 
no calls from the government or motoring groups for the minister to respond to 
this alarming increase.

Sydney is cracking under the strain of inadequate roads and a population 
slavishly devoted to the motor vehicle. And the government’s answer is to fine 
cyclists out of existence.

It would be funny if it wasn’t so irresponsible. 
 