
Russia insists it had nothing to do with what it has described as the “pulp 
fiction” scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/11/kremlin-ridicules-claims-collected-material-donald-trump>
 swirling around Donald Trump. But for Vladimir Putin,the dossier affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-media-cnn-buzzfeed-intelligence-agencies>
, following allegations of a compromised presidential election, has the effect, 
deliberately planned or not, of advancing Moscow’s long-held aim of weakening 
the US, paralysing its political decision-making process, and avenging Russia’s 
humiliation at the close of the cold war.

It may be that Putin is entirely innocent, as the Russian president’s 
spokesmen claim. Or the opposite may be the case. In a sense it does not 
matter. The damage has been done, and for the Kremlin, it’s a no-lose. The 
unprecedented confusion and disarray in the US is what old KGB agents like 
Putin could only dream of.

How the Trump dossier came to light: secret sources, a retired spy and John 
McCain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-report-opposition-research-john-mccain>
Putin famously decried the collapse of the Soviet Union 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/4480745.stm>, which the US played a leading role in 
bringing about, as “the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the [20th] 
century”. A quarter of a century later, having exhibited the calculated 
patience of Karla, John le Carré’s fictional Russian spymaster, Putin can 
savour his revenge – at arm’s length.

Whoever is responsible, doubts have been sown about the independence, 
trustworthiness, and political legitimacy of the US president-elect. American 
commentators even suggest Trump may be a Russian “asset”. Thatcarries echoes 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/11/opinion/donald-trump-a-modern-manchurian-candidate.html?_r=0>
 of another story, Richard Condon’s The Manchurian Candidate, about political 
brainwashing at the centre of power.

The barrage of claims and counter-claims has fed the suspicions of a large 
number of Americans that Trump did not win fairly last November. Unease is 
compounded by an own goal in the electoral process – Trump’s victory in the 
electoral college despite attracting 3m fewer votes than Hillary Clinton.

The Obama administration itself believes foreign agents, acting for Moscow, 
worked to influence the election on Trump’s behalf. All the US intelligence 
agencies agree.That finding has provoked a bitter public rift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/us-intelligence-trump-dossier-leak>
 between Trump, the CIA and the National Security Agency, Washington’s first 
line of defence and the Russian intelligence agencies’ principal foes.

Since the sources who spoke to Christopher Steele, the former MI6 officer 
named as author of the dossier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/christopher-steele-ex-mi6-officer-named-as-author-of-trump-dossier>
, are unidentified,it is impossible to know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-dossier-explainer-details>
 whether the information he reported concerning Trump’s alleged behaviour in 
Russia is accurate, or was fabricated by agents of the FSB (the successor 
agency to the KGB).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&media=>
Trump attacks media and intelligence community in press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Suggestions that the Russians have sufficient compromising information to 
blackmail Trump, and that Russian agents and hackers fed helpful intelligence 
to his campaign staff, are similarly alarming. Thus, true or not, some of the 
mud is certain to stick – the quintessential aim of any KGB-style 
destabilisation conspiracy designed to destroy confidence and sow confusion.

With Trump yet to be installed in office, the ramifications of this continuing 
uproar are endless. There will be no honeymoon for him. The current 
congressional and media frenzy is likely to intensify rather than subside once 
Trump sits in the Oval Office.

There is already talk of impeachment and a Watergate-sized crisis. Trump is 
seriously damaged, although his press conference performance on Wednesday 
suggests he does not realise it.

Many in the US and abroad will view him in one of three ways: dupe, dope, or 
stooge. Trump’s attempts to enact a policy agenda, domestic or foreign, are 
likely to be severely undermined by chronic political weakness. This is 
especially true of anything touchingRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

If Trump attempts a “reset”, as many expect, he risks being seen as kowtowing 
to his Moscow handlers. If he tries to strong-arm Nato members, as he promised 
in the campaign, his motives will be questioned. If, alternatively, he gets 
tough with Russia over Ukraine, for example, it could be seen by US allies as a 
dangerous reaction to the scandals rather than a responsible policy shift.

Meanwhile, in anxious eastern and central Europe and the Middle East, fear of 
Russia will be mixed with new respect. Lavrentiy Beria, Stalin’s legendary 
chief of state security and head of the NKVD, forerunner of the KGB, would be 
impressed. The American “target” has been destabilised, its democratic system 
of governance discredited before the world, and its new leader compromised 
before he takes power. Time will tell whether Putin has overplayed his hand. 
Right now, he must be laughing fit to burst – in a plausibly deniable way.
 