
In 2015, in a hotel restaurant in Kuala Lumpur, Iran coach Carlos Queiroz was 
talking qualification. In Asia, he said, there are three countries with a 
credit card that produces an automatic World Cup spot with just a simple swipe: 
Japan, South Korea andAustralia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>
. His Iran were always competing with Uzbekistan, Saudi Arabia and perhaps 
North Korea and United Arab Emirates for the fourth and last automatic berth. 
And the other near-40 nations of Asia? The former Real Madrid coach just 
shrugged.

How will a 48-team World Cup work? Fifa’s plan for 2026 explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/48-team-world-cup-fifa-plan-2026>
While the Portuguese may have intended to stress his own achievements with 
Iran, he was stating a simple truth. With South Korea, Japan and the Socceroos 
usually making it, that leaves one spot for the other 43 - for the vast 
majority in the world’s biggest continent. The dream is as distant as relations 
between Sepp Blatter and Gianni Infantino. Talk to heads of various federations 
around Asia and hear the variety of “Project 2022s”, it is almost cruel to 
point out that 15 other nations have similar grandiose plans and one, perhaps, 
will achieve it.

But not for much longer. Having four automatic spots gives perhaps eight or 
nine a realistic chance butan improved quota of eight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/fifa-vote-expand-world-cup-48-teams-from-2026>
 really opens it up. Even if the big four (the three credit card holders and 
Iran) have their spots, that leaves four for the rest in a much more open 
field. It gives eight or so a genuine opportunity, the same number an outside 
chance, and more still a dream.

Take Thailand. The country is doing all the right things: investing in the 
league, grassroots, producing decent players and aiming for as much overseas 
experience as possible but theWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> is still some years 
away, if at all. Expansion brings the competition firmly within touching 
distance and if Thailand can do it, there is huge motivation lower down the 
rankings. Having to compete with South Korea, Australia and Japan is not an 
option for many in the short to medium term but fighting it out with Jordan for 
the last spot? That are plenty who would fancy their chances.

Perhaps quality at the World Cup will suffer (though there hasn’t been a 
decent tournament for some time) but few in the AFC will be too concerned about 
such abstract issues when they finally have a chance, slim or otherwise, of 
actually making it, especially given the history of the tournament. Being 
blocked from the World Cup for most of the last century did the development of 
Asian football no favours as Europe and South America gathered the spots, 
competition, experience and riches for themselves.

Greater exposure to the global game can only benefit Asian teams. Japan and 
South Korea have demonstrated that the more you play at the World Cup, in 
general, the better you get. The more opportunities your players have to go 
overseas, the more excitement and money there is all round. Increased revenues, 
with the obvious caveat that transparency is necessary, promised for the 
smaller nations to develop can only help further down the ladder. Eventually, 
Asia becomes stronger, as does the Asian Cup, the domestic leagues and the 
Asian Champions League. And what is good for Asian football is good for 
Australia too.

There are concerns expressed in Australia over whether qualification could now 
become a relaxed stroll rather than an intense battle. It may early on, but 
Asia is slowly improving, as we have seen along the road to Russia, and the 
final round would still be full of tough ties overseas against teams that 
suddenly have a genuine chance to qualify. Over time, facing more and more 
competitors with World Cup experience can only be of benefit.

Money makes the World Cup go round: more teams means more cash | David Conn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/10/world-cup-48-teams-gianni-infantino-fifa-money>
The format is more of an issue. Sixteen three-team groups is far from ideal 
for a number of reasons that have been well-documented, manipulation in the 
final game being a major one. If a way can be found to reduce that likelihood, 
it could work. The group stage may be a game shorter than usual but having an 
extra knockout-round should offer plenty of excitement.

 It is understandable for fans in those nations that expect to qualify – like 
Australia –to view expansion with suspicion but they should remember that only 
11 of the AFC’s 46 full members have ever been to a finals, and only six have 
done so more than once.

As it stands, a considerable proportion of AFC members had never even 
considered the possibility of appearing in the biggest sporting tournament. 
Expansion may throw up some practical issues and concerns but it also enables 
much of Asia to dream for the first time.

 