
Fifa’s president, Gianni Infantino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gianni-infantino>, says world football’s 
federations are “overwhelmingly in favour” of expanding the World Cup to a 
potential 48 teams.

Infantino is a strong advocate of opening the doors of the game’s premier 
competition to more countries andFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> has been investigating a number of 
formats which would allow greater participation than the current 32-team model.

Fifa’s Infantino suggests 16 three-team groups for revamped World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/fifa-president-gianni-infantino-world-cup-proposals>
Any change of structure would not be expected to take place before the 2026 
tournament but an agreement to do so could be struck when the Fifa council 
meets in Zurich on 9 January.

Infantino said in October there was a “positive feeling” about expansion and, 
on stage at the Dubai International Sports Conference on Wednesday, appeared to 
suggest consensus is growing. BBC Sport reported the Swiss telling the 
conference that regional federations were “overwhelmingly in favour” of the 
proposal.

Fifa, and Infantino, are now thought to prefer a competition with 16 groups of 
three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/fifa-president-gianni-infantino-world-cup-proposals>
, having initially considered a design that would see 16 teams eliminated after 
just one match, but expansion to 40 sides remains possible.

Gazzetta dello Sport, the Italian newspaper, quoted Infantino as saying: “I am 
still convinced to expand the participation in the World Cup more than 32 
teams. We would still consider to increase the competition to 40 or 48 teams. A 
tournament to 48 teams would have the same period of the current one, and 
federations are clearly in favour of aWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> with more teams.”

While Infantino appears confident his plans will find favour at the Fifa 
council, there has already been discontent from other notable areas.

The European Club Association (ECA), an amalgam of 220 top teams on the 
continent, outlined its concerns this month.

Karl-Heinz Rummenigge, chairman of both the ECA and Bayern Munich, said: “In 
the interest of the fans and the players, we urge Fifa not to increase the 
number of World Cup participants. Politics and commerce should not be the 
exclusive priority in football.”

The ECA is understood to be concerned at the growing demands on top players. A 
16-group solution would increase the number of players involved during a World 
Cup summer but not necessarily the maximum number of games for any side or 
individual.

Infantino also used his stage in Dubai to give a thumbs-up to video assisted 
refereeing, as tested in the recent Club World Cup and mooted for use at the 
2018 World Cup in Russia. “The tests have been very positive and they are going 
in the right direction,” he said.
 