
The Marcus Willis story – surreal and real and, if romance counts for 
anything, far from over – may soon be immortalised on film.

Roger Federer sees Marcus Willis story at Wimbledon as Hollywood gold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/marcus-willis-wimbledon-roger-federer-hollywood-gold>
Andy James, a battling London-based film-maker, wants to tell how the reformed 
party-goer came from nowhere to share Centre Court with the seven-times champion
Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> for an hour and 
25 minutes on Wednesday – but as a love story. “I’m in talks now with 
production companies out of Los Angeles,” James said. “The goal is to get it 
up, shot and ready to launch by Wimbledon next year.”

What struck James as special was not just the player’s run to the second round 
– after getting a wildcard into the qualifying tournament – but the part his 
girlfriend, the dental surgeon Jennifer Bate, played in persuading him not to 
quit the sport when he was disillusioned and struggling with injury.

James believes it is a story, provisionally called Break Point 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5e-OdEgy2QU&feature=youtu.be>, that surpasses 
even the fictional 2004 romantic comedy, Wimbledon, for real-life twists and 
turns. Willis, who still lives with his parents – “living the dream”, as he 
joked this week – teaches children and grandmothers for £30 an hour at Warwick 
Boat Club and plays club tennis in Germany and France at weekends.

He admitted he regarded himself as “a loser” before his partner convinced him 
he should give it one more shot rather than accepted a coaching job in 
Philadelphia.

“It’s a beautiful love story,” James said. “He is an everyman inspired by love 
and never giving up. Jennifer is the perfect co-lead. She’s a dentist and only 
because her equipment broke down, she got a chance to come and see him play. 
It’s like the Rocky of tennis.

“His record is basically zero all around the world. He had to work so hard 
just to make the main draw. It’s the love that is behind the sports story. I 
think it could be a really cool, low-budget English romantic drama.”

Marcus Willis takes seven games off Roger Federer: 'I’ve earned a beer, I 
think'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/marcus-willis-takes-seven-games-off-roger-federer-ive-earned-a-beer-i-think>
Willis, still carrying the last vestiges of the bulk he carried around with 
him in his partying days – when he was known as Cartman, after the South Park 
cartoon character – surprised everyone by beating Lithuania’s world No54 
Ricardas Berankis in straight sets on an outside court on Monday.

His journey then hit a peak on Wednesday when he entertained an enthralled 
audience against Federer on the biggest stage in tennis.The world No3 won 6-0, 
6-3, 6-4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/29/marcus-willis-takes-seven-games-off-roger-federer-ive-earned-a-beer-i-think>
, but the home player had the bigger support – a rarity in a Federer match. 
Nearly everyone in the arena and watching on television at home had no idea 
what Willis was like as a tennis player.

The 25-year-old left-hander, ranked 772 in the world, looked as if the 
occasion may get to him when Federer won the first set without dropping a game 
but Willis stayed in the contest and won praise from the Swiss. His unusual 
game, littered with chips, lobs, drop-shots and lots of crafty spin, is 
underpinned by a big serve, which occasionally had Federer in trouble.

His earnings this year before leaving Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> with £50,000 for reaching the 
second round amounted to €60, after a week’s competition in a Futures event in 
Tunisia in January.

On Thursday he played a doubles match in the Coventry League with his Warwick 
Boat Club partner Gavin Henderson and won it 6–4, 7–6, arriving with his 
Wimbledon accreditation still hanging around his neck. He surely will have been 
still buzzing from the greatest day of his life – and may yet see it all played 
out on screen.
 