
What is the Financial Stability Board?

It is the new regulator created by the G20 as an enlarged version of the 
Financial Stability Forum, which is an advisory group established in 1999 to 
promote international financial stability through better information exchange 
and international cooperation. The new FSB will include allG20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> countries, Spain and the European 
Commission. The body aims to identify problems in the financial system and 
oversee action to address them.

Who runs the regulator?

The Financial Stability Forum is chaired by Mario Draghi, governor of the Bank 
of Italy. The secretariat is based at the Bank for International Settlements' 
headquarters in Basel, Switzerland.

What will the new regulator do?

The regulator will monitor potential risks in the economy, especially those 
involving the biggest firms, and will conduct "early warning exercises" and 
periodic reviews to spot potential trouble. It will cooperate with the IMF, the 
Washington-based body that monitors countries' financial health, lending funds 
if needed. The new regulator will report any possible threats to the stability 
of the global financial system to the G20 finance ministers, the IMF and 
central bank governors.

Who will the regulator oversee?

All "systemically important" financial institutions, instruments and markets. 
This will include, for the first time, the most important hedge funds. These 
will have to register and report their strategy, debt and risk levels. Hedge 
funds manage about $1tn (Â£67bn) of assets.

How will it work?

The body will establish a supervisory college to monitor each of the largest 
international financial services firms. It will monitor a firm's financial and 
operational structure, and any contingency funding arrangements, amongst 
others. It will act as a clearing house for information-sharing and contingency 
planning for the benefit of its members.

How will it change the way banks work?

Financial institutions will be encouraged to maintain contingency plans that 
could be used by insolvency practitioners if the firm collapses. Firms will be 
encouraged to maintain funding plans that could be used in stressed market 
scenarios, including large amounts for foreign currency, if needed.

What will the new regulator do about debt and loans?

To prevent another debt bubble, the new body will recommend financial 
companies maintain provisions against credit losses and may impose constraints 
on borrowing.

What about credit derivatives?

This market will be tamed to curb its freewheeling excesses. These 
investments, whose value is derived from an underlying asset, such as bond or a 
loan, will have to be cleared through a central clearing house. Until now, they 
have been freely traded between banks.
 