
‘YOU KNOW THE NEARER YOUR DESTINATION’

“No comment.” Two simple words, beloved of press conference-holders across the 
Anglophone world. Two words that stand as a gentle, polite, only mildly 
aggravating two fingers at the questioner and his like. And it’s not as if 
Jürgen Klopp doesn’t know them: he used them deftly back in August when asked 
about the possibility that he might bring Borussia Dortmund whelp Christian 
Pulisic to Anfield. “I have no comment on this,” he sagely demurred. 
“Absolutely nothing to speak about this and all the other [rumours] too.” As 
knockbacks go, textbook stuff. So compare and contrast with his reaction to 
being asked if $tevie Mbewas heading back to Anfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/jurgen-klopp-believes-steven-gerrard-return-liverpool>
 after finally knocking his playing career on the head. “This is not the room I 
want to speak about this,” he blathered. “When there is something to announce 
we will announce it and then we talk. That one day in the future there will be 
something to announce I’m pretty sure too. Up till then, nothing to say.”

Well, it’s not exactly nothing, is it Jürgen? I mean, you just all but 
appointed him chairman. But still, the assembled hacks were not sated. Like one 
of Klopp’s teams on a good day, they continued to press, insatiably hassling 
and bothering their target until they finally wore him down. Under a prolonged 
barrage of $tevie-focused questioning, Klopp’s cool cracked. “Stop using me for 
stories about [$tevie Mbe]” he sobbed. “You don’t need me. If you want to write 
a story about him write it because he deserved it.” OK then!

What next for Steven Gerrard? Charlton and Guardiola offer lessons from history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/24/steven-gerrard-study-pep-guardiola-manager-liverpool-retirement>
Just hours earlier $tevie himself had announced the end of his playing career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/steven-gerrard-retires-playing-professional-football>
. “I’ve listened to people over the years,” he confessed. “Important people in 
the game who I trust have said to me: ‘Always go with a tiny bit left. Never 
overstay your welcome and play on too long where it becomes embarrassing.’” 
Showing the infallible sense of timingwith which he could once be relied upon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/23/liverpool-steven-gerrard-11-moments-never-walk-alone>
 to rifle in 40-yard Cup final thunderbolts, thump home last-gasp European 
campaign-salvaging thunderbolts or randomly fall over in key games for no 
obvious reason, he clearly had sensed that this day, the day when it becomes 
embarrassing, was finally close. And then he waited another couple of years and 
retired.

“My last three, four months I didn’t feel as sharp as I used to,” he said. 
“The games were becoming more challenging, the travel was affecting me. I’ve 
had a few moments in the last six months where I’ve thought: ‘I didn’t play 
well today.’” Don’t worry $tevie, we’ve all had those moments. His official 
statement, like Klopp’s improvised one, stopped just short of revealing what he 
would do next. “I am excited about the future and feel I still have a lot to 
offer the game, in whatever capacity that may be,” he concluded. “I am 
currently taking my time to consider a number of options.” Hell, The Fiver’s 
seen him do that before. Expect a 50-yard backpass straight to the feet of 
Thierry Henry any moment.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Paul Doyle from 8.05pm GMT for hot Big Vase MBM coverage of Manchester 
United 2-1 Feyenoord <https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“If you are planning a stag weekend and think the Clapton Ultras can provide 
you with a little ‘east London colour’, ask yourself this: how much fun can you 
really have surrounded by people who will inevitably look on you with nothing 
but absolute contempt? Is an almost sociopathic lack of empathy towards people 
who attend Clapton games week on week genuine, or would it make you feel more 
than just a little ashamed?” –the club’s response 
<http://www.claptonultras.org/2016/11/22/not-stag-party-venue/> to musician 
Frank Turner turning up for a recent game while on a stag do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-fiver-stevie-mbe-retires%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2475cd6b12f3b0053af2da7324b8e03e2e94e34a%2F0_0_4502_3121%2F4502.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Finally%20knocking%20his%20playing%20career%20on%20the%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-fiver-stevie-mbe-retires%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Finally%20knocking%20his%20playing%20career%20on%20the%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-fiver-stevie-mbe-retires%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2475cd6b12f3b0053af2da7324b8e03e2e94e34a%2F0_0_4502_3121%2F4502.jpg>
Art and wine tasting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/12/stag-dos-drop-the-strippers>
, apparently Frank. Photograph: Frantzesco Kangaris for the Guardian 
FIVER LETTERS

“While Messi’s undeniable overgrowth (yesterday’s Fiver) might be the most 
interesting and controversial piece of Argentinian shrubbery to amass since the 
Falkland Islands, I’d like to posit for consideration the talismanic properties 
such wooly statements vest on their hosts. Sure, Leo may have missed a critical 
penalty or two in the months since ‘the bushening’ commenced, but ever since 
he’s hopped on the hirsute haywagon, not a single allegation of tax evasion or 
fraud has been raised against him” – Cary Hooper.

“Regarding Fifa’s stance on displaying poppies at football matches 
(yesterday’s Bits and Bobs), I’d like to draw on the extensive wisdom of The 
Fiver and ask how you think Fifa would manage the hypothetical situation (with 
a willing suspension of disbelief) if ever Wessex League’s Bournemouth Poppies 
played in a World Club Cup scheduled for early/mid-November at some future 
date?” – James Nott.


“Being a reader from the great state of Texas, I couldn’t help but notice how 
similar England’s national team is to the Dallas Cowboys. Both think they own 
the sport, both are very arrogant and unaware of when the game changes around 
them, both are run by people that don’t know anything about the sport, and both 
enjoy periods of success that make their fans sure they will win a championship 
just to choke when it counts” – Tyson Cluff.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
letter o’the day isJames Nott, who receives a copy of Football Manager 2017 
<http://www.footballmanager.com/games/football-manager-2017> from those good 
people at Football Manager Towers, and it’s out now! We’ve got a one final copy 
left to give away, so if you want one, get busy writing.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

David White, the one-time England international, is among the former 
footballers whose “life was torn apart” by Barry Bennell andis now willing to 
go public <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/david-white> about 
his ordeal at the hands of a serial paedophile who worked in junior and 
professional football more than three decades. Meanwhile, Crewe Alexandra’s 
director of football and former managerDario Gradi has issued a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/crewe-director-football-dario-gradi-sympathy-barry-bennell-victims>
 to express sympathy for Bennell’s victims. “The first I knew of Barry 
Bennell’s crimes was when he was arrested in the United States in 1994. I knew 
nothing of his crimes before this time when he was employed by us,” said Gradi. 
“No one at the football club knew of Bennell’s crimes until his arrest in 1994 
and his subsequent prosecution in the United Kingdom.”

Paul Futcher, the former Luton, Barnsley, Grimsby and Manchester City 
defender, has died at the age of 60.

The Gareth Southgate England era is coming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/gareth-southgate-england-manager-offered-job>
. Control yourself.

Gareth Bale faces up to three months out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/gareth-bale-sidelined-three-months-ankle-injury-sporting-lisbon>
 with the ankle-knack he sustained with Real Madrid at Sporting Lisbon.

His Queen’s Celtic side may be out of Europe, but everything’s coming up 
Brendan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/celtic-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
. “The team deserve great credit,” he cheered after a 2-0 defeat at home to 
Barcelona. “We weren’t fearful. As a coach you look for improvement. I think 
this team has made significant improvement. This experience was always going to 
be invaluable for us.”

Fresh off a 2-2 draw with PSG that will likely guarantee a testing tie in Big 
Cup’s Round of Arsenal, Arsène Wengerhas got his shrug on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/arsene-wenger-no-panic-arsenal-second-champions-league-psg>
. “Will it be good or bad for us?” he mused. “I think we have to wait for the 
draw because, if you look at all of the groups, you cannot really guess if it 
is good or bad.” Bad, it’ll be bad.

Manchester City did enough to get over the line and join the Gunners with a 
1-1 draw in Mönchengladbach. “These players are so new in Europe and every time 
we play a game like this we improve,”parped Pep Guardiola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/borussia-monchengladbach-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
.

Karl Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/charlton-athletic-karl-robinson-russell-slade>
 will likely be the name on Charlton’s seemingly stock sacking statement when 
it next sees the light of day.

Andy Edwards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/leyton-orient-sack-manager-alberto-cavasin-league-two>
 will likely be the name on Leyton Orient’s seemingly stock sacking statement 
when it next sees the light of day.

And Bundesliga leaders RB Leipzig are happy to be getting all up in their 
rivals’ grilles. “We have stirred up a hornets’ nest with our sporting 
achievements and it is normal,” fizzed coach Ralph Hasenhuettl. “The fact that 
we play good and successful football at the moment of course helps us to become 
more self-confident on the pitch.”

STILL WANT MORE?

Simon Burnton dives into his time machine to recall the 1979 West Brom 
testimonialwhen black players took on a team of white players. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/west-brom-len-cantello-testimonial-1979-white-black-players>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-fiver-stevie-mbe-retires%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd479988ebbe34782592c7be00fb8410c7e4e86de%2F0_126_3121_1873%2F3121.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Finally%20knocking%20his%20playing%20career%20on%20the%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-fiver-stevie-mbe-retires%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Finally%20knocking%20his%20playing%20career%20on%20the%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fthe-fiver-stevie-mbe-retires%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd479988ebbe34782592c7be00fb8410c7e4e86de%2F0_126_3121_1873%2F3121.jpg>
 Cyrille Regis and Len Cantello. Photograph: BBC/Sugar Films/Laurie Rampling 
How Crewe Alexandra’s football talent factory has been thrown into turmoil. By 
Owen Gibson. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/crewe-alexandra-barry-bennell>

The Damilola Taylor Centre in Peckham has been central to everything in 
Mustapha Carayol’s life, says the Nottingham Forest wingerin this interview 
with Ed Aarons. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/mustapha-carayol-damilola-taylor-centre-nottingham-forest>

Some teenagers play Football Manager. Some – like Edin Djonlic – take their 
coaching badges. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-set-pieces-blog/2016/nov/24/ejdin-djonlic-coach-youngest-bosnia-mini-mourinho-premier-league>

Peterborough’s Michael Bostwick mistakes a steward for a left-back. Plus James 
Milner.Say no more about this week’s Classic YouTube collection. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/24/trash-talk-terrible-passing-and-the-bruising-best-of-samoas-brian-lima>

Manchester United dare not lose to Feyenoord as the spectre of 2005 looms, 
warns Barry Glendenning. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/24/manchester-united-feyenoord-2005-alex-ferguson>

According to today’s Rumour Mill, Thiago Silva has practically sewn up a deal 
to sign for Juventus.That and more unfounded tittle-tattle here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/football-transfer-rumour-mill-thiago-silva-juventus-psg>

Arsenal’s Mesut Özil is an easy target but he was ruddy useful against PSG, 
so-says Barney Ronay. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/23/mesut-ozil-arsenal-psg-champions-league>

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


HAPPY TURKEY DAY!
 