
MATCHDAY SIX, DIGNITY NIL 

Nothing much happens on Big Cup matchday six. That’s hardly a surprise, given 
you could have guessed the identity of at least 15 of the 16 teams to qualify 
for the knockout stage before the draw for the groups was even made. And that 
last guess was only held back because, since they managed to get themselves 
relegated to the Second Division from a position of mid-table safety with five 
games to go back in 1909, nobody has ever made any assumption about Manchester 
City. It’s just not done.

That said, even City are utterly predictable these days, so Tuesday night’s 
viewing suffered from such a paucity of meaningful action that, by comparison, 
BBC Test Card F would look like the video to Sledgehammer. Arsenal did their 
best to liven things up a bit witha 4-1 stroll in Basel/Basle/Baaarl/Barzuhl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/arsene-wenger-arsenal-top-their-group>
, thus ensuring they made it to the round that bears their name as top dogs 
from Group A. Congratulations to them for once again achieving whatever it is 
they’re trying to achieve! The first leg of their Round of Arsenal tie against 
Bayern Munich, or maybe Real Madrid, will be played on 14 February. The return 
is on 22 February, recriminations start the 23rd, and big depressing 
double-page post-mortems will be published in all the broadsheets on the Sunday.

Celtic charged by Uefa over crowd trouble but Manchester City face no action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/celtic-charged-uefa-crowd-trouble-manchester-city>
The match between Manchester City and the Queen’s Celtic was even more of a 
non-event,a draw so dull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/manchester-city-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
 that an ersatz tribute to the Olympic Stadium broke out in the stands. Outside 
the ground, a Queen’s Celtic fan was finedfor throwing a hamburger at a horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/manchester-city-celtic-fans-fighting>
. That poor, proud creature will have grown up dreaming of emulating Billy at 
the 1923 Cup final, or at the very least harboured ambitions to stand outside a 
tube station on matchday while quietly defecating. (Just to be clear, we’re 
talking about the horse, not the fan.) But instead he’s been reduced to the 
role of slapstick fall guy as one of his friends, now in half-cooked patty 
form, slathered in red sauce and encased in a soggy bun, whistles with extreme 
prejudice towards his startled face. Where’s the dignity?

There’ll be none on display at Wembley on Wednesday, that’s for sure, as Spurs 
decide whether qualifying for the knockout stage of Big Vase is less palatable 
than suffering three Big Cup defeats out of three at a venue they’ll be forced 
to call home again next season, and in the Premier League to boot. CSKA Moscow 
stand in the way of whatever it is they’re trying to achieve. Leicester 
meanwhile travel to Porto, having already qualified as Group G winners, and so 
leave star men Jamie Vardy and Riyad Mahrez at home to rest for their upcoming 
relegation battle. Another less than fascinating evening stretches out ahead of 
us, then. If The Fiver rounds it all up on Thursday, you know we’re in trouble.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Scott Murray from 7.45pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of Tottenham 2-1 CSKA 
Moscow, while Paul Doyle will be on hand for Porto 2-1 Leicester. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“Formed in 1879, Fulham FC is London’s oldest professional football club and 
the first to open a bespoke gin bar … The Clubhouse provides a hub for gin fans 
to gather at London’s original football club, enjoy each other’s company – and 
to celebrate gin!” – Fulham there, lifting The Fiver’s bespoke Tin bar concept 
– a place to celebrate Tin.

FIVER LETTERS

“Regarding ECT therapy for referees (yesterday’s Fiver letters), Dan Makeham 
makes a good point for the application of said therapy as a means of making 
Premier League refs unsee what they have seen. I see a small practical 
generator conveniently located in the referee’s room, for the ref and his 
assistants to avail themselves of just before kick-off. I’m sure there’ll be 
many volunteers to help overcome the logistics of application. The only concern 
I have about ECT is the post-therapy effects it can induce, usually lasting 
between 90-120 minutes. This can include some confusion, decreased visual 
acuity, impaired decision-making and such-like odd behaviour. If we could find 
a way to overcome these side-effects, ECT may pose the answer to decisive and 
accurate match refereeing” – Hanif Khan.

“Dan forgets that we already have a mechanism in place for electro-shocking 
refs, in their new-fangled goal-decision arm buzzer things. I’d suggest 
whacking the voltage up all the way when a referee misses something as clearly 
illegal as David Luiz shoulder-barging a striker into last Tuesday off the 
ball. We could perhaps tune it just right to wipe out enough brain cells to 
send the offending ref back to, say, last Tuesday, where he could get a better 
view of the incident” – Ben Jones.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>.Today’s winner of our 
prizeless letter o’the day is … Ben Jones.


SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

NEWS, BITS AND BOBS

Dario Gradi is to be quizzed by a team of investigators working on behalf of 
the FA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/fa-dario-gradi-chelsea>
 after claims that he visited the parents of a Chelsea youth-team player to 
“smooth over” a complaint of sexual assault against Eddie Heath, the chief 
scout who has been identified as a repeat offender in the 1970s.

Former football coach and Celtic kitman Jim McCafferty has been arrested in 
Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/former-celtic-kitman-arrested-sex-abuse-claims-jim-mccafferty>
 over child sex abuse claims.

Uefa has charged the Queen’s Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/celtic-charged-uefa-crowd-trouble-manchester-city>
 for “crowd disturbances” in Manchester – with the aforementioned supporter 
fined £90 for lobbing that burger at a police horse. The local bizzies’ Twitter 
account @GMPCityCentre got its puns out: “Police horse Lancaster is in a stable 
position.”

Entities set up in the British Virgin Islands by companies representing José 
Mourinho and Him share the same address as two companies which are to be banned 
in their present form from providing loans to Premier League clubs,documents 
have revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/vanterpool-plaza-bvi-address-mourinho-ronaldo-vibrac>
.

Former England manager Mr Roy says he’s ready for another shot at a big job. 
“I feel fit,”he star-jumped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/roy-hodgson-wants-to-return-management-after-england-iceland-wayne-rooney-future>
. “You become a bit wiser with the years and you perhaps make a few less 
mistakes. I just have to wait and see what comes along.”

Michael Carrick, Antonio Valencia, Matteo Darmian, Memphis Depay and Morgan 
Schneiderlin have all been left out of the squad for Manchester United’s 1-1 
draw at Zorya Luhansk.

Decent defending? Utterly shambolic attacking? Both 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/07/striker-thwarted-by-defender-on-goal-line-in-greek-football-match-video>
?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fstriker-thwarted-by-defender-on-goal-line-in-greek-football-match-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Striker%20thwarted%20by%20defender%20on%20goal%20line%20in%20Greek%20football%20match%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fstriker-thwarted-by-defender-on-goal-line-in-greek-football-match-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Striker%20thwarted%20by%20defender%20on%20goal%20line%20in%20Greek%20football%20match%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fstriker-thwarted-by-defender-on-goal-line-in-greek-football-match-video&media=>
Probably both 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/07/striker-thwarted-by-defender-on-goal-line-in-greek-football-match-video>
. 
Palace chairman Steve Parish says he definitely won’t sackpardew.com 
<http://sackpardew.com/>, unless he changes his mind. “[His job] is totally 
safe, in that every manager is under pressure. It’s a binary industry and you 
have to win matches.”

Hull’s Abel Hernandez has added hernia-gah to his groin-twang, and faces 
another three weeks out.

Kelechi Iheanacho says he’s ready to cover for tackling’s Sergio Agüero: 
“Sergio’s out so I need to work really hard to prove myself to the team and 
help the team get points,” he etc and so on-d.

Gong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/amy-lawrence-journalist-of-year-women-in-football-awards>
!

Basingstoke Town have denied putting themselves up for sale on eBay. “There is 
no truth,” honked a suit. “This was a misguided publicity stunt by a former 
director who does not own the club and is not in a position to sell it. The 
listing has been removed.”

And National League North basement dwellers Altrincham FC have axed manager 
Jim Harvey. “Please note, CVs for the vacant manager role must not be based on 
FM or CM achievements,” tooted the club.

STILL WANT MORE?

Floating football brain in jar Jonathan Wilson on the absolute state of 
Premier League defending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/07/goals-premier-league-pep-guardiola-barcelona-manchester-city>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-fiver-big-cup-horse-burger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83464958e7451617eb2d5023a0becabbda8f253f%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Fined%20for%20throwing%20a%20hamburger%20at%20a%20horse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-fiver-big-cup-horse-burger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Fined%20for%20throwing%20a%20hamburger%20at%20a%20horse&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-fiver-big-cup-horse-burger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83464958e7451617eb2d5023a0becabbda8f253f%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Here you go. Composite: PA, Rex, Getty 
Who were the last players in the Premier League to be born in the 50s, 60s and 
70s? It’sThe Knowledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/the-knowledge-premier-league-1950s-born-player>
.

After winning Group A, Arsène Wenger is looking beyond the Round of Arsenal. 
Oof!Dominic Fifield reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/arsenal-champions-league-arsene-wenger-last-16-draw-nyon>
.

A song written in Venezuela in the 1950s and recorded by Julio Iglesias in the 
1970s is now sung in stadiums across the world – thanks to a YouTube video.
Copa90 explain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2016/dec/07/dale-cavese-football-chant-youtube-internet-world>
.

Ben Gibson! £35m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/football-transfer-rumours-alexis-sanchez-wants-400000-a-week-deal>
!

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


BIG PAPER LETTERS BRINGING THE FIRE 
<https://twitter.com/TomBry/status/806174987774283777>
 