
Close to the historic city centre of Florence, slightly off the beaten track, 
there is a bar calledAntico Beccaria 
<https://www.facebook.com/anticobeccaria.firenze/>. The local is the 
quintessential football pub and distinctly partisan in nature. As a home for 
Fiorentina supporters, it’s walled are adorned with purple decor, the menu 
includes panini named after current and former players, and you can even buy 
bottles ofBirra Fiorentina 
<http://www.interbrau.it/sites/interbrau.it/files/styles/gallery/public/fiorentina.jpg?itok=KPUrWy7L>
, a violet-coloured beer that comes in a bottle emblazoned with the club 
emblem. Then there are the customised receipts, which do not wish you the usual 
“arrivederci” at the bottom but are marked with “Juve Merda” (“Juve Shit”).

As the owner of the bar 
<http://corrierespione.altervista.org/il-pub-viola-che-saluta-la-juve/> 
acknowledges, the message is tongue in cheek – a playful reminder of 
Fiorentina’s public enemy No1. But such sentiments are woven into the fabric of 
Florentine society. Anti-Juventus graffiti is visible across the city and 
anti-Juve scarves are plentiful on match days.

This aversion to the Turin giants is not uncommon. As the most successful club 
in Italy, they attract envy, enemies and admirers the length and breadth of the 
country. Florence, however, is a one-club city. Those native to the Tuscan 
capital look no further than Fiorentina and they are proud in the knowledge 
that they harbour no Juventus fan clubs. Perhaps only Rome, which is 
exclusively consumed by theLazio-Roma divide 
<http://www.thegentlemanultra.com/gazzetta/rivals-united-the-paradoxical-politics-of-the-rome-derby>
, can boast the same footballing insularity.

Fiorentina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fiorentina> supporters have 
rendered their city a “zona anti-gobbizzata” (“anti-hunchback zone”). The term “
gobbi’ is commonly used to disparage Juventini. Depending on which myth you 
believe, the slight is either a reference to Juve’s fortune (Italian 
superstition has it that hunchbacks are lucky); Juve’s guilt of being weighed 
down by stolen titles; or to their supporters, many of whom developed hunches 
as a result of their backbreaking work in the Fiat factories of Juve’s owners, 
the Agnelli family.

It is not uncommon to see Fiorentina supporters wearing T-shirts that read “g
razie a Dio non sono gobbo” (“thank God I’m not a hunchback”) and, at the heart 
of their animosity, lies accusations of theft. In 1928, theJuventus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/juventus> thrashed Fiorentina 11-0 in the 
first competitive fixture between the two clubs. Relations were not off to a 
good start and an equally painful 8-0 defeat for Fiorentina 25 years later only 
aggravated matters. Nonetheless, the rivalry between Turin and Florence was 
relatively nondescript until the title race of 1981-82.

Juventus: Serie A alternative club guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2014/jul/22/juventus-serie-a-alternative-club-guide-fans-trezeguet>
Heading into the last game of the season, both clubs were tied on 44 points at 
the top ofSerie A <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serieafootball>. 
Fiorentina travelled to Cagliari, who themselves needed a point to avoid 
relegation, while Juventus faced Catanzaro, who were sitting comfortably in 
mid-table. With both games goalless in the second-half, Francesco Graziani 
thought he had broken the deadlock for Fiorentina only to see his goal 
dubiously disallowed for a push on the goalkeeper. Fiorentina were unable to 
break down Cagliari and had to settle for a 0-0 draw, while Juventus found a 
late winner against Catanzaro, courtesy of a Liam Brady penalty. The awarding 
of Juve’s spot-kick was indisputable, but Catanzaro had also been denied what 
looked like a certain penalty in the first half.

Fiorentina’s burning sense of injustice was palpable and their talisman, 
Giancarlo Antognoni, fired the first broadside. “They robbed us of the title,” 
he claimed. Juventus fans celebrated their 20th Scudetto and in Florence they 
coined the slogan “beglio secondo che ladri” (“better to be second than 
thieves”).

Eight years later, tensions were fomented when Juventus beat Fiorentina in the 
Uefa Cup final. Again, the encounter provoked controversy. With the first leg 
in Turin tied at 1-1, officials missed a blatant push by Pierluigi Casiraghi on 
Fiorentina’s Celeste Pin, allowing Alessio Angelo to fire the home side in 
front. The game finished 3-1 and, as Juve coach Dino Zoff gave his post-match 
interview, Pin walked past and yelled “ladri” (“thieves”) in earshot of Zoff 
and the microphones. Juve’s goalkeeper Stefano Tacconi later reminded 
Fiorentina that, while they might win the war of words, his side would win on 
the pitch. He was right. TheBianconeri lifted the Uefa Cup after a goalless 
draw in the return leg in Florence.

But worse was to come for La Viola. Rumours had circulated that Fiorentina’s 
president, Flavio Pontello, was considering the sale of the club’s prized 
asset: Roberto Baggio. Predictably, their arch-rivals were willing to pay his 
then world-record fee of £8m. The Divine Ponytail joined Juventus shortly after 
the Uefa Cup final and a furore erupted in Florence.

Fans laid siege to the club’s headquarters and reports described bricks, 
chains and Molotov cocktails being thrown by the riotous fans. In the two days 
following the transfer, president Pontello was forced to take refuge in the 
Stadio Artemio Franchi, while 50 injuries and nine arrests were recorded. When 
Baggio returned in his new colours, the city was on edge.

Giancarlo Rinaldi <https://twitter.com/ginkers>, a Viola fan who was in 
Florence at the time, recalls the hostility: “The atmosphere was the most 
intense I can ever remember before a match, with huge tension and a genuine air 
of menace on the streets. Florence was still hurting after that transfer and 
there was a real fear that things might spill over into violence.”

Baggio was subjected to a barrage of whistles, jeers and abuse during the 
game. Despite this, when Juventus were awarded a penalty, he symbolically 
refused to take it. Baggio was later substituted and left the field embracing a 
Viola scarf that had been hurled at him by the crowd, waving it in the 
direction of theCurva Fiesole (the stronghold of Fiorentina’s ultras). 
Unsurprisingly, the gesture only served to antagonise the situation further, 
with Juventus fans also left less than impressed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ffiorentina-juventus-rivalry-theft-roberto-baggio-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F320b2e869bf4e16df5b4dddfcc6c1e39ad4e5879%2F0_137_2410_1619%2F2410.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fiorentina%20v%20Juventus%3A%20a%20rivalry%20stoked%20by%20'theft'%2C%20Roberto%20Baggio%20and%20machine%20guns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ffiorentina-juventus-rivalry-theft-roberto-baggio-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fiorentina%20v%20Juventus%3A%20a%20rivalry%20stoked%20by%20%27theft%27%2C%20Roberto%20Baggio%20and%20machine%20guns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ffiorentina-juventus-rivalry-theft-roberto-baggio-serie-a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F320b2e869bf4e16df5b4dddfcc6c1e39ad4e5879%2F0_137_2410_1619%2F2410.jpg>
 Roberto Baggio playing for Fiorentina against Juventus in the Uefa Cup final 
second leg in 1990. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
Since these episodes, the rivalry has simmered and spluttered. In 2012, the 
hierarchies of the two clubs even came to blows after Juventus made a late bid 
to hijack Fiorentina’s pursuit of Dimitar Berbatov. In the end, the Bulgarian 
snubbed both clubs, but this did not stop the Fiorentina owners (the Della Vale 
brothers) from claiming their rivals “knew nothing of the values of honesty, 
fair play and sporting ethics.”

But what makes this fixture all the more fascinating is the way in which it 
captures the differing identities and perspectives of both sets of fans. For 
Juve supporters, games against Fiorentina are ostensibly just another hurdle 
they must overcome in their race for the title. “From our perspective, the 
fixture against Fiorentina is significant, but not defining,” says Juventus fans
Arjun Pradeep <https://twitter.com/IndianRegista>. It is not a Turin derby and 
neither does it possess the prestige of aDerby d’Italia against Inter, which 
has often had direct implications for the title race. “This rivalry is felt in 
Florence more than it is in Turin,” concludes Arjun.

As such, some Juventus fans have adopted a haughty nonchalance when it comes 
to playing Fiorentina, confident in the knowledge that even if they lose, they 
will have bigger matches to worry about. This perceived hubris riles and 
motivates their rivals. “Florentines like to deflate big egos and they don’t 
come any bigger than some Juventini,” says Giancarlo. Indeed, Fiorentina revel 
in their status as underdogs and successes are treated like cup final 
victories, as evinced by thecelebrations following their famous 4-2 triumph 
over Juventus in October 2013 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NekltLjByrE>.

This is not to say Fiorentina don’t share fierce rivalries with other clubs. 
The cross-borderDerby dell’Appenino against Bologna is a colourful affair and 
their regional clashes with Tuscan foes such as Siena serve as symbolic 
re-enactments of the medieval battles fought between the two city states. But 
unlike Bologna or their Tuscan foes, Juventus have been an omnipresent and 
omnipotent adversary.

“The significance of this match simply cannot be underestimated for Fiorentina 
fans,” says Fiorentina fanChloe Beresford <https://twitter.com/ChloeJBeresford>
. She acknowledges that the rivalry is shaped by the histrionics of 1982 and 
the infamous Baggio transfer, she is also quick to point out that the 
Florentine repudiation of Juventus is inextricably tied to their local 
identity: “Florence is a one-team city and one which is regularly invaded by 
hordes of foreign tourists. The football team – with its unique purple kit – is 
a part of the city which still exclusively belongs to its people and they 
defend their identity with fierce passion.”

This local patriotism, or campanilismo in Italian, is inescapable and often 
manifests most explicitly within football. “Everyone is well aware of what they 
see as the characteristics of the city but also what they are not,” says 
Giancarlo. “Juve – and their fans – epitomise a lot of the qualities Fiorentina 
fans see as entirely alien. For me, that is at the heart of the rivalry.”

These qualities are deemed so alien, that Viola ultras have been known to 
perform a peculiar “de-hunchbacking” ritual on former Juventus players who sign 
for Fiorentina. Marco Marchionni, Angelo Di Livio and Moreno Torricelli are all 
said to have experienced this ceremony, in which players receive a membership 
card for the Gruppo Storico, a prominent group of ultras on the Curva Fiesole. 
But such passion can become suffocating and at times the rivalry has become a 
morbidly obsessive relationship that has proved unhelpful to the club. At its 
most reprehensible, this has led to violent clashes and even a minority of 
Viola fans taunting their rivals aboutthe Heysel Stadium tragedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/28/juventus-heysel-victims-30-years-liverpool>
, which claimed the lives of 39 Juventini.

Unsurprisingly, this has magnified the importance of the rivalry from a black 
and white perspective.Adam Digby <https://twitter.com/Adz77>, author of 
Juventus: A History in Black and White 
<http://www.ockleybooks.co.uk/shop/juventus-a-history-in-black-and-white>, is 
well placed to comment. He has experienced the game in both cities and believes 
that “because it means so much to fans of the Tuscan side, Juventus fans want 
to beat them in order to not watch their opponents celebrate”. This is 
especially true when the two sides meet in Florence, where games take on a more 
volatile atmosphere.

How a Scottish manager working in Wales ended up in charge of Juventus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-gentleman-ultra/2016/dec/10/juventus-turin-manager-scottish-billy-chalmers-derby-torino>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ffiorentina-juventus-rivalry-theft-roberto-baggio-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60aadfd344b6511bbb77c568a8cfb6aeee89c20a%2F0_66_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fiorentina%20v%20Juventus%3A%20a%20rivalry%20stoked%20by%20'theft'%2C%20Roberto%20Baggio%20and%20machine%20guns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ffiorentina-juventus-rivalry-theft-roberto-baggio-serie-a%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fiorentina%20v%20Juventus%3A%20a%20rivalry%20stoked%20by%20%27theft%27%2C%20Roberto%20Baggio%20and%20machine%20guns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-gentleman-ultra%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ffiorentina-juventus-rivalry-theft-roberto-baggio-serie-a%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60aadfd344b6511bbb77c568a8cfb6aeee89c20a%2F0_66_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Paul Pogba guns down Fiorentina. Photograph: Andreas Solaro/AFP/Getty Images 
This attitude has also been embodied by the players. During Juve’s 4-2 defeat 
in 2013, both Paul Pogba and Carlos Tevez goaded Viola fans by mimicking the 
machine gun celebration of legendary Fiorentina forward, Gabriel Batistuta 
(whose celebrations always seemed particularly fervent against Juve). Antonio 
Conte did the same during his Juventus playing career and later, while head 
coach in Turin, he claimed it would be provincial of Juventus to regard 
Fiorentina as one of their main rivals. The response from Fiorentina fans was 
Tuscan humour at its best: they mocked Conte’s hair transplant by sporting wigs 
the next time he was in town.

Fortunately, this kind of satire has become the weapon of choice for both sets 
of fans. But the two clubs remain a long way from reaching a detente and the 
acrimony remains, especially in Florence. The hunchback T-shirts will continue 
to be sold, the graffiti will be sprayed and the receipts will be printed. With 
its inherent baggage, evocative memories and vastly varying identities, this is 
a rivalry that will endure. And that makes Fiorentina v Juventus one of the 
most intriguing fixtures in the Serie A calendar.

• This blog first appeared on The Gentleman Ultra 
<http://www.thegentlemanultra.com/>
• Follow Luca Hodges-Ramon <https://twitter.com/LH_Ramon25> and The Gentleman 
Ultra <https://twitter.com/Gentleman_Ultra>on Twitter
• Thanks to Giancarlo Rinaldi <https://twitter.com/ginkers>, Chloe Beresford 
<https://twitter.com/ChloeJBeresford>, Adam Digby <https://twitter.com/Adz77> 
andArjun Prandeep <https://twitter.com/IndianRegista>
 