
The founder of Italy’s populist Five Star Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/five-star-movement> (M5S) has asked members 
to vote on splitting from a Eurosceptic bloc of MEPs co-chaired by Nigel Farage.

Beppe Grillo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/beppe-grillo>, a comedian 
turned politician, said in a post on his blog that since Farage had led Ukip to 
Britain voting to leave the EU, the two parties no longer shared common goals 
and he recommended leaving the Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy (EFDD).

“Recent events in Europe, such as Brexit, have led us to reconsider the nature 
of the EFDD group,” Grillo wrote. “With the extraordinary success of the leave 
campaign, Ukip achieved its political objective: to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. 


“Let’s discuss the concrete facts: Farage has already abandoned the leadership 
of his party and British MEPs will leave the European parliament in the next 
legislature. Until then, our British colleagues will be focused on developing 
the choices that will determine the UK’s political future.”

Grillo and Farage forged an alliance over lunch in Brussels after 2014’s 
European elections, in whichUkip took the largest share of the vote in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/26/ukip-european-elections-political-earthquake>
 and M5S came second in Italy after winning 17 seats.

Both said at the time that the group was aimed at “restoring freedom and 
national democracy”, with Farage adding: “Expect us to fight the good fight to 
take back control of our countries’ destinies.”

In a move that would see his party mesh with European liberals, Grillo has 
called an online referendum, scheduled for Sunday and Monday, on breaking away 
and instead forming a new group with the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> (ALDE), led by the 
former Belgian prime minister, Guy Verhofstadt, who is also the EU’s chief 
Brexit negotiator.

Grillo has long called for a referendum on Italy’s membership of the euro 
currency, but not onItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> leaving the 
EU.

With ALDE’s 68 MEPs, the alliance could become the “third political force in 
the European parliament”, Grillo wrote, while pointing to the fact that his 
party had only voted alongside Ukip about 20% of the time within the past few 
years.

He said the two shared values linked to “direct democracy, transparency, 
freedom and honesty”.

“With our vote we can make a difference and influence the result of many 
important decisions to counter the European establishment,” Grillo added.

Farage said in a statement: “In political terms it would be completely 
illogical for Five Star to join the most Euro fanatic group in the European 
parliament. The ALDE group doesn’t support referenda or the basic principle of 
direct democracy. ALDE are also the loudest voice for a EU army. I suspect if 
Five Star joins ALDE it’s support will not last long.”

A Ukip spokesman said: “Both Ukip and Five Star are free to choose to stay or 
quit a political relationship. While it’s interesting that some Five Star MEPs 
adamantly wish to stay in the EFDD group, as adults we wish them all the best 
whatever they do.”
 