
Picture the scene. A US Air Force F-16 Falcon has come down over Syria. The 
pilot is being held by Islamic State which threatens to behead him. Video shows 
the pilot being tortured in a cage, while the terrorists taunt new US president,
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. The pilot’s 
family plead for the White House to save him. The drama is dominating the 
24-hour TV news networks. It’s a media storm. What will Trump do?

Answer: nobody has a clue. Trump lacks military experience. He has never 
served in the armed forces. Nor does he have any background in diplomacy. What 
Trump does have, by all accounts, is a short fuse – a tendency to shoot first 
and ask questions later. His predecessors would have played for time, appealed 
to local allies, or pursued deniable, back-door talks while examining options 
for a rescue.

But president Trump is different. Unused to the awesome responsibility of the 
Oval Office, under fierce pressure to act, enraged by Isis’s personal jibes, 
infuriated by accusations of dithering, and determined not to show weakness, it 
is easy to imagine Trump making a wrong, hasty and disastrous call. With a few 
hot-headed words, translated into situation-room orders, Trump could not only 
lose the pilot, he could plunge the US inextricably into the quagmire of 
another Middle East war.

There are grave doubts about Trump's inexperience, volatile temperament and 
macho instincts

Grave doubts about Trump’s inexperience, volatile temperament and macho 
instincts also apply in other global hotspots where a US president’s actions, 
or inaction, are always critical and sometimes lethal. Here are five dangerous 
flashpoint issues that could suddenly and unpredictably test the novice 
president’s judgment, cool and common sense in the first 100 days of his tenure.

SYRIA AND IRAQ

The Isis hostage scenario is not wholly imaginary. In January last year, a 
Royal Jordanian air force pilot, Muath al-Kasasbeh, wascaptured and burned to 
death 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/middleeast/2015/02/isil-releases-video-showing-killing-jordanian-pilot-150203163349915.html>
 in a cage by the jihadis after negotiations for his release failed. Similar 
repeat incidents involving US, European and Arab members of the anti-Isis 
coalition, and local forces, are becoming more likely as the endgame in the 
fight against the Isis caliphate approaches.

The battle is being fought out on two main fronts. One is the siege of Mosul, 
northern Iraq’s principal city. Trump has criticised the conduct of the 
campaign, which involves the mainly Shia Iraqi army, Kurdish and Sunni Arab 
militias backed by 300 US special forces commandos. But he has not offered an 
alternative strategy.

Much the same holds true of the attempt to seize the Isis headquarters in 
Raqqa, in northern Syria. Trump says that defeating terrorism is a top priority 
and he will “bomb the shit out of Isis”. But nobody, including him, appears to 
know what this means in practice. If the battle goes badly, will he escalate? 
Will he carpet-bomb cities where millions of civilians live? Is he prepared to 
deploy US ground forces? What will he do if, as seems possible, both sieges 
become bogged down, or Isis beginsmass, daily executions of civilians 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/10/28/middleeast/iraq-mosul-isis/>?

Trump is also silent about Turkey 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/uncertainties-in-us-turkey-relations-in-trump-era.aspx?pageID=449&nID=105948&NewsCatID=409>
’s significant military intervention in Syria and Iraq and its parallel fight 
with the Kurds. President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan wants two things from Trump: an 
end to US support for the Kurdish peshmerga and the extradition ofFethullah 
Gülen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/fethullah-gulen-who-is-the-man-blamed-by-turkeys-president-for-coup-attempt>
, a cleric exiled in the US who he blames for last summer’s failed coup. With 
Isis on the back foot and the Iraqi and Syrian governments weakened, the 
Turkey-Kurd feud could explode at any time as the protagonists try to redraw 
national boundaries and compete for territory and resources.

RUSSIA AND EASTERN EUROPE

Trump has raised expectations that he can repair the US rupture with Russia. 
But a reset will come with a price. In the first instance, Vladimir Putin, 
Russia’s authoritarian president, will want a relaxation or scrapping of 
punitive sanctions imposed after Russia annexed Crimea in 2014. To dismay in 
Europe, Trump has suggested he may agree.

Putin also seems likely to get his way in Syria, where Russian forces have 
pushed his client, Bashar al-Assad, to the brink of victory inAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/may-european-leaders-stop-russian-atrocities-syria-brexi>
 and elsewhere. Trump has made no serious objection to Russian actions in 
Syria, even though the UN says they may constitute war crimes. He seems content 
to have Assad remain in power, or even to treat him as an anti-Isis ally.

However, the regime’s renewed use of chemical weapons, for example, new 
Russian atrocities, or a suddenly escalating humanitarian and refugee 
catastrophe could all trigger a new crisis that blows up in Trump’s face, 
forcing him to move against Putin. The idea ofno-fly zones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/no-fly-zone-aleppo-war-russia-syria>
 and civilian safe havens still has backers. If Trump goes down this route, he 
could end up directly confronting Russia’s military.

The European allies cannot do much about Trump’s Syria insouciance. But they 
will strongly oppose him if he tries to run down theNato alliance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/madeleine-albright-donald-trump-nato-isolationism>
, as he has suggested. Russian pressure on Nato’s easternmost members in the 
Baltic republics,Poland and Bulgaria 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-37867591> – in terms of political 
meddling, disinformation, cyber attacks, missile deployments and military 
exercises – is reaching new heights. Influence-peddling and destabilisation 
operations are increasingly reported in Moldova, Montenegro and elsewhere in 
the Balkans. Eastern Ukraine remains a ticking timebomb. Any of these 
flashpoints could ignite at any time in Trump’s first 100 days.

European governments want to present a strong, united front. But Trump seems 
more interested in buying Russia off by acquiescing in Putin’s reclamation of 
former cold war spheres of influence. Trump’sdisdain for the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/europe-leaders-cannot-hide--nerves-amid-donald-trump-congratulations>
 – he loudly applauded Britain’s vote to leave – and critical European reaction 
to his election, notably in Germany and France, point to a possible US-Europe 
schism down the road. If it happens, Trump will have helped Putin achieve a 
long-cherished Russian strategic objective, shattering 70 years of 
Euro-Atlanticism.

CHINA

Beijing shows no sign of backing away from its expansionist policies in the 
South China and East China seas. It is busily transforming reefs and tiny 
islands into military bases, which will ultimately give it control of sea lanes 
through which much of the world’s maritime trade passes.China 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=Trump+Beijing+guardian>
 continues to ignore the rival territorial claims of neighbouring countries, 
including Japan, whose commerce is directly threatened.

To counter China, the US and Japan have stepped up naval and air patrols in 
the disputed areas. They have also pursued closer military cooperation with 
Vietnam and other regional states such as Australia. A recent UN court ruling 
in the Hague on a complaint brought by the Philippines rejected China’s claims 
as illegal. But Beijing rejected the decision, and has since sought to woo the 
Philippines’ anti-American president,Rodrigo Duterte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/china-courts-philippines-leader-duterte-amid-signs-of-us-rift>
.

It is more than likely, on present trends, that the US and Chinese militaries 
will, sooner or later, come into direct confrontation, either by air or at sea. 
Until now a clash has been avoided, partly because neither side knows where it 
would lead. Nationalist feeling in China is periodically whipped up by the 
Communist party. If Trump blunders into this delicate situation, or 
deliberately tries to push the Chinese back, the fallout could be dangerous.

In terms of tripwires, Taiwan is, as always, a trap for an unwary American 
leader. Taiwan elected a new president earlier this year whom the Chinese 
suspect of pursuing an independence agenda. It has since increased pressure on 
Taipei, including suspending talks. Taiwan has been a frozen conflict for so 
long that it is hard to imagine it suddenly going “live”. ButXi Jinping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/china-tantalized-mayhem-us-election-prospect-thug-donald-trump-president>
, China’s hard-headed president, is clear that he will not wait indefinitely 
for reunification. Like Trump, he is used togetting what he wants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/obama-failed-asian-pivot-china-ascendant>
.

NORTH KOREA AND IRAN

The issue of nuclear proliferation links these two countries. Iran has always 
denied possessing or trying to acquire or buildnuclear weapons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons-foreign-policy-north-korea-iran-russia>
 in the past. Last year’s landmark pact between Washington, its European 
partners and Tehran produced pledges that Iran would not seek to make a bomb in 
the future, or at least for the next 10 years.

But Trump is on record as saying the deal is a bad one and should be scrapped. 
This stance plays into the hands of hardline clerics in Tehran who have 
consistently opposed president Hassan Rouhani’s policy of nuclear concessions 
in return for UN sanctions relief. Israel’s right-wing government, led by 
Benjamin Netanyahu, Trump’s new best friend (see below), also wants the deal 
scrapped.If Trump reneges 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-trump-iran-idUSKBN13427E>, 
Rouhani will be undermined, as will be global counter-proliferation efforts.

North Korea’s dictator, Kim Jong-un, not only already has nuclear weapons, but 
isaccelerating and expanding <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-37171608> 
the country’s weapons-building programmes, much to the alarm of Japan, South 
Korea and the west. In the past, Trump suggested he might meet Kim. The offer 
was laughed off in Pyongyang. A parlay between Kim and Trump might set some 
kind of record for clashing egos. But it would be unlikely to achieve much.

Trump’s other suggestion, that Japan and South Korea acquire nuclear weapons 
to deter North Korea, was one of his more irresponsible – and insensitive, 
given Japan’s unique experience in 1945. North Korea will be watching theTrump 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> 
closely. If it senses Trump is distracted, or disinterested in Asian security 
issues (which has certainly appeared to be the case until now), Kim could try 
something provocative or risky, if only to test US reactions. Given that he is 
three-parts unhinged, that is a scary prospect.

ISRAEL AND PALESTINE
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ffive-key-global-tests-for-the-new-president%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31ba12c3e41fdf8a7f324a84c2bc9f0dc9cfd128%2F0_190_3071_1843%2F3071.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20key%20global%20tests%20for%20the%20new%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ffive-key-global-tests-for-the-new-president%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20key%20global%20tests%20for%20the%20new%20president&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Ffive-key-global-tests-for-the-new-president%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31ba12c3e41fdf8a7f324a84c2bc9f0dc9cfd128%2F0_190_3071_1843%2F3071.jpg>
 Donald Trump with Israel’s Benjamin Netanyahu in New York. Photograph: Reuters 
Trump has taken a staunchly pro-Israel line since running for president and 
has promised to be the country’s “closest friend”. What this may mean in 
practice is the subject of speculation. But Trump advisers have told Israeli 
media that one of his first acts will be to order the removal of the US embassy 
in Tel Aviv toJerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/israel-donald-trump-netanyahu-jerusalem>
.

Such a decision, resisted by past Democrat and Republican presidents alike, is 
of enormous symbolic importance since it would represent de facto recognition 
of Israel’s claim to all of Jerusalem as its indivisible capital. It would 
negate, in one sweeping gesture, the Palestinians’ claim to east Jerusalem as 
the capital of a future independent Palestinian state.

Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel’s prime minister, has been careful to keep on the 
right side of Trump, having fallen out with Barack Obama over US peacemaking 
efforts and a range of other issues. Netanyahu’s obsequiousness may be paying 
off. As far as is known, he is the first foreign leader to be invited to the 
Trump White House. Some of his more hardline cabinet ministers are meanwhile 
predicting the end of any American efforts to implement a two-state solution.

The Palestinian leadership has politely congratulated Trump on his success. 
But if he makes the Jerusalem switch, anger in the occupied territories and 
Gaza will be intense, and could quickly turn violent. Another intifada is the 
very last thing the Middle East needs. But as the world now knows, uprisings 
are a Trump speciality.
 