
It’s late afternoon at Broadcasting House in central London and I’m watching 
with awe and amusement as BBC Radio 3’s drivetime showIn Tune 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006tp0c> is coming together – and falling 
apart. The tenor booked to sing live has lost his voice;Ornette Coleman has 
just died <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/11/ornette-coleman>, 
which requires a hastily arranged tribute; and they’ve just heard that 
conductor Andris Nelsons has withdrawn from that evening’s broadcast concert 
due to illness. “You picked a good day to come,” says one of the harassed 
production team.

The battle for the BBC | Charlotte Higgins
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/14/battle-for-the-bbc> 
The mood of spirited determination is captured perfectly by the recording of 
Grieg’s Wedding Day at Troldhaugen that is playing when I arrive with the 
station’s new controller, Alan Davey, who manages to stay cheerful throughout. 
It’s the culmination of a long and illuminating day spent with Davey, who to 
general surprise (and some consternation among those who thought he was 
ill-qualified) took over as Radio 3 controller earlier this year, having 
previously been chief executive ofArts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/arts-council-england>. The doubters 
wondered whether this cultural gamekeeper really could turn poacher overnight.

One thing’s for sure: Davey is a modest man. He oversees Radio 3 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio3>, the Proms, five BBC orchestras, the BBC Singers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/singers> and the choruses attached to two of the 
orchestras. If I had an empire that extensive, I would want an office the size 
of a football pitch. But he has a small desk in the corner of the room at 
Broadcasting House occupied by Radio 3. He’s a sentimental man, too. Next to 
the desk are two photographs of his cats.

At the arts council they used to mock me because I said everything was 
transformational. I was transformed every night

This modesty does not, however, extend to the unique cultural enterprise he 
has been running since January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/sep/26/bbc-alan-davey-radio-3-controller>
, and which over the next two months gets its annual showcase withthe Proms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms>. Indeed, he reckons it’s time to blow 
a few Wagnerian fanfares on its behalf. “We’re too darned modest about what we 
do. For instance, it’s remarkable that our drivetime show has live music every 
day. Thelicence fee <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-licence-fee>, which 
is venture capital for cultural output, allows us to do it. Our contribution to 
the classical music industry, and contemporary music and jazz, is too often 
forgotten.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwere-too-darned-modest-about-we-do-radio-3-boss-alan-daveys-typical-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437479146124%2Fafd59ca1-ab51-4053-8bb3-2d2fb2c67978-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%E2%80%99re%20too%20darned%20modest%20about%20what%20we%20do'%3A%20Radio%203%20boss%20Alan%20Davey's%20typical%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwere-too-darned-modest-about-we-do-radio-3-boss-alan-daveys-typical-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%E2%80%99re%20too%20darned%20modest%20about%20what%20we%20do%27%3A%20Radio%203%20boss%20Alan%20Davey%27s%20typical%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwere-too-darned-modest-about-we-do-radio-3-boss-alan-daveys-typical-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437479146124%2Fafd59ca1-ab51-4053-8bb3-2d2fb2c67978-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alan Davey watches from the control room as Suzy Klein broadcasts her Radio 3 
show. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
He has yet to show his hand in terms of remoulding the station – he says there 
will be changes in the autumn – but emphasises that expressing the totality of 
what it does is as important as making sure individual elements work. “We are 
about not just classical music, but interesting, complex, serious music. We 
have drama, and we’ve got talk on culture and ideas. Do people realise we’ve 
got all those elements? I’m not sure they do.”

How, though, does it differ from Radio 4, which also has highbrow chat? 
“You’re likely to get a purer approach to ideas on Radio 3,” says Davey, “and, 
increasingly, speech will be attached to something that’s going on elsewhere in 
musical terms on the station. I would never want all speech to be on Radio 4 
and all music to be onRadio 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-3>. The 
mix gives us a richness we need to develop further.”

Davey faces a dual problem: he has to boost overall numbers of listeners from 
an average of around 2 million a week, and break down the “silos” of 
listenership, with many of the core classical brigade reluctant to buy into 
more challenging parts of the schedule. “I want Radio 3 to be seen as a 
cultural institution that has classical music at its heart,” he says, “but also 
has contemporary classical music, jazz, world, roots – stuff that will interest 
anyone who has a curiosity about music and culture.”

He is coy about the changes he is planning, but hints at the launch of a 
weekly programme that will take an in-depth, nuts-and-bolts approach to musical 
works – a tacit admission that scrappingDiscovering Music 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/2013/11/cold-cold-heart> in 2013 was a mistake. 
Contemporary music also needs to become more central, and not be buried in the 
more obscure corners of the schedule. We come up with the idea of a programme 
called Stockhausen in the Morning, but he sounds doubtful about its prospects.

Alan Davey: why Radio 3 have hired well in this former punk enthusiast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/26/alan-davey-controller-radio-3-charlotte-higgins>
Live concerts every evening will stay; opera will move back from Mondays to 
Saturdays; the old warhorseComposer of the Week 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006tnxf> sounds as if it’s safe. “It’s 
building on what’s good, rather than revolution, and making more sense of 
what’s there,” he explains. “We also have to make sure we have the tone right – 
informed but informal, not exclusive, so if you turn on you’ll want to keep 
listening and be curious about what’s next.”

He wants presenters to express “their musical personalities as well as their 
personalities”, which I take to be code for less blather and more engagement 
with the music. He made a welcome start by dropping the phone-in that used to 
interrupt the breakfast programme – one of those gimmicks that was supposed to 
suggest interactivity, but in reality just got in the way.

Davey has made it clear there will be no attempt to compete with Classic FM, 
which, with its touchy feeliness and “smiling down the airwaves”, has almost 
treble Radio 3’s audience. Chasing ratings is a recipe for disaster, he says: 
audiences can sniff out manipulative programming a mile off. He points out that 
Radio 3’s famously highbrow original incarnation,the Third Programme 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio3/classical/thirdprogramme/>, will celebrate 70 
years since its foundation next year, and he intends to honour its memory. 
There will be no dumbing down on Davey’s watch.

A key question is what being a radio station means in a digital age, when 
everything is available oncatchup services <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer>. What 
he calls the Reithian ideal of “linear listening” is increasingly being 
replaced by “self-curation”. That may only make the problem of stratified 
listening – listeners sticking to what they know – worse. You are less likely 
to serendipitously stumble from Brahms into Berio. Part of the answer, he 
believes, is investment in the Radio 3 website, the key to contextualising 
works, melding together music and words, and deepening audience engagement. 
Without it, the danger is that Radio 3 could become merely an up-market version 
ofSpotify <https://www.spotify.com/uk/>.

Davey is a career civil servant. He started in health, moved into culture, was 
chief executive of Arts Council England from 2008 to 2014, and was headhunted 
for the Radio 3 job whenRoger Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/24/roger-wright-leaves-radio-3-controller>
 stepped down last year. “The headhunters rang, and what they always do is ask 
if you know anyone who might be interested. I was coming up with all kinds of 
ideas and then they said, ‘What about you?’ And I thought, ‘Yes, actually that 
would be a dream come true.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwere-too-darned-modest-about-we-do-radio-3-boss-alan-daveys-typical-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437479056401%2F3d7c8b4c-35a1-432f-a42d-d52395193ba8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%E2%80%99re%20too%20darned%20modest%20about%20what%20we%20do'%3A%20Radio%203%20boss%20Alan%20Davey's%20typical%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwere-too-darned-modest-about-we-do-radio-3-boss-alan-daveys-typical-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%E2%80%99re%20too%20darned%20modest%20about%20what%20we%20do%27%3A%20Radio%203%20boss%20Alan%20Davey%27s%20typical%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwere-too-darned-modest-about-we-do-radio-3-boss-alan-daveys-typical-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437479056401%2F3d7c8b4c-35a1-432f-a42d-d52395193ba8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Inside Radio 3’s control room Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Some critics were rather snooty 
<http://slippedisc.com/2014/09/lord-widmerpool-rising-at-the-bbc/> about a 
bureaucrat, rather than someone with a music background, getting the top job, 
but Davey is unabashed. “In order to make things happen, you don’t need 
detailed musicological knowledge. You need to know what’s interesting and 
what’s not; what’s worth pursuing and what’s not. You need to be able to manage 
budgets and lead people. I’m used to making creative things happen in a 
bureaucratic context.”

How is he finding life at the Beeb? “It is a recognisable bureaucratic 
culture. It does take a certain amount of resilience and resource. They like 
meetings a lot, but a pleasant surprise about Radio 3 is how quickly you can 
get things done.” Does thesatirical TV series W1A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/15/w1a-bbc-licence-fee-john-whittingdale>
 present an accurate picture? “I couldn’t possibly comment,” he says with his 
characteristic high-pitched giggle.

However, when I ask him to compare running Radio 3 to running the arts 
council, he says: “I feel a lot freer. I’m dealing with output. You’re in the 
spotlight if things go wrong, and I enjoy that. I was always quite hands-on at 
the arts council, but being editor-in-chief at Radio 3 is fantastic.”

During our day together, he attends various meetings – to discuss the 
presentation of contemporary music, theTen Pieces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/16/bbc-ten-pieces-classical-music-primary-school-children>
 scheme aimed at introducing children to classical music, and a month-long 
series called Magnetic North scheduled for the wintry depths of December, which 
will pull together music and drama from the world’s most northerly places. He 
also finds time to say hello to American sopranoAngel Blue 
<http://www.angeljoyblue.com/about.html>, who is recording a programme of her 
favourite music for transmission later that week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwere-too-darned-modest-about-we-do-radio-3-boss-alan-daveys-typical-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437475969702%2F8b70341f-1e96-4b8d-a407-0f634bf26a37-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%E2%80%99re%20too%20darned%20modest%20about%20what%20we%20do'%3A%20Radio%203%20boss%20Alan%20Davey's%20typical%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwere-too-darned-modest-about-we-do-radio-3-boss-alan-daveys-typical-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%E2%80%99re%20too%20darned%20modest%20about%20what%20we%20do%27%3A%20Radio%203%20boss%20Alan%20Davey%27s%20typical%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fwere-too-darned-modest-about-we-do-radio-3-boss-alan-daveys-typical-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437475969702%2F8b70341f-1e96-4b8d-a407-0f634bf26a37-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Davey meets US soprano Angel Blue at Radio 3 HQ. Photograph: David Levene for 
the Guardian 
Davey, who is 54, comes from a working-class family in the north-east of 
England – the accent is still traceable – and developed his love of music while 
studying English at Birmingham University in the early 1980s, whenSimon Rattle 
was beginning his long stint at the CBSO 
<http://www.birminghampost.co.uk/whats-on/arts-culture-news/simon-rattle---25-year-8452035>
. He says music came to define his life, and he has always wanted to pass that 
“gift” on to others. “I was always passionate about the role of culture. Poetry 
could change your life; music could change your life. At the arts council they 
used to mock me because I said everything was transformational. I was 
transformed every night. But I really do believe that if you are involved in 
interesting art, it can take you to places.” He reckons his move from health to 
culture was not as eccentric as it looks: both are about wellbeing.

We have lunch – bangers and slightly cold mash – at the BBC Symphony 
Orchestra’s rundown and soon-to-be-redeveloped rehearsal space in Maida Vale. 
Afterwards we sit in on a rehearsal and are briefed on the orchestra’s coming 
season. The orchestras and the Proms, where former Glyndebourne general director
David Pickard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/26/glyndebournes-david-pickard-new-director-of-proms>
 will shortly be installed, have their own heads, but Davey oversees them and 
has to fit them into the BBC’s cultural jigsaw.

David Pickard likely to bring evolution not revolution to the Proms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/26/glyndebournes-david-pickard-new-director-of-proms>
The orchestra’s 2016 season <http://www.bbc.co.uk/symphonyorchestra> will 
include ambitious programmes made possible by the licence fee, such as the 
“immersion days” devoted to contemporary composers. Is his budget – reckoned to 
be more than £60m, though he says it’s hard to enumerate exactly because some 
costs are split across stations – safe inthe current chilly climate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/19/bbc-speak-peace-enemies-want-war-charter-renewal>
? “I have no reason to believe it’s not,” he says. Are all five orchestras safe 
when radio bands across Europe are being cut? “I’m under no pressure to get rid 
of one.”

You hope he’s right, but as the BBC’s funding comes under increasing pressure, 
it is likely that the station and the other parts of Davey’s empire will be 
forced to take a hit. He will need all his civil service-bred dexterity and 
diplomacy to protect his domain – no doubt one of the reasons he was chosen in 
the first place.

“Radio 3, the Proms and the performing groups are a cultural institution at 
the centre of the BBC’s mission to educate, entertain and inform,” he says. “If 
we end up with significantly less income then, yes, protecting these cultural 
jewels will become harder. That’s why we have to fight to make sure the 
settlement and charter really do work for the BBC; otherwise our ability to 
broadcast the range of works we do may be endangered.”

He recognises that the Proms offer the best ground on which to wage the PR 
battle that will help determine the BBC’s future. “The Proms take up most of 
Radio 3’s schedule over the summer and are the most publicly visible piece of 
our activity,” he says. “They attract huge and varied audiences, and we need to 
persuade those audiences that the spirit of the Proms exists all year round on 
Radio 3, and in the work of theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> 
orchestras and choirs.”

The station’s critics like to moan about the amount being spent on a 
relatively small audience – it costs 12 times more per listener than Radio 2 – 
but Davey is unapologetic. “We are extremely good value for money given the 
scope of what we do, and it’s important to society for that sort of content to 
be there. We should be valued properly, not apologised for, and not spoken of 
in an embarrassed way. We should be a key part of why the BBC exists.”
 