
Arsenal striker Olivier Giroud staked his claim for the goal-of-the-season 
award with a glorious scorpion-kick finish against Crystal Palace.The Frenchman 
became the talk of the town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/01/donkey-scorpion-olivier-giroud-volley-arsenal-crystal-palace>
 when he reached behind him with his left boot to flick Alexis Sánchez’s cross 
in off the crossbar to give the Gunners a 17th-minute lead. Here are some of 
his rivals for best league goal this season.

Jordan Henderson (Liverpool)


Liverpool captain Henderson has only scored one goal this season but it was 
certainly a peach. From England colleague Gary Cahill’s clearance, Henderson 
took one touch to cushion the ball into his path before smashing a30-yard 
attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/chelsea-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 that sailed across Chelsea goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois and into the top corner 
of his net in the Reds’ 2-1 success at Stamford Bridge.

Wilfried Zaha (Crystal Palace)


If ever there was a moment where Zaha showed the type of skill which once 
persuaded Sir Alex Ferguson to make him his finalManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> signing, this was it. 
The winger took down a cleared corner and managed to sneak between Sam Clucas 
and Tom Huddlestone with some excellent close control before unleashing a shot 
with his right boot which flew into David Marshall’s top corner.

Jordan Henderson’s sumptuous strike helps Liverpool to win at Chelsea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/chelsea-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
Jeff Hendrick (Burnley)


On the same day Zaha was dropping jaws in Hull, Burnley’s record signing was 
doing likewise in east Lancashire. The Republic of Ireland international had to 
stretch to even bring Matthew Lowton’s through ball under his spell and from 
there he teed himself up before dispatching an arcing 20-yard volley over Artur 
Boruc. His manager, Sean Dyche, noted: “It’s just a shame we’re notArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> because then it would be shown a 
1,000 times instead of maybe four.”

Henrikh Mkhitaryan (Manchester United)


Wondering where Giroud got the inspiration for his goal from? Six days earlier 
ManchesterUnited’s Armenian playmaker Mkhitaryan scored with a scorpion kick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/manchester-united-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
 himself. This one was from a lower angle, closer to the goal – and Mkhitaryan 
was even offside as he leaned forward and blasted Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s 
right-wing cross into the far corner of the net. It was hailed as the 
campaign’s best strike for less than a week, though...

Olivier Giroud (Arsenal)


Giroud had already squandered one opportunity from five yards when the Gunners 
broke forward later in the first half on the counterattack. Sánchez’s cross was 
actually behind Giroud but, with the big forward barely breaking stride, he 
contorted his body to allow him to reach it with the back of his heel and 
direct the ball above Wayne Hennessey and in off the underside of the crossbar.
 