
Over the past 15 years, the choice of bicycles and commuter clothing for women 
has grown in leaps and bounds. The “shrink it and pink it” approach, once 
employed by almost all major bike brands, has mercifully been abandoned, and 
the fact there is even debate about theusefulness of female-specific bike design
 
<http://www.cyclingweekly.co.uk/news/product-news/are-women-specific-bikes-necessary-164672>
 suggests the market has become much more sophisticated.

But an increase in choice has not seen more women taking to the roads. In 
2015, men still made three times as many trips by bicycle as women, and areport 
released by the cycling app Strava 
<https://cyclingindustry.news/strava-womens-cycling-report-details-a-wealth-of-information-for-the-bike-industry/>
 found that 40% of women surveyed had experienced some kind of barrier to 
taking up cycling, with a majority citing a fear of the roads; others made 
reference to “issues related to body image”.

These barriers arguably become more acute when it comes to riding to work, 
because unlike other forms of cycling – the weekend club run, a family holiday 
spin – becoming a successful commuter means figuring out what kind of cycling 
suits your daily routine, and this can be difficult to get right.

To feel safe and confident on the road means answering some key questions 
about how you want to ride, and being honest about how a bike fits in.

Folding bike helmet wins James Dyson design award
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/17/folding-bike-helmet-wins-james-dyson-design-award>
Yes, the distance you need to ride and the cost of a new bicycle will 
influence your choice, but there are a few other things to consider too. Do you 
want to use your ride to work for exercise? And if so, do you want to wear 
Lycra? Can you change and shower at work? If not, can you face working with 
“helmet hair” and crumpled clothes? And how much do you want your bicycle to be 
an extension of your personal style?

Armed with a little knowledge about the options, the commute to work can 
easily become a joy, transforming it from a stressful rush to an exhilarating 
bookend to an otherwise sedentary day.

From speedy racing bikes, classic “sit-up-and-beg” shoppers or all-weather 
commuters, to cross bikes with disc brakes, here are some of the best options 
available this season. 

Canyon Commuter 8.0 
<https://www.canyon.com/en-gb/urban/commuter/commuter-8-0.html> (pictured top)

£1,589; 11.5kg

It may appear a little alien, but don’t let the Canyon Commuter’s unorthodox 
look put you off. This is a bicycle on which every detail has been fine-tuned 
for the city – a machine unashamed to sacrifice beauty for utility.

It’s an ambitious proposal from Canyon, a German company known for high-spec 
bikes offered at a relatively accessible price. Here, it’s as if the designers 
have identified the most annoying features of the average commute – oil stains, 
mountains of additional kit, and mechanicals – and produced a bike that 
attempts to eliminate them all.

It features a carbon belt drive, which is less likely to stretch and wear down 
than a metal chain, is impervious to oil and muck, and which is also quiet and 
fluid to use.

But the built-in lights will inspire the most curiosity from fellow commuters. 
They are powered by a dynamo on the front wheel and integrated seamlessly into 
the headset and rear mudguard. In addition, and rarely for a bike with hub 
gears, the Canyon comes with Shimano Alfine 11-speed hub gears, a welcome 
range, particularly over a longer distance.

It’s not cheap, it doesn’t race up a hill, and you are unlikely to feel 
comfortable leaving it locked up outside a pub. But this commuter bike is a 
sound investment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3815ea1e1fe29dacd4044834c18ad6204fe0c1f%2F0_240_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20of%20the%20best%20women%E2%80%99s%20commuter%20bikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20of%20the%20best%20women%E2%80%99s%20commuter%20bikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3815ea1e1fe29dacd4044834c18ad6204fe0c1f%2F0_240_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Bobbin Birdie 
<http://bobbinbikes.com/product/birdie/?variation=cornfield-yellow>

£460 (3-speed) OR £620 (8-speed); 14kg

For those of you who want to glide through the city like Audrey Hepburn in 
your best coat and shoes, sitting up tall and watching the world go by, this is 
the bicycle for you.

With mudguards, a rear rack and a chain guard to stop oil staining your 
clothes, the Birdie is a practical bike designed to keep you looking pristine. 
Originally released with old-school 3-speed Sturmey-Archer hub gears, the new 
2016 version now includes an 8-speed Shimano Nexus hub, a more forgiving range 
if you are planning to cycle up a hill or two.

That said, don’t let the elegant design trick you into thinking this is a 
diminutive bike. The Birdie is an imposing presence on the road, and demands 
space to manoeuvre. In heavy traffic even the most confident of cyclists may 
feel encumbered by the wide moustache handlebars and heavy steel frame. But not 
everyone is looking for speed and agility, and this offering from Bobbin, a 
London-based company set up in 2007 with a mission to produce good-looking 
Dutch-style bikes at an affordable price, is a great option if you are looking 
for a reliable and sturdy machine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85cbd2a1074f0d38c1a83f4c417034cbd3eaa200%2F9_212_979_588%2F979.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20of%20the%20best%20women%E2%80%99s%20commuter%20bikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20of%20the%20best%20women%E2%80%99s%20commuter%20bikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85cbd2a1074f0d38c1a83f4c417034cbd3eaa200%2F9_212_979_588%2F979.jpg>
Raleigh RXW Pro 2016 
<http://www.wiggle.co.uk/raleigh-rxw-pro-womens-2016-cyclocross-bike/> 

 RRP £1500, currently on sale for £975; 9.38kg

Raleigh is the first UK bike brand to release a dedicated cyclocross bike 
range for women, a welcome move given that cross bikes are becoming 
increasingly popular models for commuters.

Originally designed for winter racing both on- and off-road, cross bikes are 
versatile machines that work particularly well in poor weather, in large part 
due to their use of disc brakes – a system that comes into its own in the wet.

The Raleigh RXW is set up as a typical CX racer, with a light aluminium alloy 
frame and carbon fork, and slightly more aggressive female-specific geometry to 
suit those who want to go fast. But it can also be adapted for a more 
traditional commuter setup, with waiting screw-threads for a rear luggage rack, 
bottle cages and mudguards.

Riding it on a particularly wet week in September, it felt pleasantly 
balanced: it was smooth and comfortable along open stretches of road, fast up 
south London’s hills, and steady in heavy traffic, in large part thanks to the 
SRAM hydraulic disc brakes, which are gloriously smooth and quick.

So comfortable was the RX that I was keen to keep riding it at the weekend. So 
if you are looking for a bike that can reliably get you to work but can also 
provide some fun and escapism on days off, this is a good option.

Yes, it’s pink. But the shade is redolent of garish 1980s Raleigh racers or a 
Bowie album cover, so I let it slide.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ae6d31e920782327cb2261b9afd60d02c06ae23%2F34_0_877_526%2F877.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20of%20the%20best%20women%E2%80%99s%20commuter%20bikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20of%20the%20best%20women%E2%80%99s%20commuter%20bikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ae6d31e920782327cb2261b9afd60d02c06ae23%2F34_0_877_526%2F877.jpg>
Quella Evo <https://www.quellabicycle.com/evo-orange>

£674; 10.5kg

This model from Quella, a company started by two friends in an old Cambridge 
chicken shed, sounds ideal for the city: a sturdy Columbus Cromor steel frame, 
integrated mudguard and rack mounts, cantilever brakes, and the ability to fit 
thicker 35c tyres for tackling anything that isn’t as smooth as well-maintained 
asphalt.

It is marketed as a bike that “has it all”, and the website suggests that it 
can be stripped back to “a lightweight fixie for urban riding” or transformed 
into “a tourer for longer journeys”. And for a bike that’s trying to offer 
something for everyone, it’s surprisingly stylish – mine was a glossy tangerine 
colour – and sits somewhere between a single-speed and a more sophisticated 
city tourer.

But Quella seems to have overlooked one key thing: comfort. The model I tried 
featured an SRAM Automatix two-speed, which changes gears automatically via a 
centrifugal clutch that shifts according to your speed. In theory it sounds 
brilliant, but even on the slightest of inclines I was struggling to turn the 
pedals, and the stiff Promax Canti brakes meant with each traffic light I came 
to a slightly nervous and juddering halt.

The Evo doesn’t quite translate into an easy ride on the road. If you’re 
looking for a simple, single-speed setup, Quella’s other bikes are well worth a 
look.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf7f6e33c26eaaa7adff08b9e5a284b805ac03fa%2F0_0_1200_691%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Five%20of%20the%20best%20women%E2%80%99s%20commuter%20bikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Five%20of%20the%20best%20women%E2%80%99s%20commuter%20bikes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffive-best-womens-commuter-bikes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf7f6e33c26eaaa7adff08b9e5a284b805ac03fa%2F0_0_1200_691%2F1200.jpg>
Genesis Delta 20 W 
<http://www.genesisbikes.co.uk/bikes/road/road-sportive/delta/delta-20>

£849.99, 9.8kg

As you may have seen from the crowds of commuters assembling at traffic lights 
each morning, the lure of the road racing bike is hard to resist. Sleek, 
efficient, and mostly lightweight, a road bike is a great option for anyone 
hoping to use the same machine at the weekends for fitness, or who want to work 
up a bit of a sweat on the journey in to work – rush-hour traffic permitting.

As the women’s bike market has grown, so too has the debate over 
female-specific geometry, which is designed for riders who may prefer more 
compact frames, narrower handlebars and shorter cranks. On the Delta, these 
adjustments have been made with the “lady racer” in mind, and though it felt 
comfortable, it wasn’t revolutionary. A well-fitting genderless bike will do 
just as good a job.

The most pleasurable thing about the Delta is the feel it gives when ridden: 
with a carbon fork and an alloy aluminium frame, it is stiff and responsive but 
doesn’t judder over every pothole. It is fitted with Shimano Tiagra gears 
(20-speed), it has more than enough versatility to tackle sharp climbs at the 
weekend and the slower, more technical ride to work, and feels like a slick 
option for women looking for a bit more from their commuting machine.Finished 
with delicate map contour designs and flashes of teal blue that reminded me of 
the old Bianchis, this is a racer for those who want to make the most of their 
precious minutes riding a bike.
 