
Five west African countries have announced measures to end the practice of 
European oil companies and traders exporting “African quality” diesel – highly 
polluting fuels that could never be sold in Europe.

Swiss commodity traders were accused in a report published in September by 
Swiss NGO Public Eye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/15/trafigura-vitol-bp-dump-dirty-diesel-africa-swiss-ngo-public-eye>
 of exporting fuels to west Africa with sulphur levels that are sometimes 
hundreds of times higher than European levels.

The report accused oil companies of “regulatory arbitrage”, allowing traders 
and companies to exploit weak standards to export cheap, dirty fuels in a 
process that Public Eye said was maximising profits at the expense of African’s 
health. High-sulphur fuels are major contributors to respiratory diseases such 
as bronchitis and asthma.

Dirty diesel from European companies fuels pollution in Africa – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/sep/15/dirty-diesel-from-european-companies-fuels-pollution-in-africa-in-pictures>
Last week Nigeria, Benin, Togo, Ghana, and Ivory Coast agreed to ban imports 
of high-sulphur diesel fuels as part of an initiative organised by the UN 
Environment Programme. Permitted levels of sulphur in imported diesel will fall 
from as high as3,000 parts per million (ppm) 
<http://unep.org/stories/airpollution/Dumping-dirty-fuels-and-vehicles-in-africa.asp>
 in some of the countries to 50 ppm. In Europe the maximum has been 10 ppm 
since 2009.

There is nothing illegal about the practice exposed by Public Eye’s report, 
and the blending of fuels to achieve particular specifications before export is 
standard industry practice. Companies identified in the report said they comply 
with the fuel standards imposed by the governments they ship to, and support 
efforts, including those by the African Refiners Association, to improve fuel 
standards.

Erik Solheim, the head of UN Environment, said: “West Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> is sending a strong message that it 
is no longer accepting dirty fuels from Europe. Their decision to set strict 
new standards for cleaner, safer fuels and advanced vehicle emission standards 
shows they are placing the health of their people first.”

He said the decision set an example for others to follow, adding: “Air 
pollution is killing millions of people every year, and we need to ensure that 
all countries urgently introduce cleaner fuels and vehicles to help reduce the 
shocking statistics.”

Air pollution more deadly in Africa than malnutrition or dirty water, study 
warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/20/air-pollution-deadlier-africa-than-dirty-water-or-malnutrition-oecd>
Nigeria’s environment minister, Amina Mohammed, said the decision would lead 
to major improvements in air quality. “For 20 yearsNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> has not been able to address the 
vehicle pollution crisis due to the poor fuels we have been importing. Today we 
are taking a huge leap forward … this will result in major air quality benefits 
in our cities and will allow us to set modern vehicle standards.”

The five countries also agreed to upgrade their national refineries to bring 
locally produced diesel up to the same quality by 2020.

Oliver Classen, spokesman for Public Eye, said the decision to raise fuel 
standards following the report and campaign was encouraging. “The improvement 
of air quality in African cities and the protection of people’s health is 
possible. It needs neither rocket science, countless measures, or lengthy 
negotiations. But governments need to act and the time to act is now,” he said.

He called on the government of Switzerland, where most of the major commodity 
trading companies are headquartered, to impose “mandatory human rights and 
environmental due diligence standards”, adding: “It should cover the entire 
supply chain and including potentially damaging products.”

Many of the fuel exports revealed by Public Eye are shipped from Dutch ports, 
and the decision was praised by the Dutch foreign trade and development 
cooperation minister,Lilianne Ploumen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lilianne-ploumen>. 

“The recent report from the NGO Public Eye made abundantly clear that 
coordinated action is needed to stop the practice of exporting dirty fuels to 
west Africa,” said Ploumen. “I am very pleased west African governments quickly 
decided to introduce standards that will help accessing European standard 
quality fuels. Their people deserve cleaner air, better health and a cleaner 
environment.”
 