
It was one of David Bowie’s favourite records 
<http://www.bowiewonderworld.com/press/00/0611nokiarecommendp2.htm>. That may 
be as much of a recommendation as anyone needs, but Bowie’s fulsome 
appreciation ofThe Glory of the Human Voice 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V6ubiUIxbWE>, the deliciously ironic title for 
RCA’s release of Florence Foster Jenkins’s recordings, is itself a wonderful 
distillation of the Florence phenomenon: “She had and was blissfully unaware 
of, the worst set of pipes in the world of music … Be afraid, be very afraid 
<http://www.bowiewonderworld.com/press/00/0611nokiarecommendp2.htm>”. 

You’d have to be very brave or very stupid to go against Bowie’s opinions. 
Thankfully, I’m both, and on the eve of Stephen Frears’snew film that 
celebrates her life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/27/florence-foster-jenkins-opera-films>
, and her climactic 1944 performance atCarnegie Hall 
<https://www.carnegiehall.org/BlogPost.aspx?id=4294993274>, it’s time for a 
little perspective on the Florence story.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDMu9PKWthLE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDMu9PKWthLE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDMu9PKWthLE&media=>
 Florence Foster Jenkins sings Adele’s Laughing Song” from Die Fledermaus  
<https://www.youtube.com/user/EdmundStAustell> 
For a start, to make your public debut anywhere as a singer at the age of 76 
is a terrifying prospect; to do it at Carnegie Hall, New York’s prestigious 
concert venue, requires astonishing reserves of self-confidence, and quite 
possibly, self-deception.


She might have been a truly terrible singer, but Florence Foster Jenkins 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DMu9PKWthLE> was musically talented. There, I 
said it. As a child, she was touted as a piano prodigy, played her first public 
recital at the age of eight, and as “Little Miss Foster” performed at the White 
House for President Rutherford B Hayes.

Her devotion to music led to her break from her family: her wealthy father 
refused to sanction further musical study, so she eloped with a much older man, 
who she married aged 17 or 18. The union was a disaster, not least because she 
contracted syphilis from her husband (treatment for the disease would make her 
completely bald in later life). As a newly single woman she supported herself 
by teaching piano but that career collapsed, however, after an arm injury meant 
she couldn’t play. It was only through her mother, and then her father’s 
inheritance after his death in 1909, that Florence started her transformation 
into the grandiosegrande dame 
<http://www.arttes.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/Florence-Foster-Jenkins.jpg> 
of Manhattan society.

As St Clair Bayfield <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/St._Clair_Bayfield> wrote 
(Bayfield became her common-law husband and manager), the essence of the 
Florence Foster Jenkins story was that she never knew what her singing voice 
was really like. Not because she couldn’t hear it, but because she lived as a 
legend in her own lifetime. Her annual vocal recitals resounded in a gilded 
echo chamber of praise, approbation, and acclaim for the brilliance of the 
Verdi Club’s president. It would have been social suicide in the echelons of 
Manhattan’s high society for any mere member to risk criticism of their 
patroness – and only a handful ever did.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fflorence-foster-jenkins-film-worlds-worst-singer-by-tom-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8381f280e737e41bedc64a08c65b1ba7260a9534%2F0_129_6971_4180%2F6971.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Florence%20Foster%20Jenkins%3A%20we%20may%20laugh%2C%20but%20to%20be%20this%20bad%20took%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fflorence-foster-jenkins-film-worlds-worst-singer-by-tom-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Florence%20Foster%20Jenkins%3A%20we%20may%20laugh%2C%20but%20to%20be%20this%20bad%20took%20talent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F04%2Fflorence-foster-jenkins-film-worlds-worst-singer-by-tom-service%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8381f280e737e41bedc64a08c65b1ba7260a9534%2F0_129_6971_4180%2F6971.jpg>
 ‘A legend in her own lifetime.’ David Haig, Meryl Streep and Simon Helberg in 
Florence Foster Jenkins Photograph: Nick Wall/PR 
After her recordings (which have never been out of print) appeared in the 
early 1940s, she would play her own performances of the Queen of the Night’s 
Act 2 aria fromMozart’s The Magic Flute 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qtf2Q4yyuJ0> to her friends alongside versions 
by genuinely glorious divasLuisa Tetrazzini 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nzFADjv_k1k> and Frieda Hempel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u5KIbkpKmj0&nohtml5=False>. Without saying 
which was which (and my goodness, you really can tell the difference …), she 
would ask her audience to write down which they preferred. AsDonald Collup’s 
documentary on Florence, A World of Her Own 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UVcatZDdaIY> reveals, only one person is known 
to have demurred from the opinion that hers was the best, and this bravely 
honest person was promptly castigated by Florence for her lack of taste.

Make no mistake: being this bad is hard.

That Queen of the Night recording is the unimpeachable, incomparable classic 
of the – alas – very small Foster Jenkins discography, with her accompanist, 
the joyously monikeredCosmé McMoon <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xe1K-6CSztI>
. But the notion that she couldn’t sing a single note in tune or in time is 
wide of the mark. True, most of her recordings are the right notes in the wrong 
place, but if you dare tolisten to her other recordings 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DMu9PKWthLE&nohtml5=False>, you will discover 
that Florence did have a very occasional relationship with musical accuracy, 
which of course only makes the effect of the whole more miraculously hilarious.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqtf2Q4yyuJ0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqtf2Q4yyuJ0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqtf2Q4yyuJ0&media=>
 Foster Jenkins takes on Mozart. (Mozart wins) 
But make no mistake: being this bad is hard. One of the reviews of the 
Carnegie Hall concert got it right. Robert Bagar in the New York World Telegram 
wrote: “Of all the singers appearing before the public today, only Mme. Jenkins 
has perfected the art of giving added zest to a written phrase by improvising 
it in quarter tones, either above or below the original notes. Think of the 
difficulties involved in making this possible”. Bagar was right. You try it: 
those exquisite shadings of pitch and frissons of out-of-tune vibrato are 
perfectly designed to induce the greatest possible injury to the piece, and to 
your eardrums. And they are almost impossible to replicate, because what makes 
them so magical in Florence’s performances is that you can hear that she is 
really trying for the right note, the right word, the right rhythm.

The truth of is, most of us are more like Florence than we are Tetrazzini, so 
perhaps we hear some echo of our common humanity in her vocal trials and 
tribulations. But Florence had something else too: a sheer joy in her 
performances. Here’s Bagar again: “She was exceedingly happy in her work. It is 
a pity that so few artists are, and the happiness was communicated, as if by 
magic to her hearers”. Florence had a heart attack days after the Carnegie Hall 
recital – perhaps induced by reading her reviews – and she died a month later. 
But that heroically misplaced happiness in her abilities still communicates 
today; indelibly, appallingly, magnificently. The “worst set of pipes in the 
world”? Perhaps not, after all …

 * Florence Foster Jenkins is on general UK release from Friday 6 May.
 