
The inventor of a foldable bicycle helmet has won a £30,000 prize to take it 
towards commercialisation.

The “EcoHelmet” is the brainchild of Isis Shiffer, a 28-year-old designer and 
bike enthusiast from New York who came up with the idea after she began using 
city bike-hire schemes but was worried about cycling without a helmet.

Could Chicago's floating cycle path defy the doubters and reconnect the city?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/15/chicago-floating-river-bike-route-cycle-path-riverride>
“It just occured to me that there was an infrastructure gap here. We have 
these fantastic [bike-hire] schemes all around the world and if you want to 
wear a helmet you either have to bring your own or spend quite a bit of money,” 
Shiffer told the Guardian.

Her solution – the folding helmet, based on card – has been crowned the 
international winner of this year’sJames Dyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/james-dyson> award, having already won 
the national prize in the US.


Across 22 countries, prizes are awarded to university-level designers and 
engineers for innovative solutions to conundrums, with previous winners of the 
international award including a robotic arm, fishing nets that do not trap 
endangered species, and aninflatable incubator for premature babies. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2015/nov/20/engineering-lifesaving-care-for-premature-refugee-babies>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffolding-bike-helmet-wins-james-dyson-design-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ac6254834097a5545af4fc1314271843ca7d267%2F0_128_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Folding%20bike%20helmet%20wins%20James%20Dyson%20design%20award&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffolding-bike-helmet-wins-james-dyson-design-award%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Folding%20bike%20helmet%20wins%20James%20Dyson%20design%20award&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ffolding-bike-helmet-wins-james-dyson-design-award%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ac6254834097a5545af4fc1314271843ca7d267%2F0_128_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The EcoHelmet, invented by Isis Shiffer. Photograph: Kimberly Mufferi/Dyson/PA 
“EcoHelmet solves an obvious problem in an incredibly elegant way. But its 
simplicity belies an impressive amount of research and development. I look 
forward to seeing EcoHelmets used in bike shares across the world,” said James 
Dyson.

Resembling an accordion ball Christmas decoration, the helmet can be 
flattened, while a honeycomb structure, visible when unfurled, gives it 
strength.

“It is one size fits most,” said Shiffer. “These [helmets] are quite sturdy 
and the honeycomb stalls are arranged in such a way that they can protect the 
head from a blow from any direction.”

A recent graduate from the Pratt Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/design> Institute in New York, 
Shiffer developed the EcoHelmet during her course, testing the design with 
crash apparatus during a stint at the Royal College of Art and Imperial 
College, London. While Shiffer is now running her own consultancy firm, she 
says she plans to develop the helmet further and has already teamed up with an 
LA-based company to tackle supply chain, marketing and fundraising aspects of 
the project.

Tax break proposals aim to boost cycling to work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/bike-blog/2016/nov/09/tax-proposal-cycling-work-commute-sarahstorey-britishcycling>
Shiffer says her plan is to coat the helmet with a recyclable or biodegradable 
waterproofing material, such as wax, for rainy days. It will also be kitted out 
with an indicator or mechanism to highlight when it should be ditched for 
recycling and replaced with a new helmet. The finished product is expected to 
cost about $5 (£4) per helmet and could be dispensed in vending machines at 
bike-hire points.

She views the EcoHelmet as a step up from previous attempts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/sustainable-fashion-blog/cyclists-sustainable-ethical-cycling-gear-helmets-saddle>
 to create sustainable helmets, such as the Kranium design by Royal College of 
Art student Anirudha Surabi, which was later taken up by cycling gear maker 
Abus. “[That] is polystyrene on the inside, cardboard in the middle and plastic 
on the outside, so it is not really in any way biodegradable or recyclable,” 
said Shiffer.

But winning the award, she said, was a shock. “I was very surprised, and 
ricocheted around a little bit and hyperventilated and called my mum,” she 
said. “I am not an engineer so to be recognised in a very engineering-heavy 
context is incredibly gratifying and exciting for me.”
 