
West Ham have given the world license to gossip after printing an anonymous 
article on their website 
<http://www.whufc.com/news/articles/2017/january/05-january/insider>, bylined 
“The Insider”, which reveals that “the board … have allocated significant funds 
to bolstering the squad. To that end, a bid of £20m was submitted for a player 
from Scotland. Meanwhile, an £8m bid was made for a player who currently plies 
his trade in the Championship, and a £6m bid for a current Premier League 
player. It is my understanding that the board will do their best to bring their 
selected targets to London Stadium, if at all possible.”

Mikel John Obi announces he is joining Chinese Super League from Chelsea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/mikel-john-obi-chinese-super-league-chelsea>
So who could these mystery targets be, readers? The Mirror have put two and 
two together and announced that Celtic’sMoussa Dembélé is the £20m man, even 
though “sources at Parkhead are adamant no official bid has been made” – and 
want at least £30m – while the Frenchman, while currently plying his trade 
there, is very clearly not “from Scotland”. Sunderland’sJermain Defoe was 
presumably the subject of the £6m offer, though it wasturned down on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/jermain-defoe-sunderland-reject-6m-bid-west-ham>
 – the Express exclusively reveal today that they have “more than doubled their 
offer to £13m”, while the Mail on the other hand say they “intend to bid £7m”. 
The remaining mystery man might beBrentford’s Scott Hogan, though there seems 
some debate about the precise level of their bid for the Championship’s 
fourth-best marksman, with the Express suggesting the offer was in fact £10m, 
and that anyway it was rejected. It seems the Bees are confident of having some 
money to spend this month, though: they’re rumoured to have slapped in a 
£850,000 offer for Wigan’sMax Power. And in all this talk of West Ham targets 
there is no mention anywhere ofPatrice Evra, who has apparently started talks 
with the Hammers even if, the Sun reveals, he has “his heart set on a return to 
Old Trafford”.

Talking of Manchester United, the Red Devils have already discussed personal 
terms withAntoine Griezmann, says the Sun, and the diminutive Atlético Madrid 
forward will probably have liked what he heard: United are willing to match the 
£220,000 a week plus generous bonuses they already pay Paul Pogba in an effort 
to entice his fellow Frenchman to Old Trafford. Sadly Atlético are less keen on 
the transfer, demanding payment in full of the player’s £86m buy-out, but some 
sort of deal is expected to be reached. Not, though, until the summer, with the 
Mail insisting the club have “shelved their transfer plans” for this window, 
except that is for allowing Morgan Schneiderlin and Memphis Depay to leave. The 
Manchester Evening News still thinkVictor Lindelof could arrive, though, should 
his current club, Benfica, agree some kind of deal with his former club, 
Vasteras, over the 20% sell-on clause that has rather complicated the 
negotiations.

Watford’s Odion Ighalo, who has twice rejected offers from China, might have 
another one to deal with shortly with Gus Poyet’sShanghai Shenhua apparently 
keen on the misfiring Nigerian, who has scored one goal in his 17 league 
appearances this season. Whether it will be as lucrative asthe £37.5m bid from 
Shanghai SIPG 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/watford-turn-down-38m-odion-ighalo-shanghai-sipg>
 that was turned down in the summer seems extremely doubtful, though you never 
know. In September the striker said his previous refusal to depart was down to 
the fact that “I love playing in the Premier League” and “I still have 
unfinished business in England”, and indeed his lack of finishing has turned 
out to be an issue. He also said that “when the right time comes I will go”, so 
anything’s possible.

Transfer window January 2017: all the latest moves and news – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Aston Villa want to sign Middlesbrough’s Jordan Rhodes, but are being told 
that they must match the £10m Boro paid tosteal him away from Blackburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/01/middlesbrough-jordan-rhodes-transfer-blackburn>
 a year ago and are not entirely convinced that this season’s record of two 
starts, four substitute appearances and no goals or assists merits such 
outlandish spendthriftery.

Chelsea loan latest: Izzy Brown, the 19-year-old striker who has scored three 
goals in 20 appearances on loan for Rotherham so far this season, is wanted by 
bothBirmingham and Huddersfield for the second bit of it. And Ruben Loftus-Cheek
’s lengthy list of suitors has expanded followingStoke’s decision to get 
involved. Mark Hughes is also ready to battle Leicester for BR Leipzig’s 
21-year-old strikerDavie Selke, even though he has only started one league game 
this season for the Bundesliga’s surprise package.


And finally, Raheem Sterling has been shopping at Poundworld. “The 
£180,000-a-week winger held a white plastic bag and pulled a blue Poundworld 
trolley basket,” reports the Mirror. “The 22-year-old international was looking 
for toiletries.”

 * Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window withour Facebook Messenger alerts 
<http://m.me/theguardian?ref=football_transfers>. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at 
the bottom of the screen to receive the latest alerts.  