
When Liverpool played Southampton on Wednesday night, it was difficult not to 
have some sympathy with those Saints fans who had committed themselves to 
booing every player that used to wear their colours. They were, after all, in 
for quite a busy night, as they are when most of the Premier League’s monied 
fancypants clubs come to visit. However, some altruistic foreign monied 
fancypants clubs might be about to step up and lighten their boo-load.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in Europe's top five leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
For according to the Times, Juventus and Barcelona have joined PSG in taking a 
serious sniff aroundAdam Lallana, a man whose form this season has been as 
impressive as his commitment to fashionably ripped jeans 
<https://twitter.com/benjaminlowrie/status/805407011517169664>. Apparently 
Barca consider Lallana, with two years left on his current contract, an 
alternative to fellow Liverpool jinkerPhilippe Coutinho, who has three years 
remaining so would be pricier. Plus, y’know, he’s better. Doesn’t sound like 
they would turn their nose up at ol’ Phil, mind. And if Juventus don’t get 
Lallana – or even if they do and they just want more, more, more – the Old Lady 
will make a move forEmre Can, too. 

Across Stanley Park, it could be a busy month for Everton. As well as having a 
bid accepted forStandard Liège striker Ishak Belfodil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/everton-ishak-belfodil-standard-liege>
, plus their £22m move forMorgan Schneiderlin that should be sorted soon, there 
could be a few shipping out too.Tom Cleverley is supposedly wanted by 
Sunderland and Watford, while some reckonRoss Barkley will be on his bike too, 
with Tottenham keeping their beady ones on things there. January is the busiest 
month for other clubs who find themselves drowning not waving too, not least 
Crystal Palace, who are in forCarl Jenkinson and Patrick van Aanholt, but – and 
here’s a weird one – could puntChristian Benteke off to West Brom, if they 
raise some funds by finally sellingSaido Berahino to anyone really, but 
specifically Stoke.

West Ham are pumping cash all over the shop too, in a bid to fix the calamity 
that was their summer transfer window.Scott Hogan should arrive from Brentford, 
even if it costs the Hammers… bloody hell, £15m? Crumbs. They’re also looking 
at Colombia defenderYerry Mina, whose name sort of sounds like it should be a 
gag designed to fool credulous media outlets, but we’ll take it at face value 
for now. They are set to up their bid forRobert Snodgrass too, plus they’re 
also keen on Southampton’sJosé Fonte, Milan’s M’Baye Niang and basically just 
about anyone who is an upgrade on Simone Zaza. Which is just about anyone.
Transfers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/atoms/2016/12/transfer-window/transfers/embed/index.html?limit=6&league=all&currency=pounds>
Some business going on at Chelsea too, where Ben Gibson is once again 
mentioned as a potential beef-up option for their defence, particularly ifJohn 
Terry does actually go on loan to Bournemouth, something the transfers snouts 
of the land seem to be split on.Michy Batshuayi won’t be leaving on loan 
though, despite some truly tempting offers from Swansea and West Ham. They’re 
also kicking the tyres of Monaco midfielder Tiemoué Bakayoko, but José Mourinho 
could deliver another boot to the chops after last season’s shambles, and usurp 
them by bringing the Frenchman to Manchester United for £40m. Speaking of 
United, they have found a willing sucker happy to takeMemphis Depay and Adnan 
Januzajoff their hands, in the shape of Lyon, while they’ve warded off the 
hundreds of breathless suitors banging down their door, by taking up the 
one-year extension option onMarouane Fellaini’s contract.

 * Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window with ourFacebook Messenger alerts 
<https://m.me/theguardian?ref=football_transfers>. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at 
the bottom of the screen to receive the latest alerts.
 