
Oi Oi! You laaaaaacky people! It’s the Mill bringing you transfer rumours 
hotter than that burn you’ve got between the temples that makes reading this 
seem like a particularly sadistic form of torture. That’s right, the Mill is 
starting the year as it certainly will not go on and working on a weekend. And 
on the day the January transfer window FLINGS open no less. Woop!

It’s 2017 and it would appear that José Mourinho has his mojo back. United are 
back to their old selves – that is if you believeUsain Bolt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/usain-bolt-surprises-mutv-with-phone-call-to-discuss-win-over-middlesbrough>
 – and so is Mou. He’s told Anthony Martial in no uncertain terms to stop 
listening to his agent andstart listening to him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/manchester-united-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>
. He’s also plotting a £145m raid of Atlético Madrid for bothAntoine Griezmann 
andSaúl Ñíguez. It gets worse for Atlético. Arsène Wenger will not be replacing 
Diego Simeone in the dugout because, well he just doesn’t want to.

Usain Bolt surprises MUTV with phone call to discuss win over Middlesbrough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/usain-bolt-surprises-mutv-with-phone-call-to-discuss-win-over-middlesbrough>
He’s much more interested in sticking with the Gunners and has his sights 
firmly on Control + Paste’s  Red Bull Salzburg’s Dayotchanculle Upamecano. 
He’ll face competition from Barcelona on that front though, but both may be 
trumped by RB Leipzig, what with the Red Bull connection ‘n’ all. Should Wenger 
fail, he’ll turn his attentions toOghenekaro Etebo of Nigeria who banged in 
four goals against Japan at the Olympics way back when in 2016. Leicester are 
the competition in this instance. Sticking at Arsenal and Borussia Dortmund are 
afterGedion Zelalem, the German-born USA soccerballer who went on loan to 
Rangers. 

Chinese Super League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chinese-super-league> news for you now. 
Nope, nothing doing on the Mark Clattenburg front, alas, butDiego Costa is 
wanted by Tianjin Quanjian, managed by Fabio Cannavaro, of course, and they’re 
willing to line Chelsea’s already bulging pockets with £80m big ones.Axel Witsel
 also looks set for a move to Shanghai SIPG where he will sleep on piles of 
cash by night and dovetail with Oscar in midfield by day. Witsel was going to 
go to Juventus but, well, he’s not going to do that any more.

At the moment Virgil van Dijk is hotter than that burning sensation the Mill 
was talking about earlier. The Mill isn’t convinced but onwards and upwards. 
That’s what Ronald Koeman reckons anyway because he’s trying to pinch the £50m 
man from under the noses of Manchester City andChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>. File that one under ambitious. 
A more likely move to Merseyside beckons forJoe Hart though, whose Turin 
adventure is coming to a close. He wants to go to Liverpool. Badly. Whether 
Jürgen Klopp will have him remains to be seen.

And in non-transfer non-news James Rodríguez isn’t leaving Real Madrid, 
according to his old man, andAndrés Iniesta says he wants to stay at Barcelona 
for the rest of time.

 * Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window withour Facebook Messenger alerts 
<https://www.messenger.com/login.php?next=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.messenger.com%2Ft%2Ftheguardian%2F%3Fref%3Dfootball_transfers>
. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at the bottom of the screen to receive the latest 
alerts. 


 