
The promotion race in League Two now looks to be an eight-horse affair, with 
just six points covering the teams from second to eighth. Three automatic spots 
and four play-off berths are up for grabs, and with next weekend throwing up a 
potentially pivotal set of fixtures — Brentford face Wycombe, Exeter take on 
Bradford and Gillingham welcomeShrewsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shrewsbury> to the Priestfield — it seems 
an apposite time to take a look at the riders.

Brentford Promotion odds: 1–6

Former assistant manager (well, for one day) Barney Ronay went in-depth over 
the Bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2009/jan/20/brentford-barney-ronay> 
earlier this year and the buzz he reported in January shows no sign of fading. 
Last weekend brought a crucial win over Bury, and though Andy Scott's side were 
frustrated at the Don Valley Stadium against Rotherham, they remain four points 
clear having lost only once in their last 10. They face Barnet mid-week, on 
paper a very winnable fixture though the team from Underhill have beaten both 
Bradford and Rochdale in recent weeks. And four of their five games left this 
month are at Griffin Park so by the start of April they could be out of sight.

Why we should root for them? Promotion would mean back-to-back successes for 
clubs owned by their fans, following on from Stockport's play-off victory last 
season.

Wycombe Promotion odds: 2–5

Peter Taylor's side have a game in hand over most of their rivals and 
depending on whether your glass is half-empty or half-full, they've either lost 
once in the last eight games or won one of the last four. Wanderers have led 
the league for much of the season — until a slump earlier this yearbrought back 
terrible memories of 2005-06 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2009/jan/26/football-league-weekend-review-wycombe-wanderers>
 — and it took a 92nd-minute equaliser from Jon-Paul Pittman, whose three goals 
for the club since joining from Crawley Town have brought four points, to 
prevent the Chairboys losing at home to Chesterfield this weekend. It was a 
display the local press described as "one of their worst performances of the 
season". In four seasons in the bottom tier, they've never finished outside the 
top half so it's about time they got over the line.

Why we should root for them? Any fans who went through the horrendous 2005-06 
season deserve some support.

Bury Promotion odds: 6–5

Bury are having their best season since 1996-97 when winning the Second 
Division title gave the Shakers two years in the second tier under Stan 
Ternent. Their fall since began with relegation in 1998-99 when they came 
bottom of a pile of teams — including Port Vale, QPR and Portsmouth — on 47 
points. Had goal difference been the deciding factor they would have stayed up, 
as it was they had scored 10 goals fewer than Vale. Since then it's been a 
downward slide, and they've rarely threatened to escape League Two since 
dropping into this level in 2002. Victory over Rochdale on Saturday though 
meant they usurped their opponents in the top three and Alan Knill's side have 
arguably the friendliest run-in, with only Shrewsbury andGillingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gillingham> of the top eight to play.

Why we should root for them? They've reached the play-offs five times over the 
years and reached the final just once, where they lost.

Bradford Promotion odds: 6–5

It's been an odd season for Stuart McCall's side. Hot promotion favourites in 
August, they began the campaign with five wins in six in late summer, began to 
stutter in autumn and then went through a spell of one win in nine during 
December and January. That seems to have cost them any chance of the title, 
although the top three remains a realistic goal and Saturday's 5–1 demolition 
of Aldershot — the team that ended their winning start to the season — finally 
offered a glimpse of that early form. They face Rochdale tomorrow evening at 
Spotland - a game theRochdale chairman, Chris Dunphy, will be particularly keen 
to win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/sep/12/rochdale.leaguetwofootball> 
- in the first of three consecutive away games that should go some way to 
telling us which way their season is going.

Why we should root for them? It's always nice to see a club arrest a steep 
decline. Oh, andthis <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sWfp0hIhH_Q>.

Rochdale Promotion odds: 6–5

The romantic's favourite. The Dale have been in the basement for a long time, 
1973-74 was their last season outside the fourth tier. Last season was as close 
as they've been to escaping since and this year they've been more solidly in 
the promotion race than they ever were in 2007-08. Two defeats in their last 
two games is a concern, however, and they still have to faceBradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bradford>, Wycombe, Exeter, Shrewsbury 
and Gillingham.

Why we should root for them? Come on - it's been 35 years!

Exeter City Promotion odds: 15–8

Promoted through the Conference play-offs last season and have quietly 
overshadowed the 2008 Blue Square Premier winner Aldershot. The Grecians (what 
a tremendous nickname) haven't been in the third tier since 1993-94 and are 
enjoying their best season in the Football League since winning the old Fourth 
Division in 1989-90. Their history in the League is a fairly miserable one — in 
the 13 seasons since that title-winning campaign they finished in the top half 
of a division just once and the bottom six eight times. But five seasons in the 
Conference seem to have reinvigorated the club and after putting the latest 
nail in Luton's coffin on Saturday, they are now eight games undefeated. The 
18-year-old Liam Sercombe scored the opener at Kenilworth Road and spoke of the 
club's optimism. "We have all got our sights set on the top three," he told the 
Exeter Express and Echo. "We all want to be playingLeague One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> football and I think 
we have got a good chance of doing it."

Why we should root for them? They really haven't had a great deal to cheer 
about <http://www.fchd.info/EXETERC.HTM> over the years.

Gillingham Promotion odds: 5–2

The Gills are another side eyeing the top two. "We mentioned on Saturday for 
the first time that there's a chance of automatic promotion if we won," said 
the manager, Mark Stimson, after his side overcame Accrington. Gillingham have 
won three of their last four and are just two points behind third-placedBury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bury>. They've had a tendency to hit hot 
and cold patches and two home games this week offer the chance for them to 
break into the top three for the first time. Stimson's side will have to find a 
remedy for their lack of away goals that were a major factor in their 
relegation last year and hasn't entirely dissipated this time around.

Why we should root for them? Their fall has been steep — it'd be heartbreaking 
to see a repeat of the troubles of the mid-1990s when the club almost went out 
of business.

Shrewsbury Promotion odds: 9–4

My pre-season tip for the title have played a game more than their rivals, are 
a point behind the Gills and have a seven-point lead over free-falling Dagenham 
and Redbridge in ninth. The manager, Paul Simpson, showed a nice line in the 
bleeding obvious after the 3–2 win over Notts County on Saturday. "We are not 
in a bad position but we would like to be higher up the table and with more 
points." He can be excused as his team must be one of the most frustrating in 
the Football League. Imperious at home, where they've won 14 out of 19, the 
Shrews are miserable on the road where they've won one out of 17. The bad news 
is that six of their last nine are away from the comfort of the New Meadow. 
It's also worth noting that on this day last season, six of the teams that 
would eventually finish in the top seven were already there, and the seventh,
Rochdale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale>, had a couple of games 
in hand.

Why we should root for them? They deserve to be known for something other than 
This Is Spinal Tap <http://www.toffs.com/icat/shrewsburytown>.

• Bournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth>, who moved 
out of League Two's bottom for the first time this season with a 2–0 victory 
over Aldershot mid-week, again joined Luton in the relegation zone after a 
goalless draw with Port Vale. Grimsby's four-goal salvo in the final 12 minutes 
against Lincoln lifts them out of the drop zone.

• In League One, last week was a bad one for Oldham. As if this wasn't bad 
enough <http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/article2306534.ece>, on 
Saturday their grip on a play-off was loosened by their home defeat to 
Colchester, who still have an outside chance of sneaking into the top six. Of 
the other play-off chasers Leeds were frustrated by a late equaliser at Bristol 
Rovers, Millwall were the beneficiaries of yet another late winner at 
Huddersfield, and Gary Hooper took his season goal tally to 25 in Scunthorpe's 
2–1 win over Stockport.

• Martin Allen's return to the Walkers Stadium was a fairly unhappy one, his 
Cheltenham <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cheltenham> side going down 
4–0 to the League One leaders, Leicester. Promotion is all but assured for the 
Foxes, the only question remaining is whether they will become the ninth side 
to break the 100 points barrier in the Football League. A quick calculation 
reveals that they're currently going along at 2.16 (recurring) points per game. 
With 10 games left, if they carry on at this rate they'll register something in 
the region of 21.6 points. Their current tally? 78.

• Down at the bottom, Leyton Orient secured a crucial win over Brighton, where 
Russell Slade is in danger of joining theselect group of managers to help take 
two clubs down in one season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/apr/23/1>. Five players made debuts 
for Albion on Saturday (two of whom, Al Bangura and Matt Heath have recent 
Premier League experience) butthey slipped to a 2–1 defeat at Brisbane Road. 
Slade's former side Yeovil drew with Carlisle and are now without a win in 
five. In contrast, Crewe have won five of their last six. Since Christmas 
they've won eight times, before then they had won only three. Billy Jones, back 
at the club on loan from Preston, scored both goals,the second a screamer 
<http://www.football.virginmedia.com/page/Football/League1/VideoIndex/0,,12555,00.html?mvnAssetId=3785190>
, in their victory over relegation rivals Hereford.

• Derby County's revivial under Nigel Clough continued apace in the 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>. It is five 
wins and a draw in the Rams' last seven, with the solitary defeat coming at 
equally in-form Doncaster. There's 11 points between them and the play-offs and 
with a variety of teams struggling for form, a late charge is a possibility.

• While Derby's upsurge continued, Southampton's revival was stopped in its 
tracks at Birmingham, who along with Wolves have now registered back-to-back 
wins. Alex McLeish's side have been grinding results out — only three of Blues' 
wins this season have come by more than one goal.

• Blackpool's win over Norwich was crucial at the foot of the table. The 
Canaries would have gone level on points with a win, but two goals (both either 
spectacular or jammy depending on your viewpoint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/interactive/2009/jan/08/championship-football-league-highlights-goals-tv>
) means the gap between the clubs is six points. Despite defeats for Norwich 
and Southampton, Charlton look doomed. The Addicks battled from behind then 
threw it away against Watford at The Valley, Tamas Priskin's cleverly dinked 
finish securing the win for the visitors. Like Derby, the Hornets have won five 
of their last seven.

• After Saturday's home draw against Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> - who seem now to be 
securing themselves in the play-offs - QPR have gone seven games without a win. 
The Hoops' own play-off hopes are fading which means Paulo Sousa is under 
pressure. Sunday tabloids suggested Paul Ince could be being lined up as a 
replacement, though the club quickly moved to deny the rumours.
 