Which competition was Bobby Robson talking about when he said: 'The ***** final 
is the greatest single match outside the World Cup final' …  Champions League  
European Championship  FA Cup  League Cup Which competition was Rafa Benítez 
talking about when he said: 'We need to realise we're now the head of the mouse 
and not the tail of the lion' …  Europa League  Serie A  Fifa Club World Cup  
The Championship Which competition was Arsène Wenger talking about when he 
said: 'Personally I love the ***** because it’s competitive without having too 
much pressure' …  Champions League  League Cup  Community Shield  Emirates Cup 
Which competition was Mauricio Pochettino talking about when he said: 'It is a 
competition that kills you' …  EFL Cup  Premier League  Champions League  
Europa League Which competition was Neil Warnock talking about when he said: 
'Matches don't come any bigger than ***** quarter-finals' …  World Cup  FA Cup  
League Cup  Europa League Which competition was Andrea Pirlo speaking about 
when he said: 'I don't feel pressure. I don't give a toss about it. I spent the 
afternoon sleeping and playing the Playstation and, in the evening, I went out 
and won the *****' …  MLS Cup  Champions League  European Championship  World 
Cup Which competition was José Mourinho talking about when he said: 'It’s not 
the Premiership, it’s not the FA Cup, it’s not the Champions League but it's 
still a cup and we must respect it' …  Europa League  International Champions 
Cup  Community Shield  League Cup Which competition was Karl Robinson talking 
about when he sad: 'The rules need to change drastically, or don’t have the 
competition. I don’t think it is conducive to development any more. I think 
it’s rubbish' …  The EFL Cup  League One  The Checkatrade Trophy  Scottish 
Premiership Which competition was Zlatan Ibrahimovic talking about when he 
said: 'That is the first trophy game and that is the first trophy we will bring 
home. For me, every trophy is very serious. I’m not satisfied until I collect 
everything' …  EFL Cup  Europa League  International Champions Cup  Community 
Shield Which competition was Ian Rush talking about when he said: 'This is why 
cup finals are so special, because anyone can beat anyone. That's what it's all 
about and that's why, for me, the FA Cup and the ***** are the best cups in the 
world. That's the beauty of the cup' …  World Cup  European Cup  Carling Cup  
Cup Winners' Cup  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  