
League One

• Bradford City continued their unbeaten start to the League Two season with a 
2-0 win overShrewsbury. Nicky Law gave the Bantams an early lead, and while the 
struggling Shrews clung to their coattails, they failed to break down 
Bradford’s mean defence. Stuart McCall’s team have conceded only seven goals in 
12 games, and they kept the visitors at bay until Haris Vuckic’s 96th-minute 
penalty sealed the win. Bradford are now just a point behind the leaders, 
Scunthorpe United, who could only draw with 10-manNorthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northampton> as Jak McCourt forced the 
ball home to cancel out Josh Morris’s 12th league goal of the season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-bradford-carlisle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F463798631bfabe226b144d9dbc00f344a9b79078%2F245_175_2332_1399%2F2332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bradford%20City%20and%20Carlisle%20extend%20unbeaten%20starts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-bradford-carlisle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bradford%20City%20and%20Carlisle%20extend%20unbeaten%20starts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-bradford-carlisle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F463798631bfabe226b144d9dbc00f344a9b79078%2F245_175_2332_1399%2F2332.jpg>
 Jak McCourt – and Northampton fans – celebrate after his equaliser at 
Scunthorpe. Photograph: Pete Norton/Getty Images 
• The top two have a four-point cushion after third-placed Bury lost at 
Peterborough despite taking a second-minute lead. Posh bounced back to win 3-1 
and end a run of eight games without a win, with Marcus Maddison bagging his 
sixth of the season.Bolton won their first four games in League One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leagueonefootball> but took until today 
to get their fifth victory – a bizarre late own goal fromSwindon’s Brandon 
Ormonde-Ottewill at the County Ground also ending a five-match barren run for 
the Trotters, proving that it doesn’t matter how they go in.

Josh Morris's strike of beauty keeps Iron at boiling point | Alan Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/oct/03/football-league-weekly-scunthorpe-josh-morris-scoring-again-bury>
• Oldham began the day bottom of the table but Ryan Flynn’s late goal 
completed a comeback win atGillingham as the Latics climbed above Coventry, 
Shrewsbury andSouthend, who went down 3-0 at Rochdale – the hosts’ fifth 
straight win in all competitions. Sunday seesWimbledon travel to Oxford, while 
MK Dons host Port Vale.

League Two

Port Vale’s Bruno Ribeiro: ‘90% of what I do now I’ve learned from José 
Mourinho’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/bruno-ribeiro-port-vale-jose-mourinho-leeds-ludogorets>
• Carlisle also kept their unbeaten start going, Jason Kennedy scoring twice – 
including a superb overhead kick – to earn a comfortable 3-0 win atMorecambe. 
Keith Curle’s team were poised to go second asDoncaster let a 2-0 lead slip at 
home toBarnet – but the comeback proved too good to be true for travelling 
fans, with Andy Williams grabbing a 92nd-minute winner for the hosts.

• The leaders, Plymouth, extended their own unbeaten run to 10 league games 
after a narrow win atStevenage. Argyle’s Sonny Bradley had a busy afternoon, 
scoring twice at the right end, deflecting a Harry Godden header into his own 
net, and getting booked for dissent.Portsmouth, who visit Home Park in the 
dockyard derby next weekend, won 1-0 atLeyton Orient, where the arrival of 
Alberto Cavasin as manager has failed to stop the slide – they’re without a win 
in six league games, and two points off the drop zone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-bradford-carlisle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa35f2c3a2239db4257d9daf103b13c0342ab1d1e%2F51_25_2356_1413%2F2356.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bradford%20City%20and%20Carlisle%20extend%20unbeaten%20starts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-bradford-carlisle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%20Bradford%20City%20and%20Carlisle%20extend%20unbeaten%20starts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-bradford-carlisle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa35f2c3a2239db4257d9daf103b13c0342ab1d1e%2F51_25_2356_1413%2F2356.jpg>
 Sonny Bradley scores his second (at the right end) for Plymouth at Stevenage. 
Photograph: Adam Holt/Reuters 
• Mansfield struck twice in stoppage time to surprise local rivals Notts County
in the early kick-off. Matt Green’s penalty put the Stags ahead just past the 
90-minute mark, before Darius Henderson sealed Mansfield’s first win in seven 
league games with his first goal for the club. There was another unexpected win 
at Huish Park, whereYeovil earned their fourth win of the season, Ryan Hedges’s 
goal enough to defeat mid-tableWycombe.

• Elsewhere, there were draws galore as Cheltenham grabbed a late equaliser at 
Accrington, Andy Taylor earned Blackpool a late point to halt Cambridge’s 
winning run, and James Collins’s penalty secured a draw forCrawley at Hartlepool
. Play-off contendersLuton and Crewe settled for a point each at Kenilworth 
Road, while the league’s bottom two clubs,Exeter and Newport, ground out 
goalless draws againstGrimsby and Colchester.
 