
Championship

 * When Kenny Jackett walked away from Rotherham United at the end of 
November, the Millers had one win in 18 games. Caretaker manager Paul Warne 
quickly ruled himself out of the permanent job, but his side now have three 
wins in seven, and Warne is staying until the end of the season. They beat
Norwich City to pile more pressure on Alex Neil, the visitors going a goal and 
a man down inside 20 minutes. Cameron Jerome equalised, but Norwich academy 
product Tom Adeyemi struck a winner. Rotherham are still nine points from 
safety, but their task no longer looks impossible. 
 * Newcastle United returned to the top after a hard-fought win at Brentford, 
Dwight Gayle’s 20th goal of the season and Daryl Murphy’s late winner earning a 
2-1 win.Brighton drop to second after a 2-0 defeat at Deepdale, Paul Huntington 
and Callum Robinson on target forPreston North End as the Seagulls lost for the 
first time in the league since September.

 * Sheffield Wednesday closed on Huddersfield in the top six after beating 
their local rivals 2-0 at Hillsborough, a 30-yard screamer from Ross Wallace 
setting up victory before Huddersfield’s Jack Payne was sent off.Fulham kept 
pace in the battle for the play-offs, Chris Martin coming back into the side 
and scoring a penalty, before teeing up Scott Malone’s volley in the win over
Barnsley.  Scott Malone scored a cracker for Fulham against Barnsley. 
Photograph: Garcia/BPI/REX/Shutterstock 
 * Callum Connolly made quite an impact on his Wigan Athletic debut, scoring 
twice at Burton to bring his side to within three points of their opponents. 
They sit either side ofBlackburn, who lost 3-2 to the reliably inconsistent 
Ipswich Town; Tom Lawrence, another loanee making his mark, scored twice for 
the hosts, who face a tricky Cup trip to Lincoln next week. 
 * A lead is never safe with Bristol City, who have now lost seven league 
games in a row after a 3-2 defeat to Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/bristol-city-cardiff-city-championship-match-report>
 at lunchtime. For the third time in four matches, they threw away a 2-1 lead 
late on, losing to Anthony Pilkington’s 85th-minute goal and slipping closer to 
the bottom three. Also sliding into danger areNottingham Forest, who drew 0-0 at
Birmingham after a planned takeover collapsed on Friday, to make it eight games 
without a win. 
 * Leeds United made it seven games unbeaten in all competitions with a 1-0 win
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/leeds-united-derby-county-championship-match-report>
 overDerby on Friday. Chris Wood’s header lifted Garry Monk’s side into third 
aboveReading, who suffered a surprise home loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/reading-qpr-championship-match-report>
 toQPR on Thursday. In Saturday’s late kick-off, Joe Mason’s early goal proved 
enough forWolves to see off Aston Villa at Molineux. 
Related: Football clubs suffering as owners experiment with chaos theory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/07/football-club-owners-chaos-theory-morecambe>

League One

 * It was a strange day in the third tier, with four of the top five suffering 
defeat. Most surprising of all wereSheffield United, the league leaders getting 
hammered 4-1 atWalsall. Chris Wilder’s team were forced to play in last 
season’s neon green away kit after clashing with their hosts, and were shown up 
further by a third defeat of the season to the Saddlers. 
 * Bolton were shocked at home by Swindon, Yaser Kasim’s last-gasp volley 
silencing the Macron Stadium, while on-loan Freddie Ladapo stroked in a winner 
forShrewsbury against Bradford City. Fifth-placed Rochdale couldn’t take 
advantage, losing atSouthend through Simon Cox’s stoppage time goal. 
 * The chief beneficiaries were Scunthorpe, who prevailed at Northampton 
thanks to Josh Morris’ long-range strike, and closed to within a point of 
Sheffield United. Sixth-placedFleetwood also won, David Ball’s solo effort 
sealing a 3-1 win overBristol Rovers.  James Vaughan was unplayable as Bury 
ended their 21-game winless run in style. Photograph: ProSports/REX/Shutterstock
 * Performance of the day in this or any other division came at Gigg Lane, 
where James Vaughan scored four goals in 20 minutes to guideBury to a 5-1 win 
overPeterborough – their first league win since September, moving them out of 
the bottom four on goal difference, ahead of the unfortunate Shrewsbury. 
 * To take further shine off Shrewsbury’s win, two other teams below them 
registered victories. Josh Law’s fine free kick earned John Sheridan an opening 
win asOldham boss against Gillingham, while Chesterfield sent Coventry to the 
foot of the table after Dan Gardner’s goal settled their contest. 
 * Charlton and Millwall played out a goalless South London derby as both sets 
of fans were given little to take their mind away from off-field issues. Sean 
Kelly scored an early winner asWimbledon beat Oxford, while Port Vale’s game 
withMilton Keynes was called off due to a frozen pitch. 



League Two

 * Newport County had not picked up a point for eight matches, while Colchester
 had taken 22 in the same period – so there was a sense of inevitability about 
Josh Sheehan’s opener for Newport. Colchester rallied, but the Exiles picked up 
a useful point. 
 * Cheltenham saw off Accrington in their six-pointer, captain Danny Wright 
kick-starting a 3-0 win. That leavesNotts County in the bottom two in Kevin 
Nolan’s first week in charge, despite a battling point at home toMansfield. 
 * Plymouth kept Liverpool out for 90 minutes, but it took Stevenage barely 90 
seconds to breach their defence at Home Park. The hosts fought back for a 4-2 
win to keep pace withDoncaster, who also came from a goal down. James Coppinger 
scored twice as they won atBarnet. Carlisle complete the top three, but needed 
Charlie Wyke to rescue a point at home toMorecambe.  Chris Porter equalised for 
Colchester from the penalty spot. Photograph: Huw Evans/REX/Shutterstock 
 * Conor Chaplin had a mixed afternoon, scoring two but missing a penalty, as 
Portsmouth closed on the leading trio with a home win over Leyton Orient. Luton 
Town spoiled David Artell’s debut in the Crewe dugout with a comeback victory 
at Gresty Road, butWycombe Wanderers had to settle for a point at home to 
Yeovil. 
 * Exeter City fans were rewarded for their 700-mile round trip with a 3-0 win 
atGrimsby Town, but there was no such luck for Hartlepool fans who made the 
trip toCrawley. James Collins scored the only goal of the game for the hosts, 
while the day’s other game finishedCambridge 0-0 Blackpool.  