
Championship

 * Newcastle United’s hopes of steamrollering the league are over – for now at 
least – after theirfive-match winning run came to an end at home to Wolves. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/newcastle-united-wolverhampton-wanderers-championship-match-report>
 Newcastlebreezed to a 6-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/qpr-newcastle-championship-match-report>
 over QPR on Tuesday but were not to have it all their own way twice in five 
days. Chancel Mbemba sent the Iceland forward Jon Dadi Bodvarsson’s cross past 
his goalkeeper Matz Sels before winger Hélder Costa made sure of the three 
points on the hour mark. Vurnon Anita was sent off late on to compound a bad 
afternoon for Rafael Benítez’s charges. Such title hopes are in the balance 
anyway, withHuddersfield Town showing no signs of wilting at the top of tree, 
after a 2-1 win overQPR. Chelsea loanee Kasey Palmer got the ball rolling, with 
his first goal since the opening day of the season, before Elias Kachunga 
doubled the Terriers lead. Idrissa Sylla headed a late goal for the visitors 
but David Wagner’s side held on.Aston Villa’s fortunes aren’t so rosy, despite 
Roberto Di Matteo largely revamping a squad relegated from the Premier League 
last season. Villa, who still only have one win to their name this term, played 
out a stalemate atIpswich Town. 
Newcastle United crash at home to Wolves and have Vurnon Anita sent off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/newcastle-united-wolverhampton-wanderers-championship-match-report>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-31-match-unbeaten-run-ends-for-northampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58a6a35b1154877cd05ecb959d7f97eb397c1872%2F0_81_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%2031-match%20unbeaten%20run%20ends%20for%20Northampton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-31-match-unbeaten-run-ends-for-northampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%2031-match%20unbeaten%20run%20ends%20for%20Northampton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-31-match-unbeaten-run-ends-for-northampton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58a6a35b1154877cd05ecb959d7f97eb397c1872%2F0_81_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Huddersfield Town’s Kasey Palmer, right, celebrates his opening goal with 
Rajiv van La Parra. Photograph: Richard Sellers/PA 
 * Barnsley slipped up at home for the first time since April, losing to 10-man
Reading, who went ahead courtesy of early goals from Garath McCleary and John 
Swift from distance. McCleary was later sent off before Adam Armstrong, on loan 
from Newcastle, scored nine minutes from time but Jaap Stam’s side dug deep to 
clinch victory.Norwich City, perhaps after getting wind of scores elsewhere, 
came from behind to beatNottingham Forest and climb into second, thanks to 
Graham Dorrans’ winner. Scott Hogan bagged a hat-trick to take his tally to six 
goals for the season asBrentford romped to a 5-0 win over Preston at Griffin 
Park to move into the top six. Joining them there areBirmingham City, who 
grabbed a last-gasp win overSheffield Wednesday courtesy of Lukas Jutkiewicz’s 
first goal since May 2014. Gary Hooper had given Wednesday a 76th minute lead, 
before Clayton Donaldson’s penalty and then Jutkiewicz ensured a late win.

 * Derby County’s barren run in front of goal improved, slightly, at Ashton 
Gate. Ikechi Anya scored only their second league goal of the season, but the 
36-year-oldBristol City substitute Aaron Wilbraham bagged his first goal of the 
season deep into injury-time. “He was the wise old head that stuck in there and 
earned us the point,” said his manager Lee Johnson post-match. It was a 
landmark day forBlackburn Rovers, too, who secured their first league win of 
the season at Ewood Park. Sam Gallagher capped the 4-2 victory overRotherham 
United with his third goal of the season. Elsewhere, Wigan and Fulham played 
out a goalless draw andBrighton clinched a late winner at Burton Albion, 
courtesy of a Tomer Hemed penalty. In the early kick-off,Leeds United ran out 
victorious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/17/cardiff-city-leeds-united-championship-match-report>
 atCardiff, who succumbed to a fourth straight defeat and drop to bottom of the 
table. 
League One

 * Northampton Town’s 31-game unbeaten run is over. Rob Page’s side slipped to 
a 3-1 defeat atChesterfield, with Conor Wilkinson netting two goals for the 
hosts. There’s plenty of reasons to be cheerful, though, namely Manchester 
United’s pending visit on Wednesday. “The test now is how we react from it and 
there is no better game for that to happen,” said Page. As Northampton’s fine 
tale ended, another one began, in strange circumstances at Valley Parade, where
Bradford City and Bristol Rovers drew. The referee, Andy Haines, brought both 
sets of players off of the pitch during the second half for safety reasons, 
because of a flying drone overhead – surely a Football League first. The game 
was halted for around five minutes. No sooner play was restored, James Meredith 
struck before the on loan Chelsea midfielder Charlie Colkett grabbed an 
equaliser four minutes from time. Elsewhere,Bolton Wanderers surrendered top 
spot after defeat by 10-manWalsall, with on-loan Southampton defender Jason 
McCarthy scoring the only goal of the game.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-31-match-unbeaten-run-ends-for-northampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67707ff35f6a4b2ad3b9aebe17cf79f14cea1534%2F1369_389_1977_1187%2F1977.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%2031-match%20unbeaten%20run%20ends%20for%20Northampton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-31-match-unbeaten-run-ends-for-northampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%2031-match%20unbeaten%20run%20ends%20for%20Northampton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-31-match-unbeaten-run-ends-for-northampton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67707ff35f6a4b2ad3b9aebe17cf79f14cea1534%2F1369_389_1977_1187%2F1977.jpg>
 Drone stops play at Valley Parade. Photograph: Alex James/MP/REX/Shutterstock 
 * Step forward, Scunthorpe United then. David Mirfin’s goal on the brink of 
half time atShrewsbury Town was enough for Graham Alexander’s side to 
capitalise on Bolton’s defeat and leapfrog Wanderers. Hallam Hope, the former 
Everton striker, scored twice to keep upBury’s momentum, with the Shakers 
sealing their fourth win in a row atSwindon Town, who scored a consolation 
strike through Jon Obika.Sheffield United matched that very statistic, as Matty 
Done’s first-half goal againstPeterborough United was enough to secure their 
fourth win on the bounce. In a London derby,AFC Wimbledon took all three points 
away from the Valley, whereCharlton Athletic went ahead through the talented 
teenager, Ademola Lookman. But Dominic Poleon and Tyrone Barnett turned things 
around in seven second-half minutes to secure bragging rights of sorts. 
 * Gillingham, who have a glamour tie of their own to look forward to at White 
Hart Lane on Wednesday, slipped up at Port Vale, who won 2-1 thanks to Alex 
Jones’s goal six minutes from time.Rochdale beat Fleetwood Town by the same 
scoreline at Spotland, to earn their first win of the season. Elsewhere,
Southend United beat Millwall 3-1, Coventry City and Oldham Athletic played out 
a stalemate, as didOxford United and MK Dons. 
League Two

 * There’s only one place to start in the fourth tier, with Plymouth Argyle 
taking victory in the Devon derby atExeter City to remain top of the division. 
On loan Bristol City striker Arnold Garita, making only his second start in 
English football, grabbed the second goal of the game after Graham Carey’s 
opener in the 104th meeting between the two sides. “Devon is green and white 
tonight and it always will be,” said Argyle manager Derek Adams after the win. 
Well, well, well.Portsmouth lost ground on Adams’ side after sliding to a 1-0 
defeat atAccrington Stanley, with Paddy Lacey scoring the only goal of the 
game. Pompey boss Paul Cook said his side were “not good enough” after their 
third defeat on the road this season.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-31-match-unbeaten-run-ends-for-northampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89227567ea268881c8b704b244ab284ca3953090%2F388_273_3100_1860%2F3100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%2031-match%20unbeaten%20run%20ends%20for%20Northampton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-31-match-unbeaten-run-ends-for-northampton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20League%20your%20thoughts%3A%2031-match%20unbeaten%20run%20ends%20for%20Northampton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-league-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Ffootball-league-your-thoughts-31-match-unbeaten-run-ends-for-northampton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89227567ea268881c8b704b244ab284ca3953090%2F388_273_3100_1860%2F3100.jpg>
 Plymouth Argyle’s Arnold Garita celebrates his goal against Exeter City, on 
only his second start in English football. Photograph: 
Hunt/ProSports/Rex/Shutterstock 
 * James Coppinger rightly grabbed the headlines last weekend after finding 
the net on his 500th appearance in aDoncaster Rovers shirt, and he was back at 
it again, opening the scoring en route to a 2-0 home win overNewport County. 
Rovers move into second at this early stage, withCrewe in close company in 
third after their 2-0 win atGrimsby Town. Also in the play-off picture are 
Morecambe, who returned to winning ways at Cambridge United, as the Football 
League’s bottom club continued their dismal start to the season. At Blackpool, 
Armand Gnanduillet scored an equaliser as the Tangerines came from two goals 
down at home to Carlisle United. Kyle Vassell had prompted the comeback on the 
hour, Gnanduillet’s third goal in as many matches. 
 * There was a five-goal thriller at Cheltenham Town, former Sunderland 
forward Jon Stead netting twice asNotts County beat the Robins 3-2. Another 
(technically) former Premier League player, Jonathan Forte, had opened the 
scoring in Gloucestershire.Crawley Town won their first match in five against 
Luton, thanks to goals from James Collins and Enzio Boldewijn. Tom Eaves 
ensured a happy coach journey home forYeovil Town and Darren Way, after the 
Glovers’ first win in six matches atLeyton Orient. Elsewhere, Barnet drew with 
Colchester United, Wycombe Wanderers edged past Stevenage 1-0 and Hartlepool 
United and Mansfield Town played out a goalless draw.  