
Algeria


The current format needs more African teams. I think we’re missing consistent 
development across the continent. The African nations need to keep helping 
grassroots football develop.Shireen Ahmed

Argentina

This is a very bad idea. In my opinion the best format is a 16-team World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>. Qualification should 
be held intercontinentally, which could be done in play-off phases or 
mini-tournament from which winners are promoted. The expanded format will 
decrease quality of games. This was vividly evident during the last Euros. 
Wales v Northern Ireland anyone?Andrzej

Australia

It should make qualification for the tournament a little more certain. In 
terms of hosting the World Cup, Australia’s chances would be diminished. I 
can’t see that we’d have enough suitable stadia – not many countries would. How 
anyone will be able to afford to host this behemoth of an event I do not know.
Paul Kish

Belgium


It’s difficult to image any benefits coming from this change. Lowering the 
barrier for participation will decrease the overall quality of the tournament, 
but the main problems arise from the practical implications. Playing in groups 
of three, and allowing two teams to qualify, leads to pretty much every third 
game having a certain result that will allow both teams involved to progress. 
This opens the door for all sorts of “gentleman’s agreements.” Eliminating the 
concept of draws, by reverting to a sort of NASL-throwback style of penalty 
shoot-outs after regular time, would be a solution worse than the problem, 
reducing the World Cup to a sad circus. And even then, in groups where every 
team wins one game and loses one all sorts of problems would arise. Fifa’s 
desire to wring ever more money out of their cash-cow and complete disregard 
for the state of the game is hardly shocking any more.Flor Van der Eycken

Brazil

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45413a07b390510b912f964627c18f98865fbf58%2F90_0_5112_3068%2F5112.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20fans%20from%2048%20countries%20react%20to%20the%20new%2048-team%20World%20Cup%20format&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20fans%20from%2048%20countries%20react%20to%20the%20new%2048-team%20World%20Cup%20format&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45413a07b390510b912f964627c18f98865fbf58%2F90_0_5112_3068%2F5112.jpg>
 Brazil fans at their home World Cup in 2014. Photograph: Imago/Barcroft Media 
I can’t get enough World Cup football so this expansion doesn’t bother me at 
all. It will mean more time watching football and it will encourage nations who 
couldn’t participate before. The smaller nations will have more to play for and 
the only way to improve their own footballing prospects is by matching 
themselves against the bigger nations. Who will the next Iceland be?Victor 
DeAzevedo

Canada


We might actually have the faintest hope of qualifying once more in my 
lifetime! All the teams in the world are already entered anyway, so this is 
really just a debate about how many get to the final phase. The more the 
merrier as far as I’m concerned. Tell me that Germany, Brazil, Italy and 
Argentina aren’t going to be in the last eight even with this change. It’s a 
lot of fuss over nothing from purists who worry too much.Allan Castle

How will a 48-team World Cup work? Fifa’s plan for 2026 explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/48-team-world-cup-fifa-plan-2026>
Chile


I worry more about how many countries will have the facilities to host such a 
huge tournament. A pre-World Cup tournament to further dilute all the dull 
teams would have been preferable. Sixteen teams was more than enough.Javier 
Rodriguez

Colombia

South American qualification is quite tough, so with more spots and only 10 
teams competing, we will probably qualify most of the time. The qualifiers 
should be modified though. What’s the point of having a three-year league 
competition if more than 50% of the teams will qualifiy? I think it will 
decrease the level and the expectation of the World Cup in the end.Julian Sanint

Costa Rica

The current format is absolutely fine, although I’m open to a reallocation of 
places. In the new system qualifiers will be useless. If 6.5 places are given 
to Concacaf, it will be nearly impossible not to qualify. If a merger with 
Conmebol is agreed, there could be some attractive fixtures against the likes 
of Brazil or Argentina.Andrés Mora

Denmark

The expansion is a positive step. With the increase of European teams, 
Denmark’s chances of competing at the finals will hopefully be guaranteed. I 
also relish the idea that more countries from around the world will have a 
chance to compete, which makes room for more diversity at the World Cup. I’m 
all for the expansion as long as the maximum number of matches for each team 
does not exceed the current number andFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> seem to have solved this problem 
with the new three-group format. I don’t see what all the fuss is about.David

Egypt


With the current format, Africa is being severely under-represented in the 
World Cup. Egypt is generally one of the top nine teams in Africa and 
increasing the African representation in the World Cup will make it easier for 
us to qualify.Omar Aly

England

The expansion cheapens the quality of the tournament. Teams already go through 
a lengthy qualifying process to reach the finals so surely the best teams 
should be there? Gianni Infantino merely wants to curry favour with the smaller 
nations with this strategy, but I don’t see the point in countries turning up 
to play a knockout match then go back home just for the experience of sampling 
the World Cup atmosphere. Leave the current format alone!Richard Whitter

Finland

While Finland may have a slightly better chance of qualifying, I don’t support 
the move at all. The team needs to improve to realistically compete with the 
likes of Germany and Argentina, otherwise we’ll see some very embarassing 
matches. Iceland showed at Euro 2016 that any small country can reach the top 
with the right team and conditions. The change will also mean huge additional 
costs for host nations, making it almost impossible for even countries such as 
Brazil to host the tournament, despite possibly being the greatest contributor 
to the game in recent years. There are already too many phantom stadiums in 
countries such as South Africa, who have previously hosted the tournament 
without having many competitive teams in the area. This expansion will lead to 
more unused stadiums and more corruption.Matti

Germany
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F107f1f0f32570b956c91d2e304a85bb3d4add535%2F0_72_4678_3247%2F4678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20fans%20from%2048%20countries%20react%20to%20the%20new%2048-team%20World%20Cup%20format&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20fans%20from%2048%20countries%20react%20to%20the%20new%2048-team%20World%20Cup%20format&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F107f1f0f32570b956c91d2e304a85bb3d4add535%2F0_72_4678_3247%2F4678.jpg>
 Bastian Schweinsteiger in happier times. Photograph: Alex Livesey/Fifa/Getty 
Images 
I think 32 is too many already. There are not enough quality sides around to 
make each match essential viewing. And that’s what the World Cup should be. 
Group matches will matter very little, if only 16 of the 48 teams are 
eliminated. There will be even more of an incentive to grind out ties in the 
group stages. This means more tedious matches for Germany against teams who 
will be parking the bus and little else.Henning

Ghana


Europe is over-represented in the current format. It would be good for others 
teams to get a look in. European teams would usually beat them anyway so this 
expansion is unlikely to change the outcome of the competition overall. But 
it’s good for national teams to get on the world stage once in awhile. Ghana 
are a good team and would qualify for the World Cup anyway.Stuart Bolus

Greece

Greece usually has difficulties in qualifying for the tournament, so an 
expansion would benefit us and other Balkan nations like it did in the last 
24-team European Championship. Having said that we didn’t actually qualify for 
that either, so there are no guarantees and expansion will automatically mean 
Greece will be at the tournament! I don’t like the idea of three teams in each 
group and think 16 groups of four teams (64 teams in total) would be better. 
That way the top two teams of each group will qualify for the knockout round of 
32. Maybe something to consider for the 100-year anniversary World Cup in 2030?
Mike K

Guatemala


We’ll finally manage to make it to a World Cup competition. Well, maybe. Lennin

Holland

The expansion has destroyed a prestigious competition completely. More rubbish 
teams competing in more rubbish games. At least we’ll have no excuses not to 
qualify.Bas Ruten

Iceland

While the expansion increases our chance of reaching the tournament, it feels 
like it diminishes the competition as a whole. You only need to look back to 
the Euros last summer. Many people said we were one of the teams that only made 
it due to the expansion to 24 teams. That was not true, as we would have made 
it with ease in the old 16-team format and we showed people our real quality 
this summer in reaching the quarter-finals. But this expansion really sounds 
like a money-making exercise rather than trying to improve the spectacle.Sveinn 
Thor

India


Football in my country is just starting to bloom, with commercial support and 
with India set to host U-17 World Cup this year. The decision to expand the 
World Cup gives us hope for the future. It could help the development of 
football and political support for the sport in our country. The decision to 
expand the Euros didn’t end up badly, with Iceland giving us a memorable tale 
to remember for years.S. Rajaselvam

Indonesia

The quality of the tournament will no doubt suffer. It’s not as if Indonesia 
will ever have a chance of getting through anyway. I was more than happy with 
the current format.Aditya

Ireland

From an Irish perspective the extra three European spots will help our 
chances, as we’re usually “touch n go” during the qualifiers. But if the last 
Euros were anything to go by, the increase may dilute the quality of the 
competition overall. My problem is with the three-team group format. That is 
just asking for trouble. Countries not in the last round of group games could 
be left feeling hard done by, if the other two collude to secure their own 
process. On the balance of things I’m probably in favour – just!Sean Quinn

Israel

This is good for Israel. We might qualify again for the first time since 1970. 
But the expansion is bad for football overall. Fifa are thinking of countering 
safety-first scoreless draws with staged penalty shootouts to award extra 
points. I can’t think of anything worse than manufactured drama like that. 
We’re basically one step closer to “multiball madness”.Michael Schuermann

Italy

Having 48 teams is a good idea but Europe should have been given more spots 
than the 16 places that are up for grabs. Europe has a greater percentage of 
the top 48 ranked national teams after all. For Italy the expansion means an 
even easier route to the World Cup final.Domenic

Jamaica


I’m desperate for another World Cup for Jamaica, having been starved of any 
sort of success since our appearance at France 98. But I’m not sure diluting 
the entire competition is a price worth paying for it.Shemar

Lebanon

I can understand why Fifa would want to expand the tournament and offer a 
lifeline to nations who have potential to develop in the sport. But for well 
established national sides this will be an irritant and for Lebanon it really 
doesn’t matter. We’re nowhere near the standard required to become one of the 
48 teams going through.Fangis

Malaysia


It would need to be expanded to 200 teams to get my national team competing 
there. I’m happy with the current format. The best compete with the best – as 
it should be.Bob Libau

Namibia


I’m not very happy with the new format. The only silver lining is that we 
might have a chance to qualify for a major tournament. But the chances of 
Namibia gracing the World Cup in 2026 are very slim.Nick Mukanda

New Zealand


The 48 team World Cup would very likely have a positive effect on our national 
team. We’d be strong favourites to win the Oceania Group qualification spot, 
though based on past experience we certainly could not take for granted. The 
“All Whites” have only qualified for two World Cups in our history.Michael 
Leggat

Nigeria

I can’t see anything wrong with Fifa wanting more teams to participate in the 
World Cup. There are countries who would love a chance to experience the gamour 
of the big tournament and this new format might inspire them to kick on. It 
gives my country a better chance too.Darnell Uchay

Northern Ireland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a60c3c7930ed8b9a67c87b824e5d18754404540%2F0_2_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20fans%20from%2048%20countries%20react%20to%20the%20new%2048-team%20World%20Cup%20format&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20fans%20from%2048%20countries%20react%20to%20the%20new%2048-team%20World%20Cup%20format&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a60c3c7930ed8b9a67c87b824e5d18754404540%2F0_2_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Will the world’s greatest fans return to a World Cup in 2026? Photograph: 
Niall Carson/PA 
I would have preferred a reduction of teams. The World Cup should be 
prestigious, representing only the elite of world football, it’s not about 
“giving everybody a chance to experience it.” Just like the Champions League, 
the inclusion of extra teams will be to the detriment of the competition. The 
joy of competing at these competitions should stem from how tough it is to 
qualify for them. This is a decision based on money and nothing more.Paul 
McVeigh

Norway

Norway now have a very realistic chance of qualifying. By the time 2026 comes 
around we’ll have been away from football’s top table for 26 years. With the 
expanding popularity of football and a globalised world, the middle-tier teams 
will decrease the gap to the best teams. The great powers of football will 
still be more consistent and have a higher maximum potential, but in 10 years 
all the top 60 teams in the world will be able to beat the other teams on a 
good day. This was evident in the Euros last year, with matches being less 
predictable than ever.Viktor

Poland

I’m more than happy with the 32-team format. With 48 teams, smaller nations 
will find it easier to qualify. This will slow down Poland reaching our highest 
level going into a tournament.Francis

Puerto Rico


Gianni Infantino and Fifa seem to have a new plan: to kill the World Cup | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/19/gianni-infantino-fifa-world-cup-48-teams>
This may give my country a real chance of finally making it to the greatest 
football competition in the world. Even if we were eliminated in the opening 
round, which would more than likely be the case, reaching the group stages 
would represent an enormous victory for us. Also, for this particular sporting 
event, it would be truly amazing to be able to root for our own country instead 
of again having to cheer on any national team playing against the USA.Julian

Scotland

I’m not so sure about the expansion, but I’m happy to see how it pans out 
before rubbishing it. It might be beneficial for Scotland’s chances of 
qualifying but the general standard of international football might be somewhat 
diminished as a result. So while it might result in a long overdue trip to a 
major tournament for the Tartan Army, Fifa are nothing if not incompetent, so 
there’s a good chance of this being an ill-thought out farce.Adam

Serbia

Our chances of qualifying have been made easier but only slightly. Our 
national team is under-performing. We failed to qualify for the past campaign, 
when Europe had a 13-team allocation, but might fare better if it’s raised to 
16. From the European point of view I don’t think expanding the allocation by 
three teams will dilute the quality. That’s for other confederations to worry 
about.Leo

Slovakia

I loved the 32-team format. It divided everything perfectly and gave a good 
mix of countries while making qualifying hard. No one just waltzed in 
automatically. Looking at Concacaf, the US just have to show up to get through 
qualifying now. In Asia right now Syria would qualify automatically and they’re 
ranked 96th in the world. Who benefits from watching Germany thrash Syria in 
the group stages? Maybe Slovakia will qualify more often, but it won’t mean 
anything. When we made it in 2010 it really meant something and it was an 
incredible achievement to get to the knockout stage. Now the group stage will 
mean almost nothing and the potential for lousy matches will be very high.Dan

South Africa

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8694bc91d8ed83762687163ba48d3a996809f71f%2F0_44_4060_2435%2F4060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20fans%20from%2048%20countries%20react%20to%20the%20new%2048-team%20World%20Cup%20format&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20fans%20from%2048%20countries%20react%20to%20the%20new%2048-team%20World%20Cup%20format&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8694bc91d8ed83762687163ba48d3a996809f71f%2F0_44_4060_2435%2F4060.jpg>
 South Africa fans enjoy the opening game of the 2010 World Cup. Photograph: 
Tom Jenkins 
The expansion means we may qualify without having to spend billions to host 
the tournament. We’re still saddled with a lot of debt after 2010. It may also 
give us a bit of confidence to improve if we get to play similarly bad teams 
from other parts of the world. The World Cup will have a really global feel.
Hamish

South Korea


It’s good news for us and good news for Asian football in general. I’m 
confident that by 2026 we have a real chance of reaching a World Cup final.
Derek Choi

Spain

If you want to give other teams more experience, let Fifa create a tournament 
that does not include the top sides in the ranking and let the remaining sides 
get some experience playing a mini World Cup format, so you can get experience 
and confidence. There’s no point getting hammered 15-0 by Argentina. This 
expansion just ups the goals tally for the tournament for all the wrong reasons 
and it disenchants viewers from developing football nations from following 
their teams’ progress any further.Krishna

Sweden

The qualifying campaign will be rendered useless and there will be less glory 
getting through to the tournament. Fifa have killed the last really meaningful 
football tournament.Stephan

Switzerland

I was happy with the current format and fear that this expansion will result 
in a lot of boring matches where teams set out to defend and frustrate more 
creative, attacking opposition. We should have no trouble getting through at 
least.Mario

Thailand


Asia currently only has a few slots in the finals but, as a football region, 
has the most countries. Therefore current qualifying campaigns in Asia are 
unfair; giving more slots to Asian countries would help rectify this. South 
America and Europe might have a better standard of football, but allowing more 
small nations to qualify will undoubtedly enhance the tournament’s global 
appeal.Turbo

Trinidad and Tobago


What’s done is done and football fans will just have to get on with it. At 
least we’ll have a much better chance of qualifying for the first time since 
2006 in Germany. With only three direct qualifiers from Concacaf, USA and 
Mexico are almost a shoe-in. Then we have to battle it out with Costa Rica, 
Panama, Jamaica, Honduras, Cuba, Haiti etc. for the one remaining place. It’s 
proven to be too much of a challenge for us. For many “bigger” footballing 
countries it’s old hat to qualify for the World Cup, but for tiny nation states 
it would mean a lot to play on a world stage. Yes – even if it means being 
badly beaten.Jamette

USA

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4316e65252f477e0242eeedc9e91ad0982623dd2%2F0_186_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20fans%20from%2048%20countries%20react%20to%20the%20new%2048-team%20World%20Cup%20format&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20fans%20from%2048%20countries%20react%20to%20the%20new%2048-team%20World%20Cup%20format&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ffootball-fans-48-countries-team-world-cup-fifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4316e65252f477e0242eeedc9e91ad0982623dd2%2F0_186_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 USA fans watch their team at the 2014 World Cup. Photograph: Scott Olson/Getty 
Images 
This expansion will ensure our team qualifies every time. Ultimately we will 
be able to get through qualification with less stress. We’ll not need to rely 
on our best players. But on the other hand that means the best XI won’t have 
time to bond and form a cohesive unit. This will not be good when the team is 
in the final tournament and faces tougher opposition.Jon

Vanuatu

A 64-team tournament would have been better. Eight leagues of eight and a 
straight knock-out from the group stage, with the top four teams in each group 
going through. I don’t ever imagine seeing us in a World Cup though, no matter 
how many expansions Fifa plan in the future.Wally

Wales

The current format is too diluted. Just because teams qualify from weak groups 
doesn’t mean they should be allowed to participate in the finals. They should 
be made to qualify through a vigorous play-off system to weed out the poor 
teams. What is the point of Africa getting extra places? Let’s be honest – 
apart from Cameroon Italia 90, African teams have flattered to deceive. The 
qualifying groups should not be confined to regions as this format is obviously 
not working. It should be the best 16 teams in the world playing at the World 
Cup. That’s why it doesn’t bother me one iota if Wales don’t qualify. Teams 
should be there on merit, not because Fifa needs more money.Robert Jones

Zimbabwe

I was happy with the current format, despite us never qualifying. I don’t 
think expanding it to 48 teams will help Zimbabwe one bit. How about expanding 
it to 64 teams and have a straight knock-out competition?Bob
 