
Nine days and counting yet we are still waiting for a blockbuster. A mega 
transfer, one that gets super agents all weak at the knees. A hulking brick of 
a transfer to shatter this window wide open. Step forwardAlexis Sánchez, he who 
refuses to celebrate last minute equalisers, he who refuses to sign a new 
contract and who looks increasingly ready to swoon for the highest bidder. At 
the moment, said bidder isPSG – they’ll kick things off with £60m but are 
prepared to go higher to test Arsène Wenger’s resolve. Wenger, meanwhile, is 
still coming to terms withMesut Özil’s revelation that his future depends on 
his manager’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/mesut-ozil-arsenal-contract-arsene-wenger>
. Ozil’s reasoning sounds increasing like greasing the wheels for a one-way 
summer flight with Air Do One. If PSG’s interest is rebuffed,Atlético Madrid 
are also sniffing around and may have the necessary wedge shouldAntoine 
Griezmann jump ship.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in England, Spain, Germany, France 
and Italy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Not a blockbuster, but when Jürgen Klopp and Mamadou Sakho find themselves in 
the same room it’salways worth a watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/27/was-mamadou-sakhos-mock-interview-too-much-for-liverpools-jurgen-klopp>
. They won’t be for much longer though: Sakho’s Anfield hell is about to end 
with a trip toSouthampton, who are preparing themselves for the departure of 
Jose Fonté and perhaps Virgil van Dijk too. This one marks somewhat of a 
reversal of a trend, what with the congregation of former Saints at Liverpool 
now, but Klopp will not be sad to see the back of Sakho. He has bigger things 
on his mind, namely snapping up a replacement for Sadio Mané while the 
Senegalese is on AFCON duty. He’s been casting his eye overQuincy Promes, likes 
what he sees and will table a bid of £25m for the Spartak Moscow man.

In three-way tussle news, it’s Tiemoué Bakayoko being pulled this way and 
that, and that. The Monaco midfielder is of interest to Manchester United,
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> and 
Chelsea. United seem to be leading the way at the moment but City may console 
themselves with a move for Barcelona’sIvan Rakitic. The Croat has fallen out of 
favour at Camp Nou, is of course well known to Pep Guardiola and while Yaya 
Touré has rediscovered a spot of form, Rakitic has been identified as his 
long-term successor. Woof!

Staying in Catalunya, and Internazionale are preparing a 2018 swoop for Lionel 
Messi. Mundo Deportivo reports that the Italian clubs’ owners are ready to go 
“all out” for the Argentinian ... so we’ll file that one under done deal. 
Speaking of Italy, Antonio Conte doesn’t manage them any more but he is in 
charge of Chelsea, and he is not giving up in his pursuit ofFernando Llorente. 
It seems Conte will get his man provided he lets the out-of-favourMichy 
Batshuayijoin Swansea on loan in return. The Swans are also keen on Holger 
Badstuber, what with a chronic lack of able defenders, as Paul Clement calls a 
favour or two with his old Bayern Munich pals.

Last but not least, Everton still want Morgan Schneiderlin and Memphis Depay 
and seem to think boring the world to tears with their inaction will drive down 
their prices. And a number of news outlets are carrying the story that Big Sam 
has been given the green light to splash the cash atCrystal Palace. 


 * Follow your team and stay up to date with the latest rumours throughout the 
transfer window withour Facebook Messenger alerts 
<http://m.me/theguardian?ref=football_transfers>. Simply hit ‘Get started’ at 
the bottom of the screen to receive the latest alerts.  