
Rhonda Covington is short on time. As the only public defender for the 20th 
judicial district ofLouisiana <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/louisiana>, 
she has a lot to take care of.

At any given moment, she could be investigating cases, calling witnesses, 
scouring through evidence, taking photos at crime scenes (with her own camera), 
meeting with her clients’ families, writing motions, typing up pleadings, 
making appointments, answering the phones, answering the door, getting the mail 
at the post office, filling in timesheets, filing monthly reports, doing the 
accounting, paying the rent and utilities, cleaning the bathroom, dusting the 
furniture, sweeping and mopping the floors, taking out the trash, trimming the 
bushes, unclogging the plumbing, buying the toilet paper, or meeting with 
everyone arrested in a thousand-square-mile area just north of Baton Rouge, 
within 72 hours of their arrest.

“There are days,” she says, “when I feel that I could literally scream to the 
top of my lungs for 10 minutes.”

Every Wednesday, she makes an all-day trip to the infamous Angola prison to 
meet with clients.

Every other night, she visits inmates at the local jail. 

Every weekend, she works.

She also appears in court almost daily, where she handles all types of cases – 
juvenile and adult, misdemeanor and felony.

Earlier this year, following what Governor John Bel Edwards’s office called 
“the largest budget crisis in our state’s history”, the Louisiana public 
defense system spiraled into fiscal ruin. Public defenders who had long 
depended on a highly unstable source of funding – traffic tickets – now saw 
their revenues slashed further. Soon, many districts were finding makeshift 
ways of getting by – including Caddo Parish, which conscripted tax attorneys, 
real estate attorneys and other novice recruits from the private bar to fill in 
for the overwhelmed defenders.

But in other towns, public defense offices have been left to fend for 
themselves. Stripped of full-time attorneys, investigators, translators, social 
workers and support staff, they are now little more than ragtag, part-time 
squads.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Frhonda-covington-public-defender-louisiana-east-west-feliciana-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20Rhonda%20Covington%2C%20the%20only%20public%20defender%20for%20Louisiana's%2020th%20judicial%20district%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Frhonda-covington-public-defender-louisiana-east-west-feliciana-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20Rhonda%20Covington%2C%20the%20only%20public%20defender%20for%20Louisiana%27s%2020th%20judicial%20district%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Frhonda-covington-public-defender-louisiana-east-west-feliciana-video&media=>
Meet Rhonda Covington, the only public defender for Louisiana’s 20th judicial 
district – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/09/rhonda-covington-public-defender-louisiana-east-west-feliciana-video>
 * Meet Rhonda Covington, the only public defender for Louisiana’s 20th 
judicial district 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/09/rhonda-covington-public-defender-louisiana-east-west-feliciana-video>
. Video by Laurence Mathieu-Léger 
In the 16th judicial district, for example, a single public defender stands by 
as groups of up to 50 mostly black, poor defendants are convicted of and 
sentenced for major felonies – all at once, all together – in a few hours or 
less. And in the 20th district, exactly one woman, Covington, is employed 
full-time to represent poor people accused of crimes.

Because her district initially received only $34,086 in assistance from the 
state last year to run a public defender’s office that covers more than 900 
cases across two parishes, East Feliciana and West Feliciana, Covington has 
been forced to cut just about everything but herself. She recently dismissed an 
attorney (savings: $38,400 a year), reduced her secretary to part-time ($7,194 
a year), canceled the office’s cellphone plan ($1,829.28) and discontinued 
housekeeping services ($2,400). She saves another $1,000 a year by having an 
inmate work crew mow the yard outside her office.

The human toll of America's public defender crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/07/public-defender-us-criminal-justice-system>
Covington, whose clients call her “Ms Rhonda”, wears a medical boot on her 
right foot because she tore a ligament a few months ago while running to the 
courthouse. She no longer has any health insurance, let alone worker’s 
compensation, for the injury.

She gets help around the office from two contract lawyers who chip in two days 
a week, and a makeshift office corps of two part-time, $15-an-hour paralegals 
and an intern during the summer.

There are also her “office managers”: two cats, named Liberty and Justice.

For All died a long time ago.

‘Ms Rhonda’ against the world
20th district graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/la-20-public-defender/> 
On a Monday in June, Covington is frantically prepping copies of the docket 
for her next session in court. She can usually be found with a giant Sonic cup 
of Diet Coke in the crook of one arm (“I’m addicted,” she says) and a handful 
of files in the other.

Her intern, Jimmy Zahorchak, is helping out for now; by August, he will have 
gone back to law school at Louisiana State University. “One summer of help, 
that’s all I get,” she says. “I can only pay him $10 an hour anyhow, so I’ll 
probably lose him to the DA’s office.”

Zahorchak is making copies of motions for her to sign while the phone is 
ringing off the hook.

“Public defender’s office,” Covington answers. “Hey dear, how are you? Would 
you hold, please?” She brings a second phone to her other ear.

“Public defender’s office, Rhonda speaking … Oh, you’re Eric’s mother? His 
next trial date is 3 October,” she says from memory.

Covington pours another Diet Coke, using her shoulders to keep the two phones 
pressed against her ears.

A client comes through the door, explaining that his boss accused him of 
stealing a tractor, but he was just using it for side work, and –

“Hold on, Mr Brand, I’ll be right with you, don’t go anywhere!”

On the phone, she says: “Would you please tell them that even if you don’t 
think those police interviews are important, I still want to hear them? Thank 
you, ma’am, I appreciate it.”

Turning again to the client in her office, she asks: “Now, Mr Brand, what can 
I do for you?”

Within an hour Covington is making her way to court, where she has to quickly 
help a few defendants take pleas before driving to West Feliciana Parish to 
grab some files at the courthouse there, after which she has to stop to pick up 
the mail. Then she is headed to the jail back in East Feliciana Parish to visit 
a new client named Mario Adams, who she thinks might be locked up on the wrong 
burglary warrant. “It just doesn’t feel right,” she says, pointing out that 
Adams is from Mississippi and that the police have no evidence he was even in 
East Feliciana at the time of the burglary. “I have to check it out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Flouisiana-public-defenders-east-west-feliciana-parishes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2e3093d58dcdb15c3e03e9591694d5acbbed5c8%2F0_0_1905_1143%2F1905.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=For%20Louisiana's%20defenseless%20poor%2C%20it's%20one%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Flouisiana-public-defenders-east-west-feliciana-parishes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=For%20Louisiana%27s%20defenseless%20poor%2C%20it%27s%20one%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Flouisiana-public-defenders-east-west-feliciana-parishes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2e3093d58dcdb15c3e03e9591694d5acbbed5c8%2F0_0_1905_1143%2F1905.jpg>
 Covington’s district received only $34,086 in assistance from the state last 
year to run a public defender’s office that covers more than 900 cases across 
two parishes. Photograph: Laurence Mathieu-Leger for the Guardian 
Finally, a few minutes into that drive, while passing an inmate work crew on 
the left, Covington has a moment to lament how rushed she felt back in the 
courtroom. “The clients insist on your full, undivided attention,” she says. 
“But without any money, without any help, you just can’t do it … I shouldn’t 
complain. I should save my complaining for my cases.”

Covington says her father hates her criminal defense work. “Every time he 
reads in the newspaper about some terrible crime somewhere, he calls me up and 
says: ‘See, Rhonda, see, see?!’ The attitude of a lot of people in Louisiana 
is: ‘If they’ve been arrested, then by damn …’”

Her response is always the same. “I just don’t think it should be easy to take 
away somebody’s liberty. It shouldn’t be cheap to take away someone’s liberty.”

The district attorney’s office in Covington’s district, after all, handles a 
similar caseload but with about $1m more in its budget. She used to be able to 
afford a translator, but now, whenever she has a Spanish-speaking client, she 
has to rely on a police officer to translate their private discussions – which, 
she says, is a conflict for obvious reasons. She also had a case a few years 
ago in which a handwriting expert saved her client from going to jail, but she 
definitely would not be able to afford that now.

When Covington gets to the jail, she is greeted by a chorus of “Heya there, Ms 
Rhonda!” She walks past a long, white board with the names of almost a hundred 
inmates scribbled on it. Most of them are her clients.

The necessity of ‘mass pleas’
16th district graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/la-16-public-defenders/> 
Fifteen poor, black men shuffle into a courtroom together in southern 
Louisiana’s Cajun country, dressed in orange jumpsuits and shackled at the 
wrists, waist and ankles.

As they file into the jury box – which today is serving as the “plea box” – 
their chains jingle against the old, hardwood floor. Here in the 16th judicial 
district, at the St Martinville courthouse, it is “felony plea day”, with Judge 
Gregory Aucoin presiding.

Many of these defendants have not discussed their cases with their public 
defender yet, and they will have about 30 seconds to speak with him this 
morning.

Then the judge, with a cigar dangling from his mouth, will ask: “Are you 
satisfied with the advice your attorney has given you in this matter?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Yes, sir.”

“Yes, sir,” they will all say, down the row.

“OK, I accept your plea agreement.”

And just like that, with no time for arguments to be heard in each of their 
cases, they will have all pleaded guilty together, and will be headed to prison 
for years, sometimes decades.

Last year, the 16th district’s public defender’s office was forced to cut 
$311,000 from an already skeletal budget of about $1.5m. As a result, they 
offered increasingly cursory assistance at these mass hearings, in which up to 
50 defendants are collectively marched into a courtroom then convicted and 
sentenced to major felony charges carrying up to life in prison.

They’re trying to put people in prison … A fair trial is considered an 
interruption
Christopher Murell, New Orleans attorney 
“Mass pleas” of this sort are not unheard of in Louisiana and elsewhere in the 
country, especially in states with chronic public defender problems, including
Pennsylvania 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/05/30/pennsylvania-public-defenders_n_1556192.html>
,Utah <http://www.sltrib.com/home/3639321-155/utah-lawmakers-pass-a-bill-to>, 
Michigan 
<http://www.freep.com/story/opinion/columnists/stephen-henderson/2016/08/14/michigan-public-defender-davontae-sanford/88464698/>
 andMissouri 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/08/when-the-governor-is-your-lawyer/494453/>
. Usually, however, it is a process reserved for much smaller groups of 
defendants, especially in misdemeanor cases, while major felonies involving the 
possibility of significant prison time receive more individualized attention.

As the hearing in St Martinville begins, the only defender in the courtroom, 
Gary LeGros, glances at the long list of people he is representing. Wearing a 
small hoop earring and a suit that hangs over his hands, he calls out to the 
defendants in the pews, who, unlike those in the plea box, were able to pay 
bail and came to court freely: “Everyone here who’s represented by the public 
defender’s office, please come up and print your name on this sheet!”

LeGros holds up a legal pad, and over a dozen people stream forward. He then 
gives their names to an assistant, who rummages through several mammoth file 
boxes, looking for each case.

One of the defendants, Brandon Washington, is facing burglary charges. He says 
he used to have a paid attorney but lost his job at a Halliburton factory and 
had to turn to the public defender. Several months after making that switch, he 
has no idea who his lawyer is and has never talked to him.

Louisiana public defenders: a lawyer with a pulse will do
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/08/louisiana-public-defender-crisis>
“I think it may be that guy,” he says, referring to LeGros.

LeGros soon makes his way into the jury box with the men in jumpsuits and 
chains. He asks for their names, calling back to his assistant to see if she 
has the relevant file. Then he gives each the option of making a deal, and if 
they say yes, he shouts over to the DA.

“That one’s a theft case, we’ll do a deal,” shouts the DA.

“OK,” says LeGros, after checking quickly with the defendant.

“Mr LeGros, what’s that one pleading?”

“Guilty, I think.”

As more deals are made across the room, there is little discussion of the 
nature of each case, or of the background and circumstances of each defendant. 
Every agreement is made in a matter of seconds, weighed and considered by each 
defendant for only a moment. Ultimately, no defendants will plead “not guilty” 
today and go to trial.

In fact, of the 4,492 felony cases in this district last year, there were only 
eight jury trials, and not because only eight people believed they were not 
guilty. The court schedule sets aside one week for trials every three months, 
and anyone who wants a trial has to wait, usually in jail, for one of those 
dates to come around. The public defenders, with no time to be more thorough, 
advise their clients that pleading is the surest, safest way to go.

When everyone has been prepped for their “mass plea”, a bank of white lawyers 
– defenders and prosecutors seated close together – face the panel of black 
defendants. The judge, Aucoin, starts reading off their pleas. He informs them 
of their rights, and in an instant, all are felons.

LeGros turns to the defendants’ families, who have been watching from the 
front rows, and says: “Welcome to the criminal justice system.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Flouisiana-public-defenders-east-west-feliciana-parishes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45e76ddb1dcf1d5d606d84e6be4a703ef405ab5f%2F147_0_1858_1115%2F1858.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=For%20Louisiana's%20defenseless%20poor%2C%20it's%20one%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Flouisiana-public-defenders-east-west-feliciana-parishes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=For%20Louisiana%27s%20defenseless%20poor%2C%20it%27s%20one%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Flouisiana-public-defenders-east-west-feliciana-parishes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45e76ddb1dcf1d5d606d84e6be4a703ef405ab5f%2F147_0_1858_1115%2F1858.jpg>
 There were only eight jury trials in the 16th judicial district last year. 
Photograph: Laurence Mathieu-Léger for the Guardian 
If he had more funding, LeGros would spend more time doing “real lawyer work”, 
as he puts it, instead of just processing his clients en masse. “I can pretty 
much keep track of all of them, and most cases don’t require much attention,” 
he says by phone. “But there’s no way all those boys understand what’s going on 
when they get their rights all together like that. I don’t like it, but shit, 
I’m just a country lawyer. What you going to do?”

Yet the group pleas are only partly the result of an underfunded public 
defender’s office, says Christopher Murell, a civil rights attorney in New 
Orleans and the executive director of the Promise of Justice Initiative, a 
criminal justice reform organization. It is also about a courtroom culture – on 
the part of judges, DAs and public defenders alike – of trying to get all the 
cases processed expediently, without friction.

The judges and DAs “get angry at you for not giving them a heads up that 
you’re going to file a motion, because that will mess up their schedule”, says 
Murell. “A fair trial is considered an interruption.”

Cecelia “Beanie” Bonin, is the chief public defender of the district (and Le 
Gros’s boss). Her office is located adjacent to an above-ground cemetery, in a 
first-floor space that feels more like a basement. On a whiteboard at the back 
of one room, someone has listed a set of priorities:

#1: How to go about getting the waitlist moving.

#2: Review who needs an attorney.

And further down the list, in all caps, #10: PROCEDURE FOR SANITY.

When she took over the office in March 2015, Bonin thought she would begin by 
raising expectations. Her plan was to get control over the caseload, promote 
performance standards, and demand that her attorneys file more motions and have 
more meaningful conversations with their clients. She never considered that 
more than a year later, her attorneys would be watching helplessly during mass 
hearings like the one in St Martinville.

But Bonin soon realized that when an office is perpetually on the brink of 
bankruptcy, little else is possible. She could not afford enough attorneys to 
actually discuss pleas in advance, let alone develop relationships with 
defendants. Nor could she find good, experienced lawyers who would work for her 
in the first place, given how little she was able to pay them. The ones she 
already employed all needed to work two jobs to supplement their salaries, 
which begin at $34,000 a year.

One of Bonin’s lawyers had 345 active cases but was working only 15 hours a 
week. The rest of the time, she ran a private practice.

‘Commit the same crime next time’

In the 16th judicial district and across Louisiana, things have improved 
slightly for public defenders since July, when the state legislature’s new 
budget went into effect. Controversially, itslashed funding 
<http://www.nola.com/politics/index.ssf/2016/04/lawmakers_look_to_give_more_mo.html>
 for the lawyers who represent defendants in death penalty cases, and shifted 
that money to the overwhelmed district-level defenders. Now, defendants facing 
the death penalty are finding themselves on waitlists for legal counsel.

Even with the shift in the budget, Rhonda Covington still labors alone, and 
the mass pleas have continued. One summer day in New Iberia, just down the road 
from St Martinville, Judge Thibodeaux turns toward a plea box of a dozen poor 
defendants. Smiling, he says to them: “Y’all just need to all commit the same 
crime next time, so we can do this faster.”

A public defender goes over to them, learns their names, and makes a deal.

Then the judge starts in, mass-processing them by reading off their rights.

“Do you understand your right to a jury trial?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Yes, sir.”

“Yes, sir,” they all answer.

“Do you understand your right to confront your accusers?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Yes, sir.”

“I can’t hear you. Say, ‘Yes, sir,’” the judge says to one defendant.

“Do you understand that you have the right to counsel when the state proceeds 
against you?”

The public defender is not paying attention. He is talking to the next batch 
of defendants, scribbling down their pleas.
 