
Boris Johnson is many things: a narcissist 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3668972/If-charlatan-sexual-adventurer-Prime-Minister-d-emigrated-says-former-boss-MAX-HASTINGS.html>
, aliar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/19/boris-johnson-grilled-past-outright-lies-uneasy-press-conference-john-kerry>
 , athug <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iDJWkS2A9T0> and an impostor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/27/boris-johnson-london-mayor-joke-job-sara-pascoe>
. But he isn’t a fool. When he said last week it was “bollocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/the-guardian-view-on-boris-johnson-he-is-causing-too-much-needless-chaos>
” to think freedom of movement was one of the European Union’s fundamental 
principles (and how refreshing it is to have a foreign secretary with a 
classical education), serious people made the mistake of not taking the new 
right seriously. What a joke our foreign secretary is, they snorted. The 
over-promoted clown does not know the EU enshrined freedom of movement in the 
Treaty of Rome of 1957. He’s either an embarrassment or light entertainment, 
but he’s clearly too stupid to matter.

Writing before Donald Trump’s victory 
<http://www.nybooks.com/daily/2016/07/26/trump-putin-fallacy-failure-of-imagination/>
, the Russian-American journalist Masha Gessen warned that too many liberals 
lacked imagination. They could not imagine that Trump would win and threaten 
American democracy’s safeguards, even though authoritarian nationalists were 
winning across the world. The British elite could not imagine Brexit and only a 
handful of academics and journalists imagined Vladimir Putin would move to 
control Russia’s media, suppress opposition and invade his neighbours. Stuck in 
a familiar past, they do not believe change for the worse can happen, even when 
it is happening in front of them.

Our current imaginative failure lies in our inability to understand the secret 
fears and bottomless opportunism of our new masters. Demagogues who have fooled 
the electorate know better than their opponents that the public can turn on 
them. For no one is more frightened of a revolution devouring its own than the 
men who lead it on.

The UK as we know it can’t survive Brexit and Trump | Gerry Hassan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/britain-brexit-trump-scotland-northern-ireland-wales>
To close the possibility of going from today’s popular heroes to tomorrow’s 
enemies of the people, they must ensure that, whoever is held to account for 
Brexit turning rancid, it is not them. Everywhere you look on the right, you 
can see the politicians who ran the Leave campaign shuffling off 
responsibility, like actors casting off their costumes.

Unlike so many of their opponents, they can imagine the future. They can see 
the possibility of Britain in 2018 heading for hard Brexit. Instead of being 
involved in the easy break they promised, we will be at the start of exhausting 
trade negotiations with the EU and dozens of countries that will drag on into 
the 2020s. A Conservative government, committed to reducing the state, will 
have to employtens of thousands of civil servants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/whitehall-struggling-to-cope-with-scale-of-work-arising-from-brexit-vote>
 to undertake the most energy-sapping task since the Second World War. Real 
wages will be failing to keep up with inflation. Investors will be looking 
elsewhere.

The 17 million who voted Leave won’t remember every item of the false bill of 
goods Johnson, Michael Gove and Nigel Farage sold. But they will remember the 
vision of an economic future so bright the NHS would receive an extra £350m a 
week. As Brexit drags the public financesever further into the red 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/brexit-blame-100-billion-budget-black-hole-deficit-autumn-statement-philip-hammond-a7422141.html>
, it already looks a straight lie. By 2018, it could sound as false as Neville 
Chamberlain’s promise in 1938 that appeasement would bring “peace for our time” 
sounded as the bombs fell in 1940.

Our former allies were baffled by Boris Johnson’s assertion that it was 
“bollocks” forEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to say 
Britain could not remain a member of the single market if we would not accept 
EU immigration. The Italian economic development minister replied: “No way” 
when Johnson told him: “I don’t want free movement of people but I want the 
single market.” The Dutch finance minister accused Johnson of “offering to the 
British people options that are really not available”.

So he is. But they failed to understand that Johnson was raising false hopes 
for the British to escape the blame he so richly deserves. Johnson knows the 
European treaties. It’s not just that he’s now foreign secretary. He was one of 
the founders of post-truth journalism during his time as a hack in the 1990s, 
when he was an unashamedly mendaciousBrussels correspondent for the Daily 
Telegraph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/15/brexit-boris-johnson-euromyths-telegraph-brussels 
Brussels>.

As a dismal decade of low growth drags on, the right wants to be able to say 
that we could have enjoyed the economic benefits of the single market, and had 
the immigration controls it had promised, if only vengeful Europeans had not 
intervened. As Johnson was speaking, Gove, a politician who can match him for
intellectual dishonesty lie for lie 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/eu-referendum-boris-johnson-michael-gove-turkey-migration-deliberately-lying-to-voters-yvette-cooper-a7072661.html>
, brushed aside the vast problems of rewriting 40 years of legislation and 
negotiating with half the world. We could have a “quickie divorce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/16/michael-gove-raises-question-of-quickie-divorce-for-uk-from-eu>
”, he maintained, if only the civil service were not preventing it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fboris-johnson-cronies-blame-always-lies-elsewhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff584593b63ec0a2e46d12ed9e2f7d7a7e9ea0b17%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=For%20Boris%20Johnson%20and%20his%20cronies%2C%20blame%20always%20lies%20elsewhere%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fboris-johnson-cronies-blame-always-lies-elsewhere%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=For%20Boris%20Johnson%20and%20his%20cronies%2C%20blame%20always%20lies%20elsewhere%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fboris-johnson-cronies-blame-always-lies-elsewhere%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff584593b63ec0a2e46d12ed9e2f7d7a7e9ea0b17%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin both know they must remain strong so their own 
people do not turn on them. Composite: Getty Images 
Dominic Cummings, Gove’s former special adviser, at least had the grace to 
admit <https://twitter.com/odysseanproject/status/798109523072417796> Brexit 
would be the “hardest job since beating Nazis”. I have just two caveats. 
Cummings never told the electorate about the vast complexities when he ran the 
Vote Leave campaign. For, if he had been honest, Leave would have lost. Then, 
like his master, he blamed the civil service for a mess that he and his friends 
had created. Conservatives are the first to tell the poor, the unlucky and the 
feckless that they must take responsibility. But “special snowflakes” that they 
are, they are also the first to embrace the “victim culture” and push the blame 
on to others when their failures find them out.

This is not the “usual rough and tumble of politics”. There are 3 million 
European Union migrants living in this country and 2 million British citizens 
living in the EU – the hostages of the Brexit negotiations. When Johnson and 
the Conservative press invent stories about Europe denying an entitled Britain 
a deal they know is impossible, they are consciously increasing the chances of 
reviving the attacks on EU migrants with which British goons “celebrated” our 
supposed declaration of independence.

Think on this, too. The promises of the Leave campaigners may have been 
unscrupulous, but their language was relatively restrained. Whatever complaints 
you had about posters of refugees and outright falsehoods about millions of 
Turks coming to Britain, they did not paint Hispanics as rapists and murderers 
and all Muslims as potential terrorists, as Trump did. They did not promise to 
deport millions of illegal immigrants, as Trump did. They did not justify 
assaulting women, as Trump did. They did not threaten journalists who crossed 
them with retribution, as Trump did. They did not use antisemitic imagery, as 
Trump did. Not one of them, not even Nigel Farage, wasendorsed by the Ku Klux 
Klan <https://www.ft.com/content/ed51526e-d6e2-3f88-ac84-e914f1d17ba8>, as 
Trump was.

If you can at last imagine how nasty the British right will turn as its 
failures mount, imagine how much more vicious the American right will become 
when Trump’s promises are revealed to be so many lies.
 