
FORÇA CHAPECOENSE

Police in Colombia have confirmed that at least 75 people were killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/colombia-plane-crash-brazil-declares-three-days-of-mourning-chapecoense>
 when a plane carrying, among other passengers and crew, the first-team squad 
of Brazilian top-flight team Chapecoense, went down close to the town of Cerro 
Gordo in the early hours of Tuesday. Initial reports said there were six 
survivors, including players and a travelling journalist, but police said one 
person had died in hospital. The plane was carrying 72 passengers and nine crew 
members.

Based in the city of Chapecó in the state of Santa Carina, Chapecoense were en 
route to Medellín to play the first leg of the final of this year’s Copa 
Sudamericana (South America’s answer to the Europa League), against the current 
Copa Libertadores holders Atlético Nacional. Colombia’s El Tiempo newspaper 
reported there were 22 players from the squad on board as well as 22 football 
journalists. A 23rd Chapecoense player, whom the newspaper did not name, had 
been supposed to travel with his team-mates but was not on the plane. 
Electrical failures on the British Aerospace 146 short-haul aircraft prompted 
the pilot to declare an emergency before the crash. Having taken those still 
alive to hospital, rescuers were later forced to suspend their efforts because 
of bad weather at the crash site.

Chapecoense fans gather in grief at team's stadium in Brazil
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/chapecoense-fans-gather-stadium-brazil-chapeco-plane-crash-colombia>
As news of the tragedy broke across South America, tributes to all involved 
were understandably quick to flood in. The Brazilian president, Michel Temer, 
declared three days of national mourning and offered his condolences to the 
friends and families of those on the plane in a series of tweets. “I express my 
solidarity at this sad time when dozens of Brazilian families have been 
affected by tragedy,” he wrote. “We are offering every form of help and 
assistance that we can to the families. The air force and foreign ministry have 
been put to work. The government will do everything possible to relieve the 
pain of these friends and families of Brazilian sport and journalism.” The 
tributes of South American fans and rival clubs were soon echoed around the 
world, with those of Manchester United and Torino proving particularly 
poignant. “The thoughts of everyone at Manchester United are with 
@ChapecoenseReal & all those affected by the tragedy in Colombia. 
#ForçaChapecoense,” tweeted United. The Serie A side declared the crash “a 
destiny that binds us inextricably” before declaring themselves with 
Chapecoense “fraternally”.

Hundreds of Chapecoense fans gathered at their stadium to mourn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/chapecoense-fans-gather-stadium-brazil-chapeco-plane-crash-colombia>
 the players and staff killed. Vice-president, Ivan Tozzo, who was not with the 
team, said: “The pain is hard to take. Chapecoense was the biggest source of 
happiness in the city. Many in the town are crying.” Plínio David de Nes Filho, 
president of the club’s guiding committee, added: “Lifelong friends were on 
that flight. It was not just a group founded on mutual respect; it was a 
family. We lived in harmony, with great happiness. Before boarding the flight, 
they said they were going to turn their dreams into reality. The dream ended 
this morning.”

A modest club, Chapecoense had enjoyed an unprecedented run of success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/29/chapecoense-brazilian-football-team-plane-crash-colombia>
 in recent years and Atlético, their opponents at the end of a fairytale run to 
the Copa Sudamericana final, have requested that the title be given to the 
stricken club. It is a heartwarming gesture at a time when all connected with 
Chapecoense, who were eagerly anticipating perhaps their greatest day, must now 
deal with the unspeakable horror of their worst.
Chapecoense (@ChapecoenseReal) 
Que essa seja a última imagem dos nosso guerreiros.#ForçaChape 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/For%C3%A7aChape?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/Q1ZxF5h4sV <https://t.co/Q1ZxF5h4sV>
 <https://twitter.com/ChapecoenseReal/status/803587792588722176> November 29, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/ChapecoenseReal/status/803587792588722176>  