
The backlash faced by a hard-working MSP last week after he spoke out about the
reduced weight of Toblerone chocolate bars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/toblerone-gets-more-gappy-but-its-fans-are-not-happy>
 is emblematic of the beastliness that has begun to creep into Scottish 
politics recently. During a febrile and quite nasty period in UK politics, 
surely the heartwarming intervention ofSNP MSP Colin Beattie 
<http://www.thenational.scot/news/14911381.SNP_MSP_Colin_Beattie_forwards_motion_to_stop_Toblerone_bars_getting_smaller/>
 will endure long after we have dug ourselves out of the ordure of Brexit, 
Trump and the Scottish international football team.

Beattie, an MSP for five years, has waited long and patiently at Holyrood 
before choosing his time to make his epoch-defining intervention in Scottish 
public life. We can only guess at how much his heart must have swelled with 
pride and how his brain must have been bursting with the implications of the 
moment. Beattie is the MSP for Midlothian North and Musselburgh. Last week, he 
lodged a motion at Holyrood calling on the UK government to “take speedy 
action” over thereduction in weight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/lighter-way-to-enjoy-maltesers-mars-shrinks-sharing-bags-by-15>
 of Toblerone chocolate bars.

Toblerone gets more gappy, but its fans are not happy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/toblerone-gets-more-gappy-but-its-fans-are-not-happy>
The full text of his historic intervention bears repeating. It reads: 
“Parliament notes with concernMondolēz International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mondelez>’s recent decision to widen the 
gaps between the segments of the iconicSwiss chocolate bar, Toblerone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/nov/08/mind-gap-toblerone-mondelez-chocolate>
, in the UK; understands that this was made in order to allay rising costs for 
numerous ingredients; believes that this is emblematic of the devastating 
consequences that Brexit could bring.”

In preparing to move this motion, the astute Beattie has chosen wisely: for 
the idiosyncratic Swiss confection retains a special place in the hearts of 
parents and children everywhere. This is more than a mere chocolate bar; this 
is a confection par excellence that opens a vast swath of educational 
possibilities to a discerning family.

Once it has been unwrapped from its silver-foil casing, the triangular aspect 
of the Toblerone marching in perfect sequence can begin to unlock geometrical 
secrets in a way that eluded my old teacher, Mr Magill, in maths. This design 
could never have been dreamed up in a British factory still beholden to the 
arithmetical meat and potatoes of squares and rectangles.

Thus the Toblerone could spark a discussion on the Swiss chocolatier’s craft 
and the infinite possibilities open to a fertile mind. From there it’s just a 
short step to a discussion on Switzerland’s other cultural contributions to the 
cultural development of western Europe. As well as providing us with the 
all-too-fleetingly glimpsedStéphane Chapuisat 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/St%C3%A9phane_Chapuisat>, the country’s greatest 
football export who once starred for Borussia Dortmund, Switzerland has also 
provided us with a conundrum that has foxed academics and geopolitical 
analysts. How does a country remain neutral while secretly acting as a 
warehouse for looted Nazi art and the ill-gotten gains of mafia bosses and 
murderous dictators? Perhaps it’s because Switzerland, like London, refuses to 
discriminate when profiteering from international criminality.

From a certain angle, the Toblerone bar can resemble a miniature Egyptian 
desert of pyramids, the geometrical shape that most perfectly provides us with 
a model for modern capitalism: billions of grains of sand feeding into giant 
building segments that narrow to a sharp point occupied by a tiny few. Thus 
Beattie, a former banker, has thought long and hard about alerting us to the 
implications of footering about with the age-old and majestic design of the 
Toblerone.

So, inspired by Beattie’s Toblerone moment I’d encourage our MSPs to deploy 
their imaginations and look beyond the current and shallow obsession with 
Brexit, the second referendum on Scottish independence and how many positions 
in his cabinet Donald Trump will reserve for his supporters in the Ku Klux Klan.

The Buckfast question

As independence for Scotland looks increasingly likely following England’s 
decision to drag the UK out of Europe, what will become ofScotland’s favourite 
tonic wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/former-ku-klux-klan-leader-and-us-alt-right-hail-election-result>
? For years, this robust and popular elixir, brewed by Devon monks, has made 
life almost bearable in neighbourhoods left untouched by the social democratic 
reforms of Holyrood and UK governments. Yet Buckfast has become the pet target 
of politicians from these administrations who would have us believe that it, 
and not their bankrupt policies, are to blame for antisocial behaviour and 
feelings of social alienation in some of our most disadvantaged communities. 
Can we not urge them to keep the price of Buckfast competitive despite onerous 
cross-border tariffs?

We do mind the gap! Who has cut down Toblerone’s triangles?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/nov/08/mind-gap-toblerone-mondelez-chocolate>
The Benson & Hedges question

Everyone knows smoking is bad for you, but just how bad is it? Generations of 
medical practitioners in a desperate rush to secure funding for cash-strapped 
research facilities have convinced us that even watching Humphrey Bogart 
smoking a cigarette inCasablanca can lead to death by passive smoking. Yet the 
health benefits to people over the age of 65 suffering from stress-related 
illnesses have been scandalously suppressed. Let’s face it, an OAP who has only 
started hitting the Bennies in his codgerdom is hardly likely to die from 
smoking. Yet, after a lifetime of stress and depression, a wee course of 
tobacco could help calm the nerves and lead to a more laidback and considered 
approach to life. Whichever way you look at it, it’s a win-win scenario. Those 
OAPs who have an adverse reaction to cigarettes will die more quickly and help 
free up hospital beds.

The responsible ATM question

One of the most welcome developments caused by the rise of the hard right in 
England has been the proliferation of anti-jaikie 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=jaikie> devices. Enterprising 
and socially responsible retail outlets have been laying down spikes outside 
their premises to discourage dangerous mendicants from biding the night there 
when the temperature drops. Obviously, such a jolly good idea would never find 
favour among the mad-eyed Marxists who run Scotland. But here’s an idea that 
just might resonate with their tendency to state intervention: responsible ATM 
machines. These would dispense bank notes coated with a special dye and 
embedded with a special chip that, if they haven’t been used to purchase fruit 
or vegetables within one hour, will begin to emit a piercing, siren-like wail, 
thus impelling its owner to jouk over to the fruit and veg counter pronto.

Drastic measures are required to take Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, the sick man of Europe, out of the 
intensive care ward and into the low-dependency units currently occupied by the 
Scandinavian countries and the Netherlands. There, they can have Toblerones, 
Buckfast and cigarettes until they are fit enough to go home unaided.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ftrump-brexit-toblerone-buckfast-chocolate-smoking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa36b04bdc1e5ba5f34466025bbf5c48b5d81b633%2F0_0_3000_2295%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20Trump%20and%20Brexit%2C%20we%20need%20to%20talk%20about%20Toblerone%20%7C%20Kevin%20McKenna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ftrump-brexit-toblerone-buckfast-chocolate-smoking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20Trump%20and%20Brexit%2C%20we%20need%20to%20talk%20about%20Toblerone%20%7C%20Kevin%20McKenna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ftrump-brexit-toblerone-buckfast-chocolate-smoking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa36b04bdc1e5ba5f34466025bbf5c48b5d81b633%2F0_0_3000_2295%2F3000.jpg>
 A youth on the banks of the River Clyde holds a bottle of Buckfast tonic wine. 
Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images  