
Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, the widely respected former Italian president who played 
a crucial role in Italy’s adoption of the euro, has died at the age of 95.

Ciampi, who served briefly as prime minister in a 1993-94 caretaker government 
of technocrats, held the largely ceremonial post of president from 1999 to 
2006. He was so popular that he was widely urged to serve a second term – a 
proposal he declined on the grounds of his advanced age.

A career economist, Ciampi spent 14 years as governor of the Bank of Italy and 
later served as a treasury minister, a role in which he was the principal 
architect of Italy’sadoption of the euro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2013/jun/02/britain-euro-what-if-joined>
 as one of the founder members of the single currency.

He “served Italy with passion”, the country’s prime minister, Matteo Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/06/matteo-renzi-italy-referendum-banks-brexit>
, wrote on Twitter. The foreign minister, Paolo Gentiloni, hailed “a great 
Italian statesman”, and other tributes poured in from across the political 
spectrum.

A rare sour note was sounded by Matteo Salvini of the far-right Northern League
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/01/northern-league-gains-italian-elections-matteo-salvini>
. He accused Ciampi of having “sold off Italy’s jobs, currency, borders and 
future”.

Ciampi was centre-left politically but was not officially aligned to any party 
for the bulk of his career.

He took over as prime minister at a time when Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> was reeling as a result of a 
financial crisis and the fallout from the enormous “mani pulite” (“clean 
hands”) corruption scandal – a criminal investigation that led to half the 
country’s lawmakers being indicted for taking bribes.

Italy grapples with suicide of woman taunted over online sex video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/italy-grapples-with-suicide-of-woman-taunted-over-online-sex-video>
It was also a time when tensions between the state and organised crime were 
running high withmafia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mafia> mobsters 
attempting to pressure the government into being lenient with convicted bosses.

Ciampi’s successor as president, Giorgio Napolitano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/14/italian-president-giorgio-napolitano-steps-down>
, testified in 2014 that Ciampi had feared a coup was under way when there was 
a blackout in his office early in his term as prime minister.

As president, Ciampi was credited with exercising a restraining influence on 
the authoritarian instincts ofSilvio Berlusconi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/silvio-berlusconi> when the controversial 
media tycoon was prime minister.

Born in the Tuscan port city of Livorno on 9 December 1920 into a family of 
opticians, Ciampi’s teachers included Jesuit priests and the prominent 
anti-fascist figure Guido Calogero.

He served as a driver for the Italian army in Albania during the second world 
war before joining the resistance to the regime ofBenito Mussolini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/01/the-dictator-who-failed-to-dictate-free-range-architecture-under-mussolini>
 on his return to Italy.

After the war, he graduated in law and began a 47-year career at the Bank of 
Italy that culminated in him getting the top job in 1979, the yearthe lira 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/dec/19/worlddispatch.euro> entered the 
European monetary system, an exchange rate grid that was a predecessor to 
monetary union.

He leaves a widow, Franca, to whom he was married for 70 years, and two 
children. Media reports said he had died after spending several weeks in 
hospital in Rome.
 