
Myth 1: You can’t predict how slum populations are going to grow


“One thing that is poorly understood is population growth in Africa,” says 
William Cobbett, director ofCities Alliance <http://www.citiesalliance.org/> . 
“It is thought that populations are growing mainly because of urban migration. 
That’s not correct. Across the continent, the bulk of population growth comes 
from natural population growth.Undesa figures 
<https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Publications/Files/Key_Findings_WPP_2015.pdf> from 
1950-2050 show that in the case of Uganda – the outlier – its population in one 
century will multiply 20 times. That has never happened in human history.” 
Tanzania will grow 18 times and Nigeria 10.5.

“Most local authorities don’t have the capacity to deal with this, so there is 
no forward planning to make provisions for this population growth, which we 
know is going to happen.”

 His organisation is trying to combat the mindset that you can’t plan for 
increased slum population, by supporting the creation of municipal development 
forums in a number of Ugandan cities. These are structured discussions where 
the local authority, local private sector companies and slum dwellers meet and 
deliberate about the future of the city.

Having the capacity to plan for future slum populations isn’t just a problem 
limited to Africa though.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09ea536ac455e2e3b35cf4d01d8999d4491d71a3%2F0_214_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20myths%20about%20slums%3A%20'Don't%20assume%20people%20want%20to%20leave'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20myths%20about%20slums%3A%20%27Don%27t%20assume%20people%20want%20to%20leave%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09ea536ac455e2e3b35cf4d01d8999d4491d71a3%2F0_214_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Cable cars travel over the Complexo do Alemao slum in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
Photograph: Felipe Dana/AP 
Population explosions in many developing countries mean by 2030, 3 billion 
people – roughly40% of the world’s population 
<http://unhabitat.org/urban-themes/housing-slum-upgrading/> – will need proper 
housing, according toUN-Habitat <http://unhabitat.org/>.

The fact that slums exist in the first place is just evidence of places where 
urban planners and governments have already failed to keep up with the demand 
for homes.

Myth 2: Slum residents would always rather live in formal housing 


The bulldozing of slums and the eviction of their residents used to be seen as 
a good thing. Why would people want to live in squalid, overcrowded spaces with 
no access to municipal services like water or waste collection? These places 
were a blight on cities so, if offered an alternative, people would jump at the 
chance to leave them, right?


Actually, no – especially as traditionally poor planning has sometimes not 
only left former slum residents in worse housing situations, but crucially also 
cut off from their old support network.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef2d173bdabfc06f4cd71cf0b4a3f395b09d6f7a%2F0_0_2333_3500%2F2333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20myths%20about%20slums%3A%20'Don't%20assume%20people%20want%20to%20leave'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20myths%20about%20slums%3A%20%27Don%27t%20assume%20people%20want%20to%20leave%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef2d173bdabfc06f4cd71cf0b4a3f395b09d6f7a%2F0_0_2333_3500%2F2333.jpg>
 An aerial view of Africa’s largest slum, Kibera in Nairobi, Kenya, in 2008
 Photograph: Halden Krog/EPA 
The social upheaval that can come with moving people out of improvised housing 
and into apartment blocks is well documented. Kenyan slum Kibera is a case in 
point, with reports of locals regretting making the move fromtheir shacks to 
hi-rise blocks 
<https://www.one.org/international/blog/why-residents-of-kibera-slum-are-rejecting-new-housing-plans/>
. Originally excited about the opportunity of moving to a complex nicknamed The 
Promised Land, some ended up moving out of the flats following water shortages 
while others saw a business opportunity renting out their new homes to 
middle-class Kenyans at several times the subsidised rate. Those who stayed 
still shop in the slum, where food is cheaper.


The importance of proper planning is a logistical nightmare across Latin 
America too. Delicate social structures can be torn down faster than the shacks 
the communities lived in. Claudio Acioly Jr, head of capacity development at 
UN-Habitat, says many delicate human factors are often overlooked: “For 
example, inBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>, the number of 
women-headed households is enormous and there is a rich network of informal 
arrangements. So when you move them, you move the location of the school and 
remove their arrangements for someone to look after the house and kids while 
they’re out.”

Poor planning puts extra pressures on residents. “In Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>, where the slums were 7km away from 
the city centre, the housing scheme was 37km away.” Nearly 5m housing units 
were unoccupied 10 years on, he says. “[Residents moved out] because they found 
they had to take two methods of transport to get to work and they’re in a 
housing estate without any shops, in the middle of nowhere.”

Myth 3: Slums should be treated differently to the rest of a city


Slums are part of the fabric of many cities and many have mighty populations. 
The informal areas in Cairo are a good example of this. They have among the 
biggest populations in the region and are given names such as ‘The City of The 
Dead’. Out of a population of 90 million people, the Housing and Land Rights 
Network says at least30% of Greater Cairo’s residents 
<http://www.madamasr.com/news/greater-cairo-40-percent-live-informal-housing> 
live in slums.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd9fbcc50c6367f57d0993ca6cedc0ccee313cfd%2F0_256_4101_2461%2F4101.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20myths%20about%20slums%3A%20'Don't%20assume%20people%20want%20to%20leave'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20myths%20about%20slums%3A%20%27Don%27t%20assume%20people%20want%20to%20leave%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd9fbcc50c6367f57d0993ca6cedc0ccee313cfd%2F0_256_4101_2461%2F4101.jpg>
 ‘The City of the Dead’ in Cairo, Egypt
 Photograph: Alamy 
Ahmed Mansour of the Housing and Land Rights Network <http://www.hlrn.org/> 
argues that a holistic approach is needed: “For decades, Egypt has been facing 
a housing crisis that governments have mismanaged and the private sector has 
exploited.

“The problems within slums or informal areas cannot be treated in isolation 
from the rest of the city since they show structural inequalities that should 
be tackled integrally.”

This is where slum upgrading 
<http://www.citiesalliance.org/About-slum-upgrading> could help, as the 
philosophy behind the urban renewal strategy is to gradually improve informal 
settlements, formalising and incorporating them into cities so residents have 
the same rights as everyone else there. Projects vary from place to place but 
the idea is to provide more durable housing, increase residents’ rights and 
connect them to infrastructure and services that other citizens have such as 
access to clean water.


Myth 4: It’s possible to discourage people from moving into slums


Alongside population growth, urbanisation is also driving slum growth – people 
moving to cities to find work. Here, India is a good example – the slum 
situation there is so vast that Prime Minister Narendra Modi has pledged to 
build20 million homes 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-02-23/modi-seeks-to-replace-crowded-india-slums-with-20-million-homes>
. As implausible as this seems – where? how? – it doesn’t change the fact that
41% of the population 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/By-2017-Indias-slum-population-will-rise-to-104-million/articleshow/21927474.cms>
 of Mumbai lives in some kind of slum.

Tony Soares, director of volunteer organisation SlumAid 
<http://www.slumaid.org/>, works primarily with the Baiganwadi slum, which is 
situated near Mumbai’s largest waste dumping ground.

“You’ve got to find a different solution that takes in the needs of the people 
who are currently living there. But people keep coming from the villages 
looking for work and people will find a way to rest their head any way they 
can,” Soares says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e35b0eee709a34d7e806fd433019f3d8d486223%2F0_0_3480_2664%2F3480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20myths%20about%20slums%3A%20'Don't%20assume%20people%20want%20to%20leave'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20myths%20about%20slums%3A%20%27Don%27t%20assume%20people%20want%20to%20leave%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Ffour-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e35b0eee709a34d7e806fd433019f3d8d486223%2F0_0_3480_2664%2F3480.jpg>
 What slum upgrading can look like: in Bang Bua, Bangkok, residents have banded 
together to improve water quality through canal cleaning.
 Photograph: Rungroj Yongrit/EPA 
How can you stop people moving to city slums? You can’t, says Soares: “People 
move from villages because they have a lot of children and there isn’t enough 
work. The cities are where they earn money.”

He speculates that Bollywood movies, which paint the major Indian cities as 
glamorous, make them all the more enticing.

“If you really wanted to do something, start by asking local residents what 
they need. Many shack owners have been there for a long time, sometimes 
generations. There is no easy solution.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 