
More than 80% of China’s underground water drawn from relatively shallow wells 
used by farms, factories and mostly rural households is unsafe for drinking 
because of pollution, a government report says.

The Water <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> Resources Ministry 
study posted to its website on Tuesday analysed samples drawn in January from 
2,103 wells used for monitoring in the country’s major eastern flatland 
watersheds.

The ministry said that of those samples, 32.9% were classed as suitable only 
for industrial and agricultural use, while 47.3% were unfit for human 
consumption of any type. None were considered pristine, although water in wells 
in the Beijing area was rated better overall than elsewhere in the northeast.

Following the report’s release on Monday, officials sought to reassure the 
public that most household water used by urban Chinese households is safe 
because it comes from reservoirs, deep aquifers or rivers that are treated to 
ensure safety.

“The quality of drinking water is good overall,” Chen Mingzhong, director of 
the ministry’s Department of Water Resources, told reporters at a news 
conference.

Most public attention in recent years has focused on heavy air pollution in 
Chinese cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/12/china-smog-pollution-beijing>
, although water and soil contamination are also regarded as serious by 
environmentalists.

China says more than half of its groundwater is polluted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/23/china-half-groundwater-polluted>
Water shortages are also expected to pose an increasing challenge to 
agriculture, with much of the arid NorthChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Plain reliant on aquifers whose 
levels are falling fast. China’s major lakes are also heavily polluted, largely 
due to fertiliser run-off and the dumping of untreated factory waste.

Environmental group Greenpeace called the ministry’s report “another stark 
warning of the extent of groundwater pollution in China.”

In a statement, Greenpeace’s east Asia toxics campaign manager Ada Kong 
applauded the ministry’s recognition of the problem and said taking serious 
action to tackle the problem was the next step.

“Water pollution in China is every bit as serious an issue as air pollution,” 
Kong said.

Part of the problem is that the Water Resources Ministry and Ministry of 
Environmental Protection have yet to clarify their roles and responsibilities 
in carrying out a National GroundwaterPollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/pollution> Prevention Plan issued in 
2011 and promised 34 billion yuan ($5.2bn) in funding, Kong said.

The authorities should also regularly test the deep groundwater that urban 
areas rely on, Greenpeace said.
 