
It's a tiny tombstone sunk into the ground. Once a fortnight, someone comes 
and puts flowers on the grave. Another visitor regularly makes the outline of a 
heart - with copper cents. Above it, a small American flag. The inscription is 
very simple: Francis Albert Sinatra, 1915-1998. And the words: "The best is 
still to come."

The lines from a Sinatra song were meant to convey a sense of optimism. They 
also mark the end of a journey: Sinatra's journey in life and what you might 
call the end of the trail.

Beneath the stone is his lead-lined coffin (to prevent grave robbers - I kid 
you not) in which next to the body of the Chairman of the Board is a bottle of 
his favourite tipple, Jack Daniel's. There's also a ring left by third wife Mia 
Farrow, sweets, a cigarette lighter and a roll of dimes.

It is here in the Desert Memorial Park in Cathedral City, California, five 
miles from where the singer made his home in Palm Springs, that people are 
doing what has come to be called the Sinatra trail.

At Palm Springs, there is joy in remembering the man who, before moving to LA 
during his last illness, was without doubt their favourite citizen. You won't 
be able to get into the "compound" at 70-588Frank Sinatra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/frank-sinatra> Drive, just down the road 
from Cathedral City. That is where he planned to entertain President John F 
Kennedy (just before the President became worried about Sinatra's Mafia 
connections and stayed with Bing Crosby instead) in a specially built guest 
house; it's where the Rat Pack came to stay.

But the high spot of any visit to Palm Springs is Sinatra's previous house at 
1148 East Alejo Road, designed for him by the architect Stewart Williams, of 
which there are now regular tours. Small groups that book in advance can see 
the house he had built in the mid-1940s. This is elegance Hollywood style, the 
sort of home that figures in a thousand movies - comparatively small (just 
three bedrooms), but with big, big rooms looking out through the patio windows 
at his grand piano-shaped swimming pool.

You get an idea of his taste in art from the pictures on the walls: brightly 
coloured paintings and photographs of Sinatra himself with practically every 
star of his era.

I was led through the house by his valet of 26 years, the now aged George 
Jacobs. He remembered the dinner parties, the drinks evenings with people like 
Marlene Dietrich and Mickey Rooney. Frank's bedroom, with its huge bed looking 
out on the pool - in which his bride Ava Gardner used to swim in the nude - 
will one day probably be a museum piece. I couldn't help wondering about the 
number of ladies with whom he had shared it.

Of course, Sinatra shared a lot. He shared his wealth phenomenally and that, 
too, is commemorated in Palm Springs. The Desert Museum, one of the finest 
examples of modern architecture, contains the Sinatra Sculpture Court - its 
collection donated by Frank and Barbara.

Even the local synagogue, Temple Isaiah, honours him with a plaque - as well 
it might since he paid for the initial mortgage. When he heard that a big 
dinner was being held to "burn the mortgage" - in other words, to pay it off - 
he was so upset about not being invited (the officials thought they had already 
asked too much), he demanded to be allowed to perform - free of charge.

That story was told to me by Mel Haber, who owns one of Palm Springs' 
swankiest restaurants, Melvyn's, where the paper napkins served with the drinks 
bear pictures of Ol'Blue Eyes. It is a place that bespeaks elegance - the 
waiters wear tuxedos, for heaven's sake - with the kind of food you talk about 
for weeks. The chandeliers give some idea of why Sinatra chose Melvyn's for his 
eve of wedding party with Barbara in 1976. "He rang me and said he wanted to 
have his party here. I was so honoured," says Haber.

"He came here regularly, once or twice a week," says Haber. "Usually, he liked 
the veal." As do a lot of other people, some of whom remember seeing him 
propping up the bar - and, on the occasional evening, singing by the piano.

Even if you are not interested in Sinatra, a visit to Melvyn's is an 
experience not to be missed. Like going to the wonderfully dignified Le Parker 
Meridien Hotel, which Sinatra also patronised, as he did the Spa Resort Casino.

They don't say Sinatra did it his way in Palm Springs, but practically every 
yard of the town shows that he did. You almost expect local hoteliers and 
shopkeepers to greet you not with a "hello", but with a simple Ring A Ding Ding.

Where to stay: Ballantines (001 760 320 1178, ballantineshotels.com 
<http://www.ballantineshotels.com>). Rates from $139 per room. Further 
information: Palm Springs Desert Resorts Convention and Visitors Authority (
palmspringsusa.com <http://www.palmspringsusa.com>). Getting there: American 
Airlines (08457 789789,americanairlines.co.uk 
<http://www.americanairlines.co.uk>) flies Gatwick-Palm Springs via 
Dallas/Fortworth in September from Â£478.80 inc taxes. Flights are also 
available via LA from Heathrow.
 