
There was a widely held belief in the world of fashion that Franca Sozzani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/27/all-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia>
’s original approach to the editorship of Italian Vogue was a long-term 
strategy to distinguish it from the sexy-intellectual French, romantic British 
and celebrity-filled US Vogue editions: the mag from Milan was to be the 
outrageous rogue Vogue. But it was more a confident statement of her own wide 
interests, and an understanding that the “look” of Vogue Italia was valuable if 
unwritten information about the state of the world. Her photographers and 
stylists were granted creative freedom, with Sozzani always ready to defend 
their wildest ideas.

By the logic of the publishers Condé Nast, Sozzani, who has died of cancer 
aged 66, should have been forced to quit because of the ads lost early in her 
editorship when her pages failed to feature the required rota of Italian 
brands. But Vogue Italia developed character – hers – and that attracted 
respect, even sales, outside Italy, and therefore, slowly, the ads returned. 
She was editor from 1988, and editorial director of Condé NastItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> from 1994; the company chairman 
Jonathan Newhouse said she disturbed readers “better than anybody”.

Those disturbances included fashion-shoot sequences mimicking cosmetic 
surgery, domestic violence, drugs and rehab (she covered these subjects in 
editorial copy, too). Sozzani featured bigger sizes on the cover,used black 
models in a 2008 special edition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/31/race.fashion>, which had 
to be reprinted twice to meet demand. HerAugust 2010 edition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/09/vogue-italia-oil-spill-fashion-shoot>
, following the BP oil spill in the gulf of Mexico, with images of the model 
Kristen McMenamy beached and befouled in black and slicked pelts, was 
preposterous in the way that 1790s fashion had been – shocking appearance as a 
visible marker of political and social allegiance. Sozzani expressed 
frustration that modern fashion followers lacked an understanding of history, 
and that fashion stories lacked the depth of context.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ffranca-sozzani-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f2ad3a3d39f914db508f9e9eac1dae7e763b0b7%2F0_130_4632_2779%2F4632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Franca%20Sozzani%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ffranca-sozzani-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Franca%20Sozzani%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ffranca-sozzani-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f2ad3a3d39f914db508f9e9eac1dae7e763b0b7%2F0_130_4632_2779%2F4632.jpg>
 Franca Sozzani, centre, with Princess Caroline of Monaco, left, and the editor 
of US Vogue, Anna Wintour. Photograph: Bertrand Rindoff Petroff/Getty Images 
She was born in Mantua, in northern Italy, the daughter of an motor industry 
engineer, Gilberto Sozzani, and his wife Adelmina, and was educated in convent 
schools and at the University of the Sacred Heart, Milan, where she studied 
philosophy: her father would not back her preference for physics. Her only 
frivolities were a post-college three-month marriage, quickly annulled, and 
travels to London and India.

To convince her father of her steadiness, Sozzani took a job as a secretary at 
Condé Nast, then worked her way up through editorial, starting as what she 
called an assistant’s assistant on the children’s fashion magazineVogue Bambini 
<http://www.condenastinternational.com/country/italy/vogue-bambini/>.

Decades of democratic gloss had polished up US magazines, leftwing postwar 
reinvention broadened the French market, the English dominated in eccentricity 
from the 1960s; Italian magazines, Sozzani later complained, simply exhibited 
what was for sale and far less imaginatively than their ads, which had 
developed strong identities with the rise of Milan’s fashion industry and its 
exports in the 70s.

Sozzani improved the look of Vogue Bambini, and was rewarded in 1980 with the 
editorship of Condé Nast’s new Lei magazine (an Italian edition of the US 
magazine Glamour, and now sold under that name), plus in 1982 a men’s edition, 
Per Lui.

To make them different, she recruited narrative photographers, notably 
Oliviero Toscani (who created much of Benetton’s global, multicultural, social 
imagery), and other storytellers such asSteven Meisel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/sep/24/fashion.photography> and 
Bruce Weber <http://www.bruceweber.com/>. These magazines were younger and 
looser in presentation than anything in Italy, as Elle had been in France a 
generation before, although Sozzani eventually ran through their possibilities 
and was about to leave the business when offered the sedate and 
lowish-circulation Vogue Italia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ffranca-sozzani-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa96997911057a3b3ffce22cb11974e50e01220cc%2F0_216_6487_3893%2F6487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Franca%20Sozzani%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ffranca-sozzani-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Franca%20Sozzani%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Ffranca-sozzani-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa96997911057a3b3ffce22cb11974e50e01220cc%2F0_216_6487_3893%2F6487.jpg>
 Franca Sozzani and her son Francesco Carrozzini in New York in October for the 
release of the documentary Chaos and Creation. Photograph: Christopher 
Lane/Observer 
Professionally, Sozzani was intractable: she expected all staff and 
contributors to be responsible for their own work, although she took the flak 
for public risks. “When you make a mistake, they call you immediately. And when 
you do something good, they send flowers to the stylist.”

At least since the fall of Diana Vreeland 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/culture/1993/11/diana-vreeland-199311>, all Vogue 
editors have been required to be spokeswomen for both fashion and publishing 
with diplomatic-corps levels of tact, while Sozzani’s websiteblog 
<http://www.vogue.it/franca-sozzani/wdyta> was more like an op-ed page opinion 
column, roaming through public life. Sozzani never stopped being frank; the 
fashiony lifestyle was ridiculous, its shows boring, free personal style 
mattered more than purchased fashion, and no, fashion was not an art form.

She had worn Yves Saint Laurent when young because he let women dress with 
male ease; later the supersoft tailoring she favoured was often Milanese, with 
her hair through middle age flowing in the crimped waves of an Etruscan 
figurine. She collectedManolo Blahnik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/manolo-blahnik>’s fantastical shoes as if 
they were porcelain figurines; they were never to be worn.

Sozzani had a reputation for professional kindness, helping Donatella Versace 
after rehab, establishing and maintaining an annual prize for young designers, 
working with the UN as a goodwill ambassador on sustainable development 
projects.

Her son Francesco Carrozzini was born in 1982, and she brought him up alone; 
only when he was makinga documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/nov/27/all-about-my-mother-growing-up-with-franca-sozzani-editor-of-vogue-italia>
, Franca: Chaos and Creation, to be released next year, did she tell him his 
father had been married to another woman when he was born. Sozzani had other 
discreet long-term relationships, the last with the journalistAlain Elkann 
<http://alainelkanninterviews.com/>. As well as her son, she is survived by her 
older sister, Carla, a former editor of Italian Elle.

• Franca (Francesca) Sozzani, fashion journalist, born 20 January 1950; died 
22 December 2016
 