
One of the great pioneers of the early music revival, Frans Brüggen, who has 
died aged 79, was celebrated equally for his virtuoso recorder playing and his 
stylistically authoritative conducting. It was as aplayer of the recorder 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vQatlvFvGdM&list=RDvQatlvFvGdM#t=28> and 
baroque flute 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jfapYm3XjQA&list=PL36A65E4010571611&index=24> 
that he made his reputation, winning accolades for his astonishing variety of 
tone colour, rhythmic flexibility and the sheer brilliance of his technique.

At the age of 21 he was appointed professor at the Royal Conservatory in the 
Hague <http://www.koncon.nl/en/>, later holding the position of Erasmus 
professor at Harvard University. As a close associate of the harpsichordist 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NSm0tejTXZg&list=RDvQatlvFvGdM&index=7> Gustav 
Leonhardt <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/17/gustav-leonhardt>, he 
appeared as a recorder player on more than 50 releases on Telefunken's Das Alte 
Werk label. But in 1981 he entered a new phase in this career when he founded 
the period-instrumentOrchestra of the Eighteenth Century 
<http://www.orchestra18c.com/>, remaining in charge of them for the rest of his 
life, exploring repertoire that ranged fromBach 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2zcPOgS8DBk> and Rameau through Haydn, Mozart 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vXp6MRobCig&index=2&list=PLp3hP1e-P_LgL0_fLTyxuFMrGgx6I2DEo>
 andBeethoven 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JQT8Fi09Ng4&list=PLp3hP1e-P_LgL0_fLTyxuFMrGgx6I2DEo>
 to Schubert and Mendelssohn.

Like many other period-instrument specialists, he subsequently brought 
historical principles to bear in his work with modern-instrument orchestras 
such as the Chicago Symphony, theRoyal Concertgebouw 
<http://www.concertgebouworkest.nl/en/> and the Vienna Philharmonic.

Born in Amsterdam, he studied the recorder with Kees Otten, the flute at the 
Amsterdam Muzieklyceum and musicology at Amsterdam University. His virtuoso 
technique on the recorder propelled him to celebrity status, with something of 
a cult following. With his long legs nonchalantly crossed, he would hold the 
instrument to his mouth at an implausible angle, and – as his colleague Joel 
Cohen recalled – coax from it nuances and shadings that few would have imagined 
possible: "The little whistle heaved and sighed like a wood nymph in the 
embrace of some ardent faun."

Notes would be slightly bent in slow passages to exquisitely yearning effect. 
The tone would be alternately warmed and cooled, and pinpoint articulation and 
bold use of rubato deployed to expressive effect. In the late 1960s, his 
recording company, Telefunken, seized the potential of his exceptional 
technique, allied to his heavy-lidded but boyish good looks, to produce a 
poster of their star performer for distribution with his long-playing albums. 
Many a bedroom wall was adorned with it.

If at first his inflections and messa di voce swellings ("placing the voice", 
with the dynamics on a single note rising and falling) seemed mannered, it is a 
tribute to his persuasive musicianship that such gestures became widely 
accepted. Controversial as his playing was at the time, Brüggen was able to 
defend his practice with detailed reference to 17th- and 18th-century 
performance treatises.

No less idiosyncratic was his involvement with the Dutch counterculture 
movement at this time. In 1972 he founded with Kees Boeke andWalter van Hauwe 
<http://www.rcm.ac.uk/hp/professors/profile/?id=JK36> an avant-garde recorder 
trio calledSour Cream 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ddsnuL1h1aQ&list=PL2-lEN1vkphSJSS8lKvECC1AfNSHHl7BU>
. The concluding piece of one of their Boston concerts featured a Keystone 
Kops-style chase around the stage. A year or two later, with the ensemble 
playing Telemann trios again in Boston, Brüggen wandered on to the stage, 
donned a pair of dark sunglasses, stretched himself out on a chaise longue and 
proceeded to read the newspaper. The Boston Globe was satisfyingly outraged.

In 1993 the founder members of Sour Cream returned to the recording studio 
with aprogramme <http://www.glossamusic.com/glossa/reference.aspx?id=311> called
The Passion of Reason <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nGQoAvnO-A8>, which made 
a journey through music with a scientific slant, influenced by the concept of 
the medievalquadrivium 
<https://www.princeton.edu/~achaney/tmve/wiki100k/docs/Quadrivium.html> – the 
convergence of music, arithmetic, astronomy and geometry. Brüggen also 
commissioned a number of works for recorder, among themLuciano Berio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/may/28/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries2>
'sGesti <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VYO35N3t1nQ&index=5&list=RDvQatlvFvGdM>
 (1965), which he dispatched in appropriately theatrical style.

Brüggen's work with the Orchestra of the Eighteenth Century 
<http://www.orchestra18c.com> was in general less marked by controversy, in 
part because the world had moved on. The members of this 65-strong ensemble, 
about a third of whom were Dutch, shared equally in the proceeds of concerts. 
"I earn the same as the second clarinet," Brüggen once said.

Compared with the bracing readings of classical repertoire by Nikolaus 
Harnoncourt, for example, Brüggen's were less extreme and could never be 
accused of attention-seeking. His subtly nuanced lines, relaxed tempi and 
lilting phrases were admirably suited to Haydn and Mozart. His Beethoven 
interpretations, though they exploited the acerbic timbres of period 
instruments, were for some tastes too solid and conventional. His Bach, for 
example the notable Mass in B minor for Philips (1990), was characterised by 
its rhythmic vigour, its honesty and integrity, the shape of each movement 
unfolding with seeming inevitability.

Brüggen continued to conduct even when his health deteriorated in the latter 
years. By the time of a performance ofmusic from Rameau's Les Boréades 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pQKhkVBUdZ8> at the final event of a residency 
for his orchestra at the Royal Conservatoire in The Hague last May 
<http://www.hollandbaroquesociety.com/index.php?lang=en> he was using a 
wheelchair and a nasogastric tube. But he still drew playing of extraordinary 
spiritual intensity.

He is survived by his wife, the art historian Machtelt Israëls, and their 
daughters, Zephyr and Eos.

• Frans Brüggen, recorder player and conductor, born 30 October 1934; died 13 
August 2014
 