
The British film-maker Franco Rosso, who has died aged 75, always felt like an 
outsider, which may well account for the extraordinary empathy with the 
disaffected and marginalised that characterised his work. Beginning his career 
as an assistant editor on Ken Loach’s Kes (1969), he went on to create a series 
of hard-hitting documentaries and dramas, but it was arguably his first fiction 
film, Babylon (1980), that marked him out as a fearless chronicler of the 
dispossessed.

He was born in Turin to Angela (nee Cornaglia) and Egidio Rosso who, when 
Franco was eight, left their jobs at the Fiat motor factory and moved to 
London, where his grandfather had a cafe. They settled in Streatham, south-west
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, and at the local schools he 
attended Franco developed a defiant, rebellious streak, a necessary defence, he 
said, against the postwar xenophobia he encountered: “I had an accent and I was 
picked on heavily so I had to learn to defend myself. They called me names and 
beat me up because I was an ‘eye-tie’, and the ‘eye-ties’ had lost the war.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du0nhcK_bylU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du0nhcK_bylU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Du0nhcK_bylU&media=>
 Babylon, 1980, directed by Franco Rosso 
By now a sharply dressed young mod, Franco won a place at Camberwell School of 
Art, whereRB Kitaj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/oct/23/guardianobituaries.usa>, Frank 
Auerbach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/aug/29/frank-auerbach-painters-painter-freud-tate-retrospective>
 andPatrick Procktor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/sep/03/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
 were his teachers and he was exposed for the first time to a liberal, 
cosmopolitan environment in which it was acceptable to be a maverick. However, 
more interested in social and political engagement, he eschewed the painter’s 
studio for the MA film course at the Royal College of Art, where he met the 
musicianIan Dury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/mar/27/guardianobituaries.robindenselow>
. Some years later he made a film about his friend.

His early work assisting on Kes led that year to a job as an editor on John 
Lennon and Yoko Ono’s Bed Peace <http://imaginepeace.com/archives/15702>, as 
well as the promo for the singleGive Peace a Chance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RkZC7sqImaM>. He then found himself directing 
35 hours of film at Lennon’s Ascot home during the recording of Imagine. Lennon 
and Rosso had planned a warts-and-all depiction of John’s daily life, but when 
Lennon’s new managerAllen Klein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jul/06/obituary-allen-klein> wanted a 
slick TV film for the US, Rosso withdrew cooperation and the film was locked 
away for more than 20 years without being shown. As Joanna Smith, his second 
wife and producing partner, said: “He would never compromise or be bullied into 
things he didn’t believe in.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHRYvUpsrqmg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHRYvUpsrqmg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHRYvUpsrqmg&media=>
 Kes, 1969, the Ken Loach film on which Franco Rosso worked as an assistant 
editor 
Rosso’s next film, The Mangrove Nine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tQQLLtfNhcY> (1973), required those principles 
in abundance. It told the story of the nine black protesters arrested at a 
demonstration against police raids on the Mangrove restaurant in Notting Hill, 
west London, and was so uncompromising in its portrayal of police racism that 
the BBC delayed its transmission.

For several years afterwards, Rosso could not get work with the corporation 
and firmly believed he had been blacklisted. Defiantly, he made Dread, Beat an’ 
Blood (1978), a 45-minute documentary for the Arts Council about the dub poet
Linton Kwesi Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/may/04/poetry.books>, but by now his 
sights were set on a more ambitious project, Babylon, a drama based around 
warring reggae sound systems in south London on which I was co-writer.

Although the reggae star Brinsley Forde of the band Aswad was cast in the lead 
role, with no big names and a virtually non-white cast, Babylon seemed to have 
little chance of being made. It was only when two Franco-like outsiders –Gavrik 
Losey 
<http://blog.courtauld.ac.uk/documentingfashion/2016/09/16/finding-elizabeth-hawes-dress-art-politics-an-interview-with-gavrik-losey/>
, son of the exiled Hollywood directorJoseph Losey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/21/joseph-losey-the-servant-bfi>, 
and Mamoun Hassan, the Saudi-born head of the government-funded equivalent of 
today’s BFI – became involved that the finance finally came together.

Shot feverishly in south London on the streets of Deptford and New Cross, it 
was a low-budget affair held together by the incisive cinematography of Chris 
Menges, a cutting-edge sound track from Dennis Bovell and the powerful 
performances of its young cast. Babylon won the Evening Standard’s Most 
Promising Filmmaker Award 1981 and was Rosso’s proudest achievement.

Ian Dury (1983) followed, and new projects, produced with Joanna, whom he 
married in 1989, exploring familiar Rosso themes:64 Day Hero: A Boxer’s Tale 
(1985) 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/film/watch-sixty-four-day-hero-a-boxers-tale-1985/> 
told of the life and death of the world middleweight boxing championRandolph 
Turpin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/sep/12/randolph-turpin-memories-gennady-golovkin-kell-brook>
. Struggle for Stonebridge (1987), narrated by Johnson, was the story of 
disaffected black youth in Brent.The Nature of the Beast (1988) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4TCzCDn3DrQ> featured a young boy coming to 
terms with a metaphorical beast roaming the Lancashire moors after his town is 
shattered by unemployment. Lucha Libre (1991) showed the power of the masked 
wrestler in Mexico – able to fight for the poor without arrest. With 
indomitable integrity and humour, he had an unfailing eye for a great human 
story.

In 1997 Rosso and Joanna left London with their son, Eduardo, aged seven, to 
live in a farmhouse near Ramsgate, in Kent, where Joanna had grown up. Two 
years later they had another son, Jaime. In later years, although a hip 
operation slowed him down, Rosso embarked on a whole new project – keeping 
chickens. He turned out to be a dab hand and, to his own amazement, won many 
rosettes for their splendid plumage.

He is survived by Joanna, Eduardo and Jaime, and by his children Thomas and 
Aimee, from his first marriage to Stephanie Cleverley, which ended in divorce.

• Franco Giuseppe Rosso, film-maker, born 29 August 1941; died 9 December 2016
 