
My uncle, Fred Tomlinson, who has died aged 88, was a singer, conductor, 
composer and musicologist who will be remembered for his involvement, via the 
Fred Tomlinson Singers, with such shows as Monty Python’s Flying Circus, The 
Two Ronnies, Dad’s Army and Only Fools and Horses (among many others). But 
there was much more to his life and career.

Born in Rawtenstall, Lancashire, into a musical family, he was the youngest of 
four children of Fred, a factory foreman, and his wife, May (nee Culpan), a 
teacher. Fred senior was a keen amateur musician who founded and conducted the 
Rossendale male voice choir. One of his brothers was the composerErnest 
Tomlinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/jun/30/ernest-tomlinson-light-music>, 
my father.

All the children sang, and the three boys won scholarships to Manchester 
Cathedral choir school, with Fred junior following his two older brothers there 
in 1937. It was there that he came across the song Balulalow by Peter Warlock, 
which began a lifelong interest in his music. War economies closed the choir 
school in 1940 and the boys were dispersed. Fred won a place at King’s College 
school, Cambridge, and was there until his voice broke.

He continued his studies at the local grammar school and went on to study 
maths, statistics, Italian and music at Leeds University. There he met his 
future wife, Pamela Mellor, also a singer. Fred’s horizons broadened with 
exposure to more modern music. “I thought there was no one but Bach, but then I 
discovered Doris Day,” he said. In later years his singing group was the 
Hi-Lo’s.

Following university, he did two years of national service in the RAF, mainly 
serving in Singapore. Then he moved to London to work for a music publisher 
alongside Ernest, until joining the George Mitchell Singers. He married Pamela 
in 1956 with George Mitchell as best man.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQgaRd4d8hOY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQgaRd4d8hOY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQgaRd4d8hOY&media=>
 Fred Tomlinson wrote the music for Monty Python’s Lumberjack Song, with words 
by Terry Jones and Michael Palin. 
From then on Fred’s career was mainly on radio and television, but also in 
concert. His outstanding sight-reading ability meant that he was in demand in 
every genre, from early music through to pop.

For the Monty Python show, Terry Jones and Michael Palin wrote the words to 
the famousLumberjack Song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QgaRd4d8hOY>, and 
Fred wrote the music. Palinsaid: “Fred insisted on high standards, and much 
work and rehearsal went into ensuring that something extremely silly was also 
extremely polished.”

As chairman of the Peter Warlock Society for 25 years, Fred joined with other 
musicians to give concerts, recordings and lectures. Under the pseudonym 
Frederick Culpan he wrote a companion piece to Warlock’s opus The Curlew using 
the same instrumentation. He also wrote several books about Warlock and edited 
many of his songs for publication.

Pamela survives him. His elder daughter, also a singer, was killed in a car 
accident in 1990. His younger daughter, who had Rett syndrome, died in 2011.
 