
The first round of the French presidential election is five months away, yet 
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> is already in political 
turmoil. There are several reasons. First, François Hollande, the incumbent 
president, is so weak and discredited that some expect him to pull out of the 
race altogether. This would be an unprecedented move for a president in office.

Second, Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/15/marine-le-pen-racist-front-national-france>
, leader of the Front National, is going from strength to strength. She is 
consistently polling at more than 20% of the share of the vote (against 17.9% 
in 2012) and seems guaranteed to make it to the second and decisive round of 
next year’s presidential elections. What’s more, Le Pen’s rise has been 
directly affecting her opponents across the political spectrum.

Rather than pushing back against her ideas, mainstream politicians have opted 
to emulate some of her key policy proposals. This is not a question of a left 
and right divide. Most high-profile politicians of all stripes have embraced Le 
Pen’s agenda: they promise tough law-and-order solutions; they constantly talk 
about “national identity”; they defend “republican values under the threat of 
Islam”; and they promote an exclusive if not discriminatory brand of secularism 
(laïcité). Last but not least, they insist that immigration, the FN’s pet topic 
since the 1980s, has to be curbed.

Anti-racist associations apart, the French public has shown little support in 
general for economic and political migrants. There have been situations of 
tension,in Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/24/france-begins-operation-clear-calais-refugee-camp>
 notably, between migrants and the local population. In an October 2015 poll, 
67% of the French population declared that family and housing state subsidies 
should only apply to EU migrants and 61% would like the government to scrap 
medical assistance for illegal migrants.

A September 2016 poll showed that 62% opposed welcoming in Europe migrants and 
refugees who sail to the Italian or Greek coasts. Notably, the level of support 
for migrants has decreased across voters of all political inclinations

The key question to ask on immigration, especially in the light of the Brexit 
vote, is: are there signs of the aversion to non-European migrants and lack of 
support for refugees extending to EU migrants?

Unlike in Britain the French population has not tended to direct its anger at 
EU workers. There could be a practical explanation. Tony Blair’s government 
enthusiastically opened upBritain’s borders to eastern European workers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/mar/24/how-immigration-came-to-haunt-labour-inside-story>
from 2004, the year of accession of 10 new member states. France, instead, 
restricted dramatically the conditions of access to its internal markets. Since 
then, the French government has fully adopted EU legislation, although it has 
never “caught up” with Britain on the number of eastern European migrants who 
work and live there.

A majority of French and British voters share the same dislike for EU 
bureaucracy, its byzantine legislation and the feeling of loss of 
“sovereignty”, which has to be “regained”. In France, there are also similar 
issues of racism and xenophobia, but these tend to focus on French citizens of 
foreign descent, notably from former colonies in North Africa.

So, for the moment, no mainstream politicians in France challenges the 
principle of free movement in the EU. Discussing Brexit in the British press 
recently, Nicolas Sarkozy warned Theresa May that no European government could 
agree to grant the United Kingdom free access to the single market if Britain 
does not accept free movement.

For a majority of French politicians, immigration is a problem, but it is 
essentially an extra-communitarian one. Manuel Valls, the prime minister, 
stressed the importance for Europe “to take urgent action to control its 
external borders… otherwise oursocieties will be totally destabilised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/22/french-pm-manuel-valls-says-refugee-crisis-is-destabilising-europe>
”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffrench-politicians-dancing-marine-le-pen-tune-immigration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5569d2350ae5cc0c853f08cec6814049e9490a5e%2F0_208_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=French%20politicians%20are%20now%20marching%20to%20Marine%20Le%20Pen%E2%80%99s%20immigration%20tune%20%7C%20Philippe%20Marli%C3%A8re&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffrench-politicians-dancing-marine-le-pen-tune-immigration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=French%20politicians%20are%20now%20marching%20to%20Marine%20Le%20Pen%E2%80%99s%20immigration%20tune%20%7C%20Philippe%20Marli%C3%A8re&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ffrench-politicians-dancing-marine-le-pen-tune-immigration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5569d2350ae5cc0c853f08cec6814049e9490a5e%2F0_208_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Former French president Nicolas Sarkozy delivers a speech during an election 
campaign rally in Nimes last week. Photograph: Guillaume Horcajuelo/EPA 
Despite a steady increase in Euroscepticism in France, the underlying 
principle of free movement of people across the EU remains broadly undisputed. 
Apart from in one telling area. There is growing evidence of opposition towards 
EU migrants and the notion of freedom in what has become known as “social 
dumping”. This relates to “posted workers”, employees sent by their employer to 
carry out a service in another EU member state on a temporary basis. Those EU 
workers do not integrate in the labour market in which they work.

Hence, “social dumping”, where foreign service providers undercut local 
service providers because their labour standards are lower (in terms of pay and 
social protection). Interestingly, the most staggering attack against posted 
workers has come not from the far right, as one would expect, but from the 
radical left.

Jean-Luc Mélenchon, an MEP, a presidential candidate in 2012 and running again 
in 2017, has singled out posted workers in a speech at the European parliament 
last July. He declared that “posted workers took the bread out of French 
workers’ mouths”. Part of the French left was stunned by words that could have 
easily been uttered byMarine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>.

It is undeniable that economic migration in France and in the UK has been, in 
some circumstances, poorly planned and has put a strain on public service 
provisions (schools, nurseries, hospitals). But still the prevailing view in 
France would be that EU migrants themselves are not responsible for the 
situation.

Our governments, it follows, have let people down by underinvesting in public 
services, by decisions they have taken in the first place: in 2004, the 
decision to enlarge Europe and the dismantling of the welfare state.

Economic migrants have become a convenient scapegoat, but by launching 
unprecedented austerity policies our governments have created a situation in 
which national states cannot cope with the sudden influx of EU workers at times 
of economic recession.

Sarkozy and Le Pen aim to take away immigrants’ rights and social protection 
that might not even be reallocated to nationals because of further spending 
cuts. But, at least for the moment, they don’t have EU migrants in their sights.
 