
Andy Murray might be the only player left standing between Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> and the next stage of his 
seemingly unstoppable ascent to new levels of greatness. If the new French Open 
champion, now the owner of 12 majors, holds his fitness, commitment and aura, 
there is no reason he cannot reach an untouchable zenith in the game, perhaps 
owning 20 grand slam titles or more by the time he retires.

“I don’t want to sound arrogant,” Djokovic said after defeating Murray 3-6, 
6-1, 6-2, 6-4 in the final on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/french-open-2016-final-novak-djokovic-beats-andy-murray>
, “but I really think everything is achievable in life.”

Lendl and Judy the star players in Team Murray's triumph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/07/andy-murray-backup-team-wimbledon>
The Scot has to wipe the Parisian clay from his shoes quickly after losing in 
four sets against the great Serb – blowing a one-set lead and several other 
chances – if he is to make the most of the slick home grass ofWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon>, where Djokovic waits for the 
next challenge in his quest for a calendar slam. All that can stop his momentum 
is disappointment in SW19. Bookmakers and nearly everyone else in the game 
think that is unlikely.

If Djokovic successfully defends his title against a diminished field – Rafael 
Nadal, already wounded in recent grass campaigns, is unlikely to play, andRoger 
Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> is ailing too – he 
will go to New York in September as a raging favourite to sweep the four majors 
of 2016. It would be no more than his exceptional talent deserves and Rod 
Laver, the last man to do the slam, in 1969 – for the second time – would be 
the first to applaud him.

The 77-year-old Australian was among the transfixed spectators on Court 
Philippe Chatrier when the sun broke through and Djokovic began a courtside 
celebration of his win against Murray after three hours and three minutes of 
raucous struggle.

He witnessed the degradation of Murray’s tennis as Djokovic’s razor-like 
ground strokes cut him to shreds on both flanks, pinning him yards behind the 
baseline in nearly every exchange.

The gap between Djokovic and Murray at the top of the ATP world rankings has 
now stretched to 8,035 points, the only comfort for the Scot being the fact he 
is at the head of the trailing pack. And who among the others is equipped to 
stop Djokovic in a seven-match, best-of-five-sets tournament – on any surface?

Nadal, two majors ahead of Djokovic, and Federer, who heads the board with 17, 
do not look to have enough left. The Spaniard, just turned 30, has torn tendons 
in his lethal left wrist, the weapon with which he drives his wicked top-spun 
forehand. Last week he withdrew from the Queen’s Club tournament. This week he 
probably will say that Wimbledon is beyond him, too. That injury might yet 
prove to be more than a late-career inconvenience, which would be a great shame.

As for the 34-year-old Swiss, Federer withdrew from the French Open before the 
tournament to give his painful back more time to heal, and he might recover for 
one final flurry at the place where he once was king, but another triumph is 
unlikely. He came close to beating Djokovicat Wimbledon two years ago in a 
minor classic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/06/novak-djokovic-wins-wimbledon-title-roger-federer>
, but was not in the hunt in the final last year. Djokovic is simply the 
nonpareil of the moment.

Respect in the locker room and beyond for the game’s undisputed champion is 
complete. Among those who rushed to Twitter to register their awe after 
Djokovic beat Murray were Milos Raonic, Juan Martín del Potro, Marin Cilic, 
Kevin Anderson, Fabio Fognini, Ivo Karlovic, Jonas Bjorkman (briefly on 
Murray’s coaching staff last year) and the old coaching warhorse, Nick 
Bollettieri, who called his victory an “historic accomplishment”.

This is the environment in which Murray now operates: the Novak Era. The Scot 
has no full-time lead coach to replace the recently disenchanted Amélie Mauresmo
 <http:>, and he must cope with the disappointment of falling short at Roland 
Garros, where John McEnroe reckoned he had his best chance to break through on 
clay.

McEnroe, mischievously, perhaps would still welcome a phone call to discuss 
that vacancy. Instead, the former championgoes to Wimbledon as a 
“consultant/coach” with the Canadian Milos Raonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/06/milos-raonic-sampras-wimbledon-sw19-queens-canada-tennis>
, squeezing that part-time commitment in between engagements in the commentary 
box for the BBC.

Milos Raonic: ‘Pete Sampras was my idol and I’d love to win Wimbledon’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/06/milos-raonic-sampras-wimbledon-sw19-queens-canada-tennis>
“I don’t recall ever getting a call,” he joked during a long conversation in 
Paris. “When you look at someone who’s that good you’re always interested – 
speaking for myself, I can’t speak for everyone. It depends on what type of 
commitment you’re talking about and for how long. There was never any 
discussion. I never heard from anyone.”

McEnroe likes the concept of former players advising the current crop. “It’s 
been a win-win for Boris [Becker] and Novak. I think clearly my old rivalIvan 
Lendl <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ivan-lendl> made a positive difference 
with Andy. He won a couple of majors. You’re talking about the cream of the 
crop.”

Does he think Lendl might one day return to help Murray? “I think it would be 
an interesting thought. He had great success before [two slams and an Olympic 
gold medal] and I don’t see why he would not do it. I am not sure [about] the 
baggage that took place when they broke up. I’m not sure why that happened. I 
don’t know if that was really mutual or if it was Andy or Ivan.

“I don’t know if it is like going back out with your ex-wife or ex-girlfriend 
– I don’t know if it was that extreme. On paper, potentially, [it] makes some 
sense to me.”

However, McEnroe, who sees Lendl from time to time around Florida, said he had 
heard he had fitness issues. “He has had some surgeries, I think. A hip 
surgery, a couple of surgeries, I believe. I hear about him from a buddy of 
mine who is a trainer on the seniors tour who tries to keep us in one piece. He 
lives near Ivan so I hear things about Ivan.”

The American was full of praise for the work Jamie Delgado has done with 
Murray since Mauresmo left his employment in Madrid last month. “But he might 
want to bring in a second guy,” McEnroe said, “the ‘looking for some 
extra-attention guy’.”
 