
Uncertainty about the size of a penalty for a decade-old misselling scandal 
knocked shares inDeutsche Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank> lower on Monday amid 
renewed doubts about the ability of Germany’s biggest bank to withstand the 
cost of any settlement with the US Department of Justice (DoJ).

With Germany’s stock market closed for a public holiday, its shares traded 
lower in New York as a stock research firm warned that Deutsche might want to 
tap shareholders for more cash in the wake of a fine. The bank’s shares had 
surged on Friday following reports that the settlement with the DoJ would be 
$5.4bn (£4.2bn) rather thanthe $14bn first suggested a fortnight ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/european-banking-shares-unsettled-by-deutsche-bank-fine-fears>
.

However, the absence of further news rattled US investors on Monday and 
Deutsche shares had fallen 3% by the time European markets were closing.

Speculation about the prospect of a deal with the DoJ over the misselling of 
residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) between 2005 and 2007 has been 
fuelled by the plans of John Cryan, Deutsche’s chief executive, to attend the 
International Monetary Fund’s annual meeting in Washington DC. This is regarded 
as an opportunity to thrash out a settlement ahead of the US general election 
next month.

But as Cryan prepared to attend the high-profile gathering he faced criticism 
from Germany’s minister for economic affairs, Sigmar Gabriel, for blaming 
speculators for the dive in the bank’s shares to 30-year lows.

“I did not know if I should laugh or cry that the bank that made speculation a 
business model is now saying it is a victim of speculators,” Gabriel said.

He was responding to the memo Cryan sent to 100,000 employees on Friday 
blaming “forces in the market” for destabilising the bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/market-fears-forces-deutsche-bank-to-issue-assurances-over-financial-health>
. Cryan is in the process of restructuring the bank and, according to reports, 
is close to achieving the agreement with local unions to cut 1,000 jobs.

Cryan has insisted that he does not need the help of the German chancellor, 
Angela Merkel, to prop up the bank, which has lost more than half its value on 
the stock market this year and is regarded by the IMF as the world’s riskiest 
bank.

A research note by brokers at Autonomous, cited by Bloomberg, said investors 
regarded a rights issue – a cash call on existing shareholders – as the “most 
likely tool management will use” to bolster market sentiment.

But the ratings agency Moody’s said it regarded any deal with the DoJ as more 
likely to knock profits rather than undermine its financial strength. Peter 
Nerby, senior vice-president at Moody’s, calculated that Deutsche could face a 
settlement of between $1.1bn and $5.7bn by analysing the size of agreements the 
DoJ has reached with US banks.

Even at the higher end, Nerby said: “This would require an addition to our 
assumed DoJ settlement reserve of €2.4 bn, which would dent 2016 profitability 
but would not significantly impair its capital position.”

Friday’s report by the news agency AFP that Deutsche might pay $5.4bn helped 
bolster its shares, although the Wall Street Journal cautioned on Monday that 
neither the DoJ or Deutsche had yet agreed on a deal.

Deutsche is one of a number of European banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/europeanbanks> – including Barclays and 
Royal Bank of Scotland – that face settlements with the DoJ. RBS, which could 
face a bill of £9bn from the DoJ, is in the process of tackling as many as 20 
lawsuits relating to the matter. On Monday, the state of Connecticut said the 
73% taxpayer-owned bank had agreed a $120m settlement over misselling RMBS.
 