
London and New York are now united by telephone as a permanent commonplace 
detail of the civilisation they both enjoy. With a moment’s tribute to the last 
sumptuous gift of science, both cities settle quietly into the possession of 
what will mean a vast increase eventually of their executive and economic 
power. The opening day’s experience proved that the authorities had not been 
premature in commercialising the new range of speech. Its capacity has been 
established as a permanent adjunct of communication, increasing in value with 
the urgency and delicacy of the business committed to it, and certain to gain a 
steadily widening jurisdiction. It will be a valuable stimulus to this country 
to be in such direct contact not only with New York but with the American 
telephone habit and its imperious instinct. We still do not telephone often 
enough, far enough, or in a sufficiently automatic way. In this respect 
extravagant America will teach us true economy.

Key Quote

“To climb up rocks is like all the rest of your life, only simpler and safer. 
In all the rest of your life, any work you may do … is a taking of means to 
some end. That end may be good. We all hope it is … No such dangers or doubts 
perplex the climber on rocks … His senses thrill with delight to find that he 
is just the sum of his own simple powers.”

CE Montague on mountaineering

Talking Point

The Hercules air liner, in which Sir Samuel and Lady Maud Hoare have flown to 
India, landed here safely at 12.20 this afternoon … after completing a total 
journey of some 6,300 miles in sixty-three flying hours … At one point they 
flew at a height of between 7,000 and 9,000 feet to fly above a storm, and 
again as low as fifteen feet to get under a storm.

‘Air liner lands at Delhi’, news story
 