
Gustav Mahler’s Eighth Symphony was given its first performance at the Musical 
Festival Hall of Munich on Monday last. The work is of colossal dimensions, 
taking over one hour and thirty minutes to perform. It is written in two parts, 
the first to the words of the great Catholic invocation “Veni Creator 
Spiritus,” and the second to the apotheosis of the second part of Goethe’s 
“Faust.” In the “ Veni Creator” part the symphonic form is considerably 
enlarged and almost dispensed with, while in the “Faust” section the composer 
follows closely the form of the poem. Although seven other symphonies by Mahler 
have been heard before, none has made such a deep impression asthis one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jul/15/gustav-mahler-eighth-symphony-proms>
. The choral parts are conspicuously predominant, and, the words being a sure 
guide, it is not difficult for the audience to follow the intentions of the 
composer. The emotional power of certain parts is of wonderful purity and 
uplifting strength.


Mahler’s thematic invention, however, cannot be pronounced to be a very 
remarkable one. He is more successful in the architectural structure, of which 
he proves real mastership. His scoring is almost unsurpassable. Even Richard 
Strauss has lately in a letter to a newspaper admitted that Mahler is the 
greatest living artist in this musical department.

No less than one thousand performers were engaged at the Munich performance. 
This is the number demanded by the composer for an ideal rendering of the work. 
He employs two choirs of mixed voices, a chorus of children, eight solo 
singers, an orchestra of 120 players, and an organ. Almost every musician of 
standing was present at this first performance. The huge Festival Hall was 
filled to overflowing, and after the closing chord the calls seemed as if they 
would never end.
 Manchester Guardian, 15 September 1910.  