
No sensible person wants the Labour party to have a thought police to discover 
which of its members have been influenced by Marx, Trotsky or Harold Laski. As 
MrTony Benn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tony-benn> ought to know, 
that is not the issue in the dispute over Trotskyism which comes before the 
National Executive on Wednesday. In the summer of 1975 Nora Beloff reported in 
theObserver at length on the activities of several Trotskyist groups, notably 
the Militant faction (or ‘tendency,’ to use the preferred jargon) and the 
International Marxist Group. Our particular interest was in what Trotskyists 
call “entryism” and others describe more bluntly as infiltration.

Mr Benn himself has got the criteria right: “Labour’s strength comes from its 
diversity of tradition and its common commitment to democracy and freedom.” The 
“diversity of tradition” has produced a remarkable and worthwhile tolerance of 
dissent, even of oddballs. But “the common commitment to democracy and freedom” 
is also vital.

Is that really what Militant and the IMG stand committed to? To pose the 
question is to reveal the mistake in Mr Benn’s approach. The argument of those 
who are worried about “entryism” is not an argument for a witch-hunt, but for a 
steady exposure of the essentially non-democratic way in which the Trotskyists 
operate.

Talking point

Alarums and excursions have been rising over the ultimate fate of Nagisa 
Oshima’s dazzling erotic masterpiece,Realm of the Senses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/15/nagisa-oshima-godard>, shown last 
week at the London Film Festival. HM Customs have asked the festival to send 
the print to them instead of to the distributor. A neat solution to a knotty 
problem: if it isn’t around to argue about, the censor will not have to decree 
that this superb film should not be shown.Tom Milne’s cinema column

Key Quote

“A little uncertainty is good for everyone.”

Dr Henry Kissinger
 