
Richard Strauss has just finished his latest composition – incidental music to 
Moliere’s comedy Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Le_bourgeois_gentilhomme_(Strauss)>, in the 
German version by H. von Hofmannsthal. It was generally known that Strauss had 
written the one-act operaAriadne on Naxos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/30/glyndebourne2013-michael-kennedy-ariadne-auf-naxos-strauss-hofmannsthal>
, which should follow the Bourgeois comedy, according to the intentions of 
Molière. In the comedy, however, the playwright leaves many opportunities for 
music, and as the comedy must always be given before the Ariadne, Strauss found 
himself obliged to write incidental music to it. This music will shortly be 
published, together with the opera.

Hugo von Hofmannsthal <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/hugo-von-hofmannsthal> has 
condensed the Molière comedy, which in the original is in five acts, into two 
acts, in order to keep the comedy and the opera within reasonable length. This 
condensation was easily made without mutilating the main idea of the work, by 
leaving out the many bits of topical satire, which time has made unintelligible.

Richard Strauss <https://www.theguardian.com/music/richard-strauss> has 
written to each of the two acts a small overture, and he also illustrates 
musically the entries of the various principal characters. The chief person, 
Monsieur Jourdain, whose only aim is to do everything just like the 
aristocracy, is characterised by a swaggering flourish of trumpets. He has to 
show his various gifts, as developed by his masters, in dancing (a pretty 
minuet), fencing (a lesson with his master, where all the blows and parades are 
most ingeniously pictured in music), and singing (a small song, during which he 
is supposed to get entirely out of tune). There is also a ballet of 
considerable length, danced by the tailor and his assistants, and a charming 
duet of a shepherd and his cold-hearted lady. At the end of the first act the 
doors are thrown open, and the audience will hear the band of M. Jourdain 
practising the overture to Ariadne on Naxos, all the musicians playing at the 
same time the most difficult passages of their respective parts.
 Lisa Della Casa in Ariadne auf Naxos, Paris, 1959. Photograph: Roger 
Viollet/REX 
The scoring of this incidental music is chiefly based upon the comparatively 
small orchestra of Molière’s times – i.e. flutes, oboes, bassoons, trumpet, and 
solo string quartet, the latter being sometimes reinforced by some extra 
players. Clarinets and trombone, which Strauss also employs in the score, were 
not yet in general use at the time, but can hardly be left out nowadays. From 
time to time there is music for a piano, which is meant to replace the old 
clavicembalo.


This music will be performed for the first time at the première of the comedy 
and the Ariadne at the Court Theatre of Stuttgart on October 25, when Herr 
Strauss will himself conduct, and the stage management will be in the hands of 
Herr Max Reinhardt, to whom the composer has dedicated the scores of the opera 
Ariadne on Naxos as well as the incidental music to Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme.
 