
I recall first seeing David Munrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/jun/01/david-munrow-remembered>
 at a vicarage tea-party in Cambridge in 1962. He was playing the bassoon. The 
occasion was not without moments of stress, for Munrow’s fellow-musicians kept 
turning over two pages at once, or got confused over repeats in a Telemann 
sonata. Munrow puffed on undaunted. He revealed, rather, a wicked relish for 
some of the unexpectedly jarring discords that cropped up. It was hard to keep 
a straight face. If anyone had prophesied then that he would have future 
concert audiences doubled up in their seats with laughter, we should have 
concurred wholeheartedly. For Munrow’s abundant sense of comedy has always 
complemented his flair as an interpreter of music of the Bach epoch and before.

Related: Remembering David Munrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/jun/01/david-munrow-remembered>

There has been no lack of early music specialists in this century, ranging 
from the Dolmetsch family to Noah Greenberg and theNew York Pro Musica 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_York_Pro_Musica>. Munrow seems to me to 
possess most of the scholarly virtues, but in addition, a concern and ability 
to communicate similar to that shown byThurston Dart 
<http://www.allmusic.com/artist/thurston-dart-mn0000068595> in his concerts of 
baroque music given during the fifties. Few musicians are better equipped than 
Munrow to demonstrate that the crumhorns andshawms 
<https://www.britannica.com/art/shawm> of medieval and Renaissance music are 
fit to he appreciated not merely by antiquarians but by the public at large, 
from the humblest grocer to the most patrician Prime Minister.
 David Munrow, May 1968. Photograph: Tony McGrath for the Observer 
For a start, Munrow is a staggering performer on early woodwind instruments of 
all sizes and descriptions. When I first visited him in Stratford a few years 
back, his collection numbered over 150 instruments, and it has grown since 
then. Moreover he plays them all.

Virtuoso is an unfortunate and overworked epithet which Munrow would hate to 
have applied to him. And it’s true that a keen ear can spot occasional flaws in 
his articulation or phrasing, especially since his improvised decoration of 
fast music is sometimes far too ambitious – it can obscure the sense of the 
melodic line. But when all’s said and done, how else could one indicate the 
wizardry with which he will change from shawm to dulcian tocornamuse 
<https://www.music.iastate.edu/antiqua/cornamus.htm> to gemshorn to rauschpfeife
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rauschpfeife> to recorder to crumhorn to 
kortholt . . . (need I say et cetera) ... launching off immediately in each 
case with little or no preparation. Not even Mick Jagger can have such 
versatile lips.

You have only to attend one of the hundreds of lecture-recitals on early 
woodwind instruments which Munrow gives up and down the country, and abroad, 
every year to realise how much his playing has caused such instruments to be 
taken seriously – to be thought of not merely as musical fossils, but as a 
range of sonorities that hold unlimited delights for the listener, and which 
today’s composers can find an invaluable stimulus. If you can’t get to one of 
his lecture recitals, then his exciting new demonstration disc,The Medieval 
Sound <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9eIwOJAPEvQ> on the Oryx label, will 
serve the purpose: though seeing him play these colourful instruments 
inevitably adds further dimension.

Medieval music has never for him been a dead art exhumed by scholars. It is 
alive and well and flourishing world over.

Munrow was not born with a sopranino rauschpfeife 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rauschpfeife> in his mouth. But his musical 
aspirations did develop early on. He took piano lessons from the age of six and 
(more important) sang in Birmingham Cathedral Choir, an experience that opened 
vistas on to music for him. When his voice broke he sought refuge in playing 
the recorder and bassoon, though school (King Edward VI Birmingham) provided 
little incentive to pursue a musical career. His first contact with the world 
of medieval instruments came on leaving school to spend a year teaching in 
South America. There he came across many of the instruments associated with 
medieval music in a context where they were still the staple diet of music, 
were still played with a total lack of inhibition, with a careeningly free 
sense of improvisation.


Some of Munrow’s many wind-instruments date back to this South American trip. 
Others have been acquired elsewhere in the course of his travels – from tiny 
villages in Europe to hippie shops in California. Most of his collection 
consists of modern reconstructions based on pictures or other information. (The 
makers are largely German – like Otto Steinkopf, Rainer, Weber. etc. – but 
there are now some English ones springing up, like Jim Jones.) The freshness 
and spontaneity of Munrow’s playing, however, are undoubtedly to some extent a 
product of hearing such instruments within folk-cultures where the most ancient 
musical practices survive to this day. Medieval music has never for him been a 
dead art exhumed by scholars. It is alive and well and flourishing all over the 
world.
 Peter Maxwell Davis (left) with Munrow, August 1974. Photograph: Peter Johns 
for the Guardian 
Returned from South America, Munrow went to Cambridge, where he sang in Jesus 
College choir, and met Thurston Dart. Dart encouraged him to exploit to the 
full his potential as a specialist on early woodwind instruments. Munrow did 
so, primarily playing with his friends, those with whom it was sheer enjoyment 
to make music. This is an important aspect of Munrow’s approach, something on 
which his later achievements have depended considerably. HisEarly Music Consort 
<http://www.allmusic.com/artist/early-music-consort-of-london-mn0001216719>, 
formed in 1967, developed out of such friendly music-making with Christopher 
Hogwood (harpsichord), Oliver Brookes (viol), and James Bowman (counter-tenor), 
and is a remarkably integrated and polished ensemble. In no time, the Consort 
was reckoned a front-rank group.


The Consort’s success does not depend entirely on brilliant performances. Its 
programmes are planned to run with perfect smoothness, with a precise awareness 
of what the audience needs to know or hear at any given moment. Introductions – 
either spoken or included in the programme – are invariably informative, witty, 
and often deliciously obscene as well. What people don’t generally realise is 
that the very idea of giving a concert of early music is unauthentic, a 
falsification of what originally happened. To present, therefore, a recital of 
four centuries’ dance music, as Munrow did a few weeks back, becomes a creative 
act in itself (as my colleague. Hugo Cole, so rightly pointed out).

Munrow has enlarged the Consort considerably for his Renaissance Festival 
programme, and his ideas have come off equally well on the larger canvas. For 
many people, Munrow’s name will always be associated with performances of a set 
of dances by Tielman Susato (a 16th-century composer who flourished as player, 
publisher, and composer at Antwerp. and who had a shop with the sign “In de 
Kroomhoorn”) that have often ended his Festival programmes. He first mounted 
performances of these dances at Cambridge and at Birmingham University (where 
he spent a year researching after finishing at Cambridge): the concluding 
battle-piece has always won him an ovation ­not just for its extra decibels, 
but because each time he scores it differently, preserving its raw freshness 
and potency. It is good news that he has just recorded these dances for EMI.
 David Munrow introduces the Rackett, a Renaissance wind instrument, followed 
by members of the Early Music Consort playing Caro Ortolano, by Giorgio 
Mainerio. via YouTube 
For some time he was a member of the Stratford Wind Ensemble and his 
contributions to drama productions extended into radio, television, and films. 
David Cain wrote music for him to play for the BBC radio serial of Tolkien’s 
The Hobbit. More recently television viewers will have heard the music he 
provided for The Six Wives of Henry VIII series and in the sequel. Elizabeth R, 
as well as at the V and A Exhibition. He is becoming difficult to dodge, likely 
to crop up as the indispensable background to some display or exhibition or in 
collaboration with a folk group.

Anyone who tries to pin down Munrow to any one category of work is doomed to 
failure. He is not just the crumhorn whizzkid. (Mind you, more ponderous 
medievalists underestimate his scholarship.) His skill as a deviser of recital 
programmes has stood him in good stead recently on the radio, when he 
introduced a series of Afternoon Sequences – two hours of records for Saturday 
afternoons on Radio 3. He is always on the move. His wife. Gillian, does all 
the planning of transport, food, and accommodation.

She also plays percussion and bells in their lecture-recitals: and the whole 
operation makes great demands on her energy and patience. Without such support 
Munrow would probably not have become so prominent and colourful a figure on 
the concert scene by the age of 28. And it’s a good thing he’s a small chap. 
otherwise there’d be no room in the car for him along with all those 
coffin-like cases containing racketts, crumhorns, recorders. shawms, clans, 
rauschpfeifes, kortholts, gemshorns....
 The Guardian, 9 March 1971.  