
The suppression of the large, illuminated, advertising signs throughout London 
was by far the most tolerable of war restrictions. There is no question that 
the blinding of these staring and superfluous vulgarities enhanced the 
nocturnal beauty. We dispensed most comfortably with them for five years. Why 
were they permitted to return? One, the most monstrous of its kind, can be seen 
by day across the river, chained to its tower, and threatening to blaze up any 
night. The rest of the tribe, with additions, are back. Their lights wink 
stupidly and flicker in an exasperatingly mechanical rhythm. The current 
unrolls and rolls up again a meaningless legend in strident colours, until the 
passer-by is almost provoked into a vow of abstinence from the products crudely 
heralded. The very glare of them and the inanity of their endless repetition 
are mesmeric. They assault tired eyes and harry the nerves of the home-going 
worker. They are blatant in their ugliness as they are blatant in defiance of 
the coal shortage. We are very far from being fanatical supporters of the 
sentimental argument commercial expansion has so often to meet. But commercial 
advertising must recognise its limits. A limit has been reached in this 
impudent desecration of some of our finest City-scapes.

Key quote
 H G Wells. Photograph: Hulton Getty 
“It is history that stresses, or should stress, the human brotherhood, by 
showing the single origin and adventure on which we are all of us launched.”

HG Wells, interviewed by the Observer

Talking point
 Gert Froebe in Jules Verne’s Rocket to the Moon. Photograph: RONALD GRANT 
The fascinating prospect of sending a rocket to the moon has been announced by 
the Smithsonian Institute in America. It reads like a chapter from Jules Verne. 
Many authorities in this country have discussed it. The majority are frankly 
sceptical.

Observer news story
 