
The first I heard about Amadeus was a characteristically vivid telephone call 
from the legendarily foul-mouthed director John Dexter (at that time head of 
productions at the Metropolitan Opera in New York). “Callow? What d’you know 
about Mozart?” “Well, er, I …” “You’d better find out, hadn’t you, because 
you’re about to fucking well play Mozart in Peter fucking Shaffer’s new play, 
aren’t you?” An hour later it was in my hands, in my bedsit in Hampstead.

I read the play with some surprise. I was not taken aback by the story of 
Mozart’s alleged poisoning at the hands of Antonio Salieri (which I knew from 
Rimsky-Korsakov’s operatic setting of Pushkin’s play on the same theme), nor by 
the scatological language; what amazed me was what I took to be the crudeness 
of the dramaturgy. Mozart appeared to be defined by his giggle; the emperor 
Joseph II – the most powerful monarch of the second half of the 18th century – 
simply repeated his catchphrase (“Well, there it is!”); and Mozart’s wife, 
Constanze, used words such as “delish”.

Peter Shaffer wanted to make elaborate theatre – and he succeeded
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/06/peter-shaffer-elaborate-theatre-he-succeeded-equus-amadeus>
I was just 30, had only been acting for seven years, mostly on the fringe, and 
I had highfalutin ideas about what constituted good playwriting. This was not 
it. Even the central idea – that the God-fearing, diligent and honourable 
Salieri felt mocked by the extraordinary talent with which the botty-slapping, 
shit-shanking Mozart had been so undeservedly endowed, and took it upon himself 
to take revenge on the young genius on behalf of mediocrities everywhere – 
seemed contrived and inflated. When I finished reading the play, I threw it 
across the room. “How very disappointing,” I thought. I would obviously have to 
turn it down.

And then I remembered a scene quite near the beginning of the play, when 
Mozart had just arrived at court and Salieri graciously welcomed him with a 
little tune in his honour. After the court have retired and the two composers 
are left together, Mozart plays the march from memory: “That doesn’t really 
work, does it? Did you try … ?” and within 30 seconds, he has turned the 
anodyne jingle into “Non più andrai” fromThe Marriage of Figaro. I realised 
that the script contained the essence of the play in a single perfect 
theatrical gesture, and longed to play the scene.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffrom-the-scatological-to-the-sublime-why-amadeus-strikes-a-chord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52994aaf5d971ed4e88b7bb41274b5887e322854%2F0_111_2277_1366%2F2277.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20scatological%20to%20the%20sublime%3A%20why%20Amadeus%20strikes%20a%20chord&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffrom-the-scatological-to-the-sublime-why-amadeus-strikes-a-chord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20scatological%20to%20the%20sublime%3A%20why%20Amadeus%20strikes%20a%20chord&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffrom-the-scatological-to-the-sublime-why-amadeus-strikes-a-chord%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52994aaf5d971ed4e88b7bb41274b5887e322854%2F0_111_2277_1366%2F2277.jpg>
 Tom Hulce in the 1984 film adaptation of Amadeus. Photograph: Ronald Grant 
Shaffer’s plays – especially The Royal Hunt of the Sun and Equus – had made a 
huge impact on me: the ideas were riveting, but it was the theatricality of the 
presentation that was so overwhelming. InRoyal Hunt, he gave us the 
extraordinary image of Robert Stephens as the sun-god Atahualpa surrounded by 
great golden petals; inEquus, the naked boy had ridden a steed for which an 
actor wore a horse’s head and hooves forged from steel. Dexter had directed 
both productions and now the old team was reuniting. I stilled my doubts and 
went along to the Savoy Grill in central London to meet Shaffer and Dexter.

Their relationship was one of pretty rough banter. For some reason, Dexter 
addressed the writer as Ruby; Shaffer, while remaining courteous and 
deferential, would flick away his insults with slightly narrowed eyes and a 
telling barb. It was like being in an undiscovered play by Sheridan. Shaffer 
took to calling Dexter “Rose”. “Rose?” snarled Dexter. “Yes,” he said, 
pleasantly, “as in Rose, thou art sick.” Dexter grunted appreciatively. He was 
full of plans: who should design the play, when it should be done, how we 
should approach the music, the terms on which we’d offer the production to the
National Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre>, if we 
did. Somehow, inexplicably, I had became part of the “we” who were doing the 
offering, though neither Dexter nor Shaffer had ever seen me act.

The big question, of course, was who should play Salieri. Great names were 
mentioned and shot down:Plummer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/christopher-plummer>, McCowen, Olivier. “Paul 
Scofield would be wonderful,” said Shaffer, clearly not for the first time. 
“Wouldn’t he?” He turned to me, pointedly. All through the conversation he had 
been catching my eye meaningfully, as if to say, “You see?” I said: “Oh yes – 
such gravitas.” “It’s the fucking gravitas that’s the problem,” said Dexter. 
“We’ll have to knock that out of her.” Eventually he needed to go, and Shaffer 
and I were left alone. Shaffer turned to me and said: “It’s been like this for 
years. But it’s getting worse.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffrom-the-scatological-to-the-sublime-why-amadeus-strikes-a-chord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F205296792a7eb5ba2c6ecefbfe6e7949f920593a%2F0_136_3733_2240%2F3733.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20scatological%20to%20the%20sublime%3A%20why%20Amadeus%20strikes%20a%20chord&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffrom-the-scatological-to-the-sublime-why-amadeus-strikes-a-chord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20scatological%20to%20the%20sublime%3A%20why%20Amadeus%20strikes%20a%20chord&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffrom-the-scatological-to-the-sublime-why-amadeus-strikes-a-chord%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F205296792a7eb5ba2c6ecefbfe6e7949f920593a%2F0_136_3733_2240%2F3733.jpg>
 The embodiment of embittered mediocrity … Paul Scofield as Salieri. 
Photograph: National Theatre Archive 
All this was deeply surprising to me. I had only met Dexter once, for a kipper 
breakfast at the Savoy when he offered me a part in another play, which never 
happened. Despite his not having seen me act, my playing this dazzling role in 
the latest play by the most commercially successful playwright in the English 
language seemed to be a fait accompli. After Dexter left, Shaffer relaxed 
considerably. Clearly he had been having a hard time of it with him. And 
Shaffer needed someone to talk to. At that moment we became friends for life. 
From time to time I would bump into him in a foyer or at a restaurant and his 
despair and frustration were unconcealed. “I shall go mad, my dear, quite, 
quite mad,” he said. “John won’t commit to anything. He says we’ll put it off 
for a couple of years. Well, we won’t. I know my plays: they have their 
moment.” And then one day he let me know that Dexter and he had sundered their 
long partnership; Shaffer, the most urbane of men, had uncharacteristically 
thrown himself on the floor, screaming with rage, he told me, because Dexter 
had demanded a percentage of the returns from the play whenever and wherever it 
was done.

Enter Peter Hall <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/peter-hall>, who had 
convinced Shaffer without too much difficulty that the play should be done at 
the National Theatre, and that he should direct it. The somewhat Wagnerian 
atmosphere changed to something more in keeping with Mozart’s 18th century: it 
was all charm, courteous exchanges and assurances. And, miraculously, I was 
still playing Mozart, even though Hall too had never seen me act. The cast was 
soon announced – Scofield, gravitas and all,Felicity Kendal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/may/10/felicity-kendal-my-family-values>
, with whom I had previously acted, and a peerless gang of players from the 
National’s Olivier Theatre company.

Sir Peter Shaffer obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/06/sir-peter-shaffer-obituary> 
Hall’s style, though there was no question who was in charge, was much more 
collegiate than Dexter’s. In fact, I was astonished at how flexible the process 
was: Shaffer seemed open to any suggestion, the text was infinitely malleable. 
This pleased me – I was a veteran of the fringe, where we always made plays 
like that. Shaffer would bring me presents every day of a delicious new line or 
a startling new scene. I thrashed about trying to fill, with some sort of lived 
life, the outline of the part Shaffer had so vividly sketched. Felicity and I 
had a glorious time romping around, though I was worried I was close to 
burlesque. “You gave a very brave performance,” Hall had said to me after the 
read-through, “but I have to believe at all times that you wrote the overture to
Figaro.” I wrestled with this inspired piece of directing; finally I think I 
got it.

Scofield, noble and charismatic in a rumpled sort of way, effortlessly 
dominated the rehearsal room. He was not especially happy, and went about his 
secret work on the part, with occasional volcanic eruptions when we glimpsed 
the majesty of what he might be about to deliver. And that unique voice, that 
mighty diapason, a series of organ stops covering more octaves than seemed 
humanly possible, would occasionally be deployed. (Once, alarmingly, he roared 
at me after I had irritatingly suggested that the scene needed a new line: “Not 
from me, baby,” he shouted, “you monster.”) But for the most part he seemed to 
be waiting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffrom-the-scatological-to-the-sublime-why-amadeus-strikes-a-chord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb5379a2bc4a61b01cc346365d86c1685898f231%2F13_0_3091_3861%2F3091.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20the%20scatological%20to%20the%20sublime%3A%20why%20Amadeus%20strikes%20a%20chord&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffrom-the-scatological-to-the-sublime-why-amadeus-strikes-a-chord%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20the%20scatological%20to%20the%20sublime%3A%20why%20Amadeus%20strikes%20a%20chord&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Ffrom-the-scatological-to-the-sublime-why-amadeus-strikes-a-chord%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb5379a2bc4a61b01cc346365d86c1685898f231%2F13_0_3091_3861%2F3091.jpg>
 Felicity Kendal as Constanze Weber, with Simon Callow, in the 1979 National 
Theatre production. Photograph: National Theatre Archive 
However flexible the text might be, at the core of the play were certain 
theatrical gestures in which Shaffer’s innate genius for communicating with an 
audience was plain to see. Salieri’s sudden transformation from ancient dying 
lunatic to elegant young court musician, Mozart being haunted on his deathbed 
by his jealous rival, above all Mozart’s rewriting of Salieri’s pedestrian 
march – all of these were there from the start, and they were never going to 
change. But it was hard to judge whether the play was really working. It seemed 
somehow lightweight, thin, despite all the fine language, melodrama and music.

Scofield didn’t attend the technical rehearsals: “My feet are killing me,” he 
confided in me. The dress rehearsals were fine, efficient and energised, but a 
bit mechanical. So the first preview knocked us sideways. We hadn’t reckoned on 
the audience’s hunger for the piece. Perhaps Scofield had. I had seen him 
physically expand as he came on stage for the dress rehearsals, but now, in 
front of an audience, he had become some sort of an animal, a panther or a 
tiger, prowling around in absolute contact with the audience, whose longing for 
him was almost embarrassing: positively carnal. It felt as if they had been 
aching for a very long time for the sort of full-blooded theatricality the play 
so brilliantly purveyed. They totally submitted to Scofield’s sublime 
embodiment of embittered mediocrity, they wept for Mozart’s piteous demise, 
they took it on the chin when Scofield addressed his last words to them with a 
kind of terrible complicity, which mingled intimacy with contempt: 
“Mediocrities everywhere, now and to come: I absolve you all.” And the 
audience’s response was the same at every performance over the next two years 
at the NationalTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, except for 
the night Margaret Thatcher came, when the entire audience looked at her. She 
came backstage. “Mozart wasn’t like that,” she said to Hall. “I think you’ll 
find, prime minister, that he was,” Hall replied. “I don’t think you heard me,” 
she said. “He wasn’t like that.”

The reviews were, to put it mildly, mixed. The bad ones, and some were very 
bad, created an aura of controversy around what was otherwise an unassailable 
hit – the combination of Shaffer, Scofield and Mozart had guaranteed that. But 
in the end, what made it extraordinary – what has made it extraordinary 
whenever it has been revived – is the visceral theatrical instinct of its 
author. He received his knighthood late in the day; critics never admitted him 
to the league ofPinter <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/pinter> or Stoppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stoppard>. But audiences raced to the 
theatre to see what he had wrought. He was a supreme storyteller who perfectly 
inhabited his medium. The film ofAmadeus – by far the most satisfactory of all 
attempts to make movies of his work – is a sumptuous experience, whose 
worldwide success transformed Mozart from a composer respected by the general 
public into one deeply loved by them, but if you want to taste the essence of 
Shaffer, go and see the play.

• Amadeus is at the Olivier theatre, London SE1, nationaltheatre.org.uk 
<https://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/>. There will be a National Theatre Live 
broadcast on 2 February 2017.
 