
The weekend's sporting programme has been further afflicted this morning with 
six more football fixtures falling foul of theicy weather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/weather> conditions which have swept the 
country.

The arctic blast has already accounted for the postponement of the 
Championship games between Watford and Southampton, Barnsley and Crystal Palace 
and Charlton and Cardiff. Also off are theBristol Rovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/bristolrovers> v Huddersfield, Hereford v 
Brighton, Yeovil v Northampton, Peterborough v Carlisle, Colchester v 
Stockport, Scunthorpe v Cheltenham, MK Dons v Crewe and Swindon v Southend 
matches in League One.

In League Two Accrington Stanley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/accringtonstanley> v Luton, Barnet v 
Rotherham and Chesterfield v Lincoln have also fallen by the wayside as have 
the matches between Port Vale and Aldershot, Darlington and Wycombe, 
Macclesfield and Notts County and Rochdale v Morecambe.

Aberdeen and Airdrie's respective Scottish Cup clashes with East Fife and 
Dunfermline <https://www.theguardian.com/football/dunfermline> have succumbed 
to the snow, along with the Scottish Third Division game between Elgin and 
Dumbarton, while more fixtures are set to be called off as pitch inspections 
take place throughout the day.

In racing, Newbury and Warwick are off today, but both Kempton and Ayr passed 
morning inspections. Cheltenham Gold Cup winnerDenman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/07/horse-racing> makes his seasonal 
bow at Kempton, where 13-time champion jockey has four rides in hisongoing and 
frustrating attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/feb/07/horse-racing-tony-mccoy> to 
surpass 3,000 jumps winners with four rides. Tomorrow's meetings at Exeter and 
Hereford have, however, fallen victim to the weather.

The cold has also affected the start of rugby league's Super League season, 
with tomorrow's game between Harlequins and Bradford at the Stoop off due to a 
frozen pitch.
 