
Gabriel Jesus’s £27m move to Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> is yet to be signed off 
because the final paperwork is not in place, although Pep Guardiola is hopeful 
of completing the transfer this week so the Brazil striker can be available for 
Sunday’s trip to Everton.

The initial £27m deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/manchester-city-sign-gabriel-jesus-palmeiras>
 with Palmeiras for the 19-year-old was agreed in the previous window, with the 
move delayed until the end of the Brazilian season. While there is little 
suggestion the last-minute hitch could threaten the move, Guardiola is keen for 
it to be sealed before Friday’s deadline so that Jesus can be included for 
Everton.

Enter Gabriel Jesus: an intriguing punt for Pep Guardiola and Manchester City 
| Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/06/brazilian-teenage-striker-gabriel-jesus-manchester-city>
Jesus has been training with the first-team squad since arriving in Manchester 
a fortnight ago. If the requisite paperwork is filed in time, Guardiola will 
then have to decide if he is fit enough to be in the squad for the Premier 
League meeting with Ronald Koeman’s side.

Jesus, who can operate as a No9 or wide forward, is in only the second season 
of his professional career having made his debut last year forPalmeiras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/palmeiras>. He won a first national 
championship with the São Paulo club in November, having claimed a gold medal 
with Brazil in the summer at Rio 2016 – the first time the five-times World 
Cup-winners have been Olympic champions.

Jesus made his senior international debut in September and has four goals in 
six appearances for Tite’s side. If Sunday’s game proves too soon for him, 
Jesus could make his debut in Tottenham Hotspur’s visit to the Etihad Stadium 
on Saturday week.
 