
It’s a hot sunny day in mid-September and Gareth Malone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gareth-malone> is wearing a green 
felt Christmas tree on his head. “The more you sing this carol like you’re 
singing to granny at home,” he tells the London Youth Choir, “the more 
heartfelt it is – and the more the microphones will pick it up.”

Britain’s best known choirmaster is making a Christmas record in Abbey Road 
studios. But, true to his roots, he is also doing it in the community. In fact, 
he’s doing it in lots of communities: in Cornwall withPerranarworthal Hand Bell 
Ringers <https://www.facebook.com/BBCRadioCornwall/videos/1294045967286221/>; 
in Birmingham with itsGospel Choir 
<http://www.birminghamcommunitygospelchoir.co.uk/>; and in Wales with the Coed 
Eva <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-south-east-wales-35275802> primary 
school (whose building was burnt down in an arson attack on New Year’s Eve).

Over the past decade, Malone has shown he can transform pretty much any group 
of no-hopers into a decent choir. InBoys Don’t Sing 
<http://www.garethmalone.com/programmes/boys-don't-sing>, he took a bunch of 
Leicester schoolboys who hated the idea of singing in a choir and nine months 
later had them performing at the Albert Hall. Then there wasSing While You Work 
<http://www.garethmalone.com/programmes/sing-while-you-work>, in which P&O saw 
off the likes of Sainsbury’s and Cheshire Fire Service to become Britain’s top 
workplace choir. Most famously, in 2011 he took theMilitary Wives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/dec/20/the-choir-military-wives-reality-tv>
 to a Christmas No 1 withWherever You Are <https://youtu.be/0hR6O7VxKaQ>.
The Military Wives sing Wherever You Are <https://youtu.be/0hR6O7VxKaQ>. 
Malone is a boyish 40, with the air of a children’s TV presenter, part Simon 
Cowell, part social worker and part teacher. The son of a civil servant mother 
and bank manager father, he grew up in Bournemouth and did a drama degree at 
the University of East Anglia. “I thought I was going to beKenneth Branagh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kenneth-branagh> in Henry V, that’s what I 
wanted.”

Malone was convinced he would conquer the world, that he would make his name 
as an actor, a director or a singer – and, if things worked out well, all 
three. But his ambition was not matched by his talent or dedication. “I had 
moments of realisation at university. I saw other actors and thought, ‘Yes, 
you’re a bit more dedicated and a bit more serious and a bit better than me.’ 
So that was a little knockback. I think I had the same with directing: there 
were these people who had a singlemindedness about what they wanted to do that 
I didn’t.”

He took a postgrad in classical singing at the prestigious Royal Academy of 
Music – passing with a distinction – but again he felt he was lacking. “I 
didn’t have a huge operatic voice. It’s a smallish instrument. The people who 
get picked up tend to be the ones with opera-sized voices.” To even stand a 
chance, he says, he would have also had to show unwavering commitment for six 
to eight years. “It’s like brain surgeon-type commitment. A lot of my friends 
who I was in college with are just starting their careers now.”
 Malone in the recording studio. Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 
I came out of school cocksure and confident – I thought I was marvellous

So he returned to Bournemouth, worked in a bar and sold ice creams on the 
beach. He was at a bit of a loss. “One day, a friend of my parents called and 
said, ‘I’ve seen an advert for a youth worker to work with young teenagers and 
I think you’d be really good at it.’” Malone applied, got the job, and it 
changed his life. He worked with disadvantaged youngsters, encouraging them to 
take an interest in music, and he saw a world he had been oblivious to.

“I would teach them to play bass guitar, try to organise them. I found it 
deeply traumatic in some ways, because it was my first realisation that people 
had not had the same advantages I had. People would tell you their parents were 
on drugs or whatever and I found it difficult to deal with because I was young 
and didn’t know much about the world.” Was he naive? “Yes, I was sheltered till 
I was in my 20s.”
 In the first series of The Choir, pupils from Northolt High School competed 
in the World Choir Games in China. Photograph: BBC 
After the youth work, he got a job with the London Symphony Orchestra 
<http://lso.co.uk/> running its youth and community choirs and working in 
inner-city schools <http://lso.co.uk/lso-discovery/about-lso-discovery.html>. 
“I got a real kick out of seeing teenagers you’d never expect getting involved 
in classical music.” The experience knocked some of the arrogance out of him. 
“It was quite humbling. I came out of school fairly cocksure and confident – I 
thought I was marvellous.”

Disappointment had given him a new perspective: he now regarded himself more 
as an enthusiastic amateur than an unheralded divo. He certainly did not see 
community work as a stepping stone to a career in TV. I read that his wife 
Becky, an English teacher with whom he has two young children, said that he had 
grim prospects when they met and she took him on as a project. “Oh, what a 
lovely thing to say!” he says. “I think she spotted potential, but I wasn’t 
like a high-flying city lawyer with bags of cash. I was a bohemian with grand 
plans. I think she felt I’d always do something but she didn’t know what. Then 
this TV thing came up and it just clicked.”
 Gareth Malone leads a session. Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 
In 2006, he was invited to make a series for BBC2, The Choir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2006/dec/05/youreviewthechoir1>
, in which he taught choral music to teenagers. And everything fell into place. 
The skills he had learnt over the years – acting, directing, singing, teaching, 
mentoring – all played a part in this new career. I ask what he thinks makes 
him good on TV. He ums and ahs. “Well, I’m certainly not camera-shy.” He also 
says his bossiness comes in useful. “I’m a back-seat driver in life. You know, 
‘You might want to turn the oven down to three.’ Back-seat baker, cook, 
organiser, back-seat everything. I have always got an opinion on how I’d like 
things to be.”

Older women, including my mother, tend to adore Malone. She says what she 
loves about him is that he is an enabler: giving people the confidence to do 
things they wouldn’t have dreamed they were capable of. A great example isBoys 
Don’t Sing <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b008y102>, the BBC2 series Malone 
cites as his favourite. “I just lived and breathed it for nine months, in and 
out of that school every day trying to make it work. It was the joy of going 
from not knowing what we were doing to standing on the stage at the Royal 
Albert Hall for the first time in my life with 150 people – and it working. I 
was really proud of that performance.”

What makes him particularly proud is that he was working with schoolboys. Why 
do they tend to be resistant to choirs? Malone says it’s a such complex issue, 
involving masculinity, biology and language itself. “You’re always struggling 
to prove it can be as manly and as cool as football andXbox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xbox>. The term boy is quite 
complicated in relation to music. We talk of boy bands, but they are actually 
young men.

You're alway struggling to show that singing can be as manly and cool as 
football

“And the changes that occur to a young man’s voice are very traumatic. We 
don’t deal with that very well. We always talk about boys’ voices breaking and 
of course they don’t break. It’s a source of anxiety for so many men. They say, 
‘Oh, I sang in a choir and then my voice broke and I stopped. What happens when 
something breaks? You throw it away and get a new one. Well, you can’t get a 
new voice, so a lot of men just fall out of love with their own instruments.”

Does he never get bored with the TV formula of turning dross into gold? He 
looks surprised. No, he says, he loves it. “I like performing and working with 
people.Simon Rattle <https://www.theguardian.com/music/simon-rattle> doesn’t 
say, ‘I’ve played in all the big halls in the world, so I’ll stop now.’ You 
keep going on and learning. Every scenario is different.”

Would he be tempted if a good acting offer came along? He nods. “I’d be the 
right kind of nervous I think.” He grins. “I should be careful because
Coronation Street <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/coronation-street> 
will call me up and I’ll be the resident choirmaster!”
 Great buzz … Rio gold-medal hockey star Helen Richardson-Walsh sings with 
London Youth Choir. Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 
For now he’s focused on the task in hand – getting the best out of the London 
Youth Choir <http://www.londonyouthchoir.com/>, whose female singers are here 
today, as well as four of TeamGB’s gold-winning women’s hockey team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/gb-women-hockey-historic-gold-shootout-final-olympics>
 (who tweeted him to ask if he would teach them how to sing the national anthem 
properly). There is a great buzz: the girls are thrilled to meet the athletes 
who are equally thrilled (and a little scared) to be performing with Malone and 
the choir.


As soon as he gets back to work, a change comes over him. He’s more focused, 
more animated, andall enthusiasm. “Cute. That is lovely! That is a lovely 
sound!” He’s virtually jumping with excitement as they sing Oh Holy Night. Now 
we see Malone the teacher as he explains the line: “And in his name all 
oppression shall cease.”

Absolutely killer. Brilliant. We did it. Hurrah. Right, one more take

He tells the girls: “The point of this verse is it’s an end to slavery. 
Oppression isthe word. Oppression is when people are put down. When it says 
oppression shall cease, that’s abig deal. It’s a really important verse, so 
let’s try again.” And next we see Malone the perfectionist. “I think we’ve got 
pretty much everything. I’d just like two more takes. Maybe three. Here we go!”

Malone is in his element working with all ages and abilities. “Ladies of the 
hockey team, I suggest we stick you slap bang in the middle.” As the dark draws 
in, they work away at O Come All Ye Faithful, with Malone gently ticking off 
the more experienced singers for overshadowing the others, complaining that 
some words are indistinct, and suggesting they harden “Lord”. Finally, he seems 
happy.

“Absolutely killer,” he shouts. “Brilliant! We did it! Hurrah!” The choir and 
hockey players look relieved and happy – for all of one second. “Right,” says 
Malone, “one more take.”

• The Choir: Gareth’s Best in Britain starts on BBC2 on 1 November. A Great 
British Christmas <http://www.garethmalone.com/cddvd> is released on Decca 
Classics on 2 December.
 