
Preston North End's result at Elland Road was glorious and ludicrous enough to 
beworth a blog of its own 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/football-league-blog/2010/sep/29/preston-north-end-leeds-united>
, but there were a few other results worth mentioning, with the individual 
performance of the day probably reserved for the Carlisle United striker Gary 
Madine, who spent his dayin court pleading guilty to a charge of causing actual 
bodily harm 
<http://www.newsandstar.co.uk/news/prison-warning-for-carlisle-utd-player-gary-madine-after-he-admits-assault-1.762917?referrerPath=news>
 and his night scoring the first hat-trick of his career.

In the Championship, Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity> fans, probably pretty glum 
already, are unlikely to be pleased to note that precisely 40 of the 92 teams 
in the Football League have conceded fewer goals all season than the 10 the 
Foxes have shipped in the last few days. In each of their last two matches, a 
6-1 defeat to Portsmouth on Friday and a 4-3 reverse at Norwich City last 
night, they have given away a penalty for handball and had a man sent off – a 
habit they probably want to be getting out of pretty soon.

"It is a difficult time and everything is going against us," Paulo Sousa said 
<http://www.thisisleicestershire.co.uk/sport/spirit-turn-says-Leicester-City-boss-Paulo-Sousa/article-2699619-detail/article.html>
. "Everything in the game didn't go in our favour. It is something we want to 
change and to do that we need to keep the spirit and attitude I saw last night. 
From what I saw and heard in the dressing-room, we have that spirit. We need 
things to turn because we don't have other solutions, and to make things turn 
we need this attitude they have."

So Leicester will start winning, so long as they keep showing the attitude 
they already are showing when they're losing. Got that? Right. Let's carry on.

Hull City's recent improvement – clean sheets in each of their three games 
before last night, which also brought two of their three wins so far this 
season – came to an emphatic end at Burnley, where they were walloped 4-0. "We 
didn't work hard enough," Nigel Pearson said. "We gave ourselves ridiculous 
problems. There are issues that need to be dealt with. Sometimes you might get 
an unlucky break but just because you've conceded one goal, you can't just 
fold. We didn't stop crosses, we didn't track players. Quite frankly, I'm not 
happy."

Also not happy is Coventry City's Gary McSheffrey, who has started recent 
games as a substitute but came off the bench to score the winner in last 
night's fortuitous 2-1 win over Doncaster Rovers – and promptly ran to Aidy 
Boothroyd and informed him what he thinks of his selection policy, earning 
himself a fine for abusing the manager.

In League One, Brighton and Hove Albion won again to consolidate their lead 
but there is more interest just behind them. So far as I can work out, AFC
Bournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth> are currently 
enjoying their highest league position since the heady days of August 1998, 
when they started the season with three wins on the spin to briefly sit second. 
Last night Michael Symes scored the first of his two goals in the second minute 
to set the Cherries on their way to a 3-0 win over Exeter City, who came into 
the match on the back of a six-game unbeaten run.

Bournemouth started the season 75/1 for the title with Paddy Power, who 
considered only three teams less likely to win it. The other surprise successes 
of the early season areRochdale <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rochdale> 
(who were 60/1 for the title pre-season but, weirdly given that they are 
currently fourth, have since gone out to 66/1), who have now gone six games 
without losing themselves. Last night's victory over Huddersfield Town – still 
favourites to win the league – was rendered considerably more emphatic when 
goals from Jean-Louis Akpa Akpro and Chris O'Grady in the last three minutes 
brought the final score to 3-0.

Carlisle are third after thrashing Hartlepool United 4-0 at Victoria Park. I 
haven't seen the goals, though Lubomir Michalik's opener is said to have been a 
45-yard – yes, 45 yards – free-kick screamer. The other three were all scored 
by Madine, a 20-year-old striker, who retained admirable focus given that he 
had earlier been warned he might end up in prison for (much less admirably)
beating up a Carlisle fan in a pub in February 
<http://www.newsandstar.co.uk/news/prison-warning-for-carlisle-utd-player-gary-madine-after-he-admits-assault-1.762917?referrerPath=news>
. Madine signed a two-year contract extension in the summer: "The chairman and 
gaffer pulled me in a few weeks ago and told me they had been impressed with 
the way I'd grown up as both a footballer and a person," he said at the time.

Port Vale remain top of League Two after beating Shrewsbury – who were second 
at the start of the game – 1-0, Micky Adams admitting his charges "weren't at 
our fluent best". Lincoln City's manager Chris Sutton resigned this morning, 
apparently citing personal reasons, following a 0-0 draw at home to Burton 
Albion (having given no hint of it last night 
<http://www.thisislincolnshire.co.uk/sport/Imps-improvement-Burton-leaves-Sutton-confident-good-times-ahead/article-2699521-detail/article.html>
). The bottom three sides, Hereford United, Barnet and Morecambe, each conceded 
four.
 