
Gary Cahill could have been forgiven for fearing the worst when the ball 
looped up off his shin and over Thibaut Courtoisto give Manchester City an 
interval lead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-v-chelsea-premier-league-live-report>
 they just about deserved, yet the Chelsea captain was confident his side could 
rise to the challenge andin the second half they most emphatically did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
.

That is the steadiness a seven-match winning sequence can bring, although the 
way Chelsea went about extending that Premier League run to eight spoke volumes 
about their experience and resilience and raised a few awkward questions about
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>, whose 
frustration boiled over at the end in the touchline fracas that resulted in 
Sergio Agüero and Fernandinho being dismissed.

“You expect to have to soak up some pressure when you are playing Manchester 
City away from home,” Cahill said. “They were on top in the first half and went 
a goal up but it never really rocked us too much mentally. We knew we were 
still in the game and I thought we played a lot more football in the second 
half and showed what we can do. Maybe they tired a bit but it was still a very 
tough game.

“Their team is full of good players, as is ours, but when you get this sort of 
momentum behind you it is easier to try and keep on winning. Every time we go 
out it’s a case of ‘we can’t lose this one’, but I think that is a good 
pressure to have on ourselves. Every individual is working hard and we are 
playing good football. We are delighted to come through a game like that and 
take three points from a top side.”

Although Eden Hazard’s last-minute goal put a gloss on the scoreline – it led 
to many home supporters leaving their seats before Agüero’s blatant foul on 
David Luiz sparked an unedifying scuffle in stoppage time – the real damage to 
City had been done byDiego Costa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/diego-costa>. In the first half he did 
little except react to a ball-winning tackle by Nicolás Otamendi in such a 
theatrical way that the defender picked up the game’s first booking.

Then after Kevin de Bruyne had spurned a couple of chances to extend City’s 
lead to two, Costa turned effortlessly past Otamendi from Cesc Fàbregas’s 
searching pass to beat Claudio Bravo for the equaliser. City began throwing men 
forward a little recklessly after that and when Costa received another clearing 
pass from Fàbregas in the middle of the pitch he held the ball up expertly 
before releasing Willian to run into space.

“I think we are seeing more composure from Diego this season,” Cahill said. “I 
know everyone thinks he is an angry guy but you can see a smarter player now. 
We were starved of the ball in the first half and so was he, and in the last 
few years maybe he gets frustrated at that. But this time he kept his cool and 
got more involved in the second half and when he does that he is one of the 
best going. He has been fantastic this season, showing maturity and still 
banging the goals in. He’s on fire at the minute and I hope it continues.”

Costa’s impressive form certainly has more chance of continuing than Agüero’s, 
who is likely to face a four-match suspension, having already beensuspended for 
three matches for violent conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/02/sergio-aguero-manchester-city-derby-united-three-match-ban-violent-conduct>
 this season. Agüero is not normally the angry guy, just as Costa is rarely 
cast as Mr Sensible, but in his defence the City striker did have something to 
be annoyed about.

David Luiz, the Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> player 
he lunged at in the final seconds, should probably not have been on the pitch 
at that point. Agüero was denied a clear run on goal in the first half by the 
defender’s calculated block and while the case for denial of a clear 
goalscoring opportunity was not quite as black and white, the referee, Anthony 
Taylor, appeared to duck out of a difficult decision by taking no action and 
allowing play to continue.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgary-cahill-diego-costa-angy-guy-more-mature-chelsea-manchester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c5703d421e3b9247e59b3ee3c817e979752481f%2F233_48_2075_1245%2F2075.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gary%20Cahill%3A%20everyone%20thinks%20Diego%20Costa%20is%20an%20angry%20guy%20but%20he%E2%80%99s%20more%20mature%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgary-cahill-diego-costa-angy-guy-more-mature-chelsea-manchester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gary%20Cahill%3A%20everyone%20thinks%20Diego%20Costa%20is%20an%20angry%20guy%20but%20he%E2%80%99s%20more%20mature%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fgary-cahill-diego-costa-angy-guy-more-mature-chelsea-manchester-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c5703d421e3b9247e59b3ee3c817e979752481f%2F233_48_2075_1245%2F2075.jpg>
 Fernandinho grabs Chelsea’s Cesc Fàbregas – resulting in the Manchester City 
player being sent off. Photograph: Paul Ellis/AFP/Getty Images 
On that occasion City could consider themselves hard done by, yet luck had 
evened itself out by the interval when Jesús Navas’s habit of regularly hitting 
the first defender with his crosses paid unexpected dividends in the form of an 
own goal.

Chelsea were perhaps lucky to still have 11 players on the pitch but City 
turned round in front and it all unravelled from there. “I will speak with my 
team about how we handle these situations,” Pep Guardiola said. “We did not 
lose because of the referee, we lost because we missed chances. It is a problem 
we have had all season. It is difficult for us to score goals and we concede 
them very easily.”

Actually, City possibly did lose because of the referee but that does not 
invalidate Guardiola’s other conclusions. Cahill summed up the difference 
between the two sides perfectly when he spoke of maturity and mental toughness. 
Chelsea have those qualities in abundance, which is why they are deservedly on 
top of the league. City are nowhere near as ruthless or professional. They 
could not close out the game when they held a lead and when Chelsea established 
superiority City reacted as impetuously as the supporters who headed for the 
exits.

Agüero’s suspension will dominate the headlines – City are notoriously 
overreliant on their leading scorer – although the loss of Fernandinho, for 
grabbing Fàbregas by the throat, should not be underestimated. The Brazilian 
was not only one of the home side’s best performers, he has been among the 
Premier League’s most consistent midfield influences all season. City must go 
into what Guardiola describes as a crucial period of the season without two key 
players.
 