
NYC is a gay-friendly town with a variety of neighbourhoods offering pockets 
of queer culture and nightlife, each with its own fruity flavour. In the past 
decade, a lot of the action has left “the big city” for Brooklyn districts such 
as Williamsburg and Bushwick, but there’s still plenty of adrenaline left in 
Manhattan to make heat-seeking worthwhile there. The West Village – the hub of 
the modern gay movement, thanks to the1969 rebellion at the Stonewall Inn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/23/stonewall-inn-new-york-landmark-lgbt>
 – still bristles with gay bars and drag clubs, mostly unaffected hangouts such 
as the appealingPieces <http://piecesbar.com/>, and The Monster 
<http://www.monsterbarnyc.com/>, a two-floor nightlife emporium with piano bar 
on top and disco down below.

Chelsea (the gay mecca in the 90s) was beset by a mass exodus as it became 
gentrified, though the long-runningBarracuda Lounge 
<https://www.facebook.com/BarracudaLounge> still provides booze and schmooze, 
andG Lounge <http://www.glounge.com/> never goes away, thanks to its ambient 
mini-areas in which to hang with your clique. And Hell’s Kitchen (or HK) is now 
the gay epicentre, where rents are a little more affordable, thereby attracting 
swarms of new arrivals who prowl the streets and look for fun on an obsessive 
basis. (On last count, there were 14 gay bars in the area, without a cap off in 
sight.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23eea7d427687079354d9b45b62b97e9622039b4%2F0_81_622_373%2F622.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23eea7d427687079354d9b45b62b97e9622039b4%2F0_81_622_373%2F622.jpg>
 The Stonewall Inn 
The internet has taken a big bite out of clubbing, as you hardly need go to a 
bar anymore to meet Mr Right-For-An-Hour, but these venues still provide 
valuable get-together spaces, as well as places to see drag performers, who are 
more popular than ever in the era of RuPaul’s Drag Race. There are also 
cultural events all over the city, fromNewFest <http://newfest.org/> (the 
city’s LGBT film festival) to concerts, such as aKiki and Herb 
<https://www.facebook.com/kikiandherb/> reunion (Justin Vivian Bond and Kenny 
Mellman reprising their act as a woozy cabaret couple). And even gays without 
muscles have a chance at some fun.

Clubs

By Steven Manchester <https://www.facebook.com/steven.manchester.35?fref=ts>, 
nightlife promoter, performer and club regular
I go to clubs based on the music and DJs, which are in my opinion what makes a 
party. For deeper beats, Brut, a monthly night atSantos Party House 
<http://santospartyhaus.com/>, is great. It’s for the leather crowd. I consider 
it like a mini Black Party (the annual hedonistic circuit party in NYC). 
Everyone’s all over the place, moving, moving, moving. There’s a play area for 
fooling around in one section and an upstairs and downstairs. There are two 
different DJs, serving two different types of music. It is promoted as having a 
“low-lit basement, after-hours vibe, and sweaty fun times” and that’s all true.

Viva on Saturdays at Stage 48 <http://stage48.com/> is always packed with 
gorgeous guys. The party, hosted by nightlife vets John Blair, Beto Sutter, and 
Ric Sena, attracts the muscle queen scene. It’s definitely high energy and a 
reliable party. It’s one of the longest running, successful parties on a weekly 
basis, and it never fails. The party took off from day one and has kept its 
mojo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4d4bce64261b91ab8161122e0aff205178b5056%2F0_0_1147_688%2F1147.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4d4bce64261b91ab8161122e0aff205178b5056%2F0_0_1147_688%2F1147.jpg>
 Pow, wow, bam! … Ric Sena’s Batman-themed party, Alegria 
Ric Sena’s party Alegria <http://www.alegriaevents.com/> – a large-scale event 
at rotating clubs such as Webster Hall – is the best. It’s full of energy, with 
amazing performances, visuals, and lighting. The last one I went to was 
Batman-themed and had an actual Batman car hanging from the ceiling and the DJ 
dressed as the Joker. The crowd is a very good mix, reflecting the melting pot 
aspect of New York, not just muscle queens.

I also wouldn’t miss Everything at Diamond Horseshoe 
<http://www.diamondhorseshoe.com/>, hosted by Brian Rafferty and Joe Roszak. 
It’s a fabulous venue in the basement of the Paramount Hotel, where earlier in 
the night they have the lavish Queen of the Night revue for tourists. You have 
to go down four flights of stairs, all marble, and it feels really atmospheric. 
Last time I went there were performance artists, aerial acrobatics, individuals 
on stilts, and neon body painting.

Pubs and bars

By Chuck Attix <https://www.facebook.com/chuck.attix?fref=ts>, party host and 
management consultant
The Hell’s Kitchen lounge Barrage <https://www.facebook.com/barrage.bar/> is a 
good date spot because it’s got lots of seating and the music isn’t too loud. 
There are naked pictures in the bathroom but this isn’t your typical 
over-the-top gay bar with loud music and customers. It’s a place to really get 
to know someone, which is rare.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e282756fb206f9cca0001e7ab69dc480209237e%2F0_0_4814_2884%2F4814.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e282756fb206f9cca0001e7ab69dc480209237e%2F0_0_4814_2884%2F4814.jpg>
 Boiler Room in the East Village. Photograph: Roger Gaess/Getty Images 
Boxers NYC <http://www.boxersnyc.com/> in Chelsea is a great cruisey bar. 
There are always cute people there. It also has bar food, like pizza, wings and 
mozzarella sticks. It’s friendly, with a good after-work crowd. But it’s a 
sports bar, and it’s a bit ironic that it has sports games on that no one pays 
any attention to. A straight guy owns it, and I guess he doesn’t know any 
better.

I enjoy the long-running West Village bar Julius <http://www.juliusbarny.com/> 
because you can’t beat its $3 happy hour drinks from 4pm to 9pm and I also like 
the older, neighbourhood crowd – it’s packed full of regulars. It’s the gay 
Cheers – if you’re 70, lol, though there’s usually a mix, with other types 
straggling in. It serves great food and it’s so cheap.

When you want something a little dark, there’s the Boiler Room 
<http://boilerroomnyc.com/> in the East Village. It’s actually a good place to 
take an ugly date. It has a pool table and also the photo booth is pretty fun. 
The ambience draws an edgier, more hipster, crowd than most of the other bars. 
I like it for the sense of mystery and a feeling of possibility.

Lesbian bars
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fadb981b3df11545627c510d331ad0c2991c59f%2F0_16_809_485%2F809.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fadb981b3df11545627c510d331ad0c2991c59f%2F0_16_809_485%2F809.jpg>
 Cubby Hole 
By Yetta G Kurland, civil rights attorney
One of the few go-to lesbian bars that still exists is the Cubby Hole 
<http://www.cubbyholebar.com/>, on the corner of W 12th and W 4th Streets. Any 
night of the week, you can go and have a good time. It’s packed on weekends, 
but it’s a good Tuesday or Wednesday hangout, when other places might be dead. 
It’s very much a neighbourhood lesbian bar. You’ll run into friends you know 
from different places, and though there are straight folks who go there too – 
men and women – there’s definitely a lesbian vibe. It’s small and cosy and 
there’s a jukebox.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e1456c481c86614bf9a51ee0d2c5ef10e79471%2F0_0_652_960%2F652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80e1456c481c86614bf9a51ee0d2c5ef10e79471%2F0_0_652_960%2F652.jpg>
 Vintage – Sunday Tea Dance 
On Friday night, you can also hang out in what many call “the Bermuda 
Triangle”: the confluence of theDuplex <http://www.theduplex.com/site/the-cafe>
, Stonewall Inn, and the Monster. The Duplex is a cabaret/hangout with a mixed 
crowd – an especially good place to hang at when the weather is warmer, given 
the cruisey outside patio (and on Saturdays, there’s a big lesbian crowd 
upstairs). On Fridays,upstairs at the Stonewall 
<http://www.thestonewallinnnyc.com/StonewallInnNYC/Welcome.html> is a girl 
thing called Lesbo-A-Gogo, with DJs and gogo dancers. And the same night, 
across the street at Monster isHot Rabbit 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/619190351448238/>, a girl event with gogo 
dancers and offbeat performances. It has different DJs serving up good dance 
music, and it has a good vibe, and a lot of women turn out there. Between those 
places, you’ll usually be able to find something that appeals to you. You’ve 
got three chances to find what you want.

Dagger is a monthly party held at a space it keeps unnamed. There is a cast of 
DJs, like JD Samson. The cover charge is on a sliding scale based on your 
gender. Women get in cheaper, “homo cys dudes” pay more, and “str8 cys dudes” 
pay a lot more. It’s mostly women, but queer flavoured, and attracts a much 
younger crowd, with a Williamsburg-hipster feel, and it’s trans friendly.

There’s a party thrown by the owner of the Stonewall Inn, Stacy Lentz, called 
Vintage at 49 Grove Street <https://www.facebook.com/events/878565282176590>. 
It’s a monthly tea dance specifically geared towards women in their 30s and 
over. It has a huge turnout, with really good music, and younger women go there 
too. It’s pretty much exclusively women. And it’s really cool to see women of 
all ages having a great time. It’s super-packed and super-fun, and a place 
where people can pick people up. You can definitely meet your next whatever 
there.

Arts and culture

By Adam Feldman <https://www.facebook.com/adfeldman?fref=ts>, theatre and 
cabaret critic, Time Out New York
Always worth visiting is the HOT! Festival (of theatre, music, dance, and 
literature)at Dixon Place <http://dixonplace.org/>, celebrating queer culture. 
It’s usually in July and encompasses a wide range of different performance 
styles and approaches. A lot of it consists of works in progress and there’s 
usually a centrepiece show by a more established artist. Dixon Place is a haven 
for creative experimentation.

Also, the FringeNYC Festival <https://fringenyc.org/> in August, has a lot of 
queer content. It’s usually around 200 shows performing in a range of venues, 
with different levels of professionalism. It provides the joy of finding a 
diamond in the rough, a real jewel in a bauble tiara. The shows turn over 
quickly – they’re very low-tech – so you really get stripped-down theatre, 
which can be more fun. It’s a nice way to dip your foot in the talent pool. 
Urinetown and some other shows that have had an afterlife started there, but 
it’s more of its own reward. Don’t go thinking you’re necessarily going to see 
the best show you’ve ever seen, but it’s fun as an experience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40f6780f1b0fdc37f6cf1bf0c1202621d4aabd48%2F18_146_2060_1236%2F2060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40f6780f1b0fdc37f6cf1bf0c1202621d4aabd48%2F18_146_2060_1236%2F2060.jpg>
 Leslie-Lohman Museum of Gay and Lesbian Art 
The Public Theater <http://www.publictheater.org/> is a great place to see 
theatre, and it is committed to diversity. It is among the best in the city at 
programming with a strong eye to diverse voices, and it also attracts some of 
the best talent. The Tony-winning Fun Home played there before its current run 
on Broadway. Fun Home’s main character is a butch lesbian, which is new for a 
Broadway musical. But the show doesn’t just break ground; it digs up the 
memories that are buried there, both joyful and tragic, and airs them in 
poignant and intelligent ways.

In Soho, Leslie-Lohman Museum of Gay and Lesbian Art 
<https://www.leslielohman.org/> (admission free) is a small treasure that 
celebrates the work of queer artists past and present. Its emphasis is on 
providing a space for work that might be excluded elsewhere, including very 
racy, but artistic, exhibits of LGBT erotica.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa10e88eaf7aea85dd0d9cdee01d165c0e2eff1f7%2F0_0_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa10e88eaf7aea85dd0d9cdee01d165c0e2eff1f7%2F0_0_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Joe’s Pub and The Public Theater, Lafayette Street. Photograph: Philip 
Scalia/Alamy 
Pop culture is memorialised at The Meeting <http://www.themeetingshow.com/>, a 
monthly theatrical-style event withJustin Sayre 
<https://twitter.com/JustinSayreCHM?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, usually at Joe’s Pub at 425 Lafayette Street. Justin is a leading figure in 
retro queer comic sophistication, a hilarious, cutting wit of the old school. 
His show is a combination of ranting monologues and sketches and musical 
guests. The shows pay tribute to a different element of gay culture, high or 
low, every episode. It might be Bette Davis or it might be the movie Practical 
Magic.

Drag and cabaret

By Logan Hardcore <https://www.facebook.com/logan.hardcore?fref=ts>, drag 
performer at Stonewall Inn,La Carbonara 
<https://www.facebook.com/laCarbonaraRestaurant?hc_location=ufi>, and Fire 
Island’s Ice Palace <https://www.facebook.com/IcePalaceFI/>
Boots and Saddle Drag Lounge <http://www.bootsandsaddlenyc.com/> is a 
legendary bar with a new venue, at 100A 7th Avenue South, that’s better than 
its first one. It’s bigger, and there’s finally a stage – a big stage. You 
can’t go in there without seeing a drag show. There’s a variety of live singing 
and dancing and good cheap drinks. It has around five shows a day and does a 
drag brunch on Saturday and Sunday. There’s bright lighting, and it’s very 
laid-back, very enjoyable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9c175cf7a6c962d2ed4b4e175bff18325e64170%2F0_253_4814_2884%2F4814.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9c175cf7a6c962d2ed4b4e175bff18325e64170%2F0_253_4814_2884%2F4814.jpg>
 Boots & Saddle. Photograph: Roger Gaess/Getty Images/Lonely Planet Images 
The uptown drag restaurant Lips <http://www.lipsnyc.com/> is known for its 
entertainment and drinks. The girls put on a terrific show that’s good, campy 
fun. It’s especially fun for birthdays and bachelorette-style parties. There’s 
a celebration, with a crown and everything. The birthday boy or girl goes 
onstage and gets harassed by a drag queen, and that includes gay birthdays and 
other gay parties. The decor adds to the whole spectacle – it’s very drag 
Disneyland, with neon and sparkles and over the top Liberace-style chic. 
Definitely worth a booking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc15bec045fab3ce71af09b0459d23294344a7ce%2F35_0_675_405%2F675.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc15bec045fab3ce71af09b0459d23294344a7ce%2F35_0_675_405%2F675.jpg>
 Lips 
Industry Bar <http://www.industry-bar.com/>, on W 52nd Street in Hell’s 
Kitchen, is one of the most popular and successful bars in the area and it has 
a strong appreciation for the value of drag queens. On Thursday night, there’s 
the “Queen” show, one of New York’s only drag revues, with a different theme 
every week. It’s a splashy show starring “Holly Dae and the greatest queens on 
earth”. Bob the Drag Queen, who’s a very zany performer, has a night at 
Industry. Rumour has it she’s going to be on RuPaul’s Drag Race, so she’s going 
to blow up big. The bar is very homey and lounge-y, with lots of side seating 
areas and always something to take in.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b1a720979c1212a6be2251fb3e003c2bb664514%2F0_53_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20New%20York%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fgay-new-york-guide-clubs-bars-drag-cabaret-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b1a720979c1212a6be2251fb3e003c2bb664514%2F0_53_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Laurie Beechman Theatre 
A little bit more formal, the Laurie Beechman Theatre 
<http://www.westbankcafe.com/beechman_theatre.html> is an intimate space that’s 
like a comfy cabaret with tons of drag queens. They have great revues including 
Distorted Diznee and Distorted Divas, and a lot of the Drag Race girls perform 
there, such as Courtney Act, Jinkx Monsoon, and Alaska Thunderfuck. There are 
no bad seats, and there’s good food and entertainment.
 