
The City by the Bay has a long and varied history of artists, activists, and 
eccentrics, and was a key location in the rise of the early LGBT rights 
movements with theCompton’s Cafeteria Riot 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compton%27s_Cafeteria_riot> in 1966 (the first 
large-scale rebellion against police violence by trans and queer people), the 
annual pride parade beginning in 1970, and the historic election of Harvey Milk 
in 1977 – the first openly gay man elected to public office in California. The 
city also boasts the US’s original gaybourhood: the Castro.

Arty living in San Francisco’s rising Outer Sunset district
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/25/san-francisco-up-and-coming-outer-sunset-district>
Today, the Castro has a flourishing bar and nightlife scene and plenty to 
offer in the art and history departments, too, such as theGLBT History Museum 
<http://www.glbthistory.org/museum/> and Castro Theatre 
<http://www.castrotheatre.com/>, which hosts the annual LGBTQ film festival, 
special screening events, and drag-inspired parodies of classic and cult films.

However, the Castro is not the only place you’ll find LGBT people 
congregating: the South of Market (SoMa) neighbourhood in particular has long 
been a stronghold for the leather and bear communities. And, despite San 
Francisco’s rapid transformation during the recent tech boom, many gay and 
gay-friendly institutions are keeping queer creativity alive in SF. Among them 
are the literary-inclinedRADAR Productions <http://www.radarproductions.org/>, 
CounterPulse <http://counterpulse.org/>, a theatre, gallery and community 
centre, theSF Queer Open Mic <http://queeropenmic.com/>, the community-focused 
arts organisationGalería De La Raza <http://www.galeriadelaraza.org/>, SOMArts 
<http://www.somarts.org/> and the Center for Sex and Culture 
<http://www.sexandculture.org/>. In fact, you can find a strong queer presence 
throughout the city, it’s just a case of knowing where to look. So …

Drag
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ff38a471e30c94791679950608ed0cbc759355d%2F0_0_3136_1883%2F3136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ff38a471e30c94791679950608ed0cbc759355d%2F0_0_3136_1883%2F3136.jpg>
 New on the block … the recently opened Oasis cabaret club. Photograph: Gareth 
Gooch 
By drag performer LOL McFiercen <https://www.facebook.com/lolmcfiercen>, 
co-hostess ofLilith Bear <https://www.facebook.com/lilithbear/>

San Francisco is exploding with drag amazingness! You can find a show any 
night of the week. But there are a few performers and events that you need to 
experience in your trip to the “Gay Mecca”. The newest cabaret and club space,
Oasis <http://sfoasis.com/> is co-owned by SF drag legends Heklina and D’Arcy 
Drollinger <http://www.darcydrollinger.com/>, and hosts a plethora of 
dragtastic events, including solo-performer shows, storytelling, pageants, 
parties and, of course, Heklina’s weekly Saturday night show, Mother (formerly 
Trannyshack). The stage is perfect for big production numbers with video, 
choreography, and reveal after reveal! Oasis also creates its own shows and, in 
2015, Drollinger helmed drag parodies of Star Trek, Sex and the City and Facts 
of Life, as well as staging 70s exploitation-inspired comedies about exotic 
dancer Champagne White.

If you’re looking for more of an arty edge, then check out The Stud 
<http://www.studsf.com/>’s weekly Friday night show, Club Some Thing. It’s a 
great mix of traditional drag and experimental performance art curated by
VivvyAnne ForeverMORE <https://www.facebook.com/vivvyanneforevermore/>. Catch 
newbies strutting their stuff at Try Some Thing at 10pm(ish), give all your 
dollars to the queens in the 11pm(ish) show, and stay late for the after-hours 
dancing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24978c299c0fdf4ab6cd487dacd6624c196a4e06%2F0_288_4368_2623%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24978c299c0fdf4ab6cd487dacd6624c196a4e06%2F0_288_4368_2623%2F4368.jpg>
 The Castro Theatre. Photograph: Alamy 
Start your weekend early with Thursday’s The Monster Show at Castro’s Edge Bar 
<https://www.facebook.com/EdgeSF/>. Founded by another SF drag legend, Cookie 
Dough (may she rest in peace) and MC2, the eclectic performers always 
audiences. The show starts at 10.30pm but get there early to get a good seat. 
You might even catch me hostessing with regulars Sue Casa andSugah Betes 
<https://www.facebook.com/sugah.betes>.

Rainbow city: the colourful houses of San Francisco – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jun/30/rainbow-city-san-francisco-colourful-houses-in-pictures>
Another quintessential San Francisco experience is anything involving film 
connoisseurPeaches Christ <http://www.peacheschrist.com/>. She creates 
elaborate stage shows at the Castro Theatre for cult movies, and her annual 
Showgirls tribute (in August) features an army of drag queen lap dancers. If 
that’s not enough for you, here’s a list that’s worth your time, and money. 
#MyNameIs movement leaderSister Roma <https://www.facebook.com/SisterRoma> and 
the community efforts of theSisters of Perpetual Indulgence 
<http://www.thesisters.org.uk/>, Mahogany Mondays at Midnight Sun 
<http://www.midnightsunsf.com/> with SF’s only RuPaul girl Honey Mahogany 
<http://www.itshoney.com/>, High Fantasy (Tuesday) and Hot Boxxx Girls (Friday, 
Saturday) atAunt Charlie’s Lounge <http://www.auntcharlieslounge.com/>, the 
Broni Mitchell Show <https://www.facebook.com/thebronimitchellshow> at The 
Lookout, and the drag and vintage storeRetro Fit 
<http://www.retrofityourworld.com/>.

Bear scene
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7929bb1648d0569e091bf4bb68fc9b0df837947f%2F0_0_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7929bb1648d0569e091bf4bb68fc9b0df837947f%2F0_0_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 The Hole in the Wall saloon 
By Kevin Seaman <http://seamanart.com/>, artist, cultural worker and long-time 
San Francisco resident


The first stop should be quintessential bear bar The Lone Star Saloon 
<http://lonestarsf.com/> in the historic leather neighbourhood of SoMa. The 
Lone Star never charges a cover but has many great events where you can meet 
like-minded hirsute men, such as Cubcake (second Friday of the month) and great 
Saturday night parties, including Leader of the Pack (50s music night). Also be 
sure to get a pulled pork sandwich if you’re there for Friday happy hour: place 
your order with bar/food guru Charlie. Another favourite SoMa hangout isthe 
Eagle <http://sf-eagle.com/storm/index.php>, which has a cruise-y atmosphere. 
Make sure to check out its Sunday beer bust (3-6pm), DJ Bus Station John’s 
Disco Daddy (regular Sundays) and Pound Puppy (second Saturdays).

Local's guide to San Francisco's coolest neighbourhoods
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/apr/11/guide-to-san-francisco-neighbourhoods>
Other SoMa venues that bears frequent include everyone’s favourite biker bar, 
the Hole In The Wall Saloon <http://hitws.com/>, Powerhouse 
<http://www.powerhousebar.com/> and men-only “social” club Blow Buddies 
<http://www.blowbuddies.com/>.

You may have been to one of its international events, but be sure to check out 
SF’s homegrown bear partyBearracuda <http://bearracuda.com/> while you’re here. 
There’s always a great mix of people, sexy go-go bears and plenty of eye-candy!

Try an evening bar hopping in the Castro. There’s not an official event, but 
Friday happy hour at Midnight Sun usually gets packed with thick-set men and 
the two-for-one drink specials keep everyone pretty well (socially) lubricated. 
You can check out dudes at440 Castro <http://www.the440.com/> (Monday Underwear 
Nights, $2 Beer Tuesdays), andMoby Dick <https://www.facebook.com/MobyDickBar/>
. Fora nightcap, head toLast Call <http://www.thelastcallbar.com/>, where you 
can play your favourite songs on the jukebox.

And if it’s not on your mobile device already, be sure to download Growlr 
<http://www.growlrapp.com/> to hear about other great local parties and annual 
events such as SFBear Pride <https://www.facebook.com/SanFranciscoBearPride/> 
andLazy Bear <http://www.lazybearweekend.com/main_menu.htm>.

Women and kink events
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f5791c35e636087933171a0696a8963c2f8ea24%2F0_229_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f5791c35e636087933171a0696a8963c2f8ea24%2F0_229_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Mrs Madeline working the crowd at Folsom Street Fair. Photograph: Alamy 
By Andre Shakti <https://twitter.com/AndreShakti>, sex worker, activist, writer
who teaches sexuality classes <http://www.armorystudios.com/workshops/> for the 
San Francisco Armory, and writes about sex work forCosmopolitan online 
<http://www.cosmopolitan.com/author/14100/andre-shakti/>


QBar’s Hella Saucey <https://www.facebook.com/hellasaucey> on Tuesdays is an 
all-inclusive weekly queer party (female majority). TheQBar 
<http://www.qbarsf.com/qbarhome.php> itself is an intimate and polished venue 
with attentive bartenders, great happy hour specials, and a $5 cover.Cat Club 
<http://www.sfcatclub.com/>’s Bondage-A-Go-Go is held every Wednesday night and 
is an all-inclusive and queer-friendly party with a dark, industrial 
electro-goth vibe. I’m also a fan ofDJ Lady Ryan <http://www.ladyryan.com/> – 
wherever she is spinning, ladies are sure to follow.

Oakland: the city stepping out of San Francisco's shadow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/dec/13/oakland-san-francisco-california-new-brooklyn>
Every September kinksters gather for blocks of DJs, public flogging, spanking, 
and more. All right out in the open.Folsom Street Fair 
<http://www.folsomstreetfair.com/> (and its little brother Up Your Alley) 
provide a uniquely San Francisco experience, and one that attracts 400,000 
fetish-loving –and just plain curious – visitors each year.

The SF Citadel <http://www.sfcitadel.org/> is home to BENT and Transmission, 
and while BENT is not exclusively queer, it is produced and staffed by queers, 
and every party is packed wall-to-wall with enthusiastic young kinksters. The 
Citadel has multiple connecting rooms and a slew of traditional dungeon 
equipment. BENT always has an “intro” class prior to the party for those new to 
the scene. Transmission (three times a year) is “a celebration and safe space 
for any and all who identify as trans, gender-queer, gender-fluid, 
gender-fucked, gender-free, gender-nonconforming, and agender! Our lovers and 
allies are welcome as well!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa2f8c57f7d13adbf7b2a8b1cb57913ee315bbd2%2F42_0_678_407%2F678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa2f8c57f7d13adbf7b2a8b1cb57913ee315bbd2%2F42_0_678_407%2F678.jpg>
 Awaken Cafe, in downtown Oakland 
A lot of great queer- and women-focused events occur across the Bay bridge in 
Oakland (a quick train ride away), includingQueer Sphere Happy Hour 
<http://www.queersphere.net/> on the second Friday of the month at Club BnB 
<http://www.bench-and-bar.com/>. Folks should also check out Queer Leather 
Happy Hour <https://www.facebook.com/QLHappyHour/> at SF Eagle on the first 
Friday of the month, from 6pm to 9pm. And if you’re looking to relax a little 
and step away from the dancefloor tryKaroake With Dana 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/karaokewithdana/> at Club OMG in downtown San 
Francisco and theAwaken Cafe <http://www.awakencafe.com/> in downtown Oakland.

This is a city that loves technology, so go ahead and make yourself a profile 
onFetlife <https://fetlife.com/> to see what events are going on, check out 
GirlPages <http://www.girlpagesnetwork.com/> and follow @SFQueer 
<https://twitter.com/sfqueer> on Twitter.

Live music
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0fdc8d502638967935dee29130d068c0d5ab535%2F0_142_1024_615%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0fdc8d502638967935dee29130d068c0d5ab535%2F0_142_1024_615%2F1024.jpg>
 Hemlock Tavern 
By drag queen, artist and musician Tamale Ringwald. Ringwald delivers a mix of 
pop art, outlaw fashion, and 21st-century Chola realism (Cholas are a 
subculture of Chicanos that originated in southern California)

Long-running venues such as The Eagle, El Rio <http://www.elriosf.com/>, The 
Stud, theMake Out Room <http://www.makeoutroom.com/>, Hemlock Tavern 
<http://www.hemlocktavern.com/>, and newer venues such as Beatbox 
<http://beatboxsf.com/> and Oasis, provide live music. Whether you like hard 
rock, electronic, indie, drag punk, hip-hop, bounce, or straight-up pop, these 
queer bands will bring the SF scene straight to your ears …

Muñecas <http://munecas.bandcamp.com/releases> mixes punk rock and dark wave 
musical styles with postcolonial drag, a drag representation of the cultural 
legacy of colonialism and imperialism and its exploitation of a native people. 
It’s also a drag reaction to gentrification.

Top 10 budget hotels, hostels and B&amp;Bs in San Francisco
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/30/us-san-francisco-best-budget-hotels-hostels-bandbs>
Queen Crescent <http://www.queencrescent.com/> are four hard rockers who’ll 
make your ears bleed. Equal parts Black Sabbath and Jethro Tull, Andrea, Amy, 
Melissa and Eden shred, beat, and belt out like no other.Zbörnak 
<http://wearezbornak.com/merch/bloody-nice-tee> are led by sexy glitter bear 
Greg DerAnanian – their catchy riffs and pop-punk singalongs will kick your ass 
into high gear. “We vow to liberate the universe through cheesecake and rock,” 
they say.

Adonisaurus <http://derekschmidtmusic.com/adonisaurus/> explores electronic 
sounds in pop music. The duo pushes their songs into unexpected territories, 
not at all concerned with fitting into one box, whileDouble Duchess 
<http://doubleduchess.com/> (Krylon Superstar and davO) have been keeping SF 
crowds on their feet for years with their raw and campy electronic sound.

Clubbing
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a24746ee72b3c08cee64fadd61996eb2233957%2F0_0_2036_1222%2F2036.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a24746ee72b3c08cee64fadd61996eb2233957%2F0_0_2036_1222%2F2036.jpg>
 Revellers at Cockblock. Photograph: Lyra Lopez-Kamoku 
By Jimmy Swear <https://www.facebook.com/jimmyswearxoxo/>, DJ, musician and 
performer


Tubesteak Connection 
<http://www.auntcharlieslounge.com/indexes/numberthree.htm> is on every 
Thursday night at Aunt Charlie’s Lounge in the Tenderloin. Get into SF’s disco 
time machine in one of the most authentic spots in town and enjoy the queer 
friendly mash-up dance party. If you’re into goth/industrial,Dark Room 
<http://darkroomsf.tumblr.com/> is a must on the last Saturday of the month at 
The Stud, hosted by local drag luminary Suppositori Spelling and DJ Le Perv.


Are you a furry? Or just love a good costume? Check out Frolic 
<http://frolicparty.com/> every second Saturday at The Stud, with DJ Neon Bunny 
<http://neonbunny.com/>. Veteran music aficionados Hoku Mama Swamp and Jess 
Cuevas throw Smooth Operator at QBar every second Saturday – get your slow jam 
dedications done right.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8f787f9d53a1d4c34c39e126844e7964f893ce3%2F0_81_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gay%20San%20Francisco%3A%20a%20guide%20to%20clubs%2C%20bars%2C%20drag%20shows%20and%20queer%20culture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F02%2Fgay-san-francisco-guide-clubs-bars-cabaret-drag-music%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8f787f9d53a1d4c34c39e126844e7964f893ce3%2F0_81_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Hard French. Photograph: Cynthia Halverson 
Some of the best music in town is at Swagger Like Us 
<https://www.facebook.com/swaggerlikeussf/> a monthly queer hip-hop party (with 
an amazing light show) from Kelly Lovemonster and davO (third Friday’s at 
Oasis, first Sunday’s at El Rio), the latter attracting a lot of national 
talent in the hip-hop scene. Honorable mentions include Juanita More’sBeatpig 
<http://www.beatpigsf.com/> every third Saturday at the Powerhouse, Pound Puppy 
<https://www.facebook.com/oscarblake.jorgekevin/> (dates vary), and Mango 
(fabulous salsa/hip-hop dyke party) fourth Saturdays at El Rio andBootie 
<http://bootiemashup.com/sf/> at DNA Lounge on Saturday nights.

We are lucky enough to have institutions such as Honey Soundsystem 
<http://hnysndsystm.tumblr.com/>, Cockblock <http://www.cockblocksf.com/> and 
Hard French <http://hardfrench.com/>, all of which pack people in every time 
they open their doors. Keep an eye out for gems such asStudio 5’4” 
<https://www.facebook.com/studiofivefootfour>, San Francisco’s pocket disco for 
short men and their admirers, orRiotgrrr <https://www.facebook.com/riotgrrr/>, 
a tribute night to the riot grrrl scene.

Take in everything the city has to offer while you’re here – save the safe-bet 
for your hometown.

Wonder Dave <http://wonderdave.org/> is a writer and performer living in San 
Francisco. He is the host of queer burlesque showSeduction Feroce 
<http://www.seductionferoce.com/> and co-host of the underground variety show 
Tourettes Without Regrets <http://touretteswithoutregrets.com/>. Follow him on 
Twitter@TeamWonderDave <https://twitter.com/teamwonderdave> 


• This article was amended on 7 December 2015 because Transmission at the SF 
Citadel takes place three times a year, not every third Friday as an earlier 
version said.
 