
Kate and Helen Richardson-Walsh may want to reconsider their future. The 
couple are supposed to be moving to the Netherlands shortly. Having broken 
Dutch hearts, while securing Great Britain’s first women’s hockey gold medal 
with a shootout win, they might find the reception a bit frosty.

The Netherlands were considered the rulers of world hockey and GB’s win came 
entirely against the run of play. The defending Olympic champions had dominated 
but a goal in the final 10 minutes from Britain’s Nicola White levelled the 
scores at 3-3 and took it to penalty shuffles.

It was Hollie Webb, one of the youngest members of the team at 25, who scored 
the winning goal. “I watched it go into the net and then I can’t remember 
anything else since then,” she said. “We practise them so many times and I just 
tried to imagine I was training at Bisham Abbey. I knew what I was going to do 
against their keeper, so I just stared her in the eye.”

‘To win an Olympic medal with your wife standing next to you is so special’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/olympic-medal-wife-hockey-team-gb-gold>
The first four shuffles had gone begging before the Dutch keeper Joyce 
Sombroek was ruled to have deliberately fouled Sophie Bray, and Helen 
Richardson-Walsh stepped up to score from the consequent penalty stroke.

There were two more misses – including Margot van Geffen’s shot hitting the 
post – before Webb stepped up to the 23-yard line to take Britain’s first 
potshot at gold. The ball clanged into the back of the goal like Calamity Jane 
shooting a tin can off the head of a drunk.

It was a nerveless finish for a team who had said repeatedly throughout this 
tournament that nothing but gold would do. Eight of the players had been forced 
to settle for an Olympic bronze at London 2012 after a heartbreaking semi-final 
defeat. They included captain Kate Richardson-Walsh and her wife Helen, who 
came into this match with 657 caps between them.

They are the first married couple to win gold for Britain since Cyril and 
Dorothy Wright, who took the 7m sailing class in Antwerp in 1920. To be fair, 
there were so few yachts competing in that Games only one team went home 
without a medal. The Richardson-Walshes and the rest of the GB team have bossed 
this Olympics, defeating all eight sides they faced.

The main grandstand was full of Dutch fans. Some wore inflatable crowns while 
one man had a giant slice of Edam on his head. A tiny pocket of British fans 
sat right in the middle of the orange mass and made considerably more noise.

Britain scored first nine minutes into the game after Bray took on three Dutch 
players to shoot from the edge of the D and the rebound was tucked away by 
White. The Netherlands equalised immediately after the first break, when 
Lidewij Welten stole the ball in midfield. She and Kitty van Male stepped on 
the accelerator, catching Britain on the break and allowing Van Male to run 
around Maddie Hinch entirely unhindered. She finished with a flick into the top 
right corner.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fgb-women-historic-hockey-gold-rio-olympics-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=GB%20women%20win%20historic%20hockey%20gold%20in%20Rio%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fgb-women-historic-hockey-gold-rio-olympics-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=GB%20women%20win%20historic%20hockey%20gold%20in%20Rio%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fgb-women-historic-hockey-gold-rio-olympics-video&media=>
GB women win historic hockey gold in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/19/gb-women-historic-hockey-gold-rio-olympics-video>
. 
For much of the match the Netherlands had set up camp in Britain’s half so 
comfortably they may have considered lighting fires and sending a few players 
off for provisions. A penalty corner reached Maartje Pauman 10 minutes into the 
second quarter and the Dutch captain, who was looking for her third consecutive 
Olympic title, sent it skimming past Hinch’s outstretched leg.

There were army tanks parked forbiddingly on the road leading to the arena. 
Hinch did much the same job protecting Britain’s goal. A series of brilliant 
saves kept her team in the game from as early as the 12th minute when Sam Quek 
fouled Laurien Leurink and conceded a penalty stroke. Paumen’s shot came high 
and straight at Hinch’s head but she deflected it wide. There were plenty more 
where that came from, including a brilliant double save against Naomi van As.

A long ball that was deflected past a hapless Caia van Maasakker landed in 
prime scoring position for Crista Cullen who scored to keep Britain in the 
hunt. But after three penalty corners in as many minutes the Dutch went ahead 
again, Van Male scoring her second goal.

Kate Richardson-Walsh and Maddie Hinch lead epic triumph of teamwork
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/kate-richardson-walsh-and-maddie-hinch-lead-epic-triumph-of-teamwork>
Going into the final quarter, the Dutch had won 10 penalty corners, their 
opponents none. Britain’s first and second came with nine minutes to go, both 
ungainly scrambles in the goalmouth. Sombroek saved the first but the second 
drew her a foot further out of her ground, leaving a gap for White to slot home 
Alex Danson’s rebound.

For Danny Kerry, Britain’s coach, the gold medal had seemed almost 
preordained. “I know this will sound corny but some days you know you’re going 
to win,” he said, “and even though we didn’t play very well in the first three 
quarters of the match I thought we were going to tough it out.

“We have probably the best goalie in the world when it comes to shootouts. As 
soon as it went there, I knew.”
 