
 More action may be needed to protect the financial services industry from a 
devastating cyber-attack, the head of the Treasure select committee has 
suggested.

Andrew Tyrie MP wrote to Ciaran Martin, head of the new cybersecurity centre 
of UK surveillance agencyGCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq>, saying the 
lines of responsibility and accountability for reducing cyber-threats are 
opaque.

Tyrie’s letter to Martin, who is leading the Cheltenham-based National Cyber 
Security Centre (NCSC), uses last month’s incident at Tesco Bank to illustrate 
the vulnerabilities of the financial system.

In November, the  banking arm of supermarket chain Tesco admitted that £2.5m 
had been stolen from 9,000 accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/tesco-bank-cyber-thieves-25m> 
in an incident which raised fresh concerns about the methods used by financial 
services firms to detect cyber-attacks.

Two-thirds of all major UK companies – not just financial services firms – 
have reported security breaches in the last year. The Bank of England has also 
listed the threat of cyber-attacks as one of the major risks facing the 
financial services industry.

In his letter Tyrie, a Conservative MP, outlines the responsibility for 
cyber-threats as being shared between the Bank’sPrudential Regulation Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/prudential-regulation-authority> (PRA), 
theFinancial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> and GCHQ. In 
turn, the regulatory arms are responsible to the Treasury, while GCHQ reports 
through the foreign secretary.


Cyber-attacks and hacking: what you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/01/cyber-attacks-hacking-philip-hammond-state-cybercrime>
In light of this, Tyrie said: “It is for consideration whether a single point 
of responsibility for cyber risk in the financial services sector, with full 
ownership of – and accountability for – financial cyber-threats is now 
required. It may be necessary to create a line of accountability to the 
Treasury for financial cybercrime.”

Tyrie also asks Martin for clarity on the objectives of NCSC, which was set up 
two months ago to take charge of the UK’s defences against cyber-offences.

“Legacy systems, human error and deliberate attack have resulted in 
unacceptable interruptions to vital banking services and weakened the public’s 
confidence in the banking system as a whole. The recent attack on Tesco Bank is 
only the latest example of criminals exploiting vulnerabilities in the banking 
industry’s IT systems,” said Tyrie.

 A spokesman for the NCSC said: “We have received this letter and there will 
be a government response in the New Year.”

TalkTalk hit with record £400k fine over cyber-attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/talktalk-hit-with-record-400k-fine-over-cyber-attack>
The parliamentary committee has been asking questions about the need for a 
clearer command structure to tackle cyber-attacks during its evidence sessions. 
Last week, Sam Woods, the Bank’s deputy governor who runs PRA, was asked his 
views on the need for a single point of contact.

Woods replied it was important to know which body was in charge of each 
incident rather than have the same point of contact.

 “It is essential that the intelligence community gives the regulators the 
technical and practical support they need to do their job. This means making 
sure that financial cybercrime has a high priority, and is not subordinate to 
other work,” said Tyrie.

“Certainly, as millions of customers are exposed to the risks of cybercrime, a 
higher level of scrutiny and accountability for existing arrangements is 
needed,” he added.
 