
The authors of a new report forecasting that it could take 170 years to 
eradicate the disparity in pay and employment opportunities for men and women 
have called for urgent action to close the gender equality gap.

The report by the World Economic Forum – best known for its high-profile 
gathering each year inDavos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/davos>, 
Switzerland – found that economic disparity between women and men around the 
world was rising even though the gap was closing on other measures, such as 
education.

When measured in terms of income and employment, the gender gap has widened in 
the past four years; at 59%, it is now at a similar level to that seen in the 
depths of the financial crisis in 2008.

Last year, the WEF predicted it would take 118 years for economic parity to be 
achieved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/18/women-will-get-equal-pay-in-118-years-wef-gender-parity>
. This year, the Geneva-based institution has calculated the gap would take 
until 2186 – 170 years – to close.

Now in its 11th year, the report measures the relative discrepancies between 
women and men across four key areas: health, education, economy and politics.

The report says: “More than a decade of data has revealed that progress is 
still too slow for realising the full potential of one half of humanity within 
our lifetimes.”

The authors, Richard Samans and Saadia Zahidi, said they hoped the report 
“will serve as a call to action for governments to accelerate gender equality 
through bolder policymaking, to business to prioritise gender equality as a 
critical talent and moral imperative, and to all of us to become deeply 
conscious of the choices we make every day that impact gender equality 
globally”.

The economic gap is caused by a number of factors, including women being paid 
almost half of what men receive, working on average 50 minutes a day longer and 
having a much slimmer chance of reaching senior roles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fgender-pay-gap-170-years-to-close-world-economic-forum-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26e07de3b8cb556834bbab71e2e4a8c7830f6e00%2F0_0_933_932%2F933.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gender%20pay%20gap%20could%20take%20170%20years%20to%20close%2C%20says%20World%20Economic%20Forum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fgender-pay-gap-170-years-to-close-world-economic-forum-equality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gender%20pay%20gap%20could%20take%20170%20years%20to%20close%2C%20says%20World%20Economic%20Forum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fgender-pay-gap-170-years-to-close-world-economic-forum-equality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26e07de3b8cb556834bbab71e2e4a8c7830f6e00%2F0_0_933_932%2F933.jpg>
 Graphic showing the average working day for men and women across the 144 
countries surveyed. Photograph: WEF 
Zahidi blamed slower economic growth for keeping women out of the workforce 
and added that, after making some progress, “we’re now hitting a bit of a wall” 
in terms of policy changes to help women in the workplace. Automation is 
affecting jobs in sales and administration – sectors with relatively high 
levels of female employment.

On an overall scale, including health, education and politics, the gender gap 
could be closed in 83 years across the 107 countries included in the report 
since it was originally published in 2006 – which is “just within the 
statistical lifetime of the baby girls born today”.
Gender gap 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-25T13:38:50/embed.html>
Within that overall measure, the education gap could be closed in 10 years, 
while the inequality in politics – which has the widest gap, despite having 
closed by 23% – should end in 82 years because of the fast pace of improvement 
since 2006, when it stood at 14%.

This year, 144 countries are included. Iceland, Finland, Norway and Sweden are 
in the top four, while Rwanda makes it in to the top five.

The UK has risen to 20th from 18th place in the overall rankings, well below 
its top 10 position in 2006.

The UK’s rankings were compiled before Theresa May became prime minister 
following the vote for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/cameron-announces-he-will-step-down-after-pmqs-on-wednesday>
 and are affected by a change to the way income is measured, which lifted the 
cap on estimated income from $40,000 (£32,800) to $75,000. This pushed the UK 
down in the economic parity ranks by 10 places to 53. As a result, the US is 
also ranked as less gender equal, falling 17 places to 45.
 