
While 3,741 firefighters continue to ensure the safety of California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> residents by keeping in check 
the Rough fire – one of California’s 12 currently burning wildfires – 
firefighters for the US Park Service have been tasked with keeping something 
else safe: the world’s second-largest tree.

The General Grant tree, as it’s known to its many admirers, is the only living 
thing Congress has named as a national shrine, according tothe National Parks 
website <http://www.nps.gov/seki/learn/nature/engine-51.htm>. It is a memorial 
to American men and women who have given their lives while serving. It is named 
for Ulysses S Grant, the union army general and president of the United States.

The tree can be found in General Grant Grove, a section of the Kings Canyon 
national park. And it’s surrounded by other giant sequoia trees, some of which 
are 3,000 years old. Millions of people visit the General Grant tree and those 
surrounding it, according to Mike Theune, Kings Canyon national park fire 
information and education specialist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgeneral-grant-tree-worlds-second-largest-california-wildfires%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ca54de088e7717751bea839eef74d4f82f029a9%2F0_0_2468_3702%2F2468.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=General%20Grant%20tree%2C%20world's%20second-largest%2C%20is%20safe%20from%20California%20wildfires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgeneral-grant-tree-worlds-second-largest-california-wildfires%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=General%20Grant%20tree%2C%20world%27s%20second-largest%2C%20is%20safe%20from%20California%20wildfires&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgeneral-grant-tree-worlds-second-largest-california-wildfires%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ca54de088e7717751bea839eef74d4f82f029a9%2F0_0_2468_3702%2F2468.jpg>
 The General Grant giant sequoia tree. Photograph: Mark Ralston/AFP/Getty Images
“It’s really important for us to make sure that those values are protected,” 
Theune said. “They mean so many things to so many people worldwide. We have 
visitors that come to us that show us pictures of their parents visiting the 
tree and want to have that same experience.”

Now, the nearby Rough fire has threatened not just the General Grant tree but 
other important sites, including the Wilsonia historic district (a neighborhood 
of historic cabins), a fallen sequoia tree called the Fallen Monarch, and the 
sixth-largest Sequoia tree in the world, the Boole tree.

The Rough fire <http://inciweb.nwcg.gov/incident/4456/> began on 31 July at 
approximately 7pm because of lightning. It hasspread to 139,133 acres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/15/northern-california-wildfire-grows-100-square-miles>
 and 40% of its perimeter has been contained. As of Tuesday it has injured 
seven firefighters and destroyed three structures. Also as of Tuesday, the fire 
has begun moving away from the Sierra Nevada’s giant sequoia trees, according 
to the AP.

Thus far, the firefighters of Engine 51 have ensured the safety of the sequoia 
trees. They “patrol that area”, look out for any burning embers from the nearby 
fire, and “ensure that nothing happens to that tree or the surrounding trees”.

“They’re the local crew, so this is their backyard,” Theune said.

Theune credits some of their success to their “active field management 
program”, which they work on year round in order to ensure the safety of the 
trees. They remove underbrush “using hands and good old-fashioned hard work” 
and “fight fire with fire” by setting prescribed burns. They also have 
sprinklers set up around some of the trees, including the Boole tree.
 