
Over the next 10 days Valery Gergiev will be conducting his final concerts as 
the London Symphony Orchestra <http://lso.co.uk/whats-on/2015-16-season>’s 
principal conductor. It promises to be a distinctly low-key leave-taking; 
tributes to what he has achieved during his eight years at the helm have been 
conspicuous by their absence so far, and it seems unlikely that there will be 
the kind of fond farewell that many conductors receive when their tenures with 
an orchestra come to an end. It’s hard to avoid the conclusion that the LSO 
itself, as much as many of its regular audience, will be mightily relievedwhen 
Gergiev steps down from the Barbican podium for the last time 
<http://lso.co.uk/whats-on/icalrepeat.detail/2015/10/18/287/-/bartok-stravinsky>
.

Over the past decade Gergiev has consistently spread his considerable talent 
far too thinly

Which is not to say that Gergiev is a bad conductor, far from it, but over the 
past decade and more he has consistently spread his considerable talent far too 
thinly, so that routine and sometimes under-prepared performances have been far 
too frequent, and his concerts with the LSO have included more than their fair 
share. When, in the 1990s, he first began to conduct the Mariinsky Opera (then 
still operating under its Soviet name of the Kirov) beyond its St Petersburg 
home, his impact on the international musical scene was immense. In St 
Petersburg he conducted the first stagings of Wagner’s Ring cycle and Parsifal 
since the revolution, while some of his performances in the UK with his company 
– Rimsky Korsakov operas at the Edinburgh festival, concert performances in 
London of Tchaikovsky’s Eugene Onegin, and more recently ofRubinstein’s The 
Demon <http://tinyurl.com/p25juu5> – have been unforgettable. Very quickly 
Gergiev became one of the most sought after conductors in the world, so that 
his professional life seemed to become atireless whirl of jet-setting 
engagements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/1999/sep/18/classicalmusicandopera>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fgergiev-and-the-lso-fond-farewells-or-sighs-of-relief%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444380389255%2F2322e23e-aaf1-4239-be5a-2c396146f9aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gergiev%20and%20the%20LSO%3A%20fond%20farewells%20or%20sighs%20of%20relief%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fgergiev-and-the-lso-fond-farewells-or-sighs-of-relief%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gergiev%20and%20the%20LSO%3A%20fond%20farewells%20or%20sighs%20of%20relief%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fgergiev-and-the-lso-fond-farewells-or-sighs-of-relief%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444380389255%2F2322e23e-aaf1-4239-be5a-2c396146f9aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gergiev leading the Mariinsky Orchestra in an all-Stravinsky programme at 
Carnegie Hall in 2013. Photograph: Hiroyuki Ito/Getty Images 
Flashes of that old, irresistible flair and energy still sometimes come 
through in his performances, most often when he is back conducting Russian 
repertoire with the Mariinsky singers and players who know him so well. But 
even in 2005,when it was announced that he would be taking over the LSO from 
Colin Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/may/24/arts.artsnews1> in two 
years’ time, there was scepticism that a conductor who never seemed to stay in 
one city longer than it took for a final rehearsal and then the concert itself, 
would really do the careful, responsible job that one of the UK’s leading 
orchestras required to maintain its standards.


There was scepticism that he would do the careful, responsible job the LSO 
required to maintain its standards

Gergiev was appointed to the LSO by its then managing director Clive 
Gillinson, not long before he left to runCarnegie Hall in New York 
<http://www.carnegiehall.org/Press/Clive-Gillinson-Biography/>. The deal was 
done and dusted by the time Gillinson’s successor Kathryn McDowell took over, 
though she was later responsible for extending that initial contract through to 
this autumn, at a time when Gergiev’s tenure with the orchestra must have 
already seemed less than a total success to say the least, andquestions were 
being asked about his dubious connections with the Putin regime 
<http://tinyurl.com/purh82n>.

The fact remains that the LSO has had Gergiev as its figurehead for eight 
years, and in that period it has very rarely experienced the inspirational best 
of him on the podium, or received the close attention, what you might call the 
pastoral care, that a really diligent chief conductor can bring to an 
orchestra’s culture of concert-giving. At times during that period, the sound 
of the orchestra, in its home at the Barbican especially, was coarse and 
unpleasant. Gergiev, one could only assume, liked loud and liked his 
performances to have a brassy glare (though the Mariinsky Orchestra rarely 
sounds like that), and the LSO never seems to need much encouragement to play 
in that manner.

At times during the Gergiev era, the sound of the LSO, in its home at the 
Barbican especially, was coarse and unpleasant

Very few of his performances with the orchestra have lodged in the memory in 
the way that over the years so many with the Mariinsky have done, and the 
composer-themed series – Mahler, Brahms andSzymanowski 
<http://tinyurl.com/pe6y77d>, Berlioz <http://tinyurl.com/pqbxh5l> – far too 
many of themassiduously documented for posterity <http://tinyurl.com/pyxto9h> 
on theLSO’s own CD label <http://lsolive.lso.co.uk/>, have often seemed like 
featureless mediocrity. It may be that eventually Gergiev will be recognised as 
the great Russian conductor he promised to become 20 years ago, perhaps the 
best sinceYevgeny Mravinsky <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yevgeny_Mravinsky>; 
if that’s the case, though, it’s very unlikely his eight years with the LSO 
will have played a significant part in establishing that reputation, and that’s 
a shame.

• Gergiev conducts the LSO as their chief conductor in three final concerts 
<http://lso.co.uk/whats-on> at the Barbican, London, on 9, 11 and 18 October.

 