
In November 1989, three days before the fall of the Berlin Wall, East German 
television screened a documentary calledIst Leipzig noch zu retten 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u_Ks_epzmRY> 
(Is there hope for Leipzig?). The revelations were explosive: contrary to what 
the GDR regime had been claiming, the film showed Saxony’s largest city 
crumbling to pieces. Saving it would require so much time and money, some of 
the architects interviewed reckoned, that it would make be more sense to 
flatten the historic quarters altogether.

Twenty-five years later, the people of Leipzig have different concerns. 
Gushing reports of the city’s thriving creative scene, green spaces and quality 
of living have earned the place the nickname Hypezig, and some locals fear its 
reputation as “the better Berlin” may attract private investors, and drive up 
property prices.

Plagwitz, the western district whose housing stock was so bad in 1989 that 
Leipzig’s chief architect said “it would be irresponsible to have people 
continue to live here”, illustrates the city’s transformation. Once a 
soot-covered industrial suburb dotted with the chimneys of metalwork shops, it 
has cleaned up its act but not lost its crooked charm. Buildings on the main 
thoroughfare, Karl-Heine-Strasse – it’s named after the 19th-century 
industrialist who put the district on the map – have almost all been renovated, 
but without losing their sense of history. Some of them may now house galleries 
and ice-cream parlours that sell strawberry and lavender sorbet, but family 
businesses such asSchicketanz butchers <http://schicketanzhof.jimdo.com/> and 
Seidel’s bakery <http://www.baeckerei-seidel.de/> will keep the area grounded. 
AtMeins bar and cafe <http://www.meins-leipzig.de/>, a student favourite, they 
cook old-fashioned family recipes such as eggs in mustard sauce, and invite 
guests request their favourite “granny food”.

As part of a project started in 2006, houses on Karl-Heine Strasse have been 
fitted with neon signs spelling out abstract qualities associated with what 
takes place inside 
<http://www.foto-zett.de/portfolio-bilder-stadt/karl_heine_str_sorge_leipzig_agentur_zett_stadt-2/>
 – “comfort”, “effort”, “lust”, and so on. To find out more, try a three-hour 
walking tour with Ina Thyrolf ofEat The World 
<http://www.eat-the-world.com/en/food-tours-leipzig.html> that dives deep into 
the area’s cultural and culinary secrets.

Plagwitz’s charm is different from Berlin’s, where the numerous side-street 
cafes can lend the capital a sleepy, villagey feel. Leipzig, though smaller, 
feels busier: social life takes place along the city’s main arteries. Its art 
scene, too, is more focused, more work-orientated, with an aesthetic –socialist 
realism meets pop art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/feb/01/germany.art> – which feels like 
it belongs nowhere else.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fis-leipzig-the-new-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410366577570%2F25a45c65-c448-428e-b7fb-afcbf89d874a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Germany%3A%20Is%20Leipzig%20the%20new%20Berlin%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fis-leipzig-the-new-berlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Germany%3A%20Is%20Leipzig%20the%20new%20Berlin%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F11%2Fis-leipzig-the-new-berlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F10%2F1410366577570%2F25a45c65-c448-428e-b7fb-afcbf89d874a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A gallery in the Baumwollspinnerei, a former cotton mill now home to over 120 
artists’ studios. Photograph: Andreas Schmidt/ © LTM - Schmidt 
The Baumwollspinnerei  <http://www.spinnerei.de/>on Spinnereistrasse off the 
western end of Karl-Heine Strasse is a former cotton mill now home to over 120 
artists’ studios and the engine of Plagwitz’s revival: walking along its 
cobbled streets on a balmy late summer afternoon, one sees surprisingly few 
artists basking in the sunshine. Most of them are in their studios, getting 
work done.

On Fridays and Saturdays, you can take a guided tour of the studios (€10pp, 
non-German speakers should call in advance), and even stay in some of the 
studios – at €65-€85 a night, they are cheaper than hotels in the area. Next 
year, as Leipzig celebrates its 1,000th birthday, the Spinnerei also celebrates 
the tenth anniversary of itsRundgänge, the open days held in January, May and 
September.

The artists, such as Maria and Vlado Ondrej, accept that Plagwitz is no longer 
a secret. After all, they need people to buy their work, say the couple, who 
have been making prints in the Spinnerei since 1993. “If we want to get on with 
our work we just close our doors”, says Vlado. “The good thing about working in 
a factory is that the doors are really solid.”
 