
The head of Germany’s domestic intelligence agency has said his country should 
be prepared to actively counter cyber-attacks in the future rather than focus 
solely on protecting its digital infrastructure.

“We think it’s essential that we don’t just act defensively, but that we are 
also able to attack the enemy so that he stops continuing to attack us in the 
future,” Hans-Georg Maassen told the German news agency dpa.

Germany outlines plans to overhaul security following Berlin attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/germany-outlines-plans-overhaul-security-following-berlin-attack>
The terrorist attack on a Christmas market in Berlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/berlin-christmas-market-attack> and fears of 
Russian interference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/russian-cyber-attacks-could-influence-german-election-says-merkel>
 in September’s federal elections followingUS claims of Moscow-led meddling 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
 have triggered a bout of soul-searching over the competence and powers of 
Germany’s intelligence and police agencies, which were widely decentralised in 
response to the abuses of the Nazi era.


Maassen, the president of the Federal Office for the Protection of the 
Constitution, complained that his agency was not authorised to delete files 
that had been stolen or copied and stored on an external server. “Thus we have 
a high risk that the damage will increase, because third parties as well as the 
culprit can access the data,” he said.

The spy chief also called for clearer regulation allowing his agency to 
“disable attack structures that pose a grave threat to our cybersecurity”. 
Germany’s domestic intelligence agency says it has noted a significant increase 
of so-called spear-phishing attacks in recent months, in which hackers send 
spoof emails to a specific organisation with view to obtaining confidential 
data.

In 2015 Germany’s parliament had to reboot its IT infrastructure after hackers 
gained access to the Bundestag’s internal network.
 