
It has become known as the first genocide of the 20th century: tens of 
thousands of men, women and children shot, starved, and tortured to death by 
German troops as they put down rebellious tribes in what is nowNamibia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/namibia>. For more than a century the 
atrocities have been largely forgotten in Europe, and often in much of Africa 
too.

Now a series of events – and a policy U-turn by Berlin – is raising the 
international profile of the massacre of Herero and Namaqua peoples and 
bringing justice for their descendants a little closer. Negotiations between 
the German and Namibian governments over possible reparation payments are 
expected to be completed and result in an official apology before next June.

In Berlin a major new exhibition 
<https://www.dhm.de/en/ausstellungen/german-colonialism.html> about the 
country’s bloody colonial history opened earlier this winter. It features 
letters from missionaries expressing their concerns about concentration camps 
and killings in Germany’s south-west African colony.

In the US activists have hired lawyers to pressure the United Nations. 
Elsewhere there are plays exploring the tragic story and displays of 
photography at high-profile contemporary art fairs.

In 1884, as European powers scrambled to carve up Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, Berlin moved to annex a new colony 
on the south-west coast of the continent. Land was confiscated, livestock 
plundered and native people subjected to racially motivated violence, rape and 
murder. In January 1904, the Herero people – also called the Ovaherero – 
rebelled. More than a hundred German civilians were killed. The smaller Nama 
tribe joined the uprising the following year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fgermany-moves-to-atone-for-forgotten-genocide-in-namibia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590086c95548f2cc4b72a5308e3e8aaea5455498%2F0_39_2589_1553%2F2589.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Germany%20moves%20to%20atone%20for%20'forgotten%20genocide'%20in%20Namibia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fgermany-moves-to-atone-for-forgotten-genocide-in-namibia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Germany%20moves%20to%20atone%20for%20%27forgotten%20genocide%27%20in%20Namibia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fgermany-moves-to-atone-for-forgotten-genocide-in-namibia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590086c95548f2cc4b72a5308e3e8aaea5455498%2F0_39_2589_1553%2F2589.jpg>
 Troops in German south-west Africa (now Namibia) at the time of the Herero 
revolt of 1904. Photograph: Three Lions/Getty Images 
Colonial rulers responded without mercy. Tens of thousands of Herero were 
forced into the Kalahari desert, their wells poisoned and food supplies cut. 
Gen Lothar von Trotha, sent to quell the revolt, ordered his men to shoot “any 
Herero, with or without a rifle, with or without cattle”.

“I do not accept women or children either: drive them back to their people or 
shoot them,” he told his troops. The order was rescinded butother measures were 
employed that were equally lethal. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/jan/31/genocide-namibia>

Those who had survived were rounded up and placed in concentration camps, 
where they were beaten and worked to death in squalid conditions. Half of the 
total Nama population were also killed, dying in disease-ridden death camps 
such the infamous site on Shark Island, in the coastal town of Lüderitz. By 
1908, only 16,000 remained, historians say.

I do not accept women or children either: drive them back to their people or 
shoot them
General Lothar von Trotha 
As many as 3,000 Herero skulls were sent to Berlin for German scientists to 
examine for signs that they were of racially inferior peoples.

“We are talking now about the lives that were lost, the land that was taken, 
the cattle that was killed, the rape, the lost dignity, the culture that was 
destroyed. We cannot even speak our language,” said Esther Muinjangue, a Herero 
activist and social worker at the University of Namibia, in Windhoek, the 
capital.


Thousands of women were systematically raped, often taken as “wives” by 
settlers. “My great-great-grandfather was German. This relationship was not of 
love, but a product of force,” Muinjangue added.

Ongoing struggle

The issue has long caused tensions in Namibia, where farmers descended from 
the original German settlers still own land seized from local people. The 
Herero, who make up about 10% of Namibia’s population of 2.3 million, say they 
never regained a fraction of their former prosperity.

“We live in overcrowded, overgrazed and overpopulated reserves – modern-day 
concentration camps – while our fertile grazing areas are occupied by the 
descendants of the perpetrators of the genocide against our ancestors. IfGermany
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> pays reparation then the Ovaherero 
can buy back the land that was illegally confiscated from us through the force 
of arms,” said Veraa Katuuo, a US-based activist.

Resentment has been rising for years. Earlier this year red paint was poured 
over a German colonial monument in the town of Swakopmund.
Map <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/oct/2016-10-20T11:17:47.html> 


Germany was forced out of the colony in 1915, but the killings there and in 
its territories on the east coast of the continent are seen by some historians 
as important steps towards the Holocaust inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> during the second world war.

In Germany, debate around the country’s colonial project has long been 
overshadowed by the crimes of the National Socialist era. While most German 
cities commemorate the victims of the Nazi period, there are no significant 
monuments to the victims of German colonialism.

Other than a memorial stone in a cemetery 
<http://www.freiburg-postkolonial.de/Seiten/2009-Zeller-Namibiagedenkstein-Berlin.htm>
 in Berlin’s Neukölln district and a statue of an elephant in Bremen, no 
permanent display currently bears testament to the genocide of the Herero.

German officials rejected the use of the word “genocide” to describe the 
killings of the Herero and Namaqua until July 2015, when the Social Democrat 
foreign minister, Frank-Walter Steinmeier,issued a “political guideline” 
<http://www.dw.com/en/germany-officially-refers-to-herero-massacre-as-genocide/a-19396892>
 indicating that the massacre should be referred to as “a war crime and a 
genocide”.

But there are still strict limits. German chief negotiator Ruprecht Polenz 
told The Guardian that personal reparations to relatives of Herero and Namaqua 
victims were “out of the question”. His position has angered senior Herero and 
Nama leaders, and a meeting in Windhoek in November ended with representatives 
of the Nama genocide committee storming out of the German embassy after Polenz 
said that massacre in south-west Africa was “incomparable” to the Holocaust.

“We understand that the German government is proposing an apology without 
reparations. If that is the case, it would constitute a phenomenal insult to 
the intelligence not only of Namibians and the descendants of the victim 
communities, but Africans in general, and in fact to humanity … It would 
represent the most insensitive political statement ever to have been made by an 
aggressor nation to the victims of its genocide,” said Vekuii Rukoro, the 
paramount chief of the Herero.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fgermany-moves-to-atone-for-forgotten-genocide-in-namibia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6426fc8df1d663281ef5f18353f4ad84ae5d0cff%2F0_194_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Germany%20moves%20to%20atone%20for%20'forgotten%20genocide'%20in%20Namibia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fgermany-moves-to-atone-for-forgotten-genocide-in-namibia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Germany%20moves%20to%20atone%20for%20%27forgotten%20genocide%27%20in%20Namibia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fgermany-moves-to-atone-for-forgotten-genocide-in-namibia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6426fc8df1d663281ef5f18353f4ad84ae5d0cff%2F0_194_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Visitors look at a wall of postcards that form part of the the exhibition, 
German Colonialism: Fragments of its History and Present, at the German 
Historical Museum. Photograph: Carsten Koall/Getty Images 
Instead of direct payments, German negotiators have proposed setting up a 
foundation for youth exchanges with Namibia and funding various infrastructure 
projects, such as vocational training centres, housing developments and solar 
power stations. But this means bilateral discussions between the Namibian 
government and Berlin, without Herero or Namaqua participation. Herero 
representatives say they are being marginalised.

“Development aid never goes to the Herero or Namaqua areas,” said Festus 
Muundjua, secretary for foreign affairs of the Ovaherero Traditional Authority.

Another key issue is the return of human remains stolen by the Germans. Twenty 
skullswere returned in 2011 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/id/44778704/ns/world_news-africa/t/germanys-return-namibian-skulls-stokes-anger/#.WAdrgTJh3uS>
 to be welcomed by warriors on horseback, ululations and tears. Hundreds, 
perhaps thousands, remained.

‘Uncomfortable thesis’

Jürgen Zimmerer, a historian at Hamburg University and consultant to the new 
exhibition, argued that “colonial amnesia” had created a warped perspective on 
later German crimes in the 20th century.

“If you focus only on the 30 years of imperial Germany’s excursions into 
Africa, then of course the story pales in comparison to the colonial histories 
of other European nations, such as Britain or Belgium,” Zimmerer said.

“But it’s important to see Germany’s history in Africa as continuous with its 
better-known dark chapters in the 30s and 40s. In Africa, Germany experimented 
with the criminal methods it later applied during the Third Reich, for example 
through … the colonisation of eastern and central Europe … There is a trend 
among the public to view the Nazi period as an aberration of an otherwise 
enlightened history. But engaging with our colonial history confronts us with a 
more uncomfortable thesis.”

Recent historical works have highlighted the links between the fate of the 
Herero and Nama, and that of European Jews. Ideas and techniques that would 
play a key role in the Holocaust have some of their roots in German atrocities 
in colonial Africa, researchers argue.

Other former colonial powers have been deeply reluctant to acknowledge the 
violence associated with their imperial history. Belgium has never officially 
recognised the cost of its invasion and exploitation of Congo, where about 10 
million people – roughly half the country’s population – are thought to have 
died during its rule.

The Hereros and the Namas of Namibia will never … declare ceasefire with 
generations of German governments to come
Vekuii Rukoro 
In 2013 the UK government reluctantly offered “sincere regret”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/18/uncovering-truth-british-empire-caroline-elkins-mau-mau>
and £2,600 each to about 5,000 Kenyans imprisoned and tortured during the Mau 
Mau rebellion in the former colony in the 1950s.

A video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/24/indian-prime-minister-modi-endorses-britain-paying-damages-for-colonial-rule>
 of Indian politician Shashi Tharoor demanding a token £1 reparation to India 
from the UK at the Oxford Union attracted more than 3m views on YouTube last 
year, and earned an endorsement from Narendra Modi, the Indian prime minister.

“Reparations payments to Namibia could set a precedent for Belgium and the 
Congo, France and Algeria or Great Britain and the history of the slave trade. 
Descendants of the Herero know that too,” Zimmerer, the historian, said. Some 
experts have arguedreparations would be impractical 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-33647422>.

Rukoro, the Herero chief, rejected what he called Germany’s “chequebook 
diplomacy” and bilateral dealings with the Namibian government. “Guess what: 
the Hereros and the Namas of Namibia will never … declare ceasefire with 
generations of German governments to come. Our war will continue,” he said.
 