
The president of the Nigerian Football Federation, Amaju Pinnick, has said it 
would be “a big surprise” if Gianni Infantino’s proposals toexpand the World 
Cup to 48 teams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/fifa-president-gianni-infantino-world-cup-proposals>
 from 2026 are not enthusiastically adopted when the Fifa Council meets in 
Zurich on Tuesday.

Pinnick is in Switzerland and, while he is not one of the 37 members of the 
council, he said he has yet to meet anyone who does not support theFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> president’s plan.

José Mourinho voices his support for 48-team World Cup finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/jose-mourinho-48-team-world-cup-finals-fifa>
“So far everybody’s excited about it,” he said. “I wouldn’t say there’s 100% 
support but all my colleagues I’ve spoken to – all my colleagues – are excited 
about it. I’m not going to say 100% because I haven’t spoken to everybody, but 
certainly most of Africa is excited about it.”

The council will vote on five potential formats for the 2026 competition. 
Infantino’s plan would involve 48 nations playing in 16 groups of three teams, 
with the top two progressing to a 32-team knockout stage.

But there are also two options under which the competition would expand to 40 
teams, one in which 32 teams would play a one-off knockout round for the right 
to join 16 pre-qualified teams in the main tournament, and the possibility of 
retaining the present 32-team format.

Under Infantino’s proposal the total number of World Cup games would rise from 
64 to 80 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/fifa-president-gianni-infantino-world-cup-proposals>
 but the maximum number of matches any one team could play would remain at 
seven. “There won’t be too much football. Why worry about it? We’re just 
excited about it,” Pinnick said. “You should understand, the president of Fifa, 
whatever he does, he does a lot of consultation and research.

“And of course he knows it’s not going to be boring. It’s going to be very 
good. There’s going to be more teams and more football. The more the merrier, 
and I believe he will get it right. If it isn’t agreed it would be a big 
surprise because most nations are supporting it.”

Last week Reinhard Grindel, president of the German FA, said the new format 
contained “considerable weaknesses” and his organisation was “fundamentally 
convinced that the tried-and-tested model of 32 participating nations should be 
held”. But no other nation has so far publicly opposed the idea.

The English FA is understood to be resigned to the competition’s expansion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/fa-powerless-world-cup-expansion-fifa>
 and its representative on the Fifa council, David Gill, will miss the vote 
because of prior commitments in Australia.

Fifa’s internal research has suggested the expanded format will increase 
revenues by $1bn (about £800m), raising total profits from the event to nearly 
£3.5bn. It is not yet known how the 16 additional places would be distributed, 
though the African and Asian confederations would expect their current 
allocation of four places each to be significantly increased.

“We are 100% in support of it,” Pinnick said. “It will give more countries an 
opportunity, so I think it’s good. It will help teams from Africa, and other 
developing nations.”

Nigeria have not qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations, about to start in 
Gabon, but are top of their qualifying group for the 32-team 2018World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> with two wins from 
two games.
 