
In January, the Republican party will take control of the US government for 
the first time since 2005. The switch from being the party of opposition to 
being the governing party is never easy and the deep divisions in today’s 
Republican party make today’s transition unusually chaotic.

The election added to the chaos. As president-elect, Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>’s evident dismay and lack of 
preparation for taking office suggested that he had little interest in doing 
the job for which he had campaigned so viciously. What’s more, Trump lost the 
popular vote by a significant margin and Democrats also got more votes for both 
houses of Congress. This lack of popular support puts even more pressure on 
Republicans to craft policies that a majority of Americans can accept.

Therein lies the Republicans’ problem. Today’s party is led not by practical 
politicians but by ideologues. This was not always the case. Traditionally,
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> embraced the idea 
that Americans naturally enjoyed social and economic harmony. It was the job of 
congressmen and women to develop that harmony by figuring out how to use the 
government to promote equality of opportunity for those just starting their 
climb up the economic ladder. Those individuals were the engine room of 
production. They would produce more than they could consume, so they would, in 
turn, support a thriving middle class.

When he was elected president in 1952, the first Republican to be elected to 
the job since 1928, Dwight Eisenhower accepted the reality that unregulated 
capitalism and the lack of a social safety net in a newly industrialised 
country precipitated economic and social crisis. Although it sprang from 
traditional Republicanism rather than the tenets of the Democrats,Eisenhower’s 
“middle way” <http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/dissertations/AAI9952203/> looked much 
like the Democrats’ New Deal.

This new “liberal consensus” between Democrats and Republicans maintained that 
the government had a role in promoting economic fairness and social stability. 
But it sparked a backlash, one we can still see playing itself out today. A few 
wealthy businessmen insisted that government regulation infringed their liberty 
by affecting the way they did business. Taxes to fund social welfare also 
hampered their freedom.

They stood firm on the concept of individual liberty, which was, they argued, 
as firm as a principle as those of the Ten Commandments. These“movement 
conservatives” <http://www.conservapedia.com/Movement_conservative> saw an epic 
battle between themselves and “liberals”, whose embrace of government activism 
was permitting communism to snake its way into America.

But movement conservatives had a practical problem. Most Americans liked 
government regulation of business and social welfare. To advance their cause, 
movement conservatives turned to racism. When the US supreme court handed down 
the1954 Brown v Board of Education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/usa/brown/0,,1216081,00.html> decision requiring 
desegregation in schools, leading movement publicationNational Review 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/> pushed the idea that an active government used 
white tax dollars to benefit black Americans. Suddenly, the arguments of 
movement conservatives began to get traction. In 1964, they got their chance to 
restore America to “purity”.Republican candidate Barry Goldwater 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barry_Goldwater_presidential_campaign,_1964>’s 
supporters called for an end to civil rights legislation. A new voice in the 
movement added conspiracy theory and populism to what had been an elite 
conversation.Phyllis Schlafly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/06/phyllis-schlafly-outspoken-rightwing-activist-has-died-aged-92>
, president of the Illinois Federation of Republican Women, accused the eastern 
financiers and banking interests who made up the eastern establishment of 
backing the liberal consensus because they made money from a murky world of 
international co-operation.

She backed Goldwater as he offered a clear vision of a nation that stood 
against communism. Enough with eggheads who called for nuanced responses to 
complicated problems in the world. What should Americans do about communism? 
Stop it!

Goldwater’s presidential run turned into a rout, but the electoral map offered 
a blueprint for future Republican candidates. Goldwater carried his home state 
of Arizona, and five other states, all of them in the deep South. Race became a 
staple in movement conservatives’ lexicon.

Later, Richard Nixon added sexism and a distrust of organised labour to the 
racism that had clinched his election. He told supporters that “some people” 
wanted to live by government handouts rather than by working and that these 
lowlifes were sucking hardworking Americans dry through tax dollars. In 1980, 
Ronald Reagan implanted this bifurcated world view into the White House.

The election of Democrat Bill Clinton horrified them. He was a popular statist 
who threatened to undo all the work they had done to destroy government 
programmes. They set out to destroy his administration. In 1994, when movement 
conservatives underNewt Gingrich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/15/newt-gingrich-muslims-sharia-law-donald-trump>
 captured the House for the first time since the Eisenhower administration, 
they set out to “begin an emergency dismantling of the welfare system, which is 
shredding the social fabric”, bankrupting the country and “gutting the work 
ethic, educational performance and moral discipline of the poor”. They set out 
to defund the government entirely, in the hope that debt would end expenditures.

Newt Gingrich: Muslims who believe in sharia law should be expelled from US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/15/newt-gingrich-muslims-sharia-law-donald-trump>
By 2000, movement conservatives laid siege to remaining traditional 
Republicans in the party, purging it of those they called “RINOs” – Republicans 
in Name Only. They turned to Texas governorGeorge W Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/16/hes-back-george-w-bush-turns-on-the-campaign-trail-charm-to-fight-for-brother-jeb>
 as their presidential nominee and when he squeaked into office after losing 
the popular vote, declared he had a mandate. Bush slashed taxes and regulations 
and brought evangelicals directly into White House deliberations.

Barack Obama’s election represented everything Republicans opposed. He was a 
black man who promised to use the government to help women and people of 
colour. “Taxed enough already,” screamed protesters who called themselves “Tea 
Partiers <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tea-party-movement>”. When 
Obama’s foreign policy signalled a return to a multilateralism that recognised 
the end of America’s post-Second World War dominance, movement conservatives 
howled. In 2010, Republicans built on the Tea Party anger with the money of 
wealthy businessmen to take control of swing state legislatures.

In 2016, however, the winking of Republican leaders at the racism and sexism 
of Obama bashers backfired. They found themselves trailing in the wake of a 
reality-show TV star who stripped the veneer off theirdog-whistle rhetoric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/13/donald-trump-dog-whistle-racism>
 and openly calledMexicans rapists and criminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
 and talked about women in the crudest terms. Trump was not one of them – he 
was not even a politician. Trump is a salesman, pitching to a population primed 
by a generation of movement conservative politicians to see themselves as 
embattled, assailed by the demands of minorities and women for special 
treatment enforced by the government.

Donald Trump's tirade on Mexico's 'drugs and rapists' outrages US Latinos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
But this leaves the Republicans in a quandary. Pure movement conservatives who 
back economic libertarianism, such asspeaker of the House, Paul Ryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/12/paul-ryan-refuses-republican-presidential-nomination>
, were horrified by Trump’s naked racism and sexism. And, assuming he would 
lose the election, they vowed to run without him. But their vision, which 
demands, among other things, the destruction of enormously popular programmes 
such asMedicare <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/medicare> and social 
security, has historically found few backers in the general population.

Evangelicals, brought on board by the Republican coalition in the 1980s with 
promises of ending abortion rights and cultural change, backed Trump. But they, 
too, have changed in the past generation. Finding new political and cultural 
power, the religious wing of the Republican party gained momentum. Its 
adherents took advantage of new religious liberty laws to keep their children 
out of state schools and to demand that civic society bow to religious 
imperatives.

By the 1990s, religious leaders were no longer simply defending family values 
in a secular society. They were insisting that US democracy was originally 
based in Christian laws and demanding that the nation be restored to its 
Christian heritage. This “Dominionism 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/09/01/5-facts-about-dominionism_n_945601.html>
” inspired political leaders such asMike Huckabee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/07/huckabee-debate-illegals-prostitutes-military-trans>
,Michele Bachmann <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michele-bachmann>, Sarah 
Palin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/sarahpalin> and Ted Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz>. And then there is Trump, a 
huckster closing a sale with whatever promises his supporters want. Fed on 
decades of movement conservative warnings that people of colour and women are 
gaming the system to take tax dollars from hardworking white men, his 
supporters have made it clear that what they want is a nation dominated by 
white men.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ftrump-won-party-divided-republicans-conservative-extremists-white-house-moderates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f52d56c763ccd7c16c9039c81285ef0249bca6b%2F0_183_4049_2430%2F4049.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Given%20the%20divisive%20historical%20strains%20at%20work%20within%20his%20party%2C%20how%20will%20Trump%20govern%3F%20%7C%20Heather%20Cox%20Richardson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ftrump-won-party-divided-republicans-conservative-extremists-white-house-moderates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Given%20the%20divisive%20historical%20strains%20at%20work%20within%20his%20party%2C%20how%20will%20Trump%20govern%3F%20%7C%20Heather%20Cox%20Richardson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ftrump-won-party-divided-republicans-conservative-extremists-white-house-moderates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f52d56c763ccd7c16c9039c81285ef0249bca6b%2F0_183_4049_2430%2F4049.jpg>
 Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (centre) with vice president-elect Mike 
Pence (left) in Washington this week. Photograph: Alex Brandon/AP 
Can these factions reconcile? At first, it seemed as if the weight of the new 
administration would fall on Ryan. President-elect Trump presented a list of 
things he promised in his first hundred days, including a large infrastructure 
package and an end to lobbying, as well as the tax cuts so popular with 
movement conservatives. Ryan and Senate Republican majority leader,Mitch 
McConnell, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/mitch-mcconnell-donald-trump-senate-control-video>
 nodded quickly to tax cuts and ending Medicare, but refused even to consider 
infrastructure or lobbying.

But Trump’s appointment of Steve Bannon as chief strategist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
 challenges Ryan’s dominance in the White House. Bannon is the head of the 
website Breitbart, often accused of racism, sexism and conspiracy theories. He 
calls himself an economic nationalist, but there is more to his ideology than 
that. He is an outspoken defender of the idea that the Christian west is 
engaged in a holy war with Islam for control of the world. This belief in a 
holy war between the west and Islam is shared byMichael Flynn, Trump’s nominee 
for national security council adviser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/sessions-flynn-and-pompeo-who-are-the-potential-trump-cabinet-picks->
, and byMike Huckabee, presumptive nominee for ambassador to Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/27/mike-huckabee-iran-nuclear-deal-iowa-jewish>
.

Steve Bannon: appointment of 'white nationalist' must be reversed, critics 
declare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
This bifurcation of the world is one that could marry evangelicals to Trump’s 
alt-right supporters. Evangelicals have long supported the idea of a militant 
Christianity. Even in the absence of congressional support for infrastructure 
projects, such a worldview might also attract America’s economically and 
culturally dispossessed white men. A resurrection of the traditional Christian 
west would promise to relegate minorities and women to subordinate positions.

That vision of a world divided in two echoes 40s and 50s anti-communism and 
promises to return the US to preeminence, erasing multilateralism and the 
cultural importance of women and minorities. It is a world in which America is, 
uppermost, ruled by white men. It is also a world that has gone beyond recall, 
except in the fantasies of those whom the world has left behind.

Heather Cox Richardson 
<http://www.bc.edu/schools/cas/history/people/faculty/alphabetical/richardson_heather.html>
 is professor of history at Boston College and author ofTo Make Men Free: A 
History of the Republican Party 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/review-to-make-men-free-republican-party-history-by-heather-cox-richardson/2014/10/02/65dd9d5c-32be-11e4-8f02-03c644b2d7d0_story.html?utm_term=.6c3145e0623f>
(2014)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ftrump-won-party-divided-republicans-conservative-extremists-white-house-moderates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4373172a6692fb76c03fc3c83629186a2dc90362%2F0_97_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Given%20the%20divisive%20historical%20strains%20at%20work%20within%20his%20party%2C%20how%20will%20Trump%20govern%3F%20%7C%20Heather%20Cox%20Richardson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ftrump-won-party-divided-republicans-conservative-extremists-white-house-moderates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Given%20the%20divisive%20historical%20strains%20at%20work%20within%20his%20party%2C%20how%20will%20Trump%20govern%3F%20%7C%20Heather%20Cox%20Richardson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Ftrump-won-party-divided-republicans-conservative-extremists-white-house-moderates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4373172a6692fb76c03fc3c83629186a2dc90362%2F0_97_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Phyllis Schlafly, who as president of the Illinois Federation of Republican 
Women, accused financiers of backing the liberal consensus because they made 
money from a murky world of international co-operation. Photograph: Rebecca 
Cook / Reuters/Reuters  