
While many were up in arms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/13/andrew-marr-defends-remembrance-sunday-marine-le-pen-interview-french-far-right-bbc>
 about Andrew Marr interviewing Marine Le Pen on the BBC on Sunday, I couldn’t 
see the problem. Many of those who didn’t see the Brexit vote or Donald Trump’s 
win coming have decided to put all their chips on her rising to the French 
presidency in spring. While I think – and hope – that’s unlikely, we cannot 
afford to underestimate the Front National leader, and her ideas only become 
dangerous when they are not challenged openly.

Unfortunately, Marr failed to make a concerted effort to pick apart key flaws 
in Le Pen’s arguments, allowing her to dominate the discussion. When she asked: 
“Do we want a multicultural society following the model of the English-speaking 
world where fundamental Islam is progressing … or do we want an independent 
nation with people able to control their own destiny?” Marr failed to remind 
her that actually, fundamental Islam is not just confined to the Anglophone 
world – and it is France that has been the target for themost intense wave of 
extremist attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/why-does-france-keep-getting-attacked>
 in recent years. He allowed Le Pen the platform to frame the debate as a 
choice between secularism and nationalism over oppression by religious 
fundamentalism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmarine-le-pen-racist-front-national-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03eda7bf31b12082d864480b64ea75d8ea3ca52e%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Give%20Marine%20Le%20Pen%20a%20platform%20for%20her%20racist%20views%2C%20then%20challenge%20them%20%7C%20Iman%20Amrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmarine-le-pen-racist-front-national-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Give%20Marine%20Le%20Pen%20a%20platform%20for%20her%20racist%20views%2C%20then%20challenge%20them%20%7C%20Iman%20Amrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmarine-le-pen-racist-front-national-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03eda7bf31b12082d864480b64ea75d8ea3ca52e%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Marking the one-year anniversary of the Paris attacks. Photograph: Ian 
Langsdon/EPA 
The omission was even more glaring, given that the interview was broadcast on 
thefirst anniversary of the Bataclan attacks, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/memorial-plaques-unveiled-in-paris-on-first-anniversary-of-attacks>
 where 130 innocent people were killed by extremists. This was the most deadly 
massacre in Paris since 17 October 1961, whereabout 200 Algerian protesters 
were killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/17/france-remembers-algerian-massacre>
 by the French police.

How can Le Pen suggest that multiculturalism in Anglophone countries is 
leading to the progression of fundamental Islam when France with its rigid 
interpretation of laicité andscreaming inequality 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2015/01/france-growing-income-inequality-problem-201512311224855101.html>
 has a much bloodier history – and present – with regard to minority 
communities?

This is not just about offending minorities or Muslims. The normalisation of 
this argument against multiculturalism in favour of nationalism is one that 
poses a real threat to security, and ignoring this is tantamount to ignoring 
the factors that contributed to the frightening rise of radicalisation inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>.

When someone like Le Pen fans the flames for racist and Islamophobic 
discourse, there are those who use her words to justify extremist ideas and 
recruit young, disillusioned potential western-born jihadis. Le Pen and those 
who echo her give ammunition to the narrative being pushed by extremists online 
and in isolated places where integration is virtually nonexistent, validating 
arguments that “they don’t want you here”, “you will never be accepted as one 
of them”, “they want to strip your mothers and force your children to eat pork”.

I’ve spent a lot of time speaking to young French Muslims in the wake of 
recent attacks, and I’ve seen how in some dark places, Le Pen’s statements 
actually encourage a culture of counter-conspiracies that can fuel extremism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmarine-le-pen-racist-front-national-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb841c9d6e2eb3ecf4559b42c40602248dbaba066%2F0_33_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Give%20Marine%20Le%20Pen%20a%20platform%20for%20her%20racist%20views%2C%20then%20challenge%20them%20%7C%20Iman%20Amrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmarine-le-pen-racist-front-national-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Give%20Marine%20Le%20Pen%20a%20platform%20for%20her%20racist%20views%2C%20then%20challenge%20them%20%7C%20Iman%20Amrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fmarine-le-pen-racist-front-national-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb841c9d6e2eb3ecf4559b42c40602248dbaba066%2F0_33_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘Chérif and Saïd Kouachi, who carried out the Charlie Hebdo attacks, are said 
to have been radicalised while serving time for petty crime in French prisons.’ 
Photograph: French Police/AFP/Getty Images 
It’s important to remember that the religious dimension is a relatively new 
twist on a deeper issue. In 2005, there wereriots in the Parisian suburbs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/22/nothings-changed-10-years-after-french-riots-banlieues-remain-in-crisis>
 of Clichy-sous-Bois following the death of teenagers Zyed Benna and Bouna 
Traoré, who died after running into an electricity substationas they were being 
chased by the police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/18/french-police-cleared-in-teenagers-deaths-that-sparked-riots>
. The then president, Jacques Chirac, and his interior minister, Nicolas 
Sarkozy, alongside Jean-Marie Le Pen (then leader of the Front National), 
battled to take the hard line against the “foreign” rioters, who were actually 
mostly French-born. Back then it wasn’t “terrorism” that they were battling so 
much as social unrest.

The underlying social problems besieging immigrant communities were not 
properly addressed, and here we find ourselves, over a decade later, dealing 
with these issues which have morphed into something altogether more sinister. 
Increased security wasn’t the answer the first time round, it failed to address 
the underlying issues of inequality and opportunity that has hampered 
integration.

The prime minister, Manuel Valls, Sarkozy and many other ministers such as 
Laurence Rossignol have made little or no effort to engage with these issues, 
instead choosing to ride the waves of anger and resentment towards Muslim 
communities. In the past year solutions proposed have includedspecialist jihadi 
prisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/22/france-isolation-units-islamic-extremist-prisoners-uk-paris-attacks>
,banning burkinis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/02/burkini-ban-suspended-nice-court-france>
 and a never-ending state of emergency. None of this is will make France a 
safer place.

If Le Pen wins the election in 2017, France will have a president who thinks 
that any religious indicators such as Islamic dress, halal food or prayer rooms 
are incompatible with French values. She would be the first president of the 
republic to have faced charges of inciting racial hatred, and even if she 
doesn’t win, her hardline approach to immigrants, multiculturalism and religion 
has already not only influenced the tone of the debate, it has also been 
selectively adopted by other politicians.

Angela Merkel and Marine Le Pen: one of them will shape Europe’s future | 
Natalie Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/angela-merkel-marine-le-pen-europe-destiny>
For instance, earlier this year, President Hollande caused deep concerns when 
he proposed to strip convicted terrorists of their French nationality in a 
debate that was so divisive that it lead to the resignation of the justice 
minister,Christiane Taubira 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/french-justice-minister-christiane-taubira-resigns>
. Even though he had argued fervently against stripping dual-nationality 
criminals of their French citizenship in 2010,he U-turned on this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/30/francois-hollande-drops-plan-to-revoke-citizenship-of-dual-national-terrorists>
 following the surprise surge of support for the Front National in the first 
round of regional elections last year.

It was Le Pen who cited the street celebrations in France following Algeria’s 
advance from the group stages in the 2014 World Cup as an example of how 
“immigration policies have failed”. She called for an end to dual nationality, 
saying “they must choose: they are Algerian or French, Moroccan or French, they 
can’t be both”.

This racist black-and-white approach is unhelpful, to say the least. Mohammed 
Merah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/22/mohamed-merah-toulouse-shootings-sniper>
, who carried out the Toulouse attacks in 2012, was born in France, as were 
Chérif and Saïd Kouachi, the brothers responsible for theCharlie Hebdo attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/13/charlie-hebdo-gunman-said-kouachi-wife-extremist>
 in January 2015. They both went through the French education system and, 
perhaps most importantly, are said to have beenradicalised while serving time 
for petty crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/are-french-prisons-finishing-schools-for-terrorism>
, in French prisons. The majority of theParis attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> on 13 November 2015 were 
French- or Belgian-born.

France’s problem with radicalisation is a home-grown one. The problem is not 
with multiculturalism but the resistance to it. France needs to recognise that 
it is a multicultural nation with a history that cannot be whitewashed. Its 
colonial history has led to dual-nationality French citizens who speak many 
languages, straddle multiple cultures and diversify the face of France. Instead 
of rejecting minority communities who have been in France for generations and 
aren’t going anywhere, or focusing on security and penalties, leading French 
politicians should focus on unity.

It’s unlikely that Le Pen is going to adopt this vision – the very premise of 
her party is one that seeks to divide – but it’s up to the other politicians, 
the journalists and the electorate, to make sure that these ideas are not 
accepted as fact before they have been proven. I’m not scared of Le Pen voicing 
her opinions. I’m scared that people won’t challenge them. If you’re going to 
give her a platform, it’s really the least you can do.
 