
One of the best things about my laureate decade 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrew_Motion#Laureateship> was the chance to 
collaborate withPeter Maxwell Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/19/peter-maxwell-davies-at-80-interview>
, who was then Master of the Queen’s Music. We did a few things for events in 
the royal calendar, and a couple of larger and independent commissions as well: 
he setthe five sonnets I wrote 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/3671688/The-Five-Acts-of-Harry-Patch.html>
 aboutHarry Patch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/25/harry-patch-obituary>, drawing 
on his own childhood war memories, and I wrote six more sonnets to drop between 
the movements of his String Quartet No 7, which is a meditation on the 
architect Francesco Borromini.

I’d had other things set before, by Tarik O’Regan <http://www.tarikoregan.com/>
 andJocelyn Pook <http://www.jocelynpook.com/> among others, and enjoyed the 
experience very much. But the collaborations with Max, being larger in scale, 
made me think harder about what was involved. They made me reflect, for 
instance, on the various ways music can slow down words and make them hover in 
the mind, so the listener can concentrate on them more completely than might 
otherwise be possible.

It sounds simple enough, but actually this hovering allows something rather 
complicated to take place. Poetry is just as crucially a sound art as it is a 
sense art, and communicates large elements of its meanings via cadence, rhythm 
and other sorts of noise; it need not simply float above music itself, or 
decorate it, or give it a narrative. It can actually fuse with it. This fusion 
is one of the things we enjoy, consciously or not, when we listen to music by 
the greatest setters of poems:Purcell 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2sWOWHqw18U>, for instance, or Schubert 
<http://britishlibrary.typepad.co.uk/music/2014/01/schubert-an-die-musik.html>, 
orBritten <http://www.brittenpears.org/page.php?pageid=503>. We hear two 
apparently distinct forms achieving a kind of unity, even as we register and 
appreciate difference.

Over the past year or so I have been talking about these things on and off 
with the composerSally Beamish <http://www.sallybeamish.com/>; she has been 
setting some poems of mine (sonnets, again) for a new oratorio called Equal 
Voices, that theLondon Symphony Orchestra will premiere at the Barbican next 
month <http://lso.co.uk/equal-voices>. In narrow and particular terms, the 
commission worked like this: Kathryn McDowell (the MD of the LSO) and I had the 
idea that the orchestra should mark the centenary of the outbreak of the first 
world war; Kathryn approached Sally, who chose my poemAn Equal Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/nov/09/andrew-motion-plagiarism-found-poem>
. We met a few times to talk about it; then she disappeared and wrote her music.

In larger terms, it happened like this. During the last part of my laureate 
time, I pretty much stopped writing poems: I had gone blind in the glare, and 
thought I might actually have killed myself off as a poet. But when I stood 
down and I discovered that my poems hadn’t vanished entirely; they had crept 
underground, and when they emerged again, I noticed a lot of them were about 
men fighting 20th-century western wars.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-poetry&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Motion%20on%20war%20poetry&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-poetry>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Motion%20on%20war%20poetry&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-poetry&media=>
 Watch Andrew Motion discuss his war poetry. 
Why? Partly because, like a lot of other people, I had been thinking about 
what we were doing in Iraq and Afghanistan, and partly (which is a different 
sort of point) because my father had recently died. My father had fought in the 
second world war, and stayed on in the Territorial Army for 20-odd years after 
the war ended. In almost all my childhood memories of him, he is wearing 
uniform.

Eventually, I began to shape these poems into a sequence, about half of which 
appears in my last collection,The Customs House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/14/customs-house-andrew-motion-review>
, under the title Laurels and Donkeys (the remainder of the series will be 
included in my next book). They refer to themes and incidents that run from the 
first world war through to now, and many of them quote from and acknowledge 
books I have read, conversations I have had, or interviews I have held that 
contain first-hand accounts of conflict and its consequences.

They are, in other words, varieties of “found” poem – a form I chose with a 
view to getting round the problem that besets all right-thinking non-combatant 
war poets, the problem that, for all their well-intentioned sympathy, their 
response will look gratuitous, or like a vulgar parade of sensitivity. I 
thought that by including the voices of men and women who had been “really 
there”, and confining my role to editing, selecting, arranging, tweaking – and, 
yes, sometimes adding (AKA “writing”) – I might be able to demonstrate an 
appropriate kind of negative capability.

Almost all the material in my poem An Equal Voice (which, in Sally’s version, 
becomes Equal Voices, where it is combined with sections from theSong of Songs 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Song_of_Songs>) is taken from Ben Shephard’s book 
A War of Nerves: Soldiers and Psychiatrists 1914-1994 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/feb/09/historybooks.highereducation> (a 
few more bits are taken fromShell-shock by Anthony Babington 
<http://www.pen-and-sword.co.uk/Shell-Shock-Hardback/p/491>).

As Shephard himself points out: “We hear more [about this subject] from 
doctors than patients … because most of [the patients] chose not to recount 
their experiences.” By stitching together and shaping some of Shephard’s 
examples of how this silence has been broken, I have tried to give one 
particular form of war-suffering a different sort of exposure.

And now it gets another different sort in Sally’s oratorio (she prefers to 
call it that, and not a requiem, because, she says: “It deals essentially with 
the (damaged) living, and also perhaps because I have attempted to create a 
vision for the future.” As I write this, I haven’t heard a note of the score. 
But I already know very well why Kathryn McDowell approached her in the first 
place. In works such as No, I’m Not Afraid (a setting of poems byIrina 
Ratushinskaya <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Irina_Ratushinskaya>), Sally has 
been at once very ingenious in her treatment of sung and spoken words, and very 
emotionally driven. I know she will have written something fascinating – 
something that combines orchestral music with voices speaking, singing, 
whispering, shouting and even screaming; and something that negotiates 
the difficulties of the subject and of precedent (Britten, again, and his 
War Requiem). I feel privileged to have been paired with her for a part of all 
our thinking about the first world war in this centenary year.

• Equal Voices, by Sally Beamish, is performed at the Barbican, London EC2 
<http://lso.co.uk/equal-voices>, on Sunday 2 November and at the Usher Hall, 
Edinburgh <http://www.rsno.org.uk/whatson/?c_id=215&action=Read+More>, on 
Friday 7 November.
 