
Glasgow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> will be markedly less orange 
in the near future, and its council will be millions of pounds better off, 
under plans from the government's green fund. Street lights will be replaced 
with low-energy LEDs so that the familiar sodium glow gives way to bright white 
light.

As well as saving money, it will be a boon to skywatchers in the surrounding 
countryside, as LED lights provide more illumination on the ground and less to 
the clouds. Close to 100% of the light goes downward, unlike conventional 
street lights which send a third of their glow into the night sky, causing 
light pollution.

The project is the result of a new finance deal from the government-backed 
green investment bank. Under the deal, councils will receive the cash needed 
for the replacements upfront, to be paid back over time as the savings 
materialise.

Shaun Kingbury, chief executive of the bank, which is headquartered in Scotland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, told the Guardian: "This needs no 
government subsidy and is great place for us to invest." He said all of the 
UK's street lighting could be similarly replaced by 2020, with the potential 
for hundreds of millions of pounds in energy savings and massive reductions in 
carbon dioxide emissions.

"There are over 7m street lights in the UK, and many of them are over 40 years 
old and past their best. They need a helping hand and we want to offer everyone 
a programme [for replacement]. I have an ambition that by 2020 all street 
lighting should be energy-efficient LEDs."

The UK spends 300m a year on lighting public areas, including streetlamps but 
also motorways and large areas such as hospital or local authority car parks. 
At least 80% of this expenditure could be saved by replacing the current lights 
with LEDs, which provide more light for less money.

Tests show that 80-90% of people prefer the bright white light cast by LEDs to 
the dim orange of the usual sodium bulbs. The green investment bank has come up 
with a financial proposition to spur the switchover, by which local authorities 
and other public bodies can receive the cash needed for the new lights upfront, 
to be paid back over time as they realise the efficiency savings from the new 
technology.

The new lights pay for themselves within five to 15 years, depending on where 
and how they are used, and their expected useful life is at least 40 years. "We 
take the savings as the capital cost so people do not have to pay more," 
Kingbury said.

The green investment bank was set up with Treasury funding to invest in 
projects, including energy efficiency and renewable power, that cut greenhouse 
gas emissions but would be unlikely to be funded purely from the private sector.

Vince Cable, the Lib Dem business secretary, told the Guardian this was a 
better option than selectively switching off lights, as some councils have been 
doing to save money. "There are disadvantages to switching off, such as crime 
and people's sense of personal security," he said.

Replacing the UK's street lights, which make up 40% of the average local 
authority's energy spend, would save the equivalent of the annual electricity 
use of more than 670,000 households, or taking more than 300,000 cars off the 
road.

The bank offers UK local authorities low-interest fixed-rate loans over a 
period of up to 20 years. The loans are designed to finance public sector 
energy efficiency projects, ensuring that repayments are made from within 
savings.

The bank has already invested £750m in a variety of projects, with £2bn of 
private sector co-funding.
 