
It still sounds like nothing you've ever heard, however many times you listen 
to it:Glenn Gould's first recording of Bach's Goldberg Variations 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iGY9tHHM63Q>, made in 1955, has an energy, an 
intensity and a sheer joy that is as irresistible today as it was when 
astonished record-buyers first heard it nearly 60 years ago. It's no surprise 
that this record launched the myth of Gould as much as it signalled the start 
of his career, but no one could have predicted the effect this young Canadian 
pianist would have on music. Lauded the world over – his tour to Russia in 1957 
is still remembered fondly by Vladimir Ashkenazy and by everyone else who 
packed out the concert halls to hear him – Gould none the less seemed to 
steadily retreat from public view. He gave his last concert in 1964, confining 
himself to the recording studio for the rest of his short life. One of his 
final recordings was a second, markedly slower and more deliberate version of 
the Goldbergs in 1981. Hisideas on editing 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wmiagqoXaQY> were decades ahead of their time: 
he dreamed of a true democracy of recordings, when listeners would be able to 
edit their own versions of tracks, as we can now all do at the click of a 
mouse. He was also an eccentric hypochondriac, whose obsessive personality 
traits (he wore an overcoat and gloves no matter the temperature, and insisted 
on playing on the same ancient,battered chair 
<http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/glenngould/028010-150-e.php?uid=028010-nlc003875&uidc=recKey>
) were exacerbated in his final years by cocktails of antidepressants and 
anxiety-suppressing pills that were, ironically, more harmful to him than 
helpful. He died shortly after his 50th birthday, on 4 October 1982. Yet that 
was just the start of the Gould myth. The apparent weirdness of this reclusive 
genius has only added to the mystique as much as the iconoclasm of the 
recordings – his brilliant Bach, for sure, but also hiswilfully idiotic Mozart 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IT0ghoOGn78> and tortuous Beethoven. But 
underneath the eccentric control-freakery was a much more normal person than 
has often been portrayed. He was a loner, certainly, but Gould was also one of 
thefunniest and most playful musicians 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TbT2kQaiP8c> there has ever been, he was an 
irrepressible and essential thinker on music, and his records and radio 
documentaries are fuelled by a ceaseless curiosity about the world and music's 
place in it. In what would have been his 80th year, we asked leading pianists 
what Gould means to them. As you'll discover, he's still a controversial figure.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiGY9tHHM63Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiGY9tHHM63Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FiGY9tHHM63Q%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Angela Hewitt  <http://www.angelahewitt.com/>

Glenn Gould was an unavoidable presence when I was growing up in Ottowa. He 
was already a sort of legend, although not the kind of myth he has become since 
his death. When I was four or five, his programmes would be onCBC  
<http://www.cbc.ca/gould/>(the Canadian Broadcasting Company) on a Sunday 
night. I remember running into my parents' room and seeing this person withthe 
piano up his nose <http://www.cbc.ca/gould/photos.html#igImgId_14142>! At that 
age, I couldn't understand what he was doing – and even at an older age, it was 
difficult.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIT0ghoOGn78%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIT0ghoOGn78%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FIT0ghoOGn78%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
We bought his recordings whenever a new LP came out. I remember his Brahms, 
his Strauss, and of course his Bach. We would listen to his Bach discs – my 
parents were musicians too – and my dad would say: "That's a ridiculous tempo. 
What's he playing it like that for?" (By and large, if it was a slow piece, he 
would play it too fast, and vice versa.) But there was always something to 
admire. He was a wonderful pianist, and the way he played Bach was a sensation 
at the time. It was totally fearless, there's a ferocity, a youthful exuberance 
and energy in his playing. But I have never imitated him. I never wanted to 
come out like a bad copy of Glenn Gould. I first played the Goldberg Variations 
when I was 16. I remember going to the library and listening to Gould's 
recording,the famous 1955 one 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bach:_The_Goldberg_Variations_%28Glenn_Gould_recording%29>
. I only listened to it once, though, and I recorded theWell-Tempered Clavier 
<http://www.angelahewitt.com/record.php?record_id=31> without even listening to 
his version. The thing with Gould is that there are wonderful and horrible 
things. You wonder why he played Mozart the way he did, and in Beethoven … I 
saw a film of thecello sonatas with Leonard Rose 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GchB9unYkOE>, and there's not much visible 
contact between the two.

His memory and his ideas were extraordinary, but he was eccentric and 
incredibly neurotic as well. There's a lot of sadness in his life – that it 
ended so soon, thathe was taking all those pills 
<http://vleeptronz.blogspot.co.uk/2011/02/glenn-pill-popper-genius-within.html>
. I sometimes think the cult of Gould is a little exaggerated, so that we end 
up talking about the personality rather than how he played the piano.
* Angela Hewitt performs  at the Southbank Centre on 2 October 
<http://ticketing.southbankcentre.co.uk/find/music/classical/tickets/angela-hewitt-piano-62768>
.

Stephen Hough <http://stephenhough.com/>

Although Gould seemed to be ahead of his time - a prophet even - when he saw 
people preferring to listen to music on recordings rather than in the concert 
hall, what he didn't see was that technology would make recorded music so 
available and anarchic. The LP record's hi-fidelity made it possible for him to 
live comfortably on the profits of his royalties. It would be impossible for 
him to do this in today's higher-fidelity, streaming, reproducing marketplace 
where questions are being raised about the ability to maintain copyright 
control on any level. Nevertheless he created a new way of thinking about 
recorded music where the LP became an art form in itself - not just a replica 
of a live performance. And that first recording of the Goldberg Variations, so 
alive and alert and fresh - accompanied by legends of soaking arms, thick 
gloves and creaky seats - ushered in a new era in public relations. But beyond 
all the fashion and myth, Glenn Gould was a transcendental pianist. Even if all 
he touched turned to Gould (few artists are as recognisable across so many 
different styles) he nevertheless played with a heated passion of communication 
- made all the more telling and poignant delivered as it was from a reclusive 
apartment in the cold suburbs of Toronto.
* Stephen Hough performs with the BBC Symphony Orchestra at the Barbican on 12 
October <http://stephenhough.com/performances-2012.php#1012>. 

Steven Osborne <http://www.stevenosborne.co.uk/>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FN2YMSt3yfko%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FN2YMSt3yfko%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FN2YMSt3yfko%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
I can't think of the Goldberg Variations without Gould. I find what he does so 
utterly compelling that I've never really thought to learn the piece myself: I 
think about the Goldbergs, and just imagine him playing, and there's no point 
in playing it like him again. Initially, it was his second recording of it,the 
one he made in 1981 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N2YMSt3yfko>, that I heard. 
The contrapuntal detail he finds in every bar is amazing; no one has equalled 
the way he plays the aria. But even more extraordinary is the line he creates 
that connects the whole piece. I'm not sure I have heard anything where every 
single note is placed so carefully, is so carefully thought about. For some 
people, it's too controlled, but I don't find that. And yet I prefer his 1955 
recording of the piece. I can't think of a single artist who made such a 
profound change in their approach to a piece throughout their whole career. In 
the later record, he sometimes goes at half the speed of the earlier one. And 
what makes the earlier record so wonderful is its spontaneity – it's really 
happening in the moment, and it just makes me smile. It's a combination of the 
incredible technical control he has, but it's also that he is expressing 
something so incredibly powerful. It's a sucker punch.
* Steven Osborne performs at the Turner Sims Concert Hall, Southampton, on 6 
October 
<http://www.turnersims.co.uk/upcoming-events/201213/autumn-2012-promoted-events/steven-osborne>
.


Pierre-Laurent Aimard <http://www.pierrelaurentaimard.com/>

I am fascinated by the strength of Gould's personality, his intelligence, his 
cleverness, and the way he was able to realise his own world so completely 
through his playing. I have a great admiration as a pianist for how he did 
that. He could be very interesting and funny, and his writings are always 
quality entertainment. He was an eccentric, certainly, but the way he absorbed 
the music he played, the way he realised the polyphony of, say, Bach, makes him 
an interesting phenomenon and ensures his place in the pantheon of Bach players.

But I am somehow frustrated and irritated by the result in his recordings. 
Frustrated because he seems to be living in an exclusively Glenn Gould world. 
The question is how he communicates his emotions through the sound of the 
instrument. There is a problem with his motoric, automatic approach to tempo, 
and there is a problem with his sound. It's not that it's not a beautiful 
sound, it's rather that there is no flexibility in the way he phrases the 
melodies and harmonies of what he's playing. And the irritation? That comes 
from the mannerisms and the affectations of his playing. What you are aiming 
for, as a listener, is to forget about the performer, to listen just to the 
music, but in Gould's playing, there is too much that disturbs to forget about 
him.There are many clever commercial reasons for the cult of Gould that existed 
during his lifetime and still does now. I'm not a fan nor a member of that 
club, but I'm more frustrated by the fact that for many people he isthe Bach 
interpreter. There are many other people who are really remarkable in this 
music, and Gould is certainly not a person who plays Bach's music in a way that 
is without question-marks.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FchHJdmyIiRk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FchHJdmyIiRk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FchHJdmyIiRk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Francesco Piemontesi <http://www.intermusica.co.uk/piemontesi>

Gould's sound, his perspectives, the way he experimented with recording 
techniques, are often in my thoughts. I'm grateful he left so much interesting 
material for us to listen to, to read and to amuse ourselves with. His humour 
is really unique – take a look at his alter egos, the German musicologistDr 
Klopweisser <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zFFJX0SYPvw>, the English conductor 
Sir Nigel Twitt-Thornwaite <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TbT2kQaiP8c> and the 
hostile criticTheodore Slutz 
<http://simeonjochaides.tumblr.com/post/51028621/glenn-gould-as-theodore-slutz-w-a-new-jersey>
.

But the most important aspect of the work Gould did was his love affair with 
the recording process. He thought of technology as a creative experience within 
classical music. There is a wonderful videowhere you see him playing around  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JllD47HIees>(with the help of different 
microphones) with different sound perspectives within a Scriabin prélude 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=chHJdmyIiRk&noredirect=1>.

The sound landscapes he creates through this process remind me of a good 
régisseur  <http://www.thefreedictionary.com/regisseur>who shows you the same 
scene from different angles and thereby creates contrasting psychological 
perspectives. (I'm thinking, for instance, of theopening scene of David Lynch's 
Blue Velvet <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RDIdonK4XDQ&feature=related>.) From 
what I understand of Gould, he dismissed the almost religious atmosphere of the 
concert hall and was keen to establish a more equal relationship between artist 
and listener. He even encouraged the listener to "manipulate" the sound of 
recordings to create the ideal conditions for a particular piece of music. In 
an articlepublished in the 60s he wrote 
<http://academicalism.wordpress.com/2010/12/17/glenn-gould-copyfighter/>: 
"There is nothing to prevent a dedicated connoisseur from acting as his own 
tape-editor, and exercising such interpretative predilections as will permit 
him to create his own ideal performance."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsfqS1rnn82A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsfqS1rnn82A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FsfqS1rnn82A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
This process, in which he certainly was a pioneer, led to very inspiring 
results: you can hear, for instance, how he creates a sound landscape in his 
late recording ofLa Valse by Ravel <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sfqS1rnn82A>
, almost as if he was playing with different microphone perspectives as he did 
in the Scriabin. Only, the Ravel recording was done without the aforementioned 
mic trick - it was his playing doing all of this.

I find his courage to take a very distinctive path with his interpretations 
fascinating. And often with wonderful results - particularly in his recordings 
of 20th-century music. But with all the due respect for the quality of his 
playing and the poignance of his ideas, I never was a fan of his Bach. As far 
as I can see, he often regards Bach as abstract material, isolating the music 
from its historical perspective. But the works were written in a particular 
period of time, in a limited geographical part of Europe, in a well-defined 
Protestant view of the world. I have difficulty, too, listening to his readings 
of Mozart: he deliberately chooses to cross every line in terms of form, 
structure, harmony and musical language. The price for singularity is too high 
for my own taste.

Gould's ideas of sound and interpretation flourish best without going out of 
context in 20th-century music - Prokofiev, Ravel, but also rarely performed 
works by Krenek and Strauss. Most composers from this time allow you more 
freedom to apply your own ideas.
* Francesco Piemontese performs as part of Southbank Centre's International 
Piano Series on 7 November 
<http://ticketing.southbankcentre.co.uk/find/music/classical/tickets/francesco-piemontesi-piano-62786>
 and at theBarbican with the BBC Symphony Orchestra on 1 December 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=13036>.
 