
Donald Trump’s threatening tweets have set carmakers on edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/auto-industry-donald-trump-twitter-jobs-outsourcing-mexico>
, but the industry gathering at the annual Detroit motor show has other 
pressing issues on its mind. Trump could be out of office by the turn of the 
decade, but driverless cars, Brexit and climate change will all have lasting 
effects on the sector.

Dealing with trade shake-ups 

Car sales in the UK reached record levels in 2016, but the industry forecasts 
that growth will stall as the consequences of the referendum - including higher 
inflation - cause a 5-6% dip in sales this year. Under the worst-case scenario, 
tariffs imposed by the EU once the UK leaves the single market could add £1,500 
to the price of a car, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and 
Traders. But Brexit could be a headache for manufacturers across Europe –and a 
similar scenario could play out in the Americas if Trump rips up the Nafta 
deal, which underpins car imports to the US from Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/nafta-donald-trump-mexico-economy>
. Where a car is finally “made” is not a simple thing. Take GKN, which makes 
vehicle components in Birmingham for manufacturers across Europe. David Bailey, 
professor of industrial strategy at Aston University, said: “GKN’s components 
come from Spain, Italy, France – their products could have crossed the Channel 
several times before a car is sold. A lot of Brexit debate has been about 
tariffs on cars – but even non-tariff barriers cause huge complications in the 
supply chain.”


Auto industry's Trump fear: 'Everyone dreads being subject of a tweet'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/07/auto-industry-donald-trump-twitter-jobs-outsourcing-mexico>
Curbing CO2 emissions 

To meet EU targets, manufacturers must reduce the average emissions of their 
vehicles: in some cases, the cuts are so tough that the likes of Jaguar Land 
Rover are moving into electric cars. More will follow.


Restoring trust following the VW scandal

The industry has to rebuild consumer faith in the wake of the Volkswagen 
diesel emissions scandal. It must accept more rigorous testing and probably 
even tighter regulation. As cities consider clampdowns on diesel pollution –the 
kind that saw London breach legal limits last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/06/london-breaches-toxic-air-pollution-limit-for-2017-in-just-five-days>
– one response could be to make diesel engines even cleaner. But Bailey says 
the technology needed will push up the price: “Renault has suggested it will 
make small cars too expensive to produce.”

Driverless cars 

Bailey thinks autonomous cars will become prevalent in urban areas by the mid 
2020s, eventually revolutionising city transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/apr/28/end-of-the-car-age-how-cities-outgrew-the-automobile>
. “You’ll summon a car via your phone, and won’t need to own one. That will 
shift the balance of power from manufacturers to service providers.”So BMW has 
teamed its electric i3 models with the DriveNow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/aug/22/on-street-car-hire> 
car-sharing business and General Motors is partnering with taxi-hailing app 
Lyft in a driverless trial.


Tech giants Manufacturers are spending billions on cleaner engines and 
electric or digitally connected vehicles, offsetting that cost by working more 
with tech firms. Consolidation has traditionally meant mergers or alliances 
between carmakers, but speculation that Apple might take a stake in McLaren 
points to another path. Bailey says: “The interesting issue is how much 
carmakers will have to cooperate with tech companies.”
Gwyn Topham
 