
As the annual ritual of the Last Night of the Proms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms> approaches in the year of the Brexit 
referendum, there may be a sense of foreboding that this most British of 
occasions might be hijacked to celebrate the triumph of Little England, to 
reinforce the message of a land of hope and glory in which Britons never shall 
be slaves – to the EU or anyone else.

How wrong that would be. At the end of a hugely successful BBC Proms season, 
with music and orchestras from around the globe, this would be to radically 
misread the forces that gave birth to the music of the Last Night celebrations, 
to the concept of the Proms and to the entire tradition of adventurous British 
music. The inspiration our native music has derived from continental Europe and 
beyond has been deep and lasting.

The best of British music has never been insular

What made Edward Elgar, the creator of Land of Hope and Glory 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vvgl_2JRIUs>, the outstanding composer of his 
time? It was not a narrow-minded English outlook, but his absorption in 
continental models. He found the provincial atmosphere in Worcester, where he 
grew up, stifling. He discovered Brahms, Liszt and Berlioz on his own. In the 
1890s, on visits to Europe, he heard all of Wagner’s Ring Cycle, Parsifal, 
Tristan and Die Meistersinger. He incorporated Wagnerian traits in his early 
oratorios and, by 1902, when The Dream of Gerontius was performed in 
Düsseldorf, the German composer Richard Strauss praised Elgar as “the English 
progressivist”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flast-night-of-the-proms-nicholas-kenyon-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc01cb4714de62534d328cb225f76d3c2ba3cb3e%2F0_0_4738_3137%2F4738.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=God%20save%20The%20Last%20Night%20of%20the%20Proms%20post-Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flast-night-of-the-proms-nicholas-kenyon-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=God%20save%20The%20Last%20Night%20of%20the%20Proms%20post-Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flast-night-of-the-proms-nicholas-kenyon-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc01cb4714de62534d328cb225f76d3c2ba3cb3e%2F0_0_4738_3137%2F4738.jpg>
 Sending a message at the 2015 Last Night. Photograph: Neil Hall/Reuters 
The shortlived Proms ban on Land of Hope and Glory – archive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/from-the-classical-archive-1969-proms-ban-land-of-hope-and-glory-rule-britannia>
A similar broad outlook applies to other classics of the Last Night. Hubert 
Parry <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hubert_Parry>was also deeply influenced by 
Wagner, and his choice of William Blake’s visionary poemJerusalem 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H_chlZd3x40> to set as a unison song was 
anything but narrowly national. That was the one item from the traditional Last 
Night to survivethe radical reworking of the programme in 2001 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2001/sep/17/guardianleaders> after the 
9/11 attacks.Thomas Arne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/oct/22/artaxerxes-thomas-arne-linbury-studios>
’s stage work Alfred, which hasRule, Britannia 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_rdIJ0sEEmA> as its finale, is firmly based on 
models developed by the German immigrant Handel through a lifetime of travel to 
Italy, study of European music and residence in England.

It would also be false to characterise the Proms as purely English in outlook. 
Henry Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/from-the-archive-blog/2015/nov/24/sir-henry-wood-proms-interview-1938>
 was the creator of those Last Night celebrations (although Malcolm Sargent 
deserves credit for turning them into showbiz in the early days of TV), and his 
approach was deeply international. Wood scoured Europe for great new works: 
countless premieres by Debussy, Ravel, Mahler, Bruckner – and famously 
Schoenberg and Webern – began to transform the repertory, a process carried 
much further by the revolutionary extension of the season in the 1960s by
William Glock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2000/jun/29/bbc.guardianobituaries>, both 
forward to the European avant garde and backward to early music.

In terms of performers, internationalism was a much later development. The 
same orchestra played for all the concerts in the early decades. It was only in 
the 1960s that non-British orchestras began to appear regularly – a far cry 
from today, when an endless succession of international ensembles clamour to 
appear in front of the world’s most receptive and open-minded classical music 
audience.

Elgar cannot be blamed for the ‘imperial triumphalism’ of Land of Hope and 
Glory | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/12/elgar-cannot-be-blamed-for-the-imperial-triumphalism-of-land-of-hope-and-glory>
In 1998, when I was director, there was potentially a tricky moment when we 
decidedto extend that spirit to the Last Night 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ewnq9r>, which until then had an entirely British 
cast (plus one honorary Brit, the Australian conductor Charles Mackerras). We 
were fortunate in the context: the Last Night had already expanded outside the 
Albert Hall toProms in the Park <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e2bxj5>, and 
digital TV had enabled many more broadcasts of the season. The mood was of 
ever-increasing openness, so the introduction of the American baritone Thomas 
Hampson – and a host of other international stars over the years through toJuan 
Diego Flórez <http://juandiegoflorez.com/en/> in 2016 – felt like the most 
natural thing in the world, especially when balanced with a commitment to a 
regular piece bya younger British composer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/events/works/e5634c8f-2eca-4f62-8af8-c5e9175c7ca2>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFoHgSLp19YE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFoHgSLp19YE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFoHgSLp19YE&media=>
Watch the 1998 Last Night, with Thomas Hampson, on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FoHgSLp19YE&list=RDFoHgSLp19YE#t=47> 
The best British music has never been insular. Even the aspects that feel most 
nationalistic, such as the folk-song revival, are not typical. It wasConstant 
Lambert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/04/constant-lambert-beyond-rio-grande-review-stephen-lloyd>
who noted that “the strength of the English tradition in art is that it has 
always been open to fruitful foreign influences”, and that the “self-conscious 
Englishry practised by the folk-song composers was in itself peculiarly 
un-English”.

Multi-Story Orchestra/Bold Tendencies review – Proms shifts gear with car-park 
concert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/04/multi-story-orchestrabold-tendencies-review-peckham-proms>
You can argue that we always did things very late in the day – but as a 
result, we did them very well. The composer Hugh Wood observed how powerfully 
what we think of as the English tradition – whetherByrd’s masses 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VXeT2HWpwc4> and the madrigals of the 16th 
century,Purcell’s viol consorts <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dml7DQCrs1M> 
of the 17th century,Elgar’s 20th-century symphonies 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dW8Kyr5VefQ> and concertos – are all late 
developments of European models.

The Last Night of the Proms goes around the world and represents us to the 
world. As we redefine our cultural identity in the wake of the Brexit vote, 
it’s vital that it shows us, like the rest of the Proms, as open, welcoming and 
innovative – and, above all, looking to the future of the artform. “Stick to it 
gentlemen,” said Henry Wood to his (then all-male) players as they struggled 
with Schoenberg a century ago. “This is nothing like what you will have to play 
in 50 years’ time!”

• The Last Night of the Proms <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ehgv2m> is at the 
Royal Albert Hall, London, on 10 September. Part one is on BBC2 at 7.15pm; part 
two is on BBC1 at 8.50pm.
 