
There can be few things in life more satisfying than watching years of hard 
work culminate in one fleeting but beautiful moment. In 2006 José Pékerman 
stood in the technical area at Gelsenkirchen and experienced just that, bathing 
in the warm glow of fulfilment as he saw the stars align in 54 glorious seconds.

Two years earlier, Pékerman had been entrusted with the Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/argentina> job, succeeding Marcelo 
Bielsa, with whom he shared many deeply held beliefs about how the game should 
be played. The appointment made perfect sense. Pékerman could try to improve on 
the fine but flawed work of his meticulous predecessor but better still, he 
would be working with players whom he had helped to sculpt into steely winners 
in his role as the under-20 coach.

Between 1994 and 2001 he oversaw a golden era of Argentinian youth football, 
winning the World Youth Championship three times in four tournaments. It was an 
unprecedented period of success with Juan Pablo Sorín, Esteban Cambiasso, Pablo 
Aimar, Juan Román Riquelme, Javier Saviola and Maxi Rodríguez among the players 
whom Pékerman schooled in a highly effective form of possession football that 
he hoped would serve Argentina well in the future. Underpinning his philosophy 
was the keenly held belief that a composed approach will always be rewarded 
more richly than a hurried one.

This was something he tried to drum into his under-20 players on a personal 
level as well as a tactical one. He left Aimar, among his most heralded players 
in 1997, on the bench for the final of the World Youth Championships in 
Malaysia, apparently with the sole intention to teach him the lesson that 
haste, whether on the football pitch or in progressing a career, isn’t always 
the best way forward. Having had to wait for his chance to manage Argentina 
after a career that weaved in and out of football following the early 
curtailment of an undistinguished playing career, Pékerman knew the value of 
patience.

Golden Goal: Gary McAllister for Liverpool v Everton (2001) | Sachin Nakrani
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/golden-goal-gary-mcallister-liverpool-everton-april-2001>
There were signs in the buildup to the 2006 World Cup that Argentina could be 
a force with a manager at the helm who knew the players so well. None more so 
than at a raucous Estadio Monumental on 8 June 2005, when just under 50,000 
fans bore witness to a devastating first-half display in which Argentina danced 
around a spellbound Brazil, their rhythmic passing providing a joyous backing 
track as they raced into an insurmountable 3-0 lead against the world champions 
to seal World Cup qualification. There was also a rare glimpse of peak 
Riquelme, with the enigmatic playmaker swivelling away from Roque Júnior with 
graceful ease before unleashing an unstoppable25-yard strike 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hRtiFKbVxng> into the top-left corner.

Freeing Riquelme to influence games as a menacing metronome was the chief 
reason that Pékerman’s side were so easy on the eye in Germany. There had been 
criticism in Argentina that Riquelme was often allowed to get away with too 
much in matches, paying scant regard to tracking back and scoffing at the idea 
of winning back possession. But the truth is that by playing one or both of 
Cambiasso and Javier Mascherano behind him, most of the time Riquelme didn’t 
need to.

When Mascherano stole the ball with Ivory Coast on the attack and Argentina 
just 1-0 up in the first group game in Germany, they looked perfectly set for a 
blistering counterattack. Instead, Argentina took eight considered touches, 
never accelerating the move until within striking distance. It wasRiquelme’s 
wand of a right boot <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CnQkUuSv7_k&app=desktop> 
that set up Saviola to stab home. The patient approach had worked again and 
given us a hint of what was to come. It appeared Pékerman had come up with the 
magic formula. The murmurings of approval for Argentina’s style of possession 
football afterwards would become a chorus following the game against Serbia and 
Montenegro.

Among Argentina supporters there was a whiff of anticipation about what was 
possible against Serbia and Montenegro. Two years earlier the same sides, 
containing a good portion of the players lining up in Gelsenkirchen, had met at 
the Athens Olympics, which Argentina went on to win. The score?Argentina 6-0 
Serbia and Montenegro <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JPkYdkFTWKg>. 

Perhaps that is why Argentina had a swagger about them from the start. Six 
minutes into the game, a delicious move on the left resulted in Saviola 
bursting into the box, where he poked the ball across to Rodríguez to jab home 
and prompt Diego Maradona, high up in the stands, to begin just the first of 
his many crazed celebrations that evening. It would take a further 24 minutes 
for the lead to be increased, but it was a period in which Argentina’s grip on 
the game became so unbearably tight that something had to give. It did. “The 
most beautiful goal,” as Hernán Crespo described it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fgolden-goal-esteban-cambiasso-for-argentina-v-serbia-and-montenegro-2006-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0270ac7bb4065526a597879e622bf58dd2dc521%2F0_0_1620_2048%2F1620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Esteban%20Cambiasso%20for%20Argentina%20v%20Serbia%20%26%20Montenegro%20(2006)%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fgolden-goal-esteban-cambiasso-for-argentina-v-serbia-and-montenegro-2006-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Esteban%20Cambiasso%20for%20Argentina%20v%20Serbia%20%26%20Montenegro%20%282006%29%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fgolden-goal-esteban-cambiasso-for-argentina-v-serbia-and-montenegro-2006-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0270ac7bb4065526a597879e622bf58dd2dc521%2F0_0_1620_2048%2F1620.jpg>
 Diego Maradona celebrates during Argentina’s mesmeric display of possession 
football against Serbia & Montenegro. Photograph: Achim Scheidemann/EPA 
It begins in much the same way as the second goal scored against Ivory Coast, 
with the opponents’ pocket being picked while on a dangerous-looking attack. On 
this occasion it is Rodríguez who does the pilfering, chasing back and hooking 
the ball away from Mateja Kezman, in full gallop. He then shows he has the 
intelligence to match his industry, drifting off into space and dragging three 
opponents to the left of the pitch before popping a little pass back to Sorín, 
who takes them out of the game by coming back inside.

The patient passing continues over to the right-hand side of the pitch, with 
Mascherano, Riquelme and Cambiasso all getting a touch and appearing to move in 
slow-motion as their opponents huff and puff around them. The ball, now on 
first-name terms with Argentina’s midfield, is worked back over to the left in 
sophisticated style, never in danger of being stolen away. It’s at this point 
that you become aware that the unhurried movement of both players and ball has 
begun to mesmerise.

There is an opportunity to quicken the attack as the ball arrives over on the 
left again but these Argentina players, schooled as they have been by Pékerman 
to be patient at all times, show their intelligence, choosing to eschew the 
first opportunity to attack down the left wing and instead frustrate their 
opponents to the degree that five Serbia and Montenegro players are drawn 
towards the ball as Argentina play it backwards again. Now, this is when the 
slow-slow-quick approach kicks in, with Mascherano fizzing a pass out to Sorín, 
who is hugging the touchline, before finding Saviola, the catalyst for the 
deadliest part of the attack. He bursts inside from the touchline and plays a 
cute one-two with Riquelme, who for all his influence on the game, plays only a 
minor role in this wonderfully-crafted goal.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCOe5Y29-BZY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCOe5Y29-BZY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCOe5Y29-BZY&media=>
Saviola picks up the return from Riquelme (pass 22 in case you’re interested) 
and curls the ball out towards the edge of the box, where Cambiasso is lurking. 
It’s not an easy pass to control, bouncing awkwardly in front of a player who 
had only come on 12 minutes earlier, as a substitute for the injured Luis 
González, and had never been famed for his attacking prowess. But sometimes in 
life, moments arrive that hint at perfection and must not be undone. There is a 
sense that Cambiasso was acutely aware of this as his first touch, a feathered 
dink with the outside of his left foot, feeds Crespo perfectly. The big striker 
then shows incredible deftness himself, taking one delicious touch with his 
left instep, delaying to allow Cambiasso to catch up, and then teeing him up 
with his right heel. Impeccable link-up play.

Crespo said afterwards that he knew that something great was happening as the 
move was gradually and skilfully stitched together behind him. Perhaps 
Cambiasso did too, and it is why, when the series of 25 passes was nearing its 
glorious end, neither player dared shirk the responsibility of seeing to it 
that it was given the final flourish it deserved.

Golden Goal: Faustino Asprilla for Colombia v Argentina, 1993
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jun/26/golden-goal-faustino-asprilla-colombia-argentina-1993>
There is utter joy and intense relief as Cambiasso drills the ball high into 
the net. In some ways goals that are built through patient passing moves are 
similar to 147 breaks in snooker. As they reach their denouement, the pressure 
mounts. “Don’t ruin it,” must have been the recurring thought as Cambiasso and 
Crespo realised it was up to them to do justice to what had gone before them. 
They did not. As Cambiasso raced off to celebrate, clutching his shirt with two 
hands, Pékerman roared his approval from the sidelines, having watched his team 
score a goal that he had helped make possible by drumming into them the value 
of possession when many were still kids.

It would have particularly pleased Pékerman that it was Cambiasso, the epitome 
of a team player, who was in the right place at the right time to score one of 
the great team goals. There were echoesof the recently passed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/carlos-alberto-eternal-captain-scorer-brazils-beautiful-goal>
 Carlos Alberto’siconic goal for Brazil in the 1970 World Cup final 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vh6b-Y_enJM> in Cambiasso’s effort, only with 
an even greater number of passes and a finish that was not as emphatic but 
still thoroughly assertive. A decade after it was scored, this goal is now seen 
by many as being the precursor to tiki-taka, when possession itself became a 
potent weapon in football.

It still haunts many Argentina fans that the class of 2006 did not go further 
than the quarter-finals, with Pékerman accused of blundering against Germany, 
going against his principles and substituting his pass master Riquelme for the 
more defensive qualities of Cambiasso in the 80th minute and thus ceding the 
attacking initiative. Germany went on to equalise as Argentina became far less 
assured in possession. They lost on penalties, of course. Worse still, they 
disgraced themselves as a fight broke out at the end.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fgolden-goal-esteban-cambiasso-for-argentina-v-serbia-and-montenegro-2006-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9c6249796d988d97abcbb41d4e1bab17039e835%2F0_27_2334_1400%2F2334.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Esteban%20Cambiasso%20for%20Argentina%20v%20Serbia%20%26%20Montenegro%20(2006)%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fgolden-goal-esteban-cambiasso-for-argentina-v-serbia-and-montenegro-2006-world-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Esteban%20Cambiasso%20for%20Argentina%20v%20Serbia%20%26%20Montenegro%20%282006%29%20%7C%20Gregg%20Bakowski&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fgolden-goal-esteban-cambiasso-for-argentina-v-serbia-and-montenegro-2006-world-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9c6249796d988d97abcbb41d4e1bab17039e835%2F0_27_2334_1400%2F2334.jpg>
 A fight breaks out at the end of Germany’s victory over Argentina on penalties 
at the 2006 World Cup. Photograph: Frank Augstein/AP 
Pékerman resigned after the defeat. It is a great shame. His methods had 
imbued Argentina with the kind of on-the-ball authority that would serve Spain 
so well in their period of domination between 2008 and 2012. But Pékerman can 
be proud that his team created something wonderful in Gelsenkirchen, something 
he deserved to oversee and take credit for given his key role in developing the 
players who made it happen. The fact that it took a while to arrive made it all 
the more beautiful.
 