
There are multiple ways to score a goal, but none are as highbrow as the team 
goal. They stimulate the arty fart in every football fan. The main reason for 
that is that they generally involve lots of clever, elegant passing and 
movement. (Even though it was the work of three men, nobody called this a team 
goal <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xbv3FWvWIJY>.) The other is that – good 
morning Private Eye, ohayō gozaimasu Pseuds Corner – there is a creative 
grandeur to the team goal that you don’t find elsewhere. The thrill of the 
orchestra needs no explanation, and not only because we can’t think of an 
adequate way to convey it.

That thrill is greatest during the crescendo, which is the essence of any team 
goal. If you are lucky, the commentator will instinctively supply a vocal surge 
too – as Gerald Sinstadt did during a hypnotic commentary on Mick Channon’s 
Southampton’s famous goal against Liverpool in 1981-82 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TxyYSoblpcI> that is as near to perfect as 
dammit. There are so many moving parts to the team goal that it is rare and 
precious to see them all work in sync. The degree of difficulty and speed 
involved means that the goal is usually much greater than the sum of those 
moving parts – especially as it is the result of improv rather than a song 
sheet or a script.

Related: Golden Goal: Claude Makélélé for Chelsea v Tottenham Hotspur (2006) | 
Michael Butler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/04/golden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006>

Toluca’s euphoric crescendo against América in 2003 is full of such 
improvisation, yet it is so serene, slick and knowing, with such perfect 
rhythm, that it almost looks scripted. In the context of a sport where 
imperfections happen all the time, the flawlessness is extraordinary. José 
Cardozo scored the goal, though Zinha and Rafael García deserve equal billing. 
The whole thing looks like CGI wizardry rather than the work of three 
footballers who, for a few beautiful seconds, entered the zone together.

The fact it came during a trouncing of one of their biggest rivals made it 
infinitely sweeter. The team goal is a statement of superiority at the best of 
times, a kind of legitimate showboating, but nothing says ‘I hate you’ quite 
like a swaggering passing move to go 5-0 up.

Extravagant minimalism

Cardozo is one of those South American legends that Europe never really got to 
know. He was part of Paraguay’s golden generation – everyone’s got one – and 
was the leading scorer in their history with 25 until Roque Santa Cruz overtook 
him.His 249 goals for Toluca remain a club record 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Sie3326XO8>. That included a preposterous 36 
in 25 matches in the2002 Apertura 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apertura_and_Clausura>, after which he was named 
South American Player of the Year – joininga reasonably prestigious list 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/South_American_Footballer_of_the_Year> that 
includes Pele, Diego Maradona, Zico and Elias Figueroa.
 Jose Cardozo celebrates winning the South American Footballer of the Year 
award in 2002. Photograph: Reuters Photographer / Reuter/Reuters 
It was in the following season’s Apertura that he and Toluca tore América a 
new aperture. The goal, whichreally deserves its own 1970s-style goal diagram 
<https://gotnotgot.wordpress.com/2012/07/20/the-old-school-action-replay-bring-back-goal-diagrams-with-arrows-and-dots/>
, was the second of yet another Cardozo hat-trick. Toluca were 4-0 up when 
América went through the motions of another attack. Vicente Sánchez won 
possession near his own corner flag and pushed the ball down the line to 
Cardozo. Nine touches, five passes and 15 seconds later, the ball was in the 
net.

Related: Golden Goal: Esteban Cambiasso for Argentina v Serbia & Montenegro 
(2006) | Gregg Bakowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/28/golden-goal-esteban-cambiasso-for-argentina-v-serbia-and-montenegro-2006-world-cup>

A lot of team goals have some extraneous probing or keep-ball at the start of 
the move, which add quantitative but not qualitative value. Here, every touch – 
and one spectacular non-touch – has a specific, progressive purpose. The move 
is minimalist, yet also extravagant. It includes an elaborate dummy, a hurdle, 
a one-two, a back flick, a disguised pass, all kinds of off-the-ball movement – 
and a group of defenders who, at that particular moment in time, could have 
taken a polygraph test and would have sworn their name was Andy Wibble.

Each touch is more teasing than the last, until you feel like you can take no 
more. The best bit comes at the end: when García breaks through, you think that 
must be it; he’ll belt it past the keeper. Instead he uses the eyes in the side 
of his head to square the ball, take the keeper out of the game and allow 
Cardozo to reappear from out of shot to score an open goal. That final flourish 
of walking the ball in turns a great team goal into one of the greatest team 
goals.

It’s not only crescendos that reach a climax. Footballers frequently compare 
scoring to sex, and different types of goal evoke different images. Long-range 
belters are scored behind the bike sheds; at the other end of the scale lies 
the team goal, the culmination of luscious, seductive foreplay, an exponential 
sporting climax. Cardozo’s goal wasn’t just sexy football; it was tantric 
football.
 