
Florentino Pérez and Zinedine Zidane might be playing nice at the moment but 
the pair have not always seen eye to eye. There are not many players that can 
publicly criticise the Real Madrid president and get away with it but that is 
exactly what Zidane did after Pérez took the decision to sell Claude Makélélé to
Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> in 2003.

Remembering Florentino Pérez's Pavones, the players Real Madrid forgot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2015/jan/29/remembering-florentino-perez-pavones-real-madrid-zidane>
“Why put another layer of gold paint on the Bentley when you are losing the 
entire engine?” Zidane asked after his compatriot’s exit from the Bernabéu. 
Pérez replied withthe coldest of parting shots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/sep/11/newsstory.sport9>: “We will 
not miss Makélélé. His technique is average, he lacks the speed and skill to 
take the ball past opponents, and 90% of his distribution either goes backwards 
or sideways. He wasn’t a header of the ball and he rarely passed the ball more 
than three metres. Younger players will arrive who will cause Makélélé to be 
forgotten.”

How wrong Pérez proved to be. Younger players arrived, as did more established 
names. Instead it was them who were forgotten. For the remainder of Pérez’s 
first reign until 2006, his Galácticos – numbering Zidane, Raúl, Ronaldo, Luís 
Figo, Roberto Carlos and David Beckham, among others – failed to win a single 
trophy. In this time, Makélélé would win back-to-back Premier League titles, a 
League Cup and was apenalty shootout away from winning the 2006 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/jul/10/worldcup2006.match1>, in 
which he played every minute. Operating in front of the back four, he created 
his own position – ‘The Makélélé Role’ – becoming one of the few players 
(Cruyff turn, Panenka penalty, Papinade volley) to have his name sewn into the 
fabric of the game.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6077ac8b46840e58a672e5e1d2aee5937ee2015%2F0_111_2064_1239%2F2064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Claude%20Mak%C3%A9l%C3%A9l%C3%A9%20for%20Chelsea%20v%20Tottenham%20Hotspur%20(2006)%20%7C%20Michael%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Claude%20Mak%C3%A9l%C3%A9l%C3%A9%20for%20Chelsea%20v%20Tottenham%20Hotspur%20%282006%29%20%7C%20Michael%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6077ac8b46840e58a672e5e1d2aee5937ee2015%2F0_111_2064_1239%2F2064.jpg>
 Claude Makélélé was an integral part of a Real Madrid side that won two La 
Liga titles and a Champions League in the three seasons he was at the club. 
Photograph: Ben Radford/Getty 
Zidane had understood what Pérez hadn’t. It was not Makélélé’s quality on the 
ball – his dribbling, range of passing, heading ability – that was his strength 
but his importance when Real didn’t have possession. He was not the quickest, 
as Pérez had gleefully pointed out, but his nose for danger, reading of the 
game, and tactical awareness meant that he was plastering over cracks that had 
not had time to fully form, a firefighter disguised in shin pads and shorts.

This was not lost on Claudio Ranieri, who echoed Zidane’s ‘engine’ sentiments 
upon signing the Zaire-born midfielder for Chelsea: “I have a fantastic watch. 
It is run by battery. Claude is my new battery. The best.”Shelling out £16m in 
2003 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/sep/01/newsstory.chelsea> for 
an unglamourous player the wrong side of 30 would normally be seen as a risk. 
Here it was a no-brainer.

The one facet of Makélélé’s ability that Pérez refused to criticise – and yet 
the one attribute that is so obviously lacking from his game – was his prowess 
in front of goal. In three years he scored one goal for Real. Makélélé failed 
to register an international goal in any of his 71 appearances for France. In 
over 600 club matches during his career, he scored just 17 times.

Ironically it had been two goals that first peaked Real’s interest in signing 
Makélélé. Pérez was in attendance to watch the Frenchmanhead Celta Vigo into a 
2-0 lead <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2QNqf6qSGU8> at Real Madrid in 1998 
(a goal ably assisted by another future Galáctico, Míchel Salgado –Celta would 
also beat Real 5-1 
<http://www.marca.com/en/2015/10/23/en/football/real_madrid/1445614812.html> in 
the return fixture that season). The next season,Makélélé opened the scoring 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8bjcIYUYGGg> in Celta’s 4-0 destruction of 
Zidane’s Juventus in the Uefa Cup.

Only two of Makélélé’s 17 career goals came for Chelsea – and the second, on 
Bonfire Night 2006 at Tottenham, was a ripper which gave him a 100% 
shot-conversion rate in 2006-07: one shot, one goal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b2337b0bbec80566dc7e0984377d465f039628b%2F0_422_3314_1989%2F3314.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Claude%20Mak%C3%A9l%C3%A9l%C3%A9%20for%20Chelsea%20v%20Tottenham%20Hotspur%20(2006)%20%7C%20Michael%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Claude%20Mak%C3%A9l%C3%A9l%C3%A9%20for%20Chelsea%20v%20Tottenham%20Hotspur%20%282006%29%20%7C%20Michael%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b2337b0bbec80566dc7e0984377d465f039628b%2F0_422_3314_1989%2F3314.jpg>
 Claude Makélélé strikes quite the pose for the Observer at Chelsea’s training 
ground in January 2005. Photograph: Richard Saker 
‘Three-Point Lane’ had become a happy hunting ground for Chelsea – going into 
the game, Spurs had not beaten their London rivals in 32 league encounters home 
and away, a record stretching back to 1990. Indeed in one of these matches, 
Makélélé had made his Chelsea debut against Tottenham in 2003, a 4-2 win for 
the west London side. And so, buoyed by a2-2 draw away at the Camp Nou 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/nov/01/match.sport2> in the 
Champions League the previous week, José Mourinho’s side travelled to north 
London in high spirits, on the back of a 13-game unbeaten streak in all 
competitions, and knowing that another win would send them joint-top of the 
Premier League with Manchester United. Chelsea promptly lost 2-1.

Records show that goals from Michael Dawson and Aaron Lennon were enough to 
give Spurs the victory. The result may have had far reaching consequences for 
Chelsea, they never closed that three-point gap with United, remaining in 
second until the season’s end to relinquish their Premier League crown for the 
first time in two seasons. Other things did happen in the game – John Terry was 
sent off, the substitute Khalid Boulahrouz lasted 22 minutes before he was 
himself substituted – but the game should be remembered for a 30-second period 
a quarter of an hour in:Ledley King’s outrageous slide tackle on Arjen Robben 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SjxmyjLp9tg> (which probably deserves a blog 
all in itself – stand by for the Guardian’s new football series: Golden Tackle) 
leading to a Chelsea corner, from which Makélélé scored.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58df57f3e57c65645ab6a8eaa71751cb436c62b9%2F0_26_2364_1418%2F2364.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Claude%20Mak%C3%A9l%C3%A9l%C3%A9%20for%20Chelsea%20v%20Tottenham%20Hotspur%20(2006)%20%7C%20Michael%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Claude%20Mak%C3%A9l%C3%A9l%C3%A9%20for%20Chelsea%20v%20Tottenham%20Hotspur%20%282006%29%20%7C%20Michael%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58df57f3e57c65645ab6a8eaa71751cb436c62b9%2F0_26_2364_1418%2F2364.jpg>
 Claude Makélélé scored just 17 career goals in a 20-year long career. 
Photograph: Henry Browne/Action Images 
King would play one more part, impressively beating Terry in the air to the 
subsequent set piece, but could only half clear, with Benoît Assou-Ekotto and 
Arjen Robben both unable to reach the ball. And then, it happened. 
Unexpectedly, where you might imagine Frank Lampard or Michael Ballack to 
appear on the edge of the area, Makélélé enters the shot, before delivering one 
of his own: cutting across the thigh-high bouncing ball with his right foot – 
not unlikeEric Cantona in the FA Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/jul/24/golden-goal-eric-cantona-for-manchester-united-v-liverpool-1996>
 10 years previously – and walloping a swerving effort that started outside 
Paul Robinson’s right-hand post but swerved just inside, nestling in the bottom 
corner.

Cue pandemonium. Chelsea’s fans can be seen falling about in the away end, 
figuratively and literally, at the sight of Makélélé’s feat. The beaming 
Frenchman, utterly bereft of ideas of how to celebrate, sets off towards the 
bench, visibly laughing. Every single one of his team-mates mob him, all of 
them towering over the 5ft 6in goalscorer, and there is not one face that is 
not delighted for him. José Mourinho initially walks calmly out of his 
technical area to greet his players, wearing a smug expression and opening his 
arms as though himself claiming responsibility for the goal, but in the end, 
even he breaks – a smile spreading widely across his face – caving into the 
unadulterated happiness going on around him. “Claude Makélélé’s lack of goals 
have been something of a joke around the Chelsea dressing room,” says the BBC’s 
commentator Steve Wilson. “The joke’s over now.” Meanwhile, neighbouring Spurs 
fans wear a look of disgust, King throws up both arms in despair, equally 
bemused at what has just happened.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17512eb701eeee48b9af45d22b12c992271af195%2F281_279_2104_1262%2F2104.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Claude%20Mak%C3%A9l%C3%A9l%C3%A9%20for%20Chelsea%20v%20Tottenham%20Hotspur%20(2006)%20%7C%20Michael%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Golden%20Goal%3A%20Claude%20Mak%C3%A9l%C3%A9l%C3%A9%20for%20Chelsea%20v%20Tottenham%20Hotspur%20%282006%29%20%7C%20Michael%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fgolden-goal-claude-makelele-chelsea-tottenham-2006%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17512eb701eeee48b9af45d22b12c992271af195%2F281_279_2104_1262%2F2104.jpg>
 José Mourinho and his entire backroom staff greet a celebrating Claude 
Makélélé, who is promptly mobbed by his Chelsea team-mates. Photograph: Henry 
Browne/Action Images 
After all, scoring was simply not his job. Makélélé’s running and tactical 
intelligence without the ball, and distribution with it, was geared towards one 
thing: winning the ball back. “My role is to keep the balance of the team 
right,” he later admitted. So when Didier [Drogba] goes here, I do this. When 
Frank [Lampard] goes there, I go there. Same with Michael [Ballack]. When one 
person moves out of position, then someone else comes in and covers for them. 
When you play in my position you have to enjoy it. You can’t be thinking ‘I 
don’t get any goals’. You just enjoy it, you enjoy playing football, tackling, 
giving the ball. Just enjoy it. It’s the ultimate honour to have [The Makélélé 
Role] named after me.”

He rarely spoke to the media like this but could be magnificently combative in 
the interviews he was forced into: before France’s World Cup quarter-final 
against Brazil in 2006, as his team-mates were waxing lyrical about the Seleção 
– “You can’t ignore them, they have five stars on their shirt,” flatters 
Thierry Henry; “the great Brazil … wonderful,” lauds Zidane – Makélélé says,
almost with a bored expression <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TyBBFiXtyHA>: 
“Brazil or not, I don’t give a fuck … Ronaldinho, whats-his-name, thingy … 
don’t give a shit.”France won 1-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/jul/03/worldcup2006.match>, 
Ronaldinho and Kaká were kept quiet but Makélélé’s name barely got a mention in 
the match reports.

Yet the common assertion that Makélélé was under-appreciated is a folly. From 
the reaction of his team-mates, to Zidane, to Mourinho, to Ranieri, it is easy 
to see he was appreciated, he was feared, he was eventually missed. Rather, he 
was the master of understatement – Chelsea’s Moneypenny, cleaning up the mess 
made by more ostentatious colleagues, doing the boring but necessary admin 
behind the scenes; a master French maître d’ silently going about his business 
in a decadent Russian restaurant.

Makélélé’s goal against Tottenham is remarkable because for a brief moment, 
this cloak of understatement is thrown off in glorious fashion. The value of it 
wasn’t important to winning a title, or because it was the greatest ever 
scored. It is a gem worth celebrating because of its rarity: file it next to 
Tony Adams’stitle-clinching piledriver in 1998 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EnFKRATIKUI>, or Tony Hibbert’s first career 
goal in 2012, a free-kickin his own testimonial 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2WsuEHfYfEc>. Typically, Makélélé’s 
aptly-named autobiography,Tout Simplement (‘Quite simply’), makes little 
mention of the best strike of his career. Instead, Makélélé made just one small 
remarkto a Chelsea fanzine 
<http://www.cfcnet.co.uk/2008/07/cfcnet-claude-makekele-interview/> the week 
after that match in 2006 – delivered with the same broad, joyous smile he 
showed on the White Hart Lane pitch: “I think it was a good goal, no?”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7xSAwlveL_s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7xSAwlveL_s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7xSAwlveL_s&media=> 