
A woman is punched and thrown to the ground by a man who then proceeds to kick 
her as she raises her arms to deflect the blows. A pedestrian marches ahead; a 
car drives by.

Many similar incidents in China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> have 
ended here, with a stream of passersby doing nothing to help strangers in need. 
But luckily for the woman in this video, two restaurant workers, Yang Yanshuai 
and Zhang Chengwei, chose to step in and stop the violence.

“At the time I didn’t think about it much, I just felt it’s not right to hit 
people,” said Yang, according to local media. “That man was beating that women 
pretty fiercely. You can’t do that, so I came out to stop him.”


Zhang arrived shortly after Yang, pushing the man away and eventually pulling 
off his shirt. “I look down on this type of man that hits women,” Zhang said. 
“I wasn’t afraid.”

When police arrived and began their investigation, the woman’s family asked 
for the case to be scrapped, saying it was a private matter. The police 
refused, saying the unnamed man had broken the law.

The video, shot in the northern province of Hebei, became national news, 
against a backdrop of soul-searching over repeated incidences of those in need 
being ignored. In the most infamous case, a two-year-old girl was hit by a 
truck and a dozen passersby ignored heras she lay in agony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/17/toddler-hit-and-run-china> in a 
busy market.

The lack of legal protections for good samaritans and a string of extortion 
cases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/08/chinas-good-samaritans-count-cost>
 in which people pretended to be injured have contributed to the general 
reluctance to come to the rescue.


Those who do so are often asked to pay medical bills or are later sued by 
those they have helped. In a 2013 a woman named Wang Lan helped an injured 
elderly woman at a bus stop, brought her to hospital and paid the £25 fee for 
the consultation. The woman later accused Wang of causing the injury and sued 
for £5,000.

The problem became so severe that a Chinese insurer began offering policies 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/china/society/article/1869927/chinese-good-samaritans-offered-insurance-policy-protect-them>
 for those who help elderly people in need, covering legal costs of up to 
20,000 yuan (£2,350).

Beijing is drafting a good samaritan law to reduce the risks for those who 
help, ensuring they will not need to cover medical costs. Shanghai enacted a 
law last year, but it applies only to those who first call emergency services 
and follow instructions. There is still no sign of national legislation.
 