
Traditional pubs may be in decline, but a series of new-style British boozers 
based in unlikely venues such as train stations and disused industrial 
buildings are on the rise, according to theCampaign for Real Ale (Camra) 
<http://www.camra.org.uk/> .

The 2017 edition of Camra’s Good Beer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/beer> Guide, published on Thursday, 
suggests that the “real ale revolution” is at the heart of this change. Despite 
an overall decline in the beer market, real ale’s share is growing – now at 55% 
and forecast to reach 70% by 2020.

“It’s tragic that pubs that have been the heart of their communities for 
decades and even centuries continue to close – though the closure rate is 
declining to around 21 a week,” said Roger Protz, the guide’s editor. “But they 
are being replaced by new pubs, often in the most unlikely places.”

Why the rules on real ale are small beer to me | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/16/why-the-rules-on-real-ale-are-small-beer-to-me>
The number of pubs across the UK has been in decline for years, and while the 
pace of closures slowed –from 27 a week earlier this year to 21 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/10/pricey-pints-blamed-as-21-british-pubs-a-week-call-time-at-the-bar>
, according to Camra – the direction of travel has not changed. In 1951 there 
were 73,421 pubs in England and Wales, but within 20 years that figure had 
slumped to 64,087. By this year, the total stood at just 52,750.

Bucking the trend, the JD Wetherspoon group <https://www.jdwetherspoon.com> 
aims to open 15 to 20 new pubs in the next 12 months from Scotland through to 
the West Country – the first of which started serving pints in July in the 
former (and much-remodelled) booking office of Edinburgh’s original Waverley 
station.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgood-beer-guide-2017-new-style-british-pubs-real-ale-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c29512738a2cd243b08467505c29d4b23c05129%2F0_308_4144_2487%2F4144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20Beer%20Guide%202017%20raises%20a%20pint%20to%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20British%20boozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgood-beer-guide-2017-new-style-british-pubs-real-ale-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20Beer%20Guide%202017%20raises%20a%20pint%20to%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20British%20boozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgood-beer-guide-2017-new-style-british-pubs-real-ale-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c29512738a2cd243b08467505c29d4b23c05129%2F0_308_4144_2487%2F4144.jpg>
 The Parcel Yard is now one of Fuller’s most successful pubs. Photograph: Jeff 
Blackler/Rex/Shutterstock 
“It’s full steam ahead for pubs in train stations as Waverley joins London’s 
Euston, Paddington, King’s Cross and St Pancras, all with excellent pubs, along 
with stations in Newcastle, Sheffield and York,” added Protz.


Singled out is Fuller’s Parcel Yard at King’s Cross station, in the former 
pick-up and delivery area for Red Star Parcels. Set over two floors, packed 
with railway memorabilia and with views of trains arriving and departing, the 
Parcel Yard is now one of the Chiswick-based brewery’s most successful pubs, 
offering a range of guest beers from smaller breweries.

In Manchester, new pubs have sprung up in old railway warehouses and arches. 
The Knott, opposite Deansgate station, stands below the bridge that carries 
both trains and the metro and offers beers from independent breweries in the 
north-west andvegetarian and vegan food options.

Close by, the Beer Nouveau brewery is housed in old railway buildings in – 
ironically – Temperance Street. The small brewery is run by Steve Dunkley, who 
plans to add a tasting room and a facility where customers can brew their own 
beer.

In the north-east, at Monkseaton in Tyne & Wear, the Left Luggage Room is 
based in a building previously used for storing bags and parcels in the train 
station, now part of the metro line.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgood-beer-guide-2017-new-style-british-pubs-real-ale-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6590289d78d253cb04f8bed03bd0c6018e5580c2%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Good%20Beer%20Guide%202017%20raises%20a%20pint%20to%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20British%20boozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgood-beer-guide-2017-new-style-british-pubs-real-ale-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Good%20Beer%20Guide%202017%20raises%20a%20pint%20to%20the%20new%20breed%20of%20British%20boozers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fgood-beer-guide-2017-new-style-british-pubs-real-ale-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6590289d78d253cb04f8bed03bd0c6018e5580c2%2F0_245_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 The Knott pub, opposite Deansgate station in Manchester, offers beers from 
independent breweries in the north-west. Photograph: PR image 
This year’s 1,032-page guide lists entries for more than 4,500 of the UK’s 
best pubs in rural and urban areas, also name-checking breweries and their core 
beers. The real ale revolution is “roaring on”, the guide reports, with a 
further 200 new breweries having opened in the UK since the last guide was 
published, swelling the total figure to 1,540.

This year’s Good Beer Guide also salutes the boom in micro or pop-up pubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/10/small-beer-why-micropubs-are-the-toast-of-britains-real-ale-revival>
. “In just a few short years, micropubs have become a national phenomenon,” 
Protz said. “The number has grown to 251 and 29 of them have their own in-house 
breweries as well.”

But just yards from Eustonstation in central London, the future is less rosy 
for the Bree Louise - Camra’s current north London pub of the year – which is 
set to be demolished to make way for the proposed HS2 high-speed railway 
between London and Birmingham.


Its owners, Craig and Karen Douglas, have spent 13 years turning around what 
was once a failing pub into a shrine to real ale with 23 hand pumps serving 
ales from small, independent breweries. They plan to launch a petition to try 
to save it if and when the legislation for HS2 achievesroyal assent.

“It will be shocking if that happens, but to be honest we have had to ignore 
the threat and carry on as usual,” Craig Douglas said. “We’ve had a new carpet 
put in and we’ve done our air-conditioning for the summer.”








 