
El Capitan, the iconic granite monolith in Yosemite national park, is used to 
having the world’s eyes on it: in January millions followed the progress of 
climbers Tommy Caldwell and Kevin Jorgeson as they completed thefirst-ever free 
climb of its Dawn Wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2015/jan/15/conquering-el-capitan-climbers-make-history-in-californias-yosemite-national-park-in-pictures>
, a gruelling 19-day marathon.

But now anyone with access to the internet will be able to visit the 
cliff-face, thanks to the latestGoogle Street View project 
<http://www.google.com/maps/about/behind-the-scenes/streetview/treks/yosemite/>
, which has mapped 3,000 vertical feet of the famous rock formation.

Launched this week, the images are Google’s first vertical Street View 
collection, featuring vertigo-inducing panoramas and high-definition 
photography of the wall’s cracks, ledges and handholds.

Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> worked in partnership 
with some of the world’s top climbers on the project, including Lynn Hill, Alex 
Honnold, and Tommy Caldwell – who was approached by the company around the time 
of his ascent of the Dawn Wall.


“Maybe it was the sheer exhaustion from being in the middle of a 19-day climb 
of the Dawn Wall but when the guys at Google Maps andYosemite national park 
<http://www.nps.gov/yose/index.htm> asked if I wanted to help them with their 
first-ever vertical Street View collection of El Capitan in Yosemite 
<https://www.google.com/maps/@37.729095,-119.636477,3a,90y,54.5h,46.62t/data=!3m7!1e1!3m5!1sChhPgowc3CkAAAQqZe0Geg!2e0!3e2!7i13312!8i6656>
, I didn’t hesitate,” he wrote in ablogpost 
<http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2015/06/vertical-street-view-of-worlds-most.html>
.

“Climbing is all about flirting with the impossible and pushing the boundaries 
of what you think can be done. CapturingStreet View imagery 3,000 feet up El 
Capitan 
<https://www.google.com/maps/@37.730029,-119.636392,3a,75y,240.76h,1t/data=!3m7!1e1!3m5!1sgskNYa2g8_sAAAQqZe0Ggw!2e0!3e2!7i13312!8i6656>
 proved to be an extension of that, especially when you take a camera meant for 
the inside of a restaurant and mount it thousands of feet up the world’s most 
iconic rock wall,” he said.

The team had to work out a way to keep the Street View camera on the sheer 
granite rock-face, eventually resorting to traditional climbing gear such as 
springs and cams to make it happen. According to Caldwell they “had to get 
really creative with the rigging”.

The team then captured panoramic shots of the climbers tackling some of the 
wall’s most iconic spots. Street View users can now be a fly-on-the-wall toLynn 
Hill tackling 
<https://www.google.com/maps/@37.729014,-119.636547,3a,75y,101.25h,46.82t/data=!3m7!1e1!3m5!1sCg1Rcf8h2wIAAAQqZe0GeQ!2e0!3e2!7i13312!8i6656>
 sections of The Nose, the first person to free-climb the route back in 1993.

Meanwhile, Alex Honnold, one of the world’s greatest free-solo climbers 
(climbing without ropes), who holds the record for the fastest ascent of The 
Nose (2 hours, 23 minutes) can be found wedged between a crack of rock without 
a rope, as well astaking a rest 1,500 feet up 
<http://www.google.com/maps/about/behind-the-scenes/streetview/treks/yosemite/#trek>
, signature grin on his face.

Honnold and Bret Lowell also climbed – or rather “ran”, according to Caldwell 
– up the entire 3,000ft route in order to capture The Nose from top to bottom. 
Now you can follow Honnold’s every move up the wall and anyone planning to make 
the climb can scour the details of the route in advance before they tackle it.

Caldwell hopes that the project will inspire people to visit Yosemite 
themselves. Speaking in a behind-the-scenes video about the project, he said: 
“You’re bringing this environment that’s accessible to so few to a ton of 
people. And people who could never have been up there get to see that world 
through my eyes.”
 