
I’m very privileged to have known and played for Graham Taylor. I’d like to 
thank him for all he did for me – and for all he did forAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> where we very nearly won the 
title in the season before he became England manager. He was one of the best 
managers I played under – and I’m lucky enough to have worked with some very 
good ones.

Graham Taylor put Watford on an upward path and rescued Paul McGrath | Simon 
Burnton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-watford-rescued-paul-mcgrath-aston-villa>
Graham had brought me back to Villa from Bari, which is something I’ll always 
be grateful for. I’ll never forget the day he came over to Italy to watch me 
and talking to him after the game.

It was wonderful to be back “home” playing in front of Villa fans again and 
being coached by a manager whose teams were extremely well organised but who 
placed no restrictions on players who had ability.

Graham created a framework whereby everyone knew exactly what their role 
entailed but, within it, you had absolute freedom. It meant everyone was able 
to play to their strengths and, earlier in his career at Watford, had enabled 
John Barnes, among others, to really flourish.

By the time he got to Villa, Graham’s football had evolved – and continued 
evolving – considerably from his days at Vicarage Road when he was sometimes 
unfairly labelled “long ball” but certain principles remained.

Graham was a very kind, very honest, straight, helpful man, he was always true 
to himself

Importantly we all understood exactly what we were supposed to be doing in any 
given situation – Graham’s instructions were really clear and he was very good 
at communicating them, very good at explaining things in a simple way. A big 
part of his success, though, was due to his honesty and personality, the 
excellence of his man management, as well as the strength of his coaching and 
the brilliance of his teams at getting behind opposing defences.

Graham was a very kind, very honest, straight, helpful man, he was always true 
to himself, never pretended to be something or someone he wasn’t and all the 
Villa players bought into that.

We all really wanted to play for him; we appreciated that he’d be straight 
with us – even if it meant him telling us something we didn’t really want to 
hear. With Graham you knew exactly where you stood and that’s very important. 
It was also how he got the best out of people.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-gordon-cowans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb17a7ea9969a6570db89ebce3f0d21bc1ac23622%2F0_399_1950_1170%2F1950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gordon%20Cowans%3A%20Graham%20Taylor%20was%20someone%20we%20all%20wanted%20to%20play%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-gordon-cowans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gordon%20Cowans%3A%20Graham%20Taylor%20was%20someone%20we%20all%20wanted%20to%20play%20for&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-gordon-cowans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb17a7ea9969a6570db89ebce3f0d21bc1ac23622%2F0_399_1950_1170%2F1950.jpg>
 Gordon Cowans in action for Villa, where Graham Taylor ‘got the best out of 
people’. Photograph: Bob Thomas/Getty Images 
His honesty meant he was a manager you never felt disappointed in. We had a 
great time with him at Villa but he was never frightened to tell someone that 
things weren’t going right, to make it clear that they had to improve or work 
harder.

After Villa we stayed in touch and, when I was 36, he took me to Wolves from 
Derby in December 1994 – which was a really good Christmas present! – and, 
after that, remained someone who was always incredibly helpful towards me. He 
was very down-to-earth, very grounded; a friend of mine lived next door to 
Graham and they’d chat over the garden fence. I used to say “give Graham a 
shout for me”.

Graham Taylor, former England manager, dies at the age of 72
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-dies-72-england-aston-villa-watford>
Even though it didn’t work out quite as planned – and it’s a shame we didn’t 
see how far he could have taken our Villa team after that season when we 
finished second in the old First Division; who knows what we might have 
achieved had he stayed on? – he couldn’t possibly have turned down theEngland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> job. I know how very proud he 
was to have been offered it.

He was proud for his family – they were extremely close and I remember he used 
to talk a lot about his father Tom, who was a sports journalist and, for many 
years, covered Scunthorpe United for the Scunthorpe Evening Telegraph. His 
father was a big influence on him – and perhaps explains why he always had time 
for journalists and wanted to help them.

Graham was a kind, generous, good, man; he’ll be missed by so many people.

Gordon Cowans played for Graham Taylor at Aston Villa during the manager’s 
first spell at the club between 1988 and 1990.
 