 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fyouth-justice-education-commitment-liz-truss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08a64b047447aa53c17c168ff680c39452926180%2F338_0_1200_1446%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Government%20will%20use%20education%20to%20offer%20hope%20to%20young%20offenders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fyouth-justice-education-commitment-liz-truss%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Government%20will%20use%20education%20to%20offer%20hope%20to%20young%20offenders&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fyouth-justice-education-commitment-liz-truss%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F08a64b047447aa53c17c168ff680c39452926180%2F338_0_1200_1446%2F1200.jpg>
 Liz Truss, the lord chancellor and secretary of state for justice. 
Our youth justice system should not just be about punishing crime, important 
though that is; it should also be about reforming offenders. It should provide 
discipline, purpose, supervision and someone who cares – elements that have all 
too often been missing from these young lives.

The people in our prisons and young offender institutions have broken the law, 
they have violated the rules under which a civilised society necessarily and 
rightly operates, and they must face the consequences. But we are missing an 
opportunity if we do not recognise that helping these people to turn their 
lives around not only benefits them but benefits us all, preventing more of us 
becoming victims of crime; making streets and communities safer. And delivering 
huge savings to the public purse.

Nowhere is this opportunity greater than with our young people. Because here 
the penal system has its earliest chance to intervene, to steer our young 
people away from a life of crime and on to the right path, towards finding a 
job, settling down with a family.

Today there are fewer than 1,000 children in custody but this small number 
represents some of the most complex, violent and damaged children within 
society. I repeat, they have committed some appalling crimes and it is right 
that the public are protected and justice is done. However, youth custody 
should be about more than containment where children are exposed to yet more 
violence and given little hope that things may ever change.

On average it costs £75,000 a year to keep an offender in a young offender 
institution yet seven out of 10 will commit another crime within a year of 
release. Centres that deliver containment without purpose all too often lead to 
young criminals becoming persistent offenders whose only graduation is into 
adult prison – young anger that turns into an adult’s hardened attitude to 
others and leaves a trail of devastated victims in its wake.

This is our chance to equip young offenders with the skills they need to lead 
law-abiding lives. This is why Charlie Taylor’s groundbreaking new report 
rightly focuses on putting education at the heart of youth custody. He has made 
a compelling case for change, and the government has listened. So we will 
establish two new secure schools – giving children the maths, English and 
practical skills they need to thrive on the outside.

New ‘secure schools’ launched in bid to cut youth reoffending
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/10/secure-schools-to-help-tackle-youth-crime>
The progress that young offenders make in education, health and behaviour will 
be measured to show how well establishments are doing in reforming young 
offenders. A new role will be created to take charge of youth custody, tasked 
with reducing violence, driving performance and taking action when necessary if 
centres are failing.

We will be putting an extra £15m into providing 20% more staff to give the 
children the supervision and support they need – to challenge them to change 
and to drive reform. And in time we want to see every young person in custody 
on an apprenticeship or on the path to further or higher education. Every young 
person who leaves custody should be earning or learning.

Of course, we need to do more – and we will. Intervening early is crucial in 
reducing youth crime. However, these longer-term changes we need in our system 
should not stop us taking the urgent action required to transform youth custody 
from places where young offenders are left to fester into places of discipline 
and purpose.

Youth custody represents a crossroads for the young offenders within. They 
have arrived there through a myriad of missed opportunities, a lack of good 
guidance and too many bad choices. They may be violent, damaged and challenging 
but they should not leave without hope that there is another way to lead their 
lives.

It’s not too late to turn the time spent in custody into a turning point for 
hundreds of young people.

Liz Truss is lord chancellor and the secretary of state for justice
 