
This century is already witnessing extraordinary transformation fuelled by 
rapid technological change and the availability of massive data and 
information. It’s only going to change faster.

This period of disruption and innovation – also known as the fourth industrial 
revolution – brings challenges and opportunities in which data and information 
must be leveraged to drive productivity, growth and international 
competitiveness.

In Australia, the current economy-wide value of government data is estimated 
to be as much as$25bn a year 
<https://www.communications.gov.au/departmental-news/open-government-data-and-why-it-matters-now>
. Furthermore McKinsey & companyestimate 
<http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/digital-mckinsey/our-insights/open-data-unlocking-innovation-and-performance-with-liquid-information>
 that open data has the potential not only to transform every sector of the 
global economy but also to unleash more than $3tn in economic value annually.

Australia ranks equal sixth (behind Finland, Taiwan, UK, Denmark and Colombia) 
in the 2015global open data index <http://global.census.okfn.org/>. But in a 
country where the cost of doing business is relatively high owing to input, 
labour and regulatory costs, realising the full potential of open data in 
formats that can be easily and quickly retrieved, processed and copyright-free, 
is vital.

A shorter working week could revolutionise city life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2017/jan/04/shorter-working-week-revolutionise-city-life>
Big data comes from many sources, including research findings and social 
media. The most extensive and widely used is open data from government sources. 
This includes data from statistical agencies and data gathered about 
healthcare, transport, education, agriculture and other social and economic 
sectors. Each time commuters catch a bus, each time a tax return or medical 
claim is lodged, data is collected.

State and federal governments and statutory authorities hold, create and 
collect vast amounts of high-quality data which has tremendous potential to 
drive innovation and economic growth. For example, by knowing the commute times 
and loads, roads and transport modalities can be optimised. So it’s time for 
government to share more of this data, more quickly, so it can be effectively 
mined and analysed for that potential to be fully realised.

While open data and information is made available on request, it can be 
subject to long lead times. For example, the Victorian government’s DataVIC 
Access Policyguidelines <https://www.data.vic.gov.au/policy-and-standards> 
refer to the agency’s “dataset custodian” responding to requests within four 
weeks, while data updates may be released on a quarterly or annual basis.

We are already using open data in our daily lives when we use our transport 
apps provided by state governments. Around the world governments are 
increasingly recognising the benefits of digital technologies and data and are 
using these modern tools to raise economic competitiveness in all industries 
from agriculture to manufacturing. In the UK, open data has seen many startups 
flourish.GeoLytix <https://geolytix.co.uk/>, for instance, creates geo data 
products such as maps and boundary data thanks to data issued from Transport 
for London and other government departments.

Australian companies and so-called data-preneurs are also beginning to 
capitalise on the use of open data. The creation of afree energy rating app 
<http://www.energyrating.gov.au/apps>, which, like the well-known and trusted 
energy rating labels on millions of appliances sold every year, is designed to 
help consumers save money on their power bills by choosing energy efficient 
appliances.

It's time for more Australian fund managers to invest in social outcomes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/21/its-time-for-more-australian-fund-managers-to-invest-in-social-outcomes>
The impact of open data and technology-enabled transparency is not exclusively 
economic as government openness yields other important social benefits which 
help our broader community. A good example is Melbourne’sAsk Izzy 
<https://askizzy.org.au/> app that connects homeless people to key support 
service.

For communities, using government data that matters to them promotes 
engagement and choice. The city of Melbourne took the lead by launching the 
first open data platform in Australian local government in 2014. More than 100 
data sets are now available on the platform, ranging from information about the 
city’s 70,000 trees to details of council fees and schedules.

Open data will increasingly help governments transform the way they deliver 
services, while at the same time providing significant economic stimulus, cost 
savings and improved engagement with stakeholders.

The New South Wales government is ahead of the curve when it comes to digital 
licences. Residents can now store their fishing, liquor and gambling licences 
on their mobile device and the Service NSW website. Late last year the NSW 
government launchedits first wave of digital licences 
<http://www.computerworld.com.au/article/610068/nsw-launches-its-first-digital-licences/>
. This saves licence holders from carrying and queuing for cards and allows 
them to easily update their details. Prior to this initiative, the state 
government was issuing more than 2.8m plastic licence cards each year. Digital 
licences havethe potential to save 
<http://www.smh.com.au/digital-life/digital-life-news/digital-drivers-licences-promised-for-nsw-if-mike-bairds-government-is-reelected-20150312-142yn3.html>
 tens of millions of dollars in printing alone.

The World Economic Forum states that if governments seize the open data 
opportunity now, they will not only survive this next phase of 
industrialisation by becoming more effective and transparent, but also excel as 
true supporters of innovation. Commitment to open data should also rebuild 
citizens’ trust in governments’ commitment to transparency and efficiency.

The Committee for Melbourne created its Melbourne 4.0 taskforce, working with 
its cross-sector membership to better understand the impact of the fourth 
industrial revolution on the city and to have a first mover advantage. That is 
why we are advocating for government to pick up the pace in releasing big data, 
in a cheap and accessible format, to strengthen Melbourne and Victoria’s – and 
Australia’s – competitive economic edge.

Our cities’ future prosperity and liveability depends on our ability to 
anticipate and manage global technological disruption while making better use 
of our considerable assets to effectively compete with other global smart 
cities. Technological disruption will fundamentally transform the way we work, 
live and do business. Optimal use of technology, including the broadest 
possible access to open data can be our greatest asset in ensuring that we 
continue to flourish in the Asia Pacific, the world’s fastest growing region.
 