
The British government has cut its stake in Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> to below 7%, 
raising the amount recovered to more than £17.5bn of the £20.3bn of taxpayers’ 
money used to bail out the bank during the financial crisis.

The sale of a further 1% of Lloyds shares on Tuesday reduced the government’s 
stake to 6.93%, from a peak of 43%.

Simon Kirby, the economic secretary to the Treasury, said: “Selling our shares 
inLloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> and making sure 
that we get back all the cash taxpayers injected into it during the financial 
crisis is a key government priority. So I am pleased that we have continued to 
reduce our stake in Lloyds.”


Lloyds Banking Group fails to meet 'fee-free' basic account guidelines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/lloyds-banking-group-fails-to-meet-fee-free-basic-account-guidelines-treasury>
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, announced in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/philip-hammond-drops-plan-to-sell-cut-price-lloyds-shares-to-public>
 that he was abandoning his predecessor’s plans to sell the remainder of the 
Lloyds stake to members of the public at a discounted rate.

Since then, the Treasury has been selling its remaining shares on the stock 
market, reducing its stake in stages from 9.2% to 6.9%. The aim is to have sold 
all its shares within a year, with the proceeds being used to reduce national 
debt.

The current sales 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/lloyds-banking-group--lloy-/rns/holding-s--in-company/201611220700127611P/>
 are taking place at a price lower than the 73.6p average price paid for the 
stake during the crisis, but Hammond has said he expects to recoup the full 
amount injected into the bank. Lloyds shares are trading at just above 61p.

A spokesperson for Lloyds said: “Today’s announcement shows the further 
progress made in returning LloydsBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group to full private ownership 
and enabling the taxpayer to get their money back.


“This reflects the hard work undertaken over the last five years to transform 
the group into a simple, low-risk and customer-focused bank that is committed 
to helping Britain prosper.”


While the government is selling off its stake in Lloyds, it retains a 73% 
stake in Royal Bank of Scotland which it also bailed out during the financial 
crisis.

Hammond said in October that the time was not right to sell its stake in the 
Edinburgh-based bank, in whicha 5% stake was sold in August 2015 at a £1bn loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/04/rbs-sell-off-george-osborne-defends-1bn-loss>
.
 