
Plans to build a “world-class” concert hall in London have been thrown into 
disarray after the government pulled its funding on Friday. The project, which 
was proposed by the conductorSimon Rattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/simon-rattle>, was not affordable, the 
government said.

The former chancellor George Osborne put up £5.5m to produce a detailed 
business case for the London Concert Hall to be developed. That followed a call 
from Rattle, who is due to take up the role of principal conductor at theLondon 
Symphony Orchestra <https://www.theguardian.com/music/london-symphony-orchestra>
 next year, to build a better facility in London.

Simon Rattle’s return to LSO marred by squabble over new London concert hall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/25/simon-rattle-lso-new-london-concert-hall-row>
But Osborne’s successors in the cabinet have decided that the project, also 
known as the Centre for Music, does not offer value for money for the taxpayer 
and is not affordable. It is understood that around £1.25m has been spent so 
far, with the rest now returning to the exchequer.

“London is already home to world class culture and music venues, from the 
iconic Royal Albert Hall to the Barbican Hall and the Royal Festival Hall at 
the Southbank Centre,” a government spokesman said.

“[It] provided funding to consider the business case for a new London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> concert hall to add to this mix, but 
has concluded that it does not currently offer value for money for taxpayers 
and is not affordable. Therefore it will no longer fund contributions to this 
project. We know this will disappoint those who are working hard to deliver 
this project and we wish them well with developing alternative plans for 
financing.”

Mark Boleat, policy chairman at the City of London Corporation, said: “This is 
very disappointing news. We believe the government should have waited to see 
whether a business case could have been developed before making this 
announcement.”

A spokesperson for the mayor of London said: “This is bad news for London. 
World-class cities need world-class music venues like the Centre for Music. 
This looks like a vote of no confidence in London from the government.”
 