
ANOTHER LESS THAN FASCINATING EVENING STRETCHES OUT AHEAD OF US, THEN

The English have had their fair share of forgettable days in Big Cup. Sir Alex 
Ferguson’s first great Manchester United side weretrounced 4-0 in 1994 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/oct/31/walsh-barcelona-manchester-united-1994>
 by Romário, Hristo Stoichkov and Albert Ferrer. In 1966, Liverpool were 
humiliated 5-1 by Ajax in an Amsterdam pea-souper so thick Bill Shankly was 
able to race on to the pitch mid-game and give his players beneficial advice 
and a good hard clip round the lug. And on one cold Moscovian night in 1995, 
Graeme Le Saux lost a unanimous points decision 118-109, 118-109, 118-110. 
Blackburn went down 3-0 to Spartak that evening as well. What a show everyone 
made of themselves.

Anyway, point is, these things happen. But it’s also true that Leicester 
City’s 5-0 capitulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/porto-leicester-city-champions-league-match-report>
 in Porto last night is right up there with the worst of it. Leicester are 
having a strange old season, one in which they could feasibly emulate both 
Nottingham Forest bywinning Big Cup on debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/apr/26/garry-birtles-european-cup-forest-liverpool>
, and the currently unique achievement of Manchester City’s 1938 vintage who, 
well, there’s no need to spell it out, but everyone’s thinking it, aren’t they? 
Claudio Ranieri is also exploring themes of duality, trying to retain his usual 
calm facade while clearly on a rolling boil. “I decided to change the team, the 
result is my fault,” he serenely began, before raising his voice to add the 
slightly more pointed: “My players lost a very great chance to show me their 
best.” Of course, it’s entirely possible that Leicester’s second string did 
grab their opportunity with both hands. It’s just that their best isthat.

Whether the Foxes go on to match Forest, and indeed their other great Midlands 
mates Aston Villa, by lifting Europe’s premier pot at the first attempt, or get 
thrashed 9-0 on aggregate in the Round of Arsenal by Bayer Leverkusen then get 
relegated on the penultimate weekend of the season by none other than 
Manchester City, at least they’ll have avoided Euro Vase. That living hell now 
awaits Tottenham Hotspur every Thursday until the end of time. Spurs only 
started playing like genuine Big Cup hopefuls the minute they got knocked out 
of it, and theireasy win last night over CSKA Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/tottenham-hotspur-cska-moscow-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 guarantees European football in the new year. It just remains to be seen 
whether Mauricio Pochettino takes the competition seriously, or once again 
picks the sort of preposterous team that makes this current Leicester shower 
look like Internazionale ‘64.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Paul Doyle for the boiling hot coverage of Zorya Luhansk 1-1 Manchester 
United, whilst Scott Murray is on hand for Southampton 3-2 Hapoel Beer Sheva. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“I love reading Jonathan Wilson but I really don’t know what ‘percussive 
vertical football is’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/07/goals-premier-league-pep-guardiola-barcelona-manchester-city>
” – that rarest of things, something The Fiver and Richard Keys agree on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fleicester-city-champions-league-tottenham-hotspur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80a84d5281c5ecac984b163ec96f022994aee1da%2F1298_465_1434_860%2F1434.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Graeme%20Le%20Saux%20lost%20a%20unanimous%20points%20decision&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fleicester-city-champions-league-tottenham-hotspur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Graeme%20Le%20Saux%20lost%20a%20unanimous%20points%20decision&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fleicester-city-champions-league-tottenham-hotspur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80a84d5281c5ecac984b163ec96f022994aee1da%2F1298_465_1434_860%2F1434.jpg>
 Do me a favour, love! Photograph: Richard Saker / Rex Features 
FIVER LETTERS


“On the subject of ECT for refs (Fiver passim), they’ve tried it before 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sdnv62tcH8k> on players in a game in Norway. 
So it’s possible, albeit the devices need to be placed on the refs’ heads” – 
Nigel Assam.

“For once The Fiver has come over all bold and confident all of a sudden with 
a new direction in typography (yesterday’s Fiver), although it’s played havoc 
with my eyes. Can you go back to your regular self please” – Brian Wealthall 
(and many, many others).

“Surely the horse is in a stable condition, not position (yesterday’s Fiver). 
I misspoke that joke in that way after the Tyne-Wear horse punch incident and 
have never really moved on. Do people still punch horses?” – Philip Jones.

“I laughed out loud at yesterday’s Fiver. Just thought I should let you know. 
I subscribed in 2001” – Pat Viner.

“Fulham may lay claim to many superlatives, but I’m pretty sure that Cray 
Wanderers – founded 1860 - are London’s oldest football club! Alas they do not 
have a gin bar” – Brock Kwiatkowsky.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
also tweet The Fiver.Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … 
Nigel Assam.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/uk?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING

Join AC Jimbo and the pod squad for the latest thrilling instalment of 
Football Weekly Extraaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2016/dec/08/arsenal-seal-top-spot-as-spurs-head-to-europa-league-football-weekly-extra>

NEWS, BITS AND BOBS

The Met police force has launched an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/metropolitan-police-to-investigate-football-sex-abuse-claims>
 into sex abuse claims involving London football clubs.

Gary Johnson, the former player who was paid £50,000 by Chelsea not to go 
public with allegations that he was sexually abused by their former chief scout 
Eddie Heath,has demanded further financial compensation from the club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/gary-johnson-demands-further-compensation-from-chelsea-over-sexual-abuse-claims-eddie-heath>
.

SKY SPORTS YELLOW BREAKING NEWS TICKER OF DOOM … Nasty Leeds owner Massimo 
Cellinohas been banned for 18 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/leeds-owner-massimo-cellino-banned-18-months>
 by the FA for breaking regulations relating to Mr 15%s … SKY SPORTS YELLOW 
BREAKING NEWS TICKER OF DOOM …

Ronald Koeman has said he may have to do an Oliver Twist impression and ask 
Farhad Moshiri for more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/yannick-bolasie-injury-means-everton-need-to-sign-players-in-january-admits-ronald-koeman>
 after Yannick Bolasie’s season-ending knee-knack. “

Barcelona have invited Chapecoense to play in a friendly at the Camp Nou in 
August 2017 as a tribute to the victims of the plane crash in Colombia that
killed many of the Brazilian club’s players and staff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/plane-carrying-brazilian-footballers-team-chapecoense-crashes-en-route-to-medellin>
.


David Moyes has cancelled an agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/sunderland-yann-mvila-rubin-kazan>
 to bring Yann M’Vila back to the Stadium of Light from Rubin Kazan on a 
permanent deal after word got round that the midfielder was now about as keen 
on Sunderland as your average Newcastle fan.

Arsène Wenger has invested in some leg-irons and waved them the way of Mesut 
Özil and Alexis Sánchez. “These players have 18 months on their contracts and, 
no matter what happens, they will stay for 18 months,”growled the Arsenal boss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/mesut-ozil-alexis-sanchez-will-not-be-sold-early-insists-arsene-wenger-arsenal>
.

Fifa bigwig Gianni Infantino has revealed exactly how he plans to suck the 
last remnants of excitement out of the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/fifa-president-gianni-infantino-world-cup-proposals>
. The bright spark wants to create 16 three-team groups that may feature 
nations whose quality is not dissimilar to that of Shortbread McFiver’s 
seven-a-side team.

And the third-round draw for the ever-popular Leyland DAF Cup threw up some 
tasty ties, including Yeovil v Southampton or Reading’s Under-21s. And yes, 
that incessant thumping noiseis the sound of The Fiver’s pulse racing. 

STILL WANT MORE?

There’s a new brand of Pulisball on the market, whispers Paul Doyle, and it’s 
doing West Brom’s form no harm at all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/08/tony-pulis-west-brom-buccaneer-chelsea>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fleicester-city-champions-league-tottenham-hotspur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9e46bad3257c46151c0530f28da9751f9426437%2F0_131_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Graeme%20Le%20Saux%20lost%20a%20unanimous%20points%20decision&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fleicester-city-champions-league-tottenham-hotspur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Graeme%20Le%20Saux%20lost%20a%20unanimous%20points%20decision&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fleicester-city-champions-league-tottenham-hotspur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9e46bad3257c46151c0530f28da9751f9426437%2F0_131_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Hallelujah! Photograph: Nick Potts/PA 
One for your dads, kids: Bob Paisley’s This Is Your Life from 1977, chock full 
of sensible clothing, enthusiastic siblings and scripted chat from some proper 
legends.It’s right here, along with some belting goals, in Classic YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/08/boxing-brawls-junior-joe-cole-plus-bob-paisley-this-is-your-life>
.

GOALS! GOALS! GOALS! GOALS! GOALS! (of the week) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/07/best-goals-week-robert-lewandowki-xavi-lee-trundle-goalkeeper>
, featuring a penalty from 40-year-old Lee Trundle.

Quiz! Quiz! Quiz! Which competitions are these managers and players discussing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/football-quiz-competitions-managers-players>
 (well, mostly belittling actually)?

The Seattle Sounders and Toronto FC are proof that MLS title contenders must 
be built for both a season-long haul and the dusty dash for the finish,writes 
Luis Miguel Echegaray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/how-to-build-an-mls-cup-champion-a-jekyll-and-hyde-blueprint>
 in the USA! USA!! USA!!!

In news that will send Roy Keane’s head spinning even further on its axis, 
Brazil’s Gabriel Barbosa might be off to earn a decent bit of crust at 
Leicester City.Well, so says The Rumour Mill. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/football-transfer-rumours-brazils-gabriel-barbosa-to-leicester-city>

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>!

‘I’LL STOP BOTHERING YOU’
 