
The football world has come together to mourn the death of the former England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> manager Graham Taylor at the age 
of 72 from a suspected heart attack.

Graham Taylor put Watford on an upward path and rescued Paul McGrath | Simon 
Burnton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-watford-rescued-paul-mcgrath-aston-villa>
Tributes from figures across the game have flowed for a man who enjoyed the 
highs the sport could offer and endured the greatest lows, but whose genial 
personality and human touch ultimately won him the affection of a nation.

Sir Elton John led the tributes 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BPKrjpLFruw/?hl=en>. “I am deeply saddened and 
shocked to hear about Graham’s passing,” said the former owner of Watford, with 
whom Taylor made his name in the 1970s and 80s. “He was like a brother to me. 
We went on an incredible journey together. He took my beloved Watford from the 
depths of the lower leagues to uncharted territory and into Europe.

“We have become a leading English club because of his managerial wisdom and 
genius. This is a sad and dark day forWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford>. The club and the town. We will 
cherish Graham and drown our sorrows in the many brilliant memories he gave us. 
I love you Graham. I will miss you very much.”

Sir Alex Ferguson also praised the man he called “approachable, open and 
honest”. The former Manchester United manager said: “Graham was one of the 
old-school managers. He started as a very young man of 28, having suffered a 
career‑ending injury as a player. He applied himself to every facet of football 
management. I have very fond memories of Graham. He was approachable, open and 
honest. If he could help you in any way, he always would. I was really shocked 
by this terrible news and I send my condolences to Graham’s wife and all of his 
family.”

John and Ferguson were not alone in the emotional tenor of their condolences. 
Luther Blissett who, alongside John Barnes, was the star of Taylor’s Watford 
side that finished second in the First Division in 1983 and reached the FA Cup 
final in 1984, said of his former manager: “All else in my football world fades 
into insignificance now. RIP great man from one who owes you so much Thankyou 
GT YOU were the true star.”
Luther Blissett (@LBliss8) 
All else in my football world fades into insignificance now. RIP great man 
from one who owes you so much#ThankyouGT 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ThankyouGT?src=hash> 
YOU were the true star pic.twitter.com/EqnfJatX7I <https://t.co/EqnfJatX7I>
 <https://twitter.com/LBliss8/status/819557957721530368> January 12, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/LBliss8/status/819557957721530368> 
After 10 years at Watford, Taylor moved on to Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> in 1987 where he first won 
promotion to the top flight and then two seasons later claimed a second‑place 
finish. Paul McGrath, who played for Taylor at Villa while also in the throes 
of alcoholism, posted the following message of thanks on Twitter: “Devastated 
to hear of Graham’s sad passing, what a gentleman. In my darkest days himself 
and [Taylor’s wife] Rita were always there for me #RipGrahamAHero.”

'The nicest man in football': our readers pay tribute to Graham Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-readers-tributes>
After Sir Bobby Robson stepped down following a successful World Cup in Italy 
in 1990, Taylor was made England manager, a job that was unfortunately to 
define his professional career in the eyes of many. An ignominious exit from 
Euro 92 was followed by failure to qualify for the 1994 World Cup. Taylor 
endured grotesque headlines and saw his reputation further ridiculed in a 
warts-and-all TV documentary,An Impossible Job 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6GB1KTIACtk>.

The players Taylor selected for international duty were, however, effusive in 
their tributes. Gary Lineker, who was substituted by Taylor during his final 
England match meaning he could never equal Sir Bobby Charlton’s England 
goalscoring record, said on Twitter: “Very sad news that Graham Taylor has 
passed away. An outstanding manager, lover of football and thoroughly decent 
man.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-dies-72-england-aston-villa-watford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c52b8dd7fe1ded4b6ec9d2d211a264c3a8e9aa5%2F175_0_1689_1324%2F1689.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Graham%20Taylor%3A%20tributes%20pour%20in%20after%20death%20of%20former%20England%20manager%20aged%2072&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-dies-72-england-aston-villa-watford%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Graham%20Taylor%3A%20tributes%20pour%20in%20after%20death%20of%20former%20England%20manager%20aged%2072&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fgraham-taylor-dies-72-england-aston-villa-watford%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c52b8dd7fe1ded4b6ec9d2d211a264c3a8e9aa5%2F175_0_1689_1324%2F1689.jpg>
 Graham Taylor with Watford players after winning the Nationwide League 
Division One play-off final against Bolton in 1999. Photograph: Daily 
Mail/Rex/Shutterstock 
Lineker’s Match of the Day colleague and England successor Alan Shearer shared 
similar sentiments, saying: “Completely shocked by news of Graham Taylor. 
Always held him in the very highest regard – the man who gave me my first 
England cap. So sad.”

Paul Gascoigne also paid tribute. “His enthusiasm for life and football was 
incredible,” he said.

Taylor resigned from England in 1993 and was replaced by Terry Venables. 
Venables, who managed QPR while Taylor was at Watford, said news of Taylor’s 
death had hit him “like a sledge hammer”.

“Graham was a leader”, he said. “He knew what he wanted, whether it was the 
coaching, or [later] on the radio. Me and Graham, alongside David Pleat at 
Luton, we were rivals. It was a fantastic time and we were very lucky.”

Graham Taylor obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-obituary> 
After England, Taylor spent a season at Wolverhampton Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolves> before returning to Watford 
where, once again, he won promotion, this time to the Premier League. After a 
final short return to Villa, Taylor retired from the game, becoming a radio 
pundit and honorary lifetime president at Watford. In 2014, the Vicarage Road 
club renamed the Rous stand the Graham Taylor stand in his honour.

Sean Dyche, now manager at Premier League Burnley, was one of the last to 
benefit from Taylor’s mentoring, when he helped his former player land his 
first managerial job with the Hornets. “I’m devastated at the news,” Dyche 
said. “He played a massive part in me taking over at Watford. He helped me get 
the job then let me get on with it. He always resisted the temptation to get 
involved or interfere, he knew I had to learn for myself. He had his fair share 
of knocks in his managerial career but overall I think the respect for him 
within the game runs pretty deep.”
 