
I am hanging upside down in “child’s pose”, like some sort of yogic bat 
suspended above the floor. My shins are against the wall, my arms and head 
heavy, and as I let the strap around my pelvis take the weight I sense my spine 
lengthen all the more. I feel as though I could hang here for days, feeling the 
benefits of one of the most common floor-based yoga postures enhanced by the 
inversion.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fadvanced-yoga-santillan-andalucia-malaga-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf6502ae74cf7ee93aeea75757e395ae89383e71%2F0_513_2448_2580%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gravity-assisted%20yoga%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%2C%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fadvanced-yoga-santillan-andalucia-malaga-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gravity-assisted%20yoga%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%2C%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fadvanced-yoga-santillan-andalucia-malaga-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf6502ae74cf7ee93aeea75757e395ae89383e71%2F0_513_2448_2580%2F2448.jpg>
 Jane Dunford, nearest the camera, in ‘child pose’ on the yoga wall 
Santillán, a yoga and wellbeing centre that opened last year high in the hills 
to the east of Málaga, has many things to recommend it. There are the beautiful 
views over the Med, the gorgeous Spanish finca-style accommodation (this used 
to be a boutique hotel until the owners teamed up with renowned UK yoga teacher 
Simon Low to turn it into a retreat), pretty gardens and a lovely swimming 
pool. But what sets it apart from any other centre is the vast, newly built, 
light-filled shala (yoga hall) with its 190-square metre Great Yoga Wall. 
Covered in detachable hooks for belts and straps, it has been designed to allow 
students of all heights and abilities to work on alignment and perfect held 
poses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fadvanced-yoga-santillan-andalucia-malaga-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff600d133a99f5a7c0ed3f06e8e293fa9bb3dc8f3%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gravity-assisted%20yoga%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%2C%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fadvanced-yoga-santillan-andalucia-malaga-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gravity-assisted%20yoga%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%2C%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fadvanced-yoga-santillan-andalucia-malaga-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff600d133a99f5a7c0ed3f06e8e293fa9bb3dc8f3%2F0_0_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
I’m here in sunny June on Low’s Yin Yang holiday – a week of twice-daily yoga 
classes (both dynamic flow and restorative, they can be up to three hours each, 
but fly by), with plenty of rest, optional spa treatments and tasty, healthy 
food. Although most of the group are regular practitioners, you don’t have to 
have done yoga before: classes are cleverly tailored to suit all levels and 
Simon’s co-teacher, Eija, also takes classes and is on-hand for expert 
adjustments. There are crystal bowl baths’ and meditation sessions. Time on the 
yoga wall, woven into classes, is a treat for its novelty and tangible effects. 
It’s serious yoga, but fun too – plenty of people are detoxing but no one 
frowns if you want the odd glass of wine and the paella party on the final 
evening is quite a fiesta.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fadvanced-yoga-santillan-andalucia-malaga-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d4c075206daaf0beffc1d16c507370d6cce6ae3%2F0_24_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gravity-assisted%20yoga%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%2C%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fadvanced-yoga-santillan-andalucia-malaga-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gravity-assisted%20yoga%20in%20Andaluc%C3%ADa%2C%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fadvanced-yoga-santillan-andalucia-malaga-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d4c075206daaf0beffc1d16c507370d6cce6ae3%2F0_24_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The centre, which used to be a boutique hotel, has pretty gardens and a 
saltwater swimming pool 
Santillán hosts a roster of teachers who use the wall to differing degrees, 
but all holidays here promise something special. Owner Adriana, and her family, 
couldn’t be more welcoming and there’s a peaceful, healing vibe about the 
place. The Dalai Lama once visited on his way to a Buddhist monastery in 
Granada and commented on its “beautiful energy”.

After a week chilling and stretching – with a trip out to the coast one 
afternoon (there’s the option of going into Málaga too) – I feel rejuvenated 
and physically and mentally unravelled and keep wondering if I could construct 
a yoga wall in my home. Who needs a bed when you can hang like a bat?


• The Yin & Yang Yoga retreat with Simon Low costs £985 for a week; his next 
retreat is14-21 May,centrosantillan.com 
<http://centrosantillan.com/events/yin-yang-yoga-retreat-simon-low>
 