
Australia’s offshore oil regulator is censoring documents about BP’s plans to 
drill in the Great Australian Bight on the grounds that environmental 
campaigners could use the information to “oppose all drilling activities” there 
– and that the plans are too “technical” for the public to understand.

Nathaniel Pelle, a Greenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> campaign who requested the 
documents under freedom of information laws, said the decision hindered 
democratic debate.

Greens push to outlaw all mining in Great Australian Bight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/greens-push-to-outlaw-all-mining-in-great-australian-bight>
Greenpeace sought access to BP’s “well operation management plan”, held by the 
National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority. 
Nopsema refused access to parts of the document, listing a range of reasons.

It cited one as “the likelihood of opposition/protest groups using the 
information to oppose all drilling activities in the Great Australian Bight”.

Pelle told Guardian Australia that Greenpeace was appealing the decision. 
“Obviously civil society groups have a legitimate role in discussing what 
environmental risks are appropriate,” he said.

In an email to the authority, Pelle wrote: “The implication of this argument 
is that it is unreasonable for civil society groups to oppose high-risk 
activities based on the facts. This is not an appropriate determination for 
NOPSEMA to make.”

Nopsema also considered that some of the document was too technical for it to 
properly inform the public. “Given its highly technical scope prepared for a 
confined audience with specific well-engineering expertise, it is unlikely to 
inform the community about the government’s operations or enhance scrutiny of 
government decision-making,” it said.

This was despite the FoI Act explicitly stating that government agencies 
cannot consider whether releasing information “could result in confusion or 
unnecessary debate”.

“It is unheard of, in my experience, and is clearly not true,” Pelle said. 
“We’ve had multiple experts from the US and Australia taking part in the 
debate.”

Nopsema told Guardian Australia it wasn’t appropriate to comment on the matter 
while it was still possible for Greenpeace to have its decision reviewed.

But a spokeswoman said Nopsema’s chief executive, Stuart Smith, was an 
advocate for greater transparency, including “for example, releasing full 
environment plans upfront and providing a public comment period”.

That is not allowed under current regulations, so Nopsema can only release the 
documents when required to under FoI laws.

Assessment of BP’s Bight oil drill plan secretive and weak, Senate told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/28/assessment-of-bps-bight-oil-drill-plan-secretive-and-weak-senate-told>
Pelle said the level of transparency surrounding offshore oil drilling in 
Australia was concerning. “We’re the only OECD country that doesn’t require 
this sort of document to be made public,” he said. “It’s untransparent in a way 
that is incomparable to other jurisdictions.”

The Department of Industry, Innovation and Science is reviewing Nopsema’s 
transparency arrangements 
<http://www.industry.gov.au/resource/UpstreamPetroleum/OffshorePetroleumEnvironment/Pages/StakeholderEngagementOffshorePetroleumActivities.aspx>
,considering options 
<http://www.industry.gov.au/resource/UpstreamPetroleum/OffshorePetroleumEnvironment/Pages/Public-Consultation-Session-Consultation-and-Transparency-Requirements-for-Offshore-Petroleum-Activities.aspx>
 that include making environmental plans available to the public.

In October BP – the company responsible for the world’s biggest oil spill in 
the Gulf of Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/02/bp-will-pay-largest-environmental-fine-in-us-history-for-gulf-oil-spill>
 in 2010 –announced that it was ditching its plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/bp-ditches-plans-to-drill-for-oil-in-the-great-australian-bight>
 to drill in the bight. But it has continued to pursue its application.

Nopsema told a Senate inquiry in November that the application “was still in 
play” and BPcould sell its right to drill to another company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/bps-applications-to-drill-for-oil-in-great-australian-bight-still-in-play-says-regulator>
 if its application was successful.
 