
The prospect of the UK Green Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-investment-bank> being stripped 
of its assets in a sale to Australian investment bank Macquarie is “deeply 
troubling”, Scottish ministers have told Westminster.

The sale of the Edinburgh-based bank, which supports offshore windfarms and 
other green projects, is expected to be agreed in January. But the Labour 
party, Liberal Democrats, Greens and former Conservative ministers have all 
raised concerns in recent weeks that privatisation may see the bank lose its 
environmental purpose.

In an unpublished letter to the business department, seen by the Guardian, the 
Scottish cabinet secretary for the economy said he was “frustrated” at being 
kept in the dark over a sale of the £3.8bn publicly owned bank.

Related: Green Investment Bank could be snapped up by foreign buyers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/02/green-investment-bank-foreign-buyers-energy>

“Reports have indicated that the completion of the transaction process will 
result in the complete break-up of the current Green Investment Bank portfolio 
and may result in an asset-stripping exercise with significant financial 
rewards for any new owner. This is deeply troubling,” said Keith Brown in the 
letter to Nick Hurd, the climate minister.

Brown continued: “The Scottish government does not believe that the approach 
to privatisation being reported is in line with the reassurances given in the 
autumn of 2015.”

While the Scottish government issued a statement voicing its concerns just 
before Christmas <http://news.gov.scot/news/green-investment-bank>, the letter 
reveals the extent of its frustration, with Brown saying he was disappointed 
Hurd had not taken a call from him, and warning he would continue to press 
ministers on the issue.

Vince Cable, who as former business secretary launched the bank in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/nov/28/green-investment-bank-vince-cable>
, told the Guardian he “fully shared” Scotland’s concerns.

“The Scottish government has a perfectly legitimate wish to be properly 
consulted on the matter. The problem is that because it’s a bidding process 
they’ve [the government] wrapped themselves in commercial confidentiality and 
it’s getting in the way of having a proper policy discussion.”

He added: “Under no circumstances should they be allowing a decision to 
proceed which involves a potential break-up of the bank, it’s been a big 
success story.”

Although not officially confirmed, Macquarie was chosen as the government’s 
preferred bidder last autumn, after beating off a bid from the Sustainable 
Development Capital consortium. Sources close to the London Stock Exchange
labelled the Australian bank an “asset-stripper” when it bid for the exchange 
12 years ago 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/2928243/LSE-hits-at-asset-stripper-predator.html>
.

Clive Lewis, Labour shadow secretary of state for business and energy, said: 
“Privatising the GIB makes no sense whatsoever. The bank is both a great 
success as a public institution and providing a healthy return to the taxpayer. 
It’s been multiplying our ability to build substantial low carbon 
infrastructure and fight climate change.”

Sepi Golzari-Munro, who has closely monitored the bank’s sale and is head of 
the UK programme at thinktank E3G, said: “The GIB is a strategic national asset 
that can and should be used to achieve those ends, rather than used by foreign 
banks to make a windfall at the taxpayer’s expense.”

A BEIS spokeswoman said: “This is a commercially sensitive process and 
therefore it is inappropriate for us to comment while the process is ongoing.”

The Green Investment Bank declined to comment.
 