
Greenpeace activists have climbed the British Museum and have hung banners off 
its columns in protest at BP’s sponsorship ofits new ancient Egypt exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/15/drowned-worlds-egypts-sunken-cities>
.

The museum was temporarily closed for around four hours on Thursday during the 
protest because of “visitor safety reasons.”

Greenpeace said it was targeting the oil company’s sponsorship of the Sunken 
Cities exhibition, and called on the museum to end the partnership. The protest 
today followstwo on Tuesday at the museum’s Great Court by the group BP or not 
BP 
<http://bp-or-not-bp.org/news/drenched-performers-occupy-british-museum-after-hours/>
, which campaigns against fossil fuel sponsorship of the arts.


Elena Polisano, a campaigner for Greenpeace, said: “The British Museum is an 
institution traditionally devoted to education, research and discovery, whereas 
BP’s focus is on building anoil-dependent culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/13/activists-occupy-british-museum-over-bp-sponsorship>
. The only research and discovery they are interested in is finding more of the 
fossil fuels that are warming our planet and raising sea levels.”

The green group said 85 activists took part in the protest, which involves 
27-foot-long banners with the names of cities threatened by sea level rise and 
climate change, and dubbed the exhibition ‘Sinking Cities’.

Sunken Cities review – archaeology dressed up as action movie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/17/british-museum-sunken-cities-review-archaeology-indiana-jones-hyperbole>
A spokesperson for the Metropolitan Police said officers were at the scene and 
making enquiries. “Police were called at 09:26hrs on Thursday, 19 May to 
reports of protesters at theBritish Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/british-museum>,” they said.

The Sunken Cities exhibition, which is sponsored by BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp>, hosts treasures from 
Thonis-Heracleion and Canopus, two cities lost to the sea by the 8th century. 
It is the museum’s first to explore underwater archaeology.


A BP spokesman said: “BP has a long history as a major supporter of arts and 
culture in the UK and we are proud to have partnered the British Museum for 20 
years, supporting significant exhibitions such as the new Sunken Cities 
exhibition.”
 