
The Green party’s only MP, Caroline Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/caroline-lucas>, has announced that she 
has stepped down from the committee of patrons of the Stop the War coalition 
“in light of some of [the group’s] recent positions”.

Lucas, who was formerly a vice-president of the organisation, released a 
statement on Tuesday saying she had stepped back from the organisation a few 
weeks ago because of the group’s statements following the Paris attacks and her 
concerns that Syrians had not been allowed to speak in one of the group’s 
meetings.

A statement from her office, which also stressed that the former Green party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/green-party> leader shared the group’s 
opposition to the bombing of Syria, said: “[Lucas’s] busy parliamentary and 
constituency schedule means that she doesn’t have time to fully engage with the 
role of a patron and, in light of some recent StWC positions that she didn’t 
support, she felt standing down was the responsible thing to do.”

The MP’s spokesperson said: “Caroline was specifically troubled by some Stop 
the War Coalition statements after the Paris atrocities. Though the pieces were 
subsequently taken down, she felt unable to associate herself with them.


Anti-airstrike protest at parliament keeps pressure on MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/01/anti-airstrike-protest-parliament-mps-stop-the-war-syria-action>
 “She was also concerned that some Syrian voices were not given an opportunity 
to speak at a recent meeting organised by the StWC in parliament. StWC has 
played an important role in building the anti-war movement in Britain, and 
Caroline will continue to work in support of peace.”

Responding to Lucas’s announcement, a statement from the Stop the War 
Coalition said: “Caroline Lucas indicated a month ago that she wished to step 
back from involvement in Stop the War. However, we are delighted that both 
Caroline and Green party leaderNatalie Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/natalie-bennett> have spoken on Stop the 
War platforms since to condemn the bombing of Syria. We very much welcome their 
continued support and that of many Green party activists.”

The spokesperson for the group said there had always been disagreements within 
the movement: “We are a very big coalition with different organisations within 
it … and we have very different approaches within it and sometimes we have 
different approaches tactically.”

“The Greens as a party have been since 2002 affiliated to Stop the War and we 
don’t expect that to change,” the group added.

Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> stepped 
down as chairman of Stop the War – which was formed to oppose military 
intervention in Afghanistan and Iraq – after he became Labour leader.

Lucas’s statement refers to a Stop the War Coalition meeting in parliament on 
2 November <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wcRJmbFj_xc>, at which it has been 
claimed that Syrians who wanted to speak were ignored by the meeting’s chair, 
Diane Abbott, the shadow international development secretary. Lucas laterwrote 
to the Stop the War Coalition 
<https://twitter.com/CarolineLucas/status/662337265243463680> to complain about 
the way the meeting was chaired.

A spokesperson from the Stop the War Coalition said the group disputed 
accounts given 
<http://www.syriauk.org/2015/11/why-stop-war-dont-want-to-listen-to.html?spref=tw>
 of the meeting. “Our disagreement with some Syrians is that they’ve supported 
intervention and we’ve taken the view that we should be against British 
intervention and that the speakers should reflect this ... But we do have 
contact with different Syrians and we don’t at all rule out having them speak 
at particular meetings.”

How MPs twisted my words on Paris attacks | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/how-mps-twisted-my-words-on-paris-attacks>
The Stop the War Coalition was heavily criticised when it published an article 
that claimed: “Paris reaps whirlwind of western support for extremist violence 
in Middle East, after Isis killed 130 people in the French capital.”

The article, which has since been taken down, added: “Without decades of 
intervention by the US and its allies there would have been no ‘war on terror’ 
and no terrorist attacks in Paris.”

The group was also criticised for an article – which has also been taken down 
– responding to the Commons speech by the shadow foreign secretary,Hilary Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hilarybenn>, on why he would be 
supporting airstrikes in Syria. It read: “Benn does not even seem to realise 
that the jihadist movement that ultimately spawned Daesh [Isis] is far closer 
to the spirit of internationalism and solidarity that drove the International 
Brigades than Cameron’s bombing campaign.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fthere-is-no-case-for-uk-intervention-in-syria-says-stop-the-war-coalition-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There%20is%20no%20case%20for%20UK%20intervention%20in%20Syria%2C%20says%20Stop%20the%20War%20Coalition%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fthere-is-no-case-for-uk-intervention-in-syria-says-stop-the-war-coalition-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%20is%20no%20case%20for%20UK%20intervention%20in%20Syria%2C%20says%20Stop%20the%20War%20Coalition%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fthere-is-no-case-for-uk-intervention-in-syria-says-stop-the-war-coalition-video&media=>
Stop the War Coalition demonstration in Whitehall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2015/nov/28/there-is-no-case-for-uk-intervention-in-syria-says-stop-the-war-coalition-video>
Lucas’s announcement comes after Tristram Hunt, the former shadow education 
secretary,called on Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/06/jeremy-corbyn-urged-to-pull-out-of-stop-the-war-christmas-fundraiser>
 to pull out of a Christmas fundraising event organised by what he called the 
“disreputable” group.

Hunt called on Corbyn not to attend the event  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/06/corbyn-stop-the-war-fundraiser>
in light of the group’s decision to picket Labour headquarters last week ahead 
of the parliamentary vote to extend anti-Isis airstrikes to Syria and the “ugly 
comments” it made about Benn.

Stop the War responded 
<http://www.stopwar.org.uk/index.php/news/response-to-tristram-hunt-mp-s-attack-on-stop-the-war-coalition>
 to Hunt’s comments by saying: “We did not picket Labour party offices, we have 
unequivocally condemned the terrible massacre in Paris, and we do not take a 
view on who should hold which office in the Labour party.

“Hunt has been wrong about all the wars Britain has fought this century. He is 
entitled to his errors, butStop the War  
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=newssearch&cd=3&ved=0ahUKEwihp9-i38zJAhVCJR4KHahcB7cQqQIIKygAMAI&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fstop-the-war-westminster-demo-syria-vote&usg=AFQjCNFxbA9L4oQwFCrnFL627hRBkBlMLw&sig2=KiJM6hU3kxZbTTcGnr5Llw&bvm=bv.109332125,d.dmo>
and others are entitled to peacefully protest against them, and we shall 
continue to do so.”
 