
The UK is set to gain its first power station that uses a novel gasification 
technology to convert discarded wood into electricity, following a £47.8m 
investment 
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/news/2318701/green-investment-bank-backs-birmingham-bio-plant>
 from a group including the government-backed green investment bank (GIB).

The Birmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> Bio Power plant 
will convert recovered wood into electricity through a gasification process in 
which carbon in wood is converted into gas, which is then used to raise steam 
to drive a turbine.

The 10.3MW project is being developed by Carbonarius, a joint venture between 
Stoke-on-Trent technology developer O-Gen and property firm The Una Group. It 
is aiming for completion in 2016, in time to secure payments from the Renewable 
Obligation Certificate subsidy regime.

The GIB today confirmed it has invested £12m directly in the project, 
alongside a consortium that comprises Balfour Beatty, Eternity CapitalManagement
 
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/news/2318701/green-investment-bank-backs-birmingham-bio-plant>
, GCP Infrastructure Fund.

The GIB also invested a further £6.2m indirectly through its backing of the 
Foresight Group's UK Waste Resources and Energy Investments fund 
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/news/2318701/green-investment-bank-backs-birmingham-bio-plant>
.

Business Secretary Vince Cable welcomed the deal, which is expected to create 
more than 100 jobs and boost the local supply chain. Global firm MWH Treatment 
has won the contract to design, build and maintain the plant, while Nexterra 
Systems will provide the gasification system.

"It is encouraging to see this innovative new technology coming to the UK for 
the first time," said Cable in a statement. "This investment will create green 
jobs and help the environment by reducing carbon emissions and converting wood 
diverted from landfill into cleaner energy for thousands of homes and 
businesses. It is also good news for the local area, helping to build a 
stronger economy by creating over 100 private-sector jobs in Birmingham."

The GIB said the plant would avoid 2.1 million tonnes of CO2 equivalent from 
being released into the atmosphere over its 20-year lifetime and save around 
1.3 million tonnes of wood from landfill.
 