
Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> activists have 
blockaded a palm oil refinery owned by IOI in the port of Rotterdam after a 
report linked the company’s third-party suppliers in Indonesia to 
deforestation, forest fires and human rights abuses, including child labour.

Palm oil giant's impact in Indonesia worse than reported, says Greenpeace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/09/palm-oil-giant-ioi-impact-indonesia-worse-than-reported-says-greenpeace>
For seven hours on Tuesday, a felled tree barricaded the entrance to the 
Croklaan refinery, which processes palm oil mostly sourced fromIndonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia> and Malaysia.

Police watched as a Greenpeace ship, the Esperanza, and kayakers blocked 
entrances to the docking jetty. Officers later moved in, forcibly cutting 
activists from the log and a company fence that they had locked themselves on 
to. Thirteen people were arrested.

The 750,000 tonnes of palm oil that enter Croklaan every year are destined for 
use across western Europe in biodiesel and products ranging from shampoos to 
baby milk powder.

About two-thirds of IOI’s palm oil is sourced from third-party suppliers such 
asKorindo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/01/korean-palm-oil-firm-accused-of-illegal-forest-burning-in-indonesia>
, Eagle High, and the Indofood/Salim group, which have contributed to the 
disappearance of a quarter of Indonesia’s rainforest in the last two decades, 
according toa Greenpeace report 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/Global/international/publications/forests/2016/Deadly-Trade-off-IOI-Report.pdf>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgreenpeace-blockades-ioi-palm-oil-refinery-rotterdam-port%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F417954c3f0b202650d471483dfddd97b4c1c6435%2F0_114_2500_1499%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greenpeace%20blockades%20IOI%20palm%20oil%20refinery%20in%20Rotterdam%20port&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgreenpeace-blockades-ioi-palm-oil-refinery-rotterdam-port%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greenpeace%20blockades%20IOI%20palm%20oil%20refinery%20in%20Rotterdam%20port&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgreenpeace-blockades-ioi-palm-oil-refinery-rotterdam-port%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F417954c3f0b202650d471483dfddd97b4c1c6435%2F0_114_2500_1499%2F2500.jpg>
 Greenpeace activists protest at the refinery. Photograph: Marten van 
Dijl/Greenpeace 
Meike Rijksen, a Greenpeace campaigner on the protest, said: “IOI has been 
involved in rainforest destruction, fires and human rights abuses in Indonesia, 
through the actions of its suppliers, for almost 10 years. Unilever and Nestlé 
have already cancelled contracts with IOI at the beginning of this year over 
these issues but unfortunately IOI has not changed its practices. Today, we 
hope to give them an extra push to do what is necessary to protect the 
rainforests and peoples of the region.”

Fire “seasons” in the Indonesian archipelago began in 1997 and have been 
attributed to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/11/indonesia-forest-fires-explained-haze-palm-oil-timber-burning>
 the “collective negligence” of companies, smallholders and governments.

So far this year, blazes in the region are 75% down on last year’s total, 
thanks to heavy rain and government action 
<http://www.wri.org/blog/2016/09/after-record-breaking-fires-can-indonesias-new-policies-turn-down-heat>
. Butmore than 100,000 people 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/20/world/asia/indonesia-haze-smog-health.html?smid=pl-share&_r=0>
 are thought to have died in the region last year due to haze caused by the 
fires, which are frequently caused by slash and burn, peatland drainage and 
land clearances for plantations.

In 2015 haze killed 19 people and triggered 500,000 cases of acute respiratory 
tract infections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/26/indonesias-fires-crime-against-humanity-hundreds-of-thousands-suffer>
, in a hellish inferno thatthreatened a third of the world’s  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/26/indonesias-forest-fires-threaten-a-third-of-worlds-wild-orangutans>
wild orangutangs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/26/indonesias-forest-fires-threaten-a-third-of-worlds-wild-orangutans>
.

Last year’s fires were also a major contributor to global warming 
<http://blog.globalforestwatch.org/data/indonesias-fire-outbreaks-producing-more-daily-emissions-than-entire-u-s-economy.html>
, releasing more CO2 emissions daily – from burned trees and carbon-rich 
peatland – than the entire US economy.

Greenpeace reveals Indonesia's forests at risk as multiple companies claim 
rights to same land​
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/02/greenpeace-palm-oil-logging-indonesia-overlapping-land-claims-greenpeace-forest-fires>
Greenpeace’s report alleges that third-party suppliers to IOI have been 
involved in primary forest destruction in Papua and Kalimantan, as well as 
peatland developments and human rights abuses of forest peoples.

Extensive fires in concessions held by one reported IOI supplier “raise 
questions about deliberate or negligent mismanagement”, the analysis says. The 
palm oil supplier controls about 425,000 hectares of land in Kalimantan, 
Sulawesi, Papua and Sumatra, and is also accused of human rights abuses.

“It has been reported that children as young as six work in the plantation to 
support their parents,” the paper says, of the same supplier. “In April 2014 
two employees were imprisoned after demanding better working conditions. 
Indonesian state security forces appear to be used as guards at the plantation, 
and its members were involved in the fatal shooting of a company employee in 
December 2015.”

Palm oil <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/palm-oil> produced from such 
third-party operators has been imported into Europe and North America over the 
last year, according to Greenpeace’s paper.

Its analysis is based on IOI supply data, concession maps, Nasa fire hotspot 
data, deforestation alerts, public reports, and official Roundtable on 
Sustainable Palm Oil complaints.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgreenpeace-blockades-ioi-palm-oil-refinery-rotterdam-port%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1bed12caf49bd30fed404cac15fbfdeb19f8d93%2F0_0_2500_1875%2Fmaster%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greenpeace%20blockades%20IOI%20palm%20oil%20refinery%20in%20Rotterdam%20port&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgreenpeace-blockades-ioi-palm-oil-refinery-rotterdam-port%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greenpeace%20blockades%20IOI%20palm%20oil%20refinery%20in%20Rotterdam%20port&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgreenpeace-blockades-ioi-palm-oil-refinery-rotterdam-port%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1bed12caf49bd30fed404cac15fbfdeb19f8d93%2F0_0_2500_1875%2Fmaster%2F2500.jpg>
 Burnt forest and drainage canals cutting through an area of high conservation 
value in the PT Bumi Sawit Sejahtera (IOI) oil palm concession in Ketapang, 
west Kalimantan. The area of peat swamp was identified as habitat for 
orangutans, bears and other wildlife. Photograph: Bjorn Vaugn/Greenpeace 
A statement by IOI acknowledged there was a problem but said that an 
industry-wide approach was critically needed to ensure compliance by 
third-party suppliers.

“IOI accepts Greenpeace’s challenge to use its voice and influence to help 
achieve the outcomes both IOI and Greenpeace desire. We therefore today call 
for all our fellow industry players to come together and reach agreement on 
solutions that will lead to a truly sustainable supply of one of the world’s 
most commonly used commodities,” an IOI statement said.

“We also ask that Greenpeace use its own convening power and leverage, by 
joining us in encouraging others to take part, and that it and other specialist 
NGOs also participate. IOI stands ready to host such a gathering of the major 
palm oil producing businesses, and asks that Greenpeace joins us in this 
endeavor.”

Greenpeace dismissed the offer as “an exercise in passing the buck” designed 
to block its demands for cancelling contracts with the named third-party 
suppliers.

Annisa Rahmawati, an Indonesian Greenpeace activist, said: “Unless IOI is 
willing to take these decisive, measurable actions to clean up its supply 
chain, its commitment to ‘use its voice and influence’ is meaningless. A 
failure to act is a betrayal of the millions of people affected each year by 
land conflicts, forced labour, and pollution from forest fires as a result of 
the actions of IOI and its suppliers.”

More Greenpeace direct actions against IOI are thought likely in the near 
future.
 