
Grape vines of all kinds can cope with the most extraordinarily difficult and 
extreme environments. But few varieties of this tenacious plant are as tough as 
grenache, aka garnacha in Spain. It can survive, even thrive, in some of the 
dustiest corners of the wine world, roots plunged many feet deep into 
inhospitable terrain seeking out moisture.

The wonder of grenache is that the meagre crops of fruit produced by vines 
which can be anything up to 100 years old create some of the most vivacious 
wines around: a stream of soft, mouth-filling juiciness, with flavours of 
bramble jam, raspberry, cherry, tangy plum and paprika. How all this 
primary-coloured flavour emerges from such harsh surroundings is a wonder of 
nature on a par with something from a David Attenborough documentary – like one 
of those desert plants that lie dormant for years waiting for the briefest rain 
shower to bring them into bloom.

If there’s a better-value red wine style in the world – a better yield of 
fruit flavour per pound – than the absurdly underpriced old-vine garnachas of 
the Campo de Borja region of Aragon in northern Spain, I’ve yet to find it. 
Wines such as Bodegas Borsao Garnacha 2015 (£5.95,slurp.co.uk 
<http://www.slurp.co.uk/red-wine/spanish-red-wine/47821-bodegas-borsao-garnacha-2015/>
) andthe Co-op’s <http://wine.coop.co.uk/gran-vista-garnacha.html> Gran Vista 
Garnacha 2015 (£4.99) have so much more about them than the sweetened alcoholic 
Ribena that so often passes for wine at the £5 to £6 level these days.

Related: New year, new drinking thinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/01/new-year-new-wine-drinking-thinking>

With the odd exception, grenache/garnacha has always been a little 
undervalued, a lack of recognition that is at least partly explained by 
winemakers traditionally hiding it in a blend. In regions from France’s 
southern Rhône Valley to Catalonia’s Priorat and Australia’s Barossa, there’s 
often a feeling that the plump nature of fully ripe grenache needs stiffening 
with the darker syrah, the meatier mourvèdre or the dusky carignan, while in 
Rioja, garnacha frequently acts as a fruity seasoning for the more upright 
tempranillo. Even when it is allowed out on its own – as it is in the great 
Châteauneuf-du-Pape of Château Rayas, for example – in many cases you wouldn’t 
know it from the label.

Grenache’s reputation has also suffered more than most at the hands of 
incautious winemakers: leave it to get too ripe and the abundance of fruit 
becomes a syrupy, alcoholic jamminess.

When it’s good though, it certainly deserves a place at the top table – 
indeed, over the past decade,it’s made more strides than any other grape 
variety, with producers developing a much wider palette. It can provide 
succulent, spicy easy-drinkers such as Honoro Vera Garnacha 2015 (£8.45, 
Booths) from another Spanish region, Calatayud, or the always-alluring Yalumba 
Bush Vine Grenache 2014 (£12,Morrisons 
<https://groceries.morrisons.com/webshop/product/Yalumba-Bush-Vine-Grenache/243780011>
) from South Australia. Or it can produce lush winter warmers such as Domaine 
of the Bee 2011 (£27.50,thesampler.co.uk 
<http://www.thesampler.co.uk/product/11274/Domaine-of-the-Bee-2011/>)

Most interesting of all, however, is the new wave of grenache made in a more 
restrained style. The prime movers behind this re-imagining of grenache as the 
“pinot noir of the south” are Spanish, with the likes of Daniel Jiménez-Landi 
in the hills of Mentrida, Bodegas Joan d’Anguera in Priorat’s neighbour 
Montsant, and Bodegas Aldonia in Rioja all conjuring subtly earthy, graceful, 
light-coloured garnachas from very old vines.

There are fine examples, too, in the New World’s new wave. Producers such as 
Australia’s Jauma, the Ministry of Clouds and Ochota Barrels, and the likes of 
Craig Hawkins and David Sadie from South Africa’s trendy Swartland set have all 
contributed to grenache’s more nuanced 21st-century personality in wines that, 
no matter how gentle they might feel, are still all about the sun.

 Six of the best grenaches


Tesco Old Vines Garnacha, Campo de Borja, Spain 2015 (£5, Tesco 
<http://www.tesco.com/groceries/product/details/?id=292357338>)
The winemakers of Campo de Borja are blessed with a wealth of old garnacha 
vines that provide real depth of flavour at absurd prices, like this 
delightfully exuberant bargain burst of juicy bramble fruit.

Waitrose Southern French Grenache 2015 (£6.49, Waitrose 
<http://www.waitrose.com/shop/DisplayProductFlyout?productId=224052>)
Spicy and supple, with a sprinkling of white pepper and dried herbs adding 
savoury interest to the brisk raspberry and cherry fruit, this is good-value 
grenache in light, thirst-quenching, bangers-and-mash-matching mode.

Bodegas Aldonia Vendimia Rioja 2015 (£12.50, Vinoteca 
<http://shop.vinoteca.co.uk/2013-rioja-vendimia-bodegas-aldonia-rioja-14-vol-p-88.html>
)
Having been somewhat eclipsed by tempranillo in Rioja, garnacha has made a 
comeback in recent years. At Aldonia it takes a leading role, joined here by 
40% tempanillo in a fluently elegant, red-fruited, super-silky red.

Chris Williams The Foundry Grenache, Stellenbosch, South Africa 2014 (£12.95, 
the Wine Society 
<http://www.thewinesociety.com/shop/productdetail.aspx?section=pd&pl=WEBNEW&pd=SA11211&pc=&prl=STD&cc=WEBNEW&anchor=ReviewsAnchor>
)
Talented Cape winemaker Chris Williams’s Rhône-inspired grenache is perfectly 
pitched, offering a lively succulence of blackberry and raspberry combined with 
a nip of tannin and hints of peppery spice and wild herb.

Bodegas Jiménez-Landi Las Uvas de la Ira, Castilla y Leon, Spain 2014 (from 
£21.50,St Andrews Wine Company 
<http://www.standrewswinecompany.com/collections/bodegas-jimenez-landi>; the 
Sampler 
<http://www.thesampler.co.uk/product/10878/Uvas-de-la-Ira-2014-Dani-Landi/>)
Daniel Jiménez-Landi is one of a handful of Spanish winemakers to pioneer the 
more sensitive, subtle side of garnacha, using old vines from the Gredos hills 
of central Spain. So pretty, floral and subtly earthy – it’s garnacha for pinot 
lovers.

Ochota Barrels The Fugazi Vineyard Grenache, South Australia 2014 (£28.50, 
Honest Grapes <https://www.honestgrapes.co.uk/ochota-barrels-2014-parcel.html>; 
Handfords 
<http://www.handford.net/product/ochota-barrels-the-fugazi-grenache-2014/>; 
Prohibition Wines <https://prohibitionwines.com/our-wines/>)
From a new-wave Australian cellar that puts the emphasis on fresh 
drinkability, this is a flat-out gorgeous take on grenache with a core of 
crunchy black and red berries and a streak of peppered-steak bloody-meatiness.
 