
A guide to contemporary classical music by the Guardian's Tom Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/series/a-guide-to-contemporary-classical-music>
 has been shortlisted for this year'sRoyal Philharmonic Society music awards 
<http://www.rpsmusicawards.com/>, the most prestigious classical music awards 
in the UK.

Service's Guardian guide, published weekly for a year, began with Elliott 
Carter and concluded with Karlheinz Stockhausen. It is nominated for the 
creative communication award alongside the conductor John Eliot Gardiner, for 
his book onBach, Music in the Castle of Heaven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/30/music-castle-heaven-js-bach-john-eliot-gardiner>
; classical music iPad apps byTouch Press <http://www.touchpress.com/>; and the 
Channel 4 documentary Chopin Saved My Life 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/chopin-changed-my-life/4od>.

Other shortlists include Daniel Barenboim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/daniel-barenboim>, Andris Nelsons, and 
Riccardo Chailly vying for the conductor award; mezzo-soprano Joyce DiDonato, 
soprano Barbara Hannigan and baritone Michael Volle for the singer award â€“ all 
performances at Covent Garden; and violinist Patricia Kopatchinskaja, 
harpsichordist Mahan Esfahani and pianist Nikolai Lugansky for the 
instrumentalist award.

The large-scale composition award will be contested by Sally Beamish for 
Flodden,George Benjamin <https://www.theguardian.com/music/george-benjamin> for 
Written on the Skin and David Matthews for A Vision of the Sea, while in 
chamber-scale composition the nominees are Harrison Birtwistle's The Moth 
Requiem, Peter Maxwell Davies's Oboe Quartet, James Clarke's 2013-V and Richard 
Baker's The Tyranny of Fun.

In the opera and musical theatre category Longborough Festival Opera's staging 
of Wagner's Ring Cycle goes up against heavier weights in the shape ofWelsh 
National Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/welsh-national-opera>, for 
its 2013 work as a whole, Opera North's Festival of Britten, and the Royal 
Opera House's Elektra.

A full list of nominees in the 13 categories can be found at rpsmusicawards.com
 <http://rpsmusicawards.com/news/shortlist_announcement>. The winners will be 
announced on 13 May.
 