
For my first forays into Patagonia, in the 1990s, I left behind my guidebooks 
and travelogues. Travelling light, I was blown away by big, jagged mountaintop 
glaciers and – more literally – the fierce westerlies that gusted summer long. 
Between the gawping and the roast lamb dinners, I struggled to make sense of 
German settlements, Tehuelche place names, Anglophile ranch-owners and ruddy 
Welsh faces on the coast; crossing the empty steppe, I wondered why any of 
these would come to such an arid, godforsaken place to make a home.

Later on, Bruce Chatwin’s In Patagonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/sep/16/travel-writers-favourite-books> 
helped me to make sense of all this. Chatwin visited the region 40 years ago 
this month to write what would become In Patagonia, published in 1977 to great 
acclaim. Drawing on a wide range of sources, from Shakespeare’s The Tempest to 
the accounts of the 1921-2 farm workers’ uprising (collected by Argentine 
author Osvaldo Bayer), the book fills the empty spaces of southern South 
America with people, myths and magical happenings. In Patagonia is as much a 
homage to storytelling as it is to the place itself.

Patagonia covers some 400,000 square miles – roughly one and a half times the 
size of the UK – and visitors need to plan ahead. Established tourism is found 
in the northern lake districts of Argentina and Chile, and aroundLos Glaciares 
national park <http://www.losglaciares.com/en/parque/> in the former, and 
Torres del Paine <http://www.torresdelpaine.com/ingles/> national park in the 
latter. Elsewhere, the wilderness still rules, and a cursory glance at a map 
reveals that Argentinian Patagonia is mainly empty spaces and ranching country, 
while Chilean Patagonia is a collage of islands, inlets and labyrinthine 
channels.

Chatwin stayed for four months, but you probably won’t have that much time – 
below are some experiences you can fit into a 10-day or two-week trip, and a 
few odysseys aimed at the time-rich traveller. Tour packages from the UK are 
included, but it’s easy to visit Patagonia independently – there are hostels 
all over, excellent campsites, frequent buses and mini-buses, and English is 
widely spoken. Pound sterling is very strong against the Argentine peso, so 
short local flights are affordable right now. Across the region, food and drink 
are excellent value too. A few decades ago, Patagonian cuisine consisted of 
grilled lamb and tripe stew; these days restaurants serve everything from cured 
wild boar to snook-and-hake ceviche, while localparrillas (grills) are always a 
safe bet for a meaty feast.

Argentinian Patagonia: coast

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418315915908%2Fbbf5697c-50ab-4fbe-a85f-c104faa82eeb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418315915908%2Fbbf5697c-50ab-4fbe-a85f-c104faa82eeb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A southern right whale off the Valdés peninsula, Patagonia, Argentina. 
Photograph: Pablo Cersosimo/Robert Harding World Imagery/Corbis 
Argentinian Patagonia is generally defined as the land south of the Rio Negro, 
which meets the sea near the town of Viedma. Exploring Patagonia’s Atlantic 
coast is relatively easy: the Ruta Nacional 3 highway runs all the way from 
Buenos Aires to Rio Gallegos, where you take a ferry across the Strait of 
Magellan to Tierra del Fuego, to complete the 3,000km run.Andesmar 
<http://www.andesmar.com/>, Condor <http://www.omnilineas.com/>, Don Otto 
<http://www.donotto.com.ar/> and El Pinguino 
<http://www.voyenbus.com/el-pinguino> operate comfortable, economical 
long-distance buses to the main towns (Buenos Aires to Puerto Madryn costs from 
£70). Hiring a car allows greater freedom, but you’d have to bring it back to 
the pick-up point – a 14-day hire of a small vehicle from Buenos Aires starts 
at £350 with Europcar or Budget.
 A Welsh-styled house at Chubut, Patagonia. Photograph: Alamy 
On the northern coast, the two big stories are Wales and whales. In 1865, 165 
migrants arrived from Wales aboard the Mimosa and established settlements 
beside the River Chubut. The towns that grew out of these hamlets – Rawson, 
Puerto Madryn, Trelew and Gaiman – are easy to visit by bus or car, with 
chapels and Welsh-themed teashops concentrated in the latter. If you want to do 
as the Welsh – and Chatwin – did, and travel all the way to the Andes, it’s a 
long bus ride or drive across the steppe. A side-theme here is dinosaurs; lots 
of fossils have been found in Patagonia and Trelew has an excellent collection 
at itsEgidio Feruglio Museum of Paleontology <http://mef.org.ar/>.

The South Atlantic teems with marine life. Southern right whales 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/nature/life/Southern_right_whale> can be seen calving in 
the southern winter (July-September) off Puerto Madryn, though the best place 
to see them is Puerto Pirámides on the Valdés peninsula, from which smallish 
boats allow visitors to get close to the huge cetaceans. Pods of orcas, as well 
as elephant seals, sea lions and fur seals are visible off the peninsula’s 
coast year round. South of Madryn,at Punta Tombo, there are 210,000 breeding 
pairs of Magellanic penguins 
<http://www.wcs.org/multimedia/videos/penguin-donate.aspx> – the largest colony 
in the world – resident from September to March. Further south, at Puerto 
Deseado, you can see rockhopper penguins, five species of cormorant and 
Commerson’s dolphins in the estuary, and a huge seal colony at Cabo Blanco.

The most southerly important landmark on the coast is Puerto San Julián. It is 
here that Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan made landfall in 1520, 
encountering the tall Tehuelche tribesmen whom he called Patagones, after a 
mythical character in a chivalric tale, leading to the region’s name. There is 
a fine 12km coastal walk here from the town centre to the abandoned Swift 
meatpacking plant.

There’s little reason to go further south than this unless you’re driving and 
bound for Cabo Virgenes, at the southeastern-most tip of mainland Argentina. 
This dramatic cape looks out over the Atlantic and the Strait of Magellan – the 
Estancia Monte Dinero is open to visitors and runs the cosy Al Fin y Al Cabo 
cafe-bar at the foot of the lighthouse, with sweeping views over the ocean. 
There’s another huge Magellanic penguin colony nearby.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418317044169%2Fb6cf31f9-a3d4-414f-a26c-06204f6741d8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418317044169%2Fb6cf31f9-a3d4-414f-a26c-06204f6741d8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Magellanic penguins near Puerto Madryn. Photograph: Picavet/Getty Images 
Where to stay

El Gualicho hostel, Puerto Madryn
Three blocks from the sea, this popular, brightly decorated hostel (orange 
paint is the main theme) can help guests organise diving trips and other 
excursions.
• £54 per double or twin, B&B, +54 02 80 445 4163, elgualicho.com.ar 
<http://elgualicho.com.ar/ingles/lugar.php>

Monte Dinero
One of only a few working sheep farms open to visitors; accommodation is 
lavish and the food some of the best in Patagonia.
• £260 per double, full board, +54 29 6642 8922, montedinero.com.ar 
<http://www.montedinero.com.ar/>

Territorio, Puerto Madryn
A stylish sort of haute motel right on the bay, equipped with library, spa, 
sauna and a good restaurant.
• Doubles from £135; + 54 28 0488 3180, hotelterritorio.com 
<http://hotelterritorio.com.ar/>

Argentinian Patagonia: Andes

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418316817936%2Fceda994e-c14a-4b37-b45c-2aa0137ea46d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418316817936%2Fceda994e-c14a-4b37-b45c-2aa0137ea46d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hiker admiring Monte Fitz Roy from Laguna de los Tres. Photograph: Getty 
Images/Lonely Planet Image 
The most populated and developed area of Andean Patagonia is the lake district 
of Río Negro and Neuquén provinces. The latter is more popular with 
Argentinians than foreign visitors, but the quaint towns of Junín de los Andes, 
San Martín de los Andes and Villa La Angostura are good bases for camping, 
hiking, trout fishing, horse riding and quad biking. A photogenic drive (or 
tour-bus ride) here is the Seven Lakes route, which winds for 110km between a 
series of lakes surrounded by Andean peaks and beech and myrtle forests 
enlivened by red anemone-likenotros 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=notros+flowers&biw=1920&bih=1030&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=0eqGVI6tM8KvUanbg7AK&ved=0CEwQsAQ#facrc=_&imgdii=_&imgrc=auFb2qxfLBiwfM%253A%3BrcnXtQaoEnBvpM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.wangulen.com%252Fgallery%252Fflowers%252FNotro%252520or%252520Ciruelillo%252520(Firebush).jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.wangulen.com%252Fgallery%252Fflowers%252F%3B639%3B600>
 andyellow michay flowers 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=notros+flowers&biw=1920&bih=1030&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=0eqGVI6tM8KvUanbg7AK&ved=0CEwQsAQ#tbm=isch&q=yellow+michay+flowers+flowers&imgdii=_>
.

Bariloche, on the banks of the immense Nahuel Huapi lake, is a major town, and 
a base for trekking and mountain biking;Apurabici <http://apurabici.com/> rents 
bikes for £15 a day and organises half-day guided rides along mountain trails 
for £50pp.

A popular excursion from here is a through-Andes ferry-and-bus ride to Puerto 
Varas in Chile, allowing you to see the further reaches of the lakes that are 
inaccessible by road. Operated by Cruce Andino (cruceandino.com), a single 
costs £146.

Bariloche is a natural starting point for a drive south along Argentina’s Ruta 
Nacional 40. This long, largely paved highway actually runs the length of the 
country, skirting the Andes, and the Patagonian section runs past all the towns 
listed below.

From Bariloche to Cabo Virgenes it’s 2,300km; Audley Travel 
<http://www.audleytravel.com/> can arrange a 14-day car and accommodation 
package for £4,295 per person, including all flights and a 4WD vehicle.

To do it yourself, use bus firms that operate along the entire route, such as 
Chaltén Travel <http://www.chaltentravel.com/main.php> and TAQSA 
<http://www.taqsa.com.ar/#> (one-way Bariloche to El Calafate from £106). A 
small operator,Cal Tur 
<http://www.caltur.com.ar/caltur/ingles/servicios.html#12>, connects Los 
Antiguos with El Calafate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418318063965%2F5e7bdaf8-48fa-4a8a-91d0-d4e97bfe7218-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418318063965%2F5e7bdaf8-48fa-4a8a-91d0-d4e97bfe7218-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A cabin at the Butch and Sundance ranch, Cholila, Patagonia. Photograph: Chris 
Moss 
South of Bariloche are a string of pleasant towns, including El Bolsón – a 
former hippy hangout, and still popular with Argentinian campers – and Cholila, 
where Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid bought a ranch (you can visit 
Cassidy’s log cabin there). Close by,Los Alerces national park 
<http://www.parquesnacionales.gob.ar/areas-protegidas/region-patagonia/pn-los-alerces/>
 has some of the nicest campsites in Patagonia, especially those on the edges of
Bahía Rosales <http://www.bahiarosales.com/> and on the Kruger and Rivadavia 
lakes. There are seven serviced campsites and nine basic ones, and a further 
seven areas that allow wild camping. It’s $80 (£6) to enter the park and 
camping costs £8-10 per night. There’s good trekking throughout the park, and 
also at nearby Lago Puelo, and its namesake national park.

From Esquel, the steam-powered La Trochita train – aka the Old Patagonian 
Express – still has weekly departures, but most only go 20km, to Nahuel Pan. 
Close to the town is theMuseo Leleque 
<http://www.welcomeargentina.com/esquel/leleque-museum.html>. Supported by the 
Benetton family, it showcases 14,000 native artefacts, including arrowheads, 
bone drills, ceremonial axes, grinding stones and pottery shards.

South of Esquel is Trevelin, where you enter, briefly, another Welsh-themed 
area, after which comes a lot ofnada – the great empty spaces of central 
Patagonia. The Ruta Nacional 40 passes through backwater towns like Tecka, José 
de San Martín and Alto Río Senguer, and the main population centres – Río Mayo 
(“the national capital of shearing”), Los Antiguos (which sits on the shores of 
the immense Lago Buenos Aires), and Bajo Caracoles. There’s not a lot to see on 
the roadside except sheep, though you may catch sight of a fox, a guanaco (a 
camelid), or a choique (aka Darwin’s rhea – like an emu), or the whiff of a 
skunk.

One major highlight en route is the Unesco-listed Cueva de las Manos 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/936> (Cave of Hands). On a gravel road off the 
Ruta Nacional 40, around 165km south of the town of Perito Moreno, are 
overhanging caves where, in 1972, archaeologists found 9,000-year-old 
stencilled handprints and galloping guanacos painted by ancient peoples – 
probably the ancestors of the native Tehuelche nomads. The art is 
thought-provoking and the setting, overlooking a deep gorge, is superb 
(entrance: £6).
 The Perito Moreno glacier, one of the most spectacular, and popular, 
attractions in Patagonia. Photograph: Alamy 
Continuing south, you arrive – eventually – in the extraordinarily beautiful 
Los Glaciares national park <http://www.losglaciares.com/en/parque/>, a huge 
area that protects the southern ice field, dozens of glaciers, virgin forests 
of lenga, ñire and guindo trees. The star attractions are the toweringFitz Roy 
massif 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Los+Glaciares+Fitzroy+massif&client=firefox-a&hs=tfi&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&channel=sb&biw=2560&bih=1263&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=VQyHVLvNEYm7UfXIgJAN&ved=0CAcQ_AUoAg>
 at its northern end, and the huge, turquoise-colouredLago Argentino 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=lago+argentino&client=firefox-a&hs=Chi&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&channel=sb&biw=2560&bih=1263&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=pgyHVLvdKIX_UpPrg8AN&ved=0CAcQ_AUoAg>
 to the south. Many travellers come here to see the lake’s glacier,Perito Moreno
 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=lago+argentino+glaciar+perito+moreno&client=firefox-a&hs=Q2N&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&channel=sb&biw=2560&bih=1263&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=xwyHVIHHJovzULyBhPAH&ved=0CAcQ_AUoAg>
; it’s world-famous, because the ice expands until the warmer waters beneath 
undermine it and cause a calamitous implosion, sending tsunami-like waves on to 
the terminal moraine.

There’s plenty to do in the park, from ice-hiking to walking up to ogle 3,405m 
Mount Fitz Roy, to Land Rover excursions to the top of the barren summit of 
Cerro Huyliche (withcalafateextremo.com.ar 
<http://calafateextremo.com.ar/indexen.php>). Alternatively, you can relax in 
the backpacker town ofEl Chaltén <http://www.elchalten.com/indexen.php>, 
admiring the views, the condors and the craft beers –La Vineria  
<http://www.elchalten.com/lavineria/indexen.php> has a great stock of ales and 
Patagonian wines. Frequent minibuses connect El Chaltén to the other main town, 
El Calafate.

Where to stay

America del Sur hostel, El Calafate
Simple, clean rooms in a wooden villa, five minutes’ walk from the town centre.
• From £20 for a bed in a four-berth dorm, +54 29 0249 3525, 
americahostel.com.ar <http://americahostel.com.ar/home_calafate_english.html>

Hostería Canela, Esquel
This homely B&B is a tranquil bolthole just outside the town.
• from £105 per double, +54 29 45 453 890, canelaesquel.com 
<http://www.canelaesquel.com> 

Estancia Don José, Rio Mayo
On a working guanaco farm, this country house has comfortable rooms and 
there’s a quaint cottage set apart from the main house.
• £168 per double B&B,+54 29 71 5624 9155, turismoguenguel.com 
<http://www.turismoguenguel.com> 

Chilean Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418317202479%2Fa9f73d6a-7bcb-4f8d-b0a2-4780848d4358-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418317202479%2Fa9f73d6a-7bcb-4f8d-b0a2-4780848d4358-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Guanacos grazing in Torres del Paine national park, Chile. Photograph: Jose 
Fuste Raga/Corbis 
No one can really agree where Chilean Patagonia begins. Much of the south of 
this long, skinny country is jagged coastline, uninhabited islands, roads that 
come to dead ends, and impenetrable forests and ice fields. The lake district 
looks like a mirror image of Argentina’s, though German settlers have left 
their mark on the churches and houses ofFrutillar <http://www.frutillar.com/>, 
Puerto Octay and Puerto Varas. These towns (and Pucón to the north) are close 
to a series of national parks that protect the lakes and forested slopes of the 
Villarrica and Puyehue volcanoes. Trekking, cycling, kayaking and rafting trips 
are easy to organise from any of the towns, andPachamagua 
<http://www.pachamagua.com/index.html>, in Puerto Varas, is a canyoning 
specialist.

Horse riding is available all over Patagonia, but for those seeking an 
adventure, the Puelo valley between Cochamó in Chile and Lago Puelo in 
Argentina has become something of a classic; specialistsRide World Wide 
<http://www.rideworldwide.com/> and In the Saddle <http://www.inthesaddle.com/> 
offer a variety of itineraries along the valley. The low pass through the Andes 
is also used by scores of trekkers each summer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418317573091%2F9bf41957-4711-4655-b3fa-ffaa7159a47a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418317573091%2F9bf41957-4711-4655-b3fa-ffaa7159a47a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Stilt houses in southern Chile. Photograph: Rod Irvine/Getty Images/Flickr RF 
To the south is genuine wilderness, with the main road interrupted by river 
crossings. A drive down the 1,247km Carretera Austral (Southern Highway) from 
Puerto Montt to Villa O’Higgins is a great way to see the lushly forested 
Palena and Aysén regions, and Lago General Carrera, the second biggest lake in 
South America. Four-wheel-drive vehicles are recommended, and you’ll need at 
least 10 days; it’s wise to book some accommodation beforehand, especially in 
the holiday months of January and February.

For the southern section, the highway follows the Río Baker (until recently 
the river was threatened by a hydroelectricity scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/sep/21/chile-patagonia-aisen-region>) 
and passes the newParque Patagonia 
<http://www.conservacionpatagonica.org/home.htm>. This protected swath of 
steppe and low mountain ranges is starkly beautiful, with thecoirón grasses and 
spiny bushes providing a habitat for rhea,tinamou 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=tinamou&client=firefox-a&hs=dK5&rls=org.mozilla:en-GB:official&channel=sb&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=OiqHVJOzFoX-Ur6LhPAG&ved=0CAgQ_AUoAQ&biw=2560&bih=1263>
, pigeon and burrowing owl. In the mountains are eagles and vultures, including 
the condor, while the beech forests teem with treecreepers, woodpeckers and 
even hummingbirds.

Tailor-made firms such as Last Frontiers <http://www.lastfrontiers.com/> can 
organise flights, accommodation and a car for around £5,000 per person, but 
Europcar at Coyhaique’s Balmaceda airport will rent 4WD pick-ups for two weeks 
from around £1,100, and you could keep costs down by packing a tent or using 
hostels. For those on a tight budget, there’s a ferry from Puerto Montt to 
Chaitén; the service takes 10-12 hours and costs £17 (navieraustral.cl 
<http://www.navieraustral.cl/>). Becker Buses <http://www.busesbecker.com/> 
operates on the northern section of the Southern Highway (Chaitén-Coyhaique, 
£25). Seevillaohiggins.com <http://www.villaohiggins.com> for connecting buses 
south.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418317420355%2F6062d729-17db-4e85-9eea-daea3bbe0f83-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guide%20to%20Patagonia%3A%20what%20to%20do%2C%20how%20to%20do%20it%2C%20and%20where%20to%20stay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F13%2Fguide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F11%2F1418317420355%2F6062d729-17db-4e85-9eea-daea3bbe0f83-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The path to Los Cuernos ‘the Horns’ at Torres del Paine national park. 
Photograph: Alamy 
The centrepiece of Chilean Patagonia is the Torres del Paine national park 
<http://www.torresdelpaine.com/ingles/>. The park’s 130km circuit is popular, 
though those tight for time can opt for shorter sections. There are great 
campsites, several superlative hotels, some challenging walks, and the chance 
to see guanaco and condor against quite stunning landscapes. Several firms are 
now offering puma-tracking trips in the park. Chilean firmFar South Expeditions 
<http://www.fsexpeditions.com/> offers packages from £1,650 – it’s cheaper with 
a larger group of travellers; UK luxury operatorMiraviva 
<http://www.miravivatravel.com/> will organise a five-night puma-themed safari, 
from £4,825 per person (excluding flights). From nearby Puerto Natales,Skorpios 
<http://www.skorpios.cl/> offers four-day excursions into the fjords around the 
southern ice field from £1,100 full-board.

Punta Arenas, an important port before the opening of the Panama Canal, has 
stately mansions, museums and an old cemetery – Chatwin visited his uncle’s 
grave here, as he brought his story to its conclusion. It’s also the departure 
port for the excellentAustralis <http://www.australis.com/site/en/> small-ship 
expedition cruises to Cape Horn and Ushuaia (four nights from £920), 
Argentina’s – and South America’s – southernmost city.

Where to stay
 Punta Arenas, Chile. Photograph: Alamy 
Singing Lamb, Puerto Natales
Friendly, cosy, colourfully decorated hostel with free internet, library and 
an international clientele. The generous breakfast is a combination of eggs, 
freshly baked bread, homemade marmalade, and locally grown prunes, sarsaparilla 
and gooseberries.
• Doubles from £51 B&B (also has cheap dorms), +56 61 241 0958, 
thesinginglamb.com <http://www.thesinginglamb.com/>

Hotel Nogueira, Punta Arenas
This small, rather grand 22-room hotel (former guests include King Juan Carlos 
of Spain and Princess Anne) was once the mansion of sailor José Nogueira, one 
of the founding fathers of Punta Arenas.
• Doubles from £80 B&B, +56 61 271 1000, hotelnogueira.com 
<http://www.hotelnogueira.com/>

Antumalal, Pucón
Bauhaus-style hotel built in the 1940s on the edge of Villarrica lake, beneath 
the volcano. The interior is all fleece, posh fabrics and Mapuche crafts.
• Doubles from £160, +56 45 244 1011, antumalal.com <http://www.antumalal.com/>

Patagonia: A Cultural History 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Patagonia-Cultural-History-Landscapes-Imagination/dp/190495538X>
 (Landscapes of the Imagination), by Chris Moss, is published by Signal Books
 