
Back in July, a footballer from Guinea-Bissau settled a major tournament. This 
Saturday 11 players from the small west African country will open one and if it 
is a stretch to imagine one of their number going on to emulate the feats of 
Éder, whowon Euro 2016 in Portugal’s colours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
, then perhaps they have already achieved something of comparable merit.

Guinea-Bissau will begin this year’s Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> against the host 
country, Gabon, in Libreville and it is a curtain-raiser few could claim to 
have seen coming. Seven years ago an impoverished state was in football’s 
wilderness, unable to reliably support a national team and in the midst of an 
exile during which nearly three years passed without it playing an 
international game; on 4 June last year, amid delirious scenes in Bissau, an 
injury-time goal from the former Liverpool winger Toni Silva defeated Zambia 
and a seemingly impossible mission had become reality.

“It was a complete surprise, because nobody really knew anything about our 
team,” the former Guinea-Bissau captain Bruno Fernandes says. “I think only 
those of us on the inside could feel something like this was about to happen – 
if not now, then in the very near future. We had all the quality playing-wise, 
but were lacking the right infrastructure and commitment from those taking us 
forward.”

The Premier League’s likely winners and losers from 2017 Africa Cup of Nations 
| Paul Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/premier-league-winners-losers-2017-africa-cup-of-nations>
This Cup of Nations comes too late for Fernandes, who retired in 2015 after an 
itinerant career that finished in Wales with Cefn Druids. He now works as a 
fitness instructor in Liverpool but confers regularly with the national team 
coach, his close friend Baciro Candé, about playing matters.

It was a stroke of fortune that led to the locally born Candé returning to the 
post he had occupied for most of the 2000s; his predecessor, Paulo Torres, was 
banned for their final four qualifiers after aggression towards the referee 
during their goalless draw in Zambia, and required replacing if Guinea-Bissau 
were to be properly managed on the road to Gabon. They subsequently won three 
games in a row.

“I always had the belief inside me that Baciro would be the one to take us to 
a big competition,” Fernandes says. “He knows how to talk and connect with the 
players, and as a local coach he can reach them in a different way. He knows 
the country’s football inside out and it was a big plus that he could come in 
and use all his experience.”

Candé has not been the only factor in their upturn. While Éder’s goal in Paris 
could be seen as the defining moment for asteady flow of players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/09/france-portugal-colonial-history-african-flavour-euro-2016>
 from Guinea‑Bissau to its former coloniser, Portugal, there have been 
concerted attempts to reverse the process in a similar manner to that which 
brought Cape Verde two appearances at the Cup of Nations.

All of the major Portuguese clubs have an academy presence or wide scouting 
network in Guinea-Bissau; while the majority of Candé’s squad were born 
domestically, half play in Portugal and a number had been capped at age-group 
levels by the European country. Silva, who now plays in Greece for Levadiakos, 
was an under-17 and under-18 international for Portugal; the goal against 
Zambia came on his debut for Guinea-Bissau. The forward Abel Camará, who won 10 
caps for Portugal’s Under-21s, is another example and as the team’s outlook has 
brightened it has become easier to tempt players who flew the nest early into 
setting their sights back on their home nation.

“Many of our players will leave in their early teens and go on to play for 
their new country, and that’s understandable given the different conditions,” 
Fernandes says. “But things are slowly changing. In the past, many players were 
afraid to commit because they knew there would always be a problem with the 
government and, by association, problems for the football team. Funds and 
organisation would be lacking. There is still room for improvement but now, 
having reached the Cup of Nations, we hope this will be the first of many years 
where players come back.”

The situation remains imperfect. Fernandes remembers having to pay for his own 
air fares to play in internationals – not remotely unusual in African football 
– and speaks of the forbearance that was routinely required to overcome the 
difficulties that still hold a number of the continent’s countries back; the 
latter were in evidence even before that decisive clash with Zambia, when the 
team failed to train for three days because of a dispute over missed payments 
and inadequate working conditions. Guinea-Bissau eventually made it on to the 
pitch and, somehow, created history.

From a distance it can be easy to roll the eyes at such stories but they are 
rarely without deeper roots. By most major measures, Guinea-Bissau is 
comfortably among the 20 poorest countries in the world; in fact it is unlikely 
that a country lower down the gross domestic product charts has reached a major 
football tournament and the country’s sport has suffered from the poverty and 
political instability. Military coups in 2003and 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/13/guinea-bissau-coup-suspected> 
brought turmoil and it is not overly surprising, given the context, that the 
national team has played just 31 games in the past decade – and only 12 between 
2001 and 2010.

Footballing success may not be a panacea but it certainly affects the wider 
mood. “I don’t know how far it can influence the country’s political life, but 
hopefully we will see it do more positive things,” Fernandes says. “When I was 
a player, every game was such a joy for the people. The stadium would be packed 
even for training sessions, and even if we lost a game it would be as if we had 
won – everybody cheering and telling us to keep going. So you can only imagine 
what it was like when we qualified. The country just ground to a halt for three 
days, a non-stop party.”

There is scope for the festivities to continue. While many might expect Gabon, 
in front of a home crowd and spearheaded by Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, to make 
light work of Guinea-Bissau on Saturday it has been an uncertain buildup to 
this tournament for the hosts.Gabon has been unstable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/africa-cup-of-nations-2017-gabon-draw-football>
 since a controversial election in August and there have been wide calls for 
the Cup of Nations to be boycotted by the local population. Whoever is watching 
might just see Guinea-Bissau’s “djurtus” – the nickname means “wild dogs” – 
cause reverberations again.

“The pressure is really on them, so why not?” Fernandes says. “It takes the 
weight off our team’s shoulders. If Gabon go a goal down you can only imagine 
the kind of game it will turn into. Everything feels possible for us right now.”
 