
The first thing you notice when you come to Gurgaon is the number of 
skyscrapers. The second is the pigs.

In the past few decades, Gurgaon, a city 32km outside the Indian capital New 
Delhi, has risen from a former agricultural wasteland. But it wasn’t the 
government, or even individuals, that led Gurgaon’s growth. The city was built 
almost entirely by private companies.

 According to census data, Gurgaon’s population doubled between 2001 and 2011, 
from 876,000 to more than 1.5 million 
<http://www.census2011.co.in/census/city/46-gurgaon.html>. Its people are made 
up of the two extremes of India’s developing society: rich, well-educated urban 
professionals who work for some of the biggest firms in the world live side by 
side with urban slums, home to villagers who used to own the land where Gurgaon 
now stands and migrants, who come to do blue-collar jobs for corporations.

Gurgaon has golf courses and shopping malls but it also has mountains of 
uncleared garbage, leaky pipes and potholes along government roads.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37243b1e79b30acb6c5f69374dc94cc56aa32793%2F0_0_3216_2214%2F3216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37243b1e79b30acb6c5f69374dc94cc56aa32793%2F0_0_3216_2214%2F3216.jpg>
 Water logging and patholes in Gurgoan. Photograph: Ravi Batra 
The companies have created a city to suit their needs. Big multinational 
firms, including Google, HSBC, Nokia and Intel, all have offices there. 
Startups too like to base themselves in Gurgaon, so they can be close to the 
huge network of corporates.

 Because the city appeared so quickly, there was no basic infrastructure to 
make them work. The company buildings were built before the roads, electricity, 
sewage, waste disposal, security – and even emergency services – could be 
established.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F197bfb26099b30a63e181ca1b203c4fa98a27de2%2F0_0_4112_1758%2F4112.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F197bfb26099b30a63e181ca1b203c4fa98a27de2%2F0_0_4112_1758%2F4112.jpg>
 Employees on their way to the Cyber Hub in Gurgaon. Photograph: Ravi Batra 
Instead of waiting for the Haryana Urban Development Authority to set up the 
services they needed, the companies improvised, bringing in private builders to 
pave roads and drill borewells, and buying privately owned backup diesel 
generators. Private companies, they felt, would do the job faster and better 
than the government could.

Take the privately run fire service, managed by real estate company DLF for 
residents of its properties. “Many of the buildings here are over 90m tall. The 
government’s fire brigade doesn’t have hydraulic platforms that can reach that 
height. We do. In fact, we were the first in the country to get them,” says SK 
Dheri, DLF’s head of fire safety.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd972a1a16c1273b24244b0d90d252a54ccc94a01%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd972a1a16c1273b24244b0d90d252a54ccc94a01%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
 Fire drill in Gurgaon. Photograph: Ravi Batra 
Residents’ organisations and private developers who manage Gurgaon’s elite 
residences do all the work that governments are normally responsible for. “We 
all used to pitch in around 3,000-4,000 rupees a month (£30-40),” says Surendra 
Lunia, a former resident of the DLF private colony. “The residents’ 
organisation uses that money to fix roads, build parks, pay for security and 
any other needs. If we left it to the government, it would never get done.”


India’s municipal governments are infamously inefficient. Slow bureaucratic 
process and corruption have left many parts of urbanIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> without basic infrastructure. Even in 
megacities such as Mumbai and Delhi, chronic water shortages and power cuts are 
common. The idea of private companies running public services is not new, but 
it has never been done on a scale like Gurgaon’s.


“If a streetlamp breaks in Gurgaon,” says Manjit Rajain, another resident, “a 
private technician will come and fix it the next day. If the government were in 
charge, you could be waiting for a month or more.”


Yet private services are far from ideal. Gurgaon has no sewage system, so 
private companies collect the sewage in septic tanks and dump it in nearby 
rivers or on open land. Privately drilled borewells have quickly depleted the 
amount of groundwater in the city. Other problems, where solutions are less 
obvious, such as the city’s roaming pigs and aggressive monkeys, are ignored.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d8b5b508a57ae1ba43cd3f38cad9504074b7a46%2F0_0_4170_2184%2F4170.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d8b5b508a57ae1ba43cd3f38cad9504074b7a46%2F0_0_4170_2184%2F4170.jpg>
 Garbage dump in Gurgaon. Photograph: Ravi Batra 
 Gurgaon was built because the northern state of Haryana cut red tape in the 
land acquisition process in the 1970s, allowing private developers to buy land 
quickly and cheaply in an area that was close to the capital. “Once the 
developers had the land, they built all the infrastructure. Gurgaon grew so 
fast that the government would not have had the ability to meet its needs,” 
says Rajain.

The wastelands have gone, but the pigs have stayed. The villagers whose lands 
were bought and then developed, were squeezed into ghettoes near the high rises 
of Gurgaon. Their hogs and livestock wander freely through the maze of 
skyscrapers and private fences. “The private colonies in Gurgaon are some of 
the best homes available in India,” says Lunia. “The other colonies, in Old 
Gurgaon, are the worst.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb8ccd6db904c8e87b19ad32e9f7bc7e06c92c7%2F0_0_4833_3290%2F4833.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Facb8ccd6db904c8e87b19ad32e9f7bc7e06c92c7%2F0_0_4833_3290%2F4833.jpg>
 Sakuina lives in a temporary shelter, in Gurgaon. Photograph: Gurinder Osan/AP 
 Municipal government exists but is relatively small. Residents of Old Gurgaon 
have huge problems getting water, power and basic public sanitation, but have 
no-one to provide it.

Shruti Rajagopalan, an economist who has studied the region 
<https://mason.gmu.edu/~atabarro/Lessons%20from%20Gurgaon.pdf> says, “Even the 
poor in Gurgaon are willing to pay for public utilities. Poor women are willing 
to pay for clean water that is reliable. Same for electricity. The urban poor 
in India so desperately needs access to utilities, they don’t seem to care who 
provides them. And they are even willing to pay higher charges.”

Some of the former villagers have accused Gurgaon’s developers of pushing them 
out. “There are fights all the time. The villagers say their land was 
undervalued, the developers say the land wasn’t worth anything until they came 
and built it up,” said Rajain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d4cc339b65852d573921a65d82aa0e35d97ce56%2F0_0_4073_2603%2F4073.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gurgaon%3A%20what%20life%20is%20like%20in%20the%20Indian%20city%20built%20by%20private%20companies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fgurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d4cc339b65852d573921a65d82aa0e35d97ce56%2F0_0_4073_2603%2F4073.jpg>
 Women walk through Old Gugaon. Photograph: Ravi Batra 
In contrast Gurgaon’s private colonies feel surreal. “Entering a private 
colony is like crossing an international border,” says Rajain. “Firstly, the 
checks you go through at the gate with the private security guards. And when 
you do eventually cross the gate, its like you’re in America ... with perfectly 
manicured lawns, and sprinklers and picket fences.”

Municipal government is relatively new in the city. It was formed in 2008, and 
has been playing catchup ever since. New plans to solve Gurgaon’s problems are 
regularly floated: electricity from recycled waste, GPS on garbage trucks to 
make sure waste is being removed, a new mobile app so residents can report 
problems easily. But despite these hi-tech aspirations the corporations face 
the most basic problems: supplying water, removing sewage and fixing potholes.

In the past two years, developers have started handing utility services over 
to the state, leaving many of Gurgaon’s private residents with a reduced 
quality of service. In exchange, the municipal government has started charging 
property taxes to all 368,000 owners of private properties in the city, for the 
first time this year.

Plastic roads: India’s radical plan to bury its garbage beneath the streets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/30/plastic-road-india-tar-plastic-transport-environment-pollution-waste>
Haryana’s chief minister has said the Gurgaon model – allowing private 
companies to buy land directly from villagers and develop it as they choose –
can be replicated 
<http://www.livemint.com/Politics/O2O7xxep6WAc9IU5B02jvO/Gurgaon-model-can-be-repeated-in-rest-of-Haryana-Manohar-La.html>
in other parts of the state.

In the western state of Maharashtra, a similar experiment, a city called Lavasa
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/19/inside-lavasa-indian-city-built-private-corporation>
 – which is run without any state involvement – has sprung up. And in 2011,
Afghanistan sent a delegation of officials to Gurgaon 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/gurgaon/Kabul-wants-to-replicate-a-growing-Gurgaon/articleshow/9032124.cms>
 to study its development model with the aim of replicating elements in Kabul, 
the Afghan capital.

The model has yet to be tried outside India but has inspired similar ideas 
such asPaul Romer’s “charter cities” 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/paul_romer?language=en>, where urban settlements in 
developing nations could be run entirely by other nations or private companies. 
InHonduras, where the idea was floated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/04/honduran-judges-reject-model-cities>
, courts quickly rejected plans, fearing companies’ ambitions could undermine 
the constitution.
 