
It was rumoured in Agra that, during the 1971 war between India and Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pakistan>, Pakistani bombers would be guided 
to their target by the gleaming marble of the Taj Mahal. Yet it stands as a 
towering example of how Islamic culture is so organically part of India’s 
heritage, despite the sometimes uneasy relationship between the two countries.

Prince William and Kate visit India – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/gallery/2016/apr/11/prince-william-and-kate-visit-india-in-pictures>
I am sure that the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge will have no such thoughts of 
territorial dispute in mind when they visit Agra today, but for many of us who 
have been following Prince William’s first visit to India, we cannot help but 
be reminded that his great-great uncle, Lord Louis Mountbatten, the last 
Viceroy of India and mentor to Prince Charles, presided over the independence of
India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> and birth of Pakistan – events 
that have shaped our entire lives.

For 300 years, the British in India exerted a profound influence. Prince 
William’s ancestors ruled my homeland efficiently and ruthlessly, and my 
ancestors supported that rule, holding senior posts in the British-Indian 
police force and army. But by the end of the second world war, the empire was 
politically and economically untenable. In India the imperial policy of divide 
and rule had flowered into evergrowing sectarian violence. Although many, like 
Churchill, felt that Indians were unfit to govern themselves (“a beastly people 
with a beastly religion”), Mountbatten was appointed by King George VI as his 
viceroy, and charged with peacefully transferring power from Britain to India. 
In so doing, Mountbatten agreed the division of the country on religious 
grounds: the separation of Hindus and Sikhs from Muslims to create a new 
Islamic country, Pakistan.

Partition, as it became known, sees its 70th anniversary next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/aug/17/thepartitiondelusion>. 
It involved the largest mass migration in human history, as 14 million people 
were displaced, and up to a million died as a result of sectarian violence, 
starvation and disease.

Half of the Punjab was given to Pakistan, and my Sikh relatives and their 
Hindu friends suddenly found their homes were no longer in India. They fled for 
their lives in the clothes they were wearing, grabbing what possessions they 
could carry. The homes they abandoned would soon provide shelter for Muslim 
refugees, themselves fleeing from violence in India.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fgurinder-chadha-on-viceroys-house-why-i-had-to-make-a-film-about-partition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb6afaf73617168652b84ae2f78c3c4a9ccdc69f%2F54_88_2895_1737%2F2895.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gurinder%20Chadha%20on%20Viceroy%E2%80%99s%20House%3A%20why%20I%20had%20to%20make%20a%20film%20about%20partition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fgurinder-chadha-on-viceroys-house-why-i-had-to-make-a-film-about-partition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gurinder%20Chadha%20on%20Viceroy%E2%80%99s%20House%3A%20why%20I%20had%20to%20make%20a%20film%20about%20partition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fgurinder-chadha-on-viceroys-house-why-i-had-to-make-a-film-about-partition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb6afaf73617168652b84ae2f78c3c4a9ccdc69f%2F54_88_2895_1737%2F2895.jpg>
 Following the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge’s first visit to India, I can’t 
help but be reminded that his great-great uncle presided over the independence 
of India and birth of Pakistan. Photograph: Danny Martindale/WireImage 
My uncles and aunts were only small children when they were forced to flee. My 
father’s youngest sister never made it – she starved to death. My aunt, who now 
lives in the leafy English town of Chertsey in Surrey, remembers, aged 10, 
watching her mother, my grandmother, wrap her dead child in a yard of cotton 
and place a heavy stone on her chest so that she would sink to the bottom of 
the river that was to be her grave.

I find it extraordinary that anyone could come to terms with the tragedy that 
flowed from such sectarian violence. Yet when I was growing up in a corner shop 
in London, my dad had longstanding customers who would come round in the 
evenings to keep him company in the shop.

Most of them were not fellow Sikhs. They were Muslims from his ancestral town. 
I didn’t think much about it as a child, but that sense of a common humanity, 
spanning the religious divide, really struck me in 2005 when I went to Pakistan 
to find my grandfather’s home for the BBC’s Who Do You Think You Are? programme.

The partition delusion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/aug/17/thepartitiondelusion> 
When we eventually found the house, it had become home to several Muslim 
families whose parents had all fled India during partition. One woman handed me 
a shawl and a bouquet of bright plastic flowers, saying: “My family came from 
India in 1947. I am Indian like you.” Then an old Pakistani man smiled and 
said: “This is your home, please come back any time. We will be watching the 
road waiting for your return.” I burst into uncontrollable tears, tears held 
back over years of trying to contain the injustices of history to which my 
family had been subject, tears now released as I wept with the inhabitants of 
my ancestral homeland, now a different country, but one where we still shared 
the same Punjabi language and sense of family.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fgurinder-chadha-on-viceroys-house-why-i-had-to-make-a-film-about-partition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F431bae972c85fed20d1a7ae055586a0421d98066%2F91_1150_5973_3582%2F5973.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gurinder%20Chadha%20on%20Viceroy%E2%80%99s%20House%3A%20why%20I%20had%20to%20make%20a%20film%20about%20partition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fgurinder-chadha-on-viceroys-house-why-i-had-to-make-a-film-about-partition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gurinder%20Chadha%20on%20Viceroy%E2%80%99s%20House%3A%20why%20I%20had%20to%20make%20a%20film%20about%20partition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fgurinder-chadha-on-viceroys-house-why-i-had-to-make-a-film-about-partition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F431bae972c85fed20d1a7ae055586a0421d98066%2F91_1150_5973_3582%2F5973.jpg>
 I do not believe that anyone but a British Indian could truly inhabit these 
differing perspectives on partition … Gurinder Chadha. Photograph: Sophia Evans 
for the Observer 
It was at that moment that I vowed I would make a film that told the story of 
partition. Although I had been a film-maker for many years, I had never had the 
courage to tackle the political tragedy that tore my family apart. As I 
researched the script, I also began to realise how little I really knew of the 
bigger picture, of the global interests at play as India was divided.

One book in particular was revelatory: The Shadow of the Great Game by 
Narendra Singh Sarila. Narendra had beenaide de camp to Mountbatten. In 1997 he 
was in the British Library researching a book about his family when he was 
approached by an Indian librarian. She had been given a box of papers to index 
– secret government documents that had recently been declassified.

The documents appeared to confirm a secret strategy for the protection of 
British interests in Asia that inexorably led to partition. So much for it 
being the fault of the warring Indians, as I had been taught at school in 
London, or principally the fault of Mountbatten, as many of my relatives 
believed. It was far more complex, and this revelation provided me with a way 
into the story.

Gurinder Chadha: ‘It’s been the most satisfying thing I’ve ever done’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/10/gurinder-chadha-most-satisfying-thing-i-have-done-bend-it-like-beckham-musical->
By setting the entire film in Viceroy’s House in Delhi, I was able to bring 
under one roof the Mountbattens, the key Indian leaders (Nehru, Jinnah and 
Gandhi), and the 500 ordinary Indians Hindu, Sikh and Muslim – who served the 
Mountbattens as domestic staff. To reach a global audience, I knew that I had 
to make my film entertaining and accessible. What better way than to visually 
embrace the splendour of the Raj, of Viceroy’s House, and to use humour and 
passion to tell a tale of upstairs and downstairs life in the grand tradition of
Gosford Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/nov/08/londonfilmfestival2001.artsfeatures>
 andDownton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/21/national-television-awards-downton-abbey-strictly-x-factor>
. In the microcosm of that great house, I was able to explore the multiple 
points of view of the protagonists, and grapple with the idea of partition 
without being overwhelmed by its tragedy. I do not believe that anyone but a 
British Indian – a product of Britain and India’s inextricable links – could 
truly inhabit these differing perspectives. I only hope that I do them justice.

After five years of research and development, I will complete the film at the 
end of this year. I will have written my history, the history of my family, 
intertwined with that of Prince William’s great-great uncle and the end of the 
Raj. As a British-Indian woman, I doubt Churchill had me in mind when he said: 
“History is written by the victors.”
 