
“If you read any newspaper in India, across Africa or south-east Asia, you 
regularly see big stories about crashes involving multiple casualties,” says 
Saul Billingsley. “There’s awareness that these things are happening [in 
developing countries] but not an awareness of how to deal with it.”

Some 90% of the 1.2m deaths caused by road crashes 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs358/en/> each year occur in 
developing countries. Road injuries arethe leading cause of death 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs358/en/> among people aged between 
15 and 29, and theninth leading cause of death overall 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs310/en/>, according to the World 
Health Organisation.


I’ve always described it as a hidden epidemic ... there is an incredibly low 
level of awareness
Kevin Watkins, ODI 
These are big numbers, and the issue goes beyond the immediate impact. Every 
year, 1 million children are either killed or seriously injured in road 
crashes, and miss out on an education. If a parent is injured or killed, 
children often have to drop out of school to look after them or find a way to 
earn money. And there is a strain on health systems that are already under 
pressure, says Billingsley, director of theFIA Foundation 
<https://www.fiafoundation.org/>, a global road safety charity.

Globally, the development sector has been slow to recognise road safety as an 
issue. “I’ve always described it as a hidden epidemic,” says Kevin Watkins, 
executive director of the Overseas Development Institute (ODI) 
<https://www.odi.org/>. “If you ask people working in international development 
or infrastructure planning whether they’re aware of the level of road traffic 
injuries and the associated social and economic costs, there is an incredibly 
low level of awareness.”

Billingsley blames on the millennium development goals (MDGs) – road safety 
was not one of them. Research into road safety as a development issue fell away 
from the end of the 1990s, he says, as governments, NGOs and UN agencies 
concentrated on the eight key areas of the MDGs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fhalve-traffic-accident-deaths-injuries-2020%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c1de5cb5fa2c9c0d1ac80309db2a18e6dede1eb%2F0_0_2941_1903%2F2941.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Halve%20traffic%20accident%20deaths%20and%20injuries%20by%202020%3A%20can%20it%20be%20done%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fhalve-traffic-accident-deaths-injuries-2020%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Halve%20traffic%20accident%20deaths%20and%20injuries%20by%202020%3A%20can%20it%20be%20done%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fhalve-traffic-accident-deaths-injuries-2020%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c1de5cb5fa2c9c0d1ac80309db2a18e6dede1eb%2F0_0_2941_1903%2F2941.jpg>
 Traffic accident in Delhi. Photograph: Mani Babbar / 
www.ridingfreebird.com/Getty Images 
But the dawn of the new sustainable development goals (SDGs) means that 
awareness of the issue now needs to grow fast. One of the many ambitious 
targets is tohalve the number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic 
accidents by 2020 <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300>. How can 
such a huge problem be halved in such a short amount of time?

We must focus on the UN goals that are the best value for money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/20/we-must-focus-on-the-un-goals-that-are-the-best-value-for-money>
A group of organisations have been quietly campaigning on road safety for the 
past 10 years. The campaign, coordinated by the FIA Foundation, worked to 
establish theUN Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011-2020 
<http://www.who.int/roadsafety/decade_of_action/en/> and was instrumental in 
getting the issue included in the SDGs. Two high-level ministerial conferences 
– in Russia in 2009 and Brazil in 2015 – also proved to be “momentum changers” 
in getting road safety on to the international agenda.

Over the past few years, this group of organisations have a built a rich body 
of evidence which shows exactly what can be done by different stakeholders to 
tackle deadly road traffic incidents. For governments – both national and 
municipal – the need is to pass stringent laws, such as those to reduce speed 
and enforce helmet-wearing.

In Vietnam, for example, helmet-wearing increased from 40% to 95% within days 
of the government passing a requirement for motorcycle users to wear one, says 
Kelly Henning, director of public health programmes atBloomberg Philanthropies 
<http://www.bloomberg.org/>. The organisation has committed $259m (£200m) to 
improve road safety 
<http://www.bloomberg.org/press/releases/bloomberg-philanthropies-selects-ten-cities-five-countries-participate-new-phase-global-road-safety-initiative/>
. Cambodia, too, is becoming a success story. Helmet-wearing among motorcycle 
riders has increased from 15% to 30% overall, and from 0% to 28% among 
children, since a new traffic safety law came into force at the start of 2016.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fhalve-traffic-accident-deaths-injuries-2020%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff109fc5ec2ceec4c9d9b0ff54009298a12d6d6ca%2F0_0_800_533%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Halve%20traffic%20accident%20deaths%20and%20injuries%20by%202020%3A%20can%20it%20be%20done%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fhalve-traffic-accident-deaths-injuries-2020%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Halve%20traffic%20accident%20deaths%20and%20injuries%20by%202020%3A%20can%20it%20be%20done%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fhalve-traffic-accident-deaths-injuries-2020%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff109fc5ec2ceec4c9d9b0ff54009298a12d6d6ca%2F0_0_800_533%2F800.jpg>
 A young girl crosses a busy road in Cambodia Photograph: FIA 
Sao Paulo’s Life Protection Programme – which introduced diagonal crossings, 
pedestrian-only zones, and significant speed limit reductions – contributed to a
20.6% reduction in traffic fatalities 
<http://www.wrirosscities.org/news/reducing-speeds-sao-paulo-brazil-leads-record-low-traffic-fatalities>
 in the city between 2014 and 2015. On two of the city’s busiest highways – 
Marginal Tietê and Pinheiros – the speed limit was reduced from 90km per hour 
to 70km per hour for light vehicles and from 70km per hour to 60km per hour for 
heavy vehicles. The city also implemented 11 “Areas 40” to reduce the speed 
limit to 40km per hour in areas with high pedestrian and commercial activity.



For passengers, evidence shows that speaking up about bad driving can help 
make roads safe. From 2007-13, projects in Kenya placed stickers in the back of 
long-distance minibuses featuring messages such as “Don’t let a reckless driver 
get away with murder”. After the first pilot (“Heckle and Chide”) ended, 
insurance companies released copies of their records for the previous three 
years so that researchers could study the impact of the project.

“The vehicles we targeted with stickers were half as likely to have an 
accident than the ones that were not targeted,” says Billy Jack, one of the 
researchers from Georgetown University who ran the study. “We also found that 
the number of accidents involving death or injury was reduced by 60%.”

The second study, Zusha! – Swahili for “protest” – found a 25-35% reduction in 
accidents. Researchers now plan to increase use of the stickers across Kenya, 
and introduce the scheme in Tanzania, Uganda and Rwanda.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fhalve-traffic-accident-deaths-injuries-2020%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc80acf1a8b65349bb2beb24b0dae39e71b2e102d%2F0_0_5055_3364%2F5055.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Halve%20traffic%20accident%20deaths%20and%20injuries%20by%202020%3A%20can%20it%20be%20done%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fhalve-traffic-accident-deaths-injuries-2020%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Halve%20traffic%20accident%20deaths%20and%20injuries%20by%202020%3A%20can%20it%20be%20done%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fhalve-traffic-accident-deaths-injuries-2020%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc80acf1a8b65349bb2beb24b0dae39e71b2e102d%2F0_0_5055_3364%2F5055.jpg>
 Motorcycle traffic, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam
 Photograph: Yellow Dog Productions/Getty Images 
Car manufacturers also have a role in improving safety. They are required to 
meetseven minimum recommended standards 
<https://issuu.com/globalncap/docs/democratisingcarsafety> set by the UN in 
April 2016. “At the moment, unfortunately, most of the major manufacturers have 
a policy of producing vehicles with a far lower safety standard for emerging 
markets,” says Watkins. “These vehicles are far more likely to result in death 
and injury and, to my mind, that is a dereliction of corporate responsibility.”

The FIA Foundation is supporting the Global New Car Assessment Programme 
<http://www.globalncap.org/> to crash-test cars in Latin America, India and 
south-east Asia and publish the results. Billingsley hopes it will encourage 
manufacturers to improve the quality of their vehicles.

Donors, too, can be champions for this issue by only financing projects that 
meet certain safety standards. “If the board of the World Bank were to say: 
‘We’re not going to sign-off on any projects that don’t meet a minimum safety 
standard for road infrastructure,’ that would send a very clear incentive down 
to project planners and governments seeking to borrow,” says Watkins. “I do 
think the World Bank has moved in a positive direction on this – they are ahead 
of the curve if you compare them with the African, Asian, or Latin American 
development banks – but they need to move much further and much faster.”

With NGOs, governments, the UN, researchers, car manufacturers and donors 
focusing their efforts, can global road deaths and injuries be cut by 50% by 
2020? “The target looks very daunting and it’s evident that business-as-usual 
trajectories would leave us a long way short of the target. But there’s such a 
big gap between what we can afford to do and what we’re currently doing,” says 
Watkins.

“It certainly concentrations the mind having a five-year target,” says 
Billingsley. “If it isn’t achieved in terms of total fatality numbers it 
doesn’t mean it’s failed. The work we do towards trying to meet it will not be 
in vain.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 