
It took six years longer to build than projected, overshot its budget tenfold, 
was described by its own artistic director as a “laughing stock” and reminded 
one former German chancellor of Kaiser Wilhelm’s megalomania.

But this week Hamburg’s Elbphilharmonie concert venue put an end to the 
embarrassment of a nation increasingly concerned about several overdue and 
over-budget infrastructure projects undermining its reputation for efficiency 
and engineering prowess.


Construction company Hochtief officially handed the keys for the port city’s 
new trademark project over to its mayor, lighting up the hall’s facade to spell 
outfertig, meaning “finished”, through the drizzle on Monday night.

A viewing platform, a four-star hotel and a restaurant attached to the concert 
hall will open on Friday, while the two concert halls will be inaugurated with 
performances by the renamed NDR Elbphilharmonie Orchestra and soloist Jonas 
Kaufmann on 11 and 12 January next year.

Tate Modern’s Switch House review – richness and grandeur
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/19/tate-modern-switch-house-review>
Designed by Swiss architects Jacques Herzog and Pierre de Meuron, the duo 
behind London’s Tate Modern, Munich’s Allianz Arena football stadium and 
Beijing’s “bird’s nest” Olympic stadium, the glass-panelled concert hall sits 
on top of a former warehouse in a recently regenerated part of Hamburg’s old 
port. As at the Tate Modern, visitors access the upper floors via a pair of 
central elevators.

The concert halls were constructed by Japanese acoustician Yasuhisa Toyota in 
a vineyard style, whereby the seats rise around a central stage in the manner 
of the sloping terraces of a vineyard, as opposed to the rectangular shoebox 
style.


Though the birthplace of Mendelssohn and Brahms, Hamburg and its port has 
traditionally enjoyed a reputation for musical traditions of a more raucous 
kind. It was the nurturing ground for the Beatles, who played the bars in the 
city’s red light district in the 1960s, and home of the “Hamburg school” of 
independent rock fostered here in the 1990s. City officials hope the new hall, 
which locals have already nicknamed “Elphie”, will change that.

After being handed the keys, mayor Olaf Scholz described the Elbphilharmonie 
as “an impressive building, without whose architecture it is already hard to 
imagine the skyline of our city”. His joy was only tempered by the fact that he 
“wished that it could have been done quicker and for less money.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhamburg-elphie-concert-hall-elbphilharmonie-finished%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F971691f2cab2fbdbdf99eaa45b1e147a6f4a1a2b%2F0_48_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hamburg's%20completed%20'Elphie'%20concert%20hall%20shines%20triumphant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhamburg-elphie-concert-hall-elbphilharmonie-finished%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hamburg%27s%20completed%20%27Elphie%27%20concert%20hall%20shines%20triumphant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fhamburg-elphie-concert-hall-elbphilharmonie-finished%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F971691f2cab2fbdbdf99eaa45b1e147a6f4a1a2b%2F0_48_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 The venue is finished after more than nine years. Photograph: Christian 
Charisius/EPA 
Along with the German capital’s new Berlin-Brandenburg airport and Stuttgart’s 
large-scale urban renewal project around its train station, the Elbphilharmonie 
has for years formed a troika of embarrassing building projects for Europe’s 
richest economy.

Originally estimated to cost €77m in 2005, the projected price had shot up to 
€114m by the time the building works started in 2007. In 2013, the mayor of 
Hamburg then announced that the project would cost €789m.

The late German chancellor Helmut Schmidt, a long-term resident of the city, 
said at the time that the project reminded him of Kaiser Wilhelm II’s desire to 
make “as big an impression as possible”.

The Elbphilharmonie’s defenders point out that the project’s most obvious 
inspiration, the Sydney Opera House, saw a similar explosion of costs and took 
four years longer to complete.

But many Hamburgers have grown to regard the Elbphilharmonie as a symbol of an 
untrammelled political elite. In 2010, protesters formed a human chain around 
the building site and ceremonially burned “Elphie million” dollar bills. The 
Golden Pudel nightclub, a ramshackle venue on a less salubrious side of the 
port, was re-christened as the “Elbphilharmonie of the hearts”. One of the 
club’s proprietors, the former punk singer Schorsch Kamerun, dismissed the 
concert hall as “lighthouse politics” – a trophy building projecting its own 
glory out to the rest of the world, but with little use to the people in the 
city.

Yet in November 2016 the concert hall shines triumphantly across the harbour, 
while the Golden Pudel is closed after an arson attack in the spring; and some 
of the Elphie’s former detractors are even willing to make peace with Hamburg’s 
new landmark.

“We need the whole package,” music promoter Andrea Rothaug recently told local 
newspaper Hamburger Abendblatt. “I want to see the Golden Pudel DJ on the 
podium inside the Elbphilharmonie and [American star conductor] Kent Nagano 
inside the Pudel club.”
 