
Financial markets are preparing for an uncertain final quarter of the year as 
traders fret about Theresa May’s more concrete Brexit timetable, the health of
European banks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/europeanbanks> and the US 
presidential elections.

The British prime minister suggested on Sunday that the country’s exit from 
the EU wouldlean towards a “hard Brexit” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
, as she implied regaining control of immigration was more important than 
access to the single market. May earlier announced thatarticle 50 – the legal 
device to begin the process of departure – would be triggered by the end of 
March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
.

Some traders fear the prime minister’s moves might lead to a swift fall in the 
value of pound, mirroring the markets’ reaction immediately after the UK voted 
to leave the EU on June 23, whensterling slumped to a 31-year low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/23/british-pound-given-boost-by-projected-remain-win-in-eu-referendum>
.

One trader said that financial markets had not taken account of a “timetabled 
hard Brexit” when markets closed on Friday evening, meaning the pound could 
“gap lower” on Monday.

However, others argued that the triggering of article 50 in early 2017 was 
expected, but the debate about what that move would mean would create 
uncertainty.


Joshua Raymond, a director at financial trading firm XTB, said he expected 
volatility in the value of the pound, with both sides of the Brexit argument 
using the media to sway public opinion to their side of the argument. He 
believes that the government had hedged its bets by also implying a soft Brexit.


He said that the prime minister’s indication that the UK would enact article 
50 before the end of March could actually be supportive of the pound in the 
very short term “because of the certainty it provides investors and businesses 
that the roadmap to Brexit has begun”.

He added: “However, the main support could come from recent comments from both 
the prime minister and chancellor, who spoke out against the idea of a hard 
Brexit to end freedom of movement. That leaves the door open for positive 
conversations about remaining in the single market, which is the markets key 
area of concern”.

The wavering over what Brexit eventually means comes as traders also try to 
take stock of how prices might be affected by a host of geopolitical issues, 
such as the increasingly bitter US presidential election.

Alastair Winter, the chief economist at the investment bank Daniel Stewart, 
wrote in a research note on Sunday: “Barclays Bank’s latest survey shows 
geopolitical developments to have become the biggest concern to investors. 
Moreover, concern over the developed market economies (i.e. democracies) 
continues to overshadow those over China and other emerging markets. This 
suggests rising fears that the ‘sans culottes’ with their pitchforks will yet 
storm the great citadels of the west.

“In summary, the political fundamentals are bad enough but may not get much 
worse soon. Of course ... the economic fundamentals also look grim.”

The UK’s FTSE 100 rose by 6% in the July-September quarter, its best 
performance since 2013, as the weaker pound pushed up the value of 
internationally focused blue-chip companies.Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sterling>, though, fell against the US 
dollar for the fifth quarter running – the worst run since 1984.

What will happen now timescale for article 50 has been revealed?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/article-50-timescale-theresa-may-brexit>
James Stanley, a currency analyst at foreign exchange group DailyFX, also 
believes the fourth quarter will be challenging.

“There are some very pertinent themes for markets as we enter the final 
quarter of 2016,” he said, referring the US election and concerns about the 
health of European banks following last week’s gyrations in theDeutsche Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/deutschebank> share price. The Deutsche 
sell-off followed reports thathedge funds were pulling assets from the bank 
amid suggestions that Berlin may be forced into a bailout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/29/commerzbank-job-cuts-restructuring>
.


Deutsche Bank’s plight has prompted fears that global markets are facing 
turmoil of the kind triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers eight years 
ago this month.

Stanley said: “The big worry here isn’t just one bank getting hit. The bigger 
concern is a contagion effect; because banks trade with each other and if one 
major bank gets taken out, this can create a nasty cascade effect across 
markets as other banks get pinched by counterparty risk.

“So going into Q4 this is the top theme for markets to watch because, frankly, 
it can have the most firepower. It’s also going to be one of the most difficult 
to time and follow, as this is basically a liquid situation that will continue 
to morph and develop as there isn’t a template-response for the European 
Central Bank to handle such situations.”
 