
When he was a floppy-haired 12-year-old kid from working-class western Sydney, 
Harry Kewell, along with his team-mates in the state title-winning Marconi 
Stallions’ Under-13s squad, was asked by coach Stephen Treloar to imagine what 
he would like to have achieved in football by the time he was 40. It might have 
made as much sense to ask a 12-year-old what life would be like if he were a 
unicorn, but Kewell, says the highly-regarded Treloar, gave the question 
serious thought and wrote down his answer.


Treloar then followed up that question with others. What would you like to 
have achieved in football in 10 years, in five years, in three years, in one? 
Kewell, says Treloar, though popular with his team-mates, was “his own man” and 
he had an arrogance born of confidence in his own ability. “And I mean that in 
a nice way,” says Treloar, today the director of postgraduate studies in the 
school of business at the University of Notre Dame (Australia). “Harry was the 
kid who said, ‘C’mon, see if you can get the ball off me’.” Kewell’s written 
answers, of which Treloar still has the original copy, were reflective of that, 
while also proving prescient.

Kewell wrote that he wanted to represent the junior NSW side, the Under-17 and 
Under-20 national sides, to play senior football forAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>, and – by the age of 40 – to 
be a coach. “Every one of those goals he achieved,” says Treloar, who adds, by 
way of emphasising the single-minded drive that characterised the young 
footballer, that when he was asked to rate, from zero to 10, the importance of 
attaining each of those goals, “Harry wrote down ‘10, 10, 10, 10 and 10’.”

For all Kewell’s achievements there were plenty more than he listed during 
that Under-13s planning session, including winning the Uefa Champions League 
and FA Cup with Liverpool, and playing a major role in the success the 
Socceroos enjoyed before, during and after the nation’s drought-breaking 
involvement in the 2006 World Cup. A three-time Oceania player of the year and 
the 1999-00 Professional Footballer’s Association young player of the year in 
the UK, Kewell was also named Australia’s all-time greatest footballer after a 
vote in 2012 that took in the verdict of fans, players and media. And on 
Tuesday evening Kewell, 38, now coaching Watford’s Under-21s team and aiming to 
be “a top manager in Europe”, will formally accept the Alex Tobin medal – 
selected by the executive of Australia’s PFA – for his achievements, service 
and dedication to the game.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b5bda9ff3ed08f53954560857810cfa4678a1fb%2F0_8_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Kewell%3A%20from%20Sydney's%20west%20to%20the%20grandest%20stages%20of%20world%20football%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Kewell%3A%20from%20Sydney%27s%20west%20to%20the%20grandest%20stages%20of%20world%20football%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b5bda9ff3ed08f53954560857810cfa4678a1fb%2F0_8_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Kewell’s late equalising goal in the 2006 World Cup against Croatia would have 
been enough to cement his star in Australian football. Photograph: Michael 
Steele/Getty Images 
And yet, for all that, when Kewell’s name is raised among a collection of 
Australian football fans or pundits (a “froth” would be a fitting enough 
collective noun) it’s not unusual to find that the discussion tends to explore 
various reasons Australia has never quite taken Kewell to its heart. At least 
in the same, unabashed way it has some of his arguably less-talented, though 
highly-accomplished, former team-mates like Tim Cahill.

Harry Kewell: a career in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/dec/06/harry-kewell-a-career-in-pictures>
There’s no science to love, of course, but if this is indeed true I wonder if 
it’s because, at least in part, we hold Kewell responsible for the promise we 
tend to believe he never quite fulfilled, for clubs and country. That this was 
largely due to his fragile body is neither here nor there. Quite simply, 
Kewell, who had as sweet a left foot as Christy Brown, was so exhilarating to 
watch in the first half of his career that we wanted it to go on forever. And 
when it didn’t, when he was cruelled by a litany of injuries, we felt he 
cheated us. So it became easier to define Kewell for what he didn’t give us 
than what he did.

Kewell’s time at Liverpool, for instance, was an injury-plagued 
disappointment, and he went under the surgeon’s knife seven times in six 
seasons. No doubt there were many at Leeds, heartbrokenby the manner of his 
departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2003/jul/10/newsstory.leedsunited>, who 
experienced the bitter-sweet taste of schadenfreude. (Leeds fans would later 
find more reason to poison the well of their memories when Kewell, released by 
Liverpool, signed for Galatasaray, eight years after two Leeds fans were 
stabbed to death by a Turkish football fan in Istanbul before a Uefa Cup 
semi-final between the two teams). Although, on Merseyside, Kewell provided a 
fewmoments of incandescence <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wqMf2KYUvLw> – 
brighter still for the gloom surrounding them – even his major successes there 
had to be qualified. Yes, he played a part in Liverpool’s victories in both the 
iconic 2005 Champions League final, and the remarkable 2006 FA Cup final, but 
on both occasions he had left the field at the point in the fairytale when 
Liverpool were lost in the foreboding woods.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1100a09ff1a41f283f265dd79a141d29d7be5839%2F0_0_2820_2128%2F2820.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Kewell%3A%20from%20Sydney's%20west%20to%20the%20grandest%20stages%20of%20world%20football%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Kewell%3A%20from%20Sydney%27s%20west%20to%20the%20grandest%20stages%20of%20world%20football%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1100a09ff1a41f283f265dd79a141d29d7be5839%2F0_0_2820_2128%2F2820.jpg>
 John Arne Riise celebrates with Kewell after Liverpool won the 2005 Champions 
League final against AC Milan in Istanbul. Photograph: Clive Brunskill/Getty 
Images 
Kewell’s time with the Socceroos was, on the whole, much happier than that. 
His influential turn on the do-or-die 2006 World Cup qualifier against Uruguay, 
and his late equalising goal in the 2006 World Cup against Croatia that sent 
the Socceroos into the second round, would have been enough on their own to 
cement his star in Australian football. In a golden generation he was Midas, a 
highly marketable player with boy-band looks and that “cool”-sounding name who 
was as responsible as anyone for the success of the national side, and for 
attracting a new generation of Australian fans to the game. Kewell even 
contributed to changing the way football was played in Australia.


He did this by playing the game in a way that held more natural appeal to 
children than the prevailing boot-it-to-the-shithouse style built on a bedrock 
of lungpower and muscle. Kewell had about him trickery, audacity, and a little 
bit of magic. While other players were chasing rabbits, he was pulling them out 
of his hat. “He was always a player with finesse,” recalls Treloar. “I think 
that came about because as a junior he often played in higher age groups than 
his own. He couldn’t be that robust, knock-em-down player so he developed a 
different set of skills.”

His former Leeds team-mate and now football commentator, Michael Bridges, says 
Kewell was a special player with similarities to John Barnes and Chris Waddle, 
left-footers with Brazilian flair. “I think he came to influence the way the 
game is played here [in Australia] because kids want to emulate players who are 
exciting. And Harry was that,” says Bridges (who, as an aside, says he was 
convinced to drop his “north-east diet of fish and chips” after observing 
Kewell’s dietary discipline and professionalism). “He could drop the shoulder 
and be past a player in a flash. He had that quickness, that skill. But he 
worked at that. In the gym, on the field, always staying back after training to 
putting in that bit extra.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bb8f6e3f6fe341f5c594400d807a717f4e215f2%2F0_0_1826_1156%2F1826.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Kewell%3A%20from%20Sydney's%20west%20to%20the%20grandest%20stages%20of%20world%20football%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Kewell%3A%20from%20Sydney%27s%20west%20to%20the%20grandest%20stages%20of%20world%20football%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bb8f6e3f6fe341f5c594400d807a717f4e215f2%2F0_0_1826_1156%2F1826.jpg>
 Kewell lets fly with a typically spectacular effort during his time at Leeds 
United. Photograph: Getty Images 
But as with his club football it wasn’t all plain sailing for Kewell on the 
international front. Though debuting as a 17-year-old, Kewell made just 56 
appearances for the Socceroos over a 17-year period between 1996 and 2012. One 
of the games he missed – due to an infected toe – was one of the most 
significant in Australia’s football history; their round of 16-match against 
Italy in the 2006 World Cup.

On other less significant occasions Kewell’s loyalty to the jersey was 
questioned, with many fans and pundits often wondering whether the injury of 
the day that ruled him of a Socceroos match was real or whether it was an 
excuse thrown out by Leeds or Liverpool – or indeed Kewell himself – because 
his absence would be inconvenient. Kewell, more comfortable posing in his 
underpants for a sponsor than talking into a microphone, was often forced to 
defend himself against such accusations. And when he did so he sometimes came 
across as aloof or arrogant.

That’s not who he is, says Bridges. “Harry’s actually a very shy character, 
and that gets misread by some. I don’t think he’s always been embraced as he 
should have been by Australians or Football Federation Australia, for that 
matter.” Kewell’s credibility has been unfairly damaged at times, he says, 
something which he believes owes a lot to Australia’s so-called tall-poppy 
syndrome as much as the suspicion over his many injuries. You can’t help but 
think that Kewell’s decision in 2010 to allow an Australian60 Minutes team to 
film him laid out in an operating theatre 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zk2fWT6dCdE>, with tape over his eyes, getting 
groin surgery in Sydney, was in some way a means of saying, “See? See? I’m not 
faking it!”

Ah, but look what’s happened, we’ve gone off track, dwelling on what Kewell 
never managed to deliver than what he did. Let’s rectify that.

Take yourself back to the years between 1996 and 2003 when Kewell was an 
instrumental figure in coach David O’Leary’s youthful Leeds side that variously 
included the likes of Jonathan Woodgate, Alan Smith, Ian Harte and compatriot 
Mark Viduka. For five seasons between 1997 and 2002, Leeds finished no lower 
than fifth and they made the Champions League semi-finals in 2000-01. History 
will show that that wasn’t enough to recover expenditure – and fire sales, and 
a fall from grace, soon followed – but for a time, Elland Road was a very happy 
place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ce587afb7e020c6d7ba5aa763e07bf6945c57d9%2F0_0_3072_2056%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Kewell%3A%20from%20Sydney's%20west%20to%20the%20grandest%20stages%20of%20world%20football%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Kewell%3A%20from%20Sydney%27s%20west%20to%20the%20grandest%20stages%20of%20world%20football%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ce587afb7e020c6d7ba5aa763e07bf6945c57d9%2F0_0_3072_2056%2F3072.jpg>
 Arsenal great Patrick Vieira tries to keep Kewell in check during a match in 
1999. Photograph: Mike Hewitt/Getty Images 
Now there’s no pleasing everyone, particularly Leeds fans as he’d discover for 
himself in due course, but for that period of time Kewell – dubbed the Wizard 
of Oz – was doing a pretty good job of it. If you loved football and could see 
beyond tribal loyalties how could you not enjoy the way in which the young 
Leeds winger was lighting up thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>?

Another former team-mate and England defender Danny Mills recently described 
Kewell as “the Gareth Bale of his time”, though he was probably closer in skill 
and style (though not durability) to a contemporary – Manchester United’s 
rubber-hipped left winger Ryan Giggs. Set loose on Leeds’ left wing, but given 
licence to roam by O’Leary, Kewell, quickly won over Elland Road as well and 
Premier League fans who noted, with interest, that the young Aussie had an 
English father. Might he be nudged into representing England? Like Giggs, 
Kewell was whippet quick and his close-in dribbling was done with a touch so 
soft he might have had cushions strapped to his laces. Though he scored plenty 
of fine goals with his right foot, his left was his weapon and he could use it 
as an artist uses a brush or as a blacksmith wields a hammer.

In a Premiership match against Arsenal in May 2003, for example, he opened the 
scoring with a simply stunning strike. Running onto a lofted through ball from 
Jason Wilcox, Kewell, out-pacing Martin Keown and Oleg Luzhny, allowed the ball 
to bounce over his left shoulder and into his path. A fraction of a second 
after the ball bounced for a second time Kewell, a metre outside the left edge 
of the box, swung his left leg across the flight and drilled the ball into the 
left corner of the goal, past a diving David Seaman.The sumptuous half-volley 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sttmok_x-Jc> drew an orgasmic “Ohh!” out of 
commentator Andy Gray.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b130c2ebf94f1bc1182aeca93a69e53136afd14%2F0_0_3000_2012%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Harry%20Kewell%3A%20from%20Sydney's%20west%20to%20the%20grandest%20stages%20of%20world%20football%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Harry%20Kewell%3A%20from%20Sydney%27s%20west%20to%20the%20grandest%20stages%20of%20world%20football%20%7C%20Paul%20Connolly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fharry-kewell-from-sydneys-west-to-the-grandest-stages-of-world-football%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b130c2ebf94f1bc1182aeca93a69e53136afd14%2F0_0_3000_2012%2F3000.jpg>
 Photograph: Adam Pretty/Getty Images 
Another day, in 2000, away to Sheffield Wednesday, Kewell picked up the ball 
in a central position a few metres outside the D. As Wednesday’s players 
fatally stood off him, Kewell took a soft touch as if contemplating his 
options. Then, though the ball sat before his right boot, Kewell took the least 
conventional of those. All but standing still he raised his left and used the 
outside of it to clip the ball under its chin to send it arcing out and in, 
finding the top right corner despite the efforts of goalkeeper Kevin Pressman. 
Then, casually, as if he’d done something as satisfying, but ultimately 
unremarkable, as successfully reverse-parking a car in front of a new 
girlfriend, he turned around, kissed his fingers, and gave them a little 
waggle. Hebarely raised a grin <https://youtu.be/cI-O--Qy-dg?t=7m13s>. In that 
moment, as in many others, he showed why Leeds fans adored him, why England 
fans wanted him, and why Socceroos fans were so damn happy to have him.

Kewell did admit, a couple of years ago, that he does sometimes wonder “what 
if”; what if he hadn’t had those injuries, “what could have been”. In that 
respect, he’s like many of us, looking at the glass half-happy. Perhaps time 
will fix this inclination and as the years pass he, like us, will be more 
inclined to reflect on what was, and enjoy the view. It was spectacular.
 