
Sam Allardyce has suggested the Football Association should take action 
against Watford’s club mascot for mocking theCrystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> winger Wilfried Zaha.

Zaha went down inside the area in the 87th minute of Palace’s 1-1 draw at 
Watford on Boxing Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/watford-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
, but despite contact he was booked for diving by the referee, Mark 
Clattenburg. That denied Palace a second penalty in the match as the former 
England manager Allardyce had to settle for a point from his first game in 
charge.

The strange and sometimes terrifying world of football mascots – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2015/jun/23/strange-terrifying-world-football-mascots-in-pictures>
Watford’s mascot, Harry the Hornet, got involved after the final whistle, 
diving at Zaha’s feet when the player went to applaud the Palace fans. “The 
mascot is out of order, isn’t he? If someone is diving, they don’t get that 
angry,” Allardyce said. “There’s contact. It wasn’t given.”

According to several national newspapers, he then suggested there might be 
consequences for the mascot. “That’s up to Watford to sort that out, really,” 
he said. “ThePremier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>
 and FA can look at that and do what they want to do. It could have made the 
wrong reaction, as we know. But I didn’t see it. I’m more concerned about my 
team, the overall performance.”

Every dog has its day
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/1998/dec/04/newsstory.sport6>
Allardyce had no doubts Zaha should have been awarded a spot-kick. “That was a 
penalty,” he said. “There may be an argument that the first contact is outside 
the box, but it would have been difficult to judge. To get nothing at all, and 
Wilfried booked, is very disappointing.”

The 24-year-old Zaha has received a number of bookings for simulation in his 
career. Asked whether he felt Zaha was being judged on reputation, Allardyce 
said: “You’ll have to ask the referees, ask [referees’ chief] Mike Riley. If 
they are refereeing on reputation and not fact or incident, that’s a black mark 
against them.”

Palace had already been awarded one penalty in the first half, but Christian 
Benteke missed the chance to give them a two-goal cushion and it proved costly. 
Troy Deeney’s second-half penalty – the 100thWatford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> goal of his career – cancelled 
out Yohan Cabaye’s 26th-minute strike.

Watford’s manager Walter Mazzarri played down the incident involving the 
mascot. “Let’s laugh altogether about this,” he said. “Everything doesn’t have 
to be a drama. I couldn’t see [the Zaha penalty incident] from where I was 
standing. Believe me, I didn’t see that. Or our penalty.”

The Dozen: Boxing Day's best Premier League photos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/dec/27/the-dozen-boxing-days-best-premier-league-photos> 