
For half a century the orchestral conductor and composer Harry Rabinowitz, who 
has died aged 100, played a key role in the British broadcasting and film 
industries. He was in charge of popular and light music for both the BBC and 
London WeekendTelevision <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> and 
conducted the music for more than 60 films.

Rabinowitz often said that he never wished to “waste his colleagues’ time” and 
was opposed to over-rehearsing. Although he was highly professional, he was not 
a dictatorial conductor, telling an interviewer that “in almost all the 
sessions I’ve conducted, the musicians have left smiling”.

Born in Johannesburg, South Africa, to Israel and Eva, he went to Athlone high 
school and the University of the Witwatersrand, where he studied the piano and 
composition. He was fired from his first job, as a jewellery salesman, after 
only one day and next found work demonstrating new songs to customers in the 
sheet music department of a Johannesburg store. Following a period in the South 
African army during the second world war, he conducted the orchestra for the 
musical Strike a New Note before travelling to London in 1946 to take up a 
place on the conducting course at the Guildhall School of Music.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNuVPABWagV8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNuVPABWagV8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNuVPABWagV8&media=>
With the help of the actor and comedian Sid James, a fellow South African, 
Rabinowitz found his feet in the British music business. He played the piano 
for the popular BBC radio show Variety Band- box and was a session musician at 
EMI’s Abbey Road recording studios. His conducting career began in earnest when 
he was hired to work on the musical Golden City in 1950. Written by Philip 
Tore, the show was set in the South African gold rush of 1886 
<http://www.sahistory.org.za/archive/gold-rush>. This led to work at seasonal 
ice shows atthe Empress Hall in Earl’s Court, London 
<http://www.arthurlloyd.co.uk/EmpressHall.htm>, and, in 1953, as musical 
director of the London production of Lerner and Loewe’s Broadway hit Paint Your 
Wagon.

Next, Rabinowitz was offered a contract to conduct the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Revue Orchestra. This was a house band 
of the Light Programme and could be heard on such shows as Variety Playhouse, 
Henry Hall’s Guest Night and the Jimmy Edwards comedy series Take It From Here. 
He could also be heard as a pianist on Midday Music Hall and Piano Playtime.

In 1960, Rabinowitz was appointed music director of BBC TV light 
entertainment, at a time when variety and comedy shows requiring orchestral 
accompaniment dominated the schedules. In addition to conducting the orchestra 
for the Val Doonican Show, Peter Cook andDudley Moore’s Not Only... But Also 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/15/dudley-moore-jazz-pianist-tribute-neil-cowley>
 and many others, he composed music for The Frost Report (1966).

Rabinowitz then moved to a similar post at the newly established London 
Weekend Television (1968-77). There he worked on Upstairs, Downstairs (1971) 
and Black Beauty (1972). His theme music for Love for Lydia (1977) was 
nominated for an Ivor Novello award.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7U9ySqYJKg8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7U9ySqYJKg8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7U9ySqYJKg8&media=>
By now, his reputation as a conductor and arranger of popular and light music 
was sufficiently high for him to pursue a freelance career in theatre, films 
and broadcasting, where he went on to compose music for the TV series the 
Agatha Christie Hour (1982) and Reilly: Ace of Spies (1983). In the theatre, 
Rabinowitz conducted the orchestra at the premiere of the Andrew Lloyd Webber 
and TS Eliot musical Cats (1981) and Don Black and Lloyd Webber’s Song and 
Dance the following year.

He was in even greater demand to work in films, in one year (1991) recording 
music for nine movies. His cinema credits included Chariots of Fire (1981), The 
Remains of the Day (1993), Howards End (1992), The English Patient (1996) and 
The Talented Mr Ripley (1999). His final film score assignment, at the age of 
87, was Cold Mountain (2003).

His final film score assignment, at the age of 87, was Cold Mountain (2003)

Rabinowitz’s renown as a conductor of film and light music spread to the US 
and led to seven seasons’ work as guest conductor with the Boston Pops 
Orchestra, beginning in 1985. He also appeared at the Hollywood Bowl with the 
Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra in the 1980s, as well as occasional concerts 
with the London Symphony and Royal Philharmonic Orchestras. In 1996, he 
conducted a concert at Carnegie Hall, New York, of music from the films of 
Ismail Merchant and James Ivory.

He was appointed MBE in 1977 and in 1985 received the Gold Badge of the 
British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors. Last year Rabinowitz 
became one of the oldest guests onDesert Island Discs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0606vtx> at the age of 99, choosing a pitch 
pipe as his luxury item.

In recent years, Rabinowitz divided his time between Provence and Portland, 
Oregon, the home town of his second wife, Mitzi Scott, whom he married in 2001. 
She survives him, as do three children, Karen, Simon and Lisa, from his first 
marriage, to Lorna Anderson, which ended in divorce, and four grandchildren.

• Harry Rabinowitz, conductor and composer, born 26 March 1916; died 22 June 
2016

• This article was amended on 24 June 2016. Harry Rabinowitz died on 22 June, 
not 21 June, as originally stated. His children are Karen, Simon and Lisa, 
rather than Karen, Simon and Oliver.
 