
Peter Hartley snatched a dramatic late winner as Plymouth Argyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/plymouthargyle> booked their place in the 
League Two play-off final with a 1-0 second-leg win against Portsmouth at Home 
Park .

Hartley rose to head home Graham Carey’s corner in the second minute of time 
added on to seal a 3-2 aggregate victory.

Portsmouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> started brightly, 
with Kyle Bennett cutting in from the left wing and letting fly with a 
right-foot shot that ran down the outside of the side-netting. Then striker 
Marc McNulty spun on the ball 30 yards out and tried his luck with an audacious 
effort that also flew high and wide. Bennett continued to be a threat down the 
left but when he cut inside again after 37 minutes his shot flew well wide.

The final chance of the half fell to Jake Jervis as the home captain Curtis 
Nelson nodded down Kelvin Mellor’s free-kick from the halfway line. The ball 
bounced invitingly across the face of goal but Jervis hit it on the rise and 
his powerful shot flew over the bar. Gary Roberts caused panic as he broke into 
the Argyle penalty area at the start of the second half and Hartley had to 
scramble the ball away. McGurk’s 25-yard shot on the run was gathered by Luke 
McCormick as Portsmouth started the second half in the ascendancy, with Ben 
Davies sending a 20-yard free-kick skimming inches wide.

Plymouth responded with Jervis firing just wide from the right as he latched 
on to Gregg Wylde’s far-post cross and Jamille Matt smashed a thumping rising 
drive just over.Matt, who scored twice in the first leg, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/12/porstmouth-plymouth-paul-cook-playoffs>
 then powered a header just wide from Carey’s near-post corner in the 65th 
minute and 10 minutes later substitute Ben Close cleared Carey’s header off the 
line.

In the 88th minute a measured header from Jervis came back off the post from 
Craig Tanner’s cross and another Matt header was scooped over the bar to earn 
the corner from which Hartley snatched the winner.
 