
It may have appeared that Beppe Grillo, the Italian rabble-rouser and 
Eurosceptic who heads the Five Star Movement (M5S), had had an epiphany when he 
decided to dump Nigel Farage and Ukip andseek a European parliamentary alliance 
with Guy Verhofstadt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/five-star-founder-beppe-grillo-calls-for-vote-on-quitting-farage-bloc>
, one of the most outspoken defenders of European unity.

But in Rome, far from being seen as a radical ideological shift and sudden 
embrace of Europe, the surprise move by Grillo – whose supporters voted 
overwhelmingly in an online vote on Monday to join Verhofstadt’s liberal 
democratic Alliance of Liberals and Democrats forEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> (ALDE) group – was seen as an 
attempt at a marriage of convenience.

If the proposed alliance is approved by the ALDE, the plan could bolster both 
Grillo’s party before Italian elections by giving it an air of legitimacy, and 
Verhofstadt personally by strengthening the ALDE after the former Belgian prime 
minister announcedhe was running to be president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/guy-verhofstadt-running-european-parliament-president-brexit>
 of the European parliament.

Five Star Movement's founder calls for vote on quitting Farage bloc
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/five-star-founder-beppe-grillo-calls-for-vote-on-quitting-farage-bloc>
Grillo’s decision to seek an alliance with Verhofstadt could be a way of 
trying to put a less radical face on the M5S before elections, said some 
analysts, particularly among supporters on the left who may be concerned about 
the party’s increasingly rightwing rhetoric on issues such as migration and the 
euro.

“My impression is that this might be a move on the part of the M5S to become 
more plausible, to stop scaring voters away with its anti-Europeanism and to 
appear as a mainstream party that is not going to do anything incredibly 
stupid,” said Giovanni Orsina, a professor of history and politics at Luiss 
Guido Carli University in Rome.

Grillo said on his blog on Sunday that the new alliance would share common 
goals, from simplifying bureaucracy in Brussels to resolving the migration 
crisis through “permanent relocation”, and the promotion of the green economy. 
The union would make the ALDE the third largest alliance in the European 
parliament and would leave Farage’s grouping, theEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> of Freedom and Direct Democracy 
(EFDD), hanging by a thread.

Grillo’s decision to call the snap online poll caught even members of the M5S 
off-guard, with one MEP, Marco Zanni, posting on his Facebook page that, along 
with party activists, he had only heard about the change on Sunday and was 
“shocked and dismayed” by the news. Another senior official, Manlio di Stefano, 
tweeted that the M5S’s support for a referendum on the euro and call for 
changes in Italy’s relationship with Europe and Nato did not depend on its 
association with ALDE.

Manlio Di Stefano (@ManlioDS) 
Referendum su #Euro <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Euro?src=hash> e modifica 
partecipazione a#Europa <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Europa?src=hash> e #NATO 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/NATO?src=hash> non dipendono da adesione #ALDE 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ALDE?src=hash>. #M5S 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/M5S?src=hash> non cambia idea su interessi 
italiani.
 <https://twitter.com/ManlioDS/status/818165451524079616> January 8, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/ManlioDS/status/818165451524079616> 
The M5S-ALDE union is not yet set in stone. While in the online vote in Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> 78.5% of M5S supporters voted for an 
alliance with the ALDE, the change must also be approved by two-thirds of the 
liberal grouping’s members, who are voting on Tuesday evening.

Verhofstadt and Grillo stand at polar opposites on a range of issues, from 
their views on Vladimir Putin’s Russia to gay rights, the migrant crisis, 
freedom of the press and Europe’s open borders. The breadth of that gulf was 
best captured by each man’s reaction to the November election of Donald Trump.

Italy's Five Star Movement part of growing club of Putin sympathisers in west
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/five-star-movement-beppe-grillo-putin-supporters-west>
For Verhofstadt, the “unthinkable” result 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/trump-european-defense-community-by-guy-verhofstadt-2016-11>
 was a triumph of “nativism over internationalism” that put EU’s territorial 
integrity at stake. Grillo saw the election as a tremendous victory for his own 
anti-establishment cause, saying Trump’s election was a great “vaffanculo” 
(“fuck you”) to the political establishment.

Now some analysts say Grillo is trying to position the M5S before Italy’s next 
election, which could be held as early as the spring. Monday’s vote, they say, 
also shows that he is becoming more pragmatic and obviously political. The 
movement is placed to do well whenever elections come, with polls showing what 
was once seen as a protest party now has the support of about 30% of Italian 
voters.

One reason the M5S has never been elected into national office is because it 
has always refused to form alliances with other parties to create a ruling 
majority in the Italian parliament. This latest move, though, could indicate 
Grillo is becoming more flexible in seeking opportunistic alliances.

Vincenzo Scarpetta, a senior policy analyst at the thinktank Open Europe, said 
that, in some ways, the M5S’s alliance with Ukip had been a marriage of 
convenience, too. Grillo had written in a blogpost that the M5S only voted with 
the British party on about 20% of votes, Scarpetta said.
 