
I love Ann Patchett, both because of the brilliance of State of Wonder and 
becauseshe has an independent bookshop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/02/ann-patchett-indie-bookshops-nashville-store>
. And I love lists of books, both because they give me new reading ideas and 
because they awaken my competitiveness over how many I’ve read. Soa list of 
books compiled by Patchett and her team of booksellers 
<http://parade.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/AnnPatchett75BestBooks.pdf>? Just 
the thing to cheer me up a little.

There are parameters, of course – Patchett et al have chosen 75 books from the 
last 75 years, to celebrate Parade magazine’s 75th anniversary, and only those 
written in English, “because if we opened it up to the world we would miss 
plenty of gems out of sheer ignorance and wind up with a lot more than 75 
books”.

A life in writing: Ann Patchett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/jun/10/ann-patchett-life-writing-interview>
But all in all, I think it’s a fantastic list, mixing adult fiction with 
children’s, novels with nonfiction. I’ve only read 20 of them, but they’re 20 
books I loved and which remain on my shelves today, whether it’s TH White’s The 
Once and Future King or Madeleine L’Engle’s A Wrinkle in Time on the children’s 
side, or Margaret Atwood’s The Blind Assassin and Raymond Chandler’s The Long 
Goodbye on the adults’.

I love the fact that A Tree Grows in Brooklyn by Betty Smith is (first) on the 
list – I read this very recently, when my five-year-old daughter chose it as a 
birthday present for me (she liked the cover). She has good taste.

And I’m intrigued that I’ve read little of Patchett’s team’s selections from 
the 1990s, but most of the 1950s line-up – what a decade! Charlotte’s Web, 
Foundation, Fahrenheit 451, Lolita, The End of the Affair, The Old Man and the 
Sea.

The best British novel of all time: have international critics found it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/dec/08/best-british-novel-of-all-time-international-critics-top-100-middlemarch>
Handily, there’s a ­printable checklist 
<http://parade.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/AnnPatchett75BestBooks.pdf>, so I 
can start planning my summer reading to up my tally of 20. JD Salinger’s Nine 
Stories is a woeful omission of mine, and Patchett gives it a strong push: 
“It’s ... the most perfectly balanced collection of stories I know. There are 
no weak links. The Catcher in the Rye is a great book when you’re a kid, and 
Franny and Zooey is a great book when you’re in your 20s, but Nine Stories can 
see you through your entire life.” So that’ll be first on the line-up.

So many thanks to Patchett and her team – although I’m not sure I’ll be 
forgiving them any time soon for failing to include Lucia Berlin’s magnificent 
short-story collection A Manual for Cleaning Women, which I was blown away by 
on a recent read. Or in the underrepresented 1970s, why they couldn’t have 
included William Goldman’s The Princess Bride, Stephen King’s Carrie, or, most 
unforgivably, Angela Carter’s The Bloody Chamber.

But that’s the fun of lists, I guess – thinking about what you’d have done 
better, while secretly being happy that you didn’t have to.
 