
For many it’s seen as the marriage capital of the world, catering for couples 
who want anything from a classic white wedding to drive-thru nuptials, with an 
Elvis impersonator doing the honours of course. But the allure of getting 
hitched in Las Vegas seems to be waning, with the city increasingly struggling 
to persuade lovebirds to pick Sin City as the place to tie the knot.

In the past 10 years, Vegas has had a 37% decline in the number of people 
getting married there, falling from 128,000 in 2004 to 81,000 last year, 
resulting in an estimated loss of $1 billion a year. Many chapels have been 
forced to close.

Clerk Lynn Goya, who took over the Marriage License Bureau for Clark County 
(which covers Las Vegas) earlier this year, is keen to reverse this trend and 
rebrand Las Vegas as a “hip” place to get hitched.

The decline in weddings is not, she says, simply due to the recession that hit 
in 2008. “Since then, the tourists have returned to Las Vegas,” Goya told the 
LA Times. “The weddings haven’t followed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Flas-vegas-weddings-with-a-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441717899799%2F15ae7051-c157-4c30-8ebc-4221bfcc7b25-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20Las%20Vegas%20lost%20its%20allure%20as%20the%20capital%20of%20weddings%20with%20a%20twist%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Flas-vegas-weddings-with-a-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20Las%20Vegas%20lost%20its%20allure%20as%20the%20capital%20of%20weddings%20with%20a%20twist%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Flas-vegas-weddings-with-a-twist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441717899799%2F15ae7051-c157-4c30-8ebc-4221bfcc7b25-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Hangover Wedding Chapel at Madame Tussauds, Las Vegas. Photograph: Vox 
Solid Communications 
Hit films such as The Hangover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/12/film-review-the-hangover> (which 
depicts a group of friends on a calamitous rampage of Vegas) have been a mixed 
blessing for the city. On one hand it perpetuates the notoriety that appeals to 
many visitors – indeed, it is without a hint of irony that Madame Tussauds Las 
Vegas unveiled a reconstruction ofthe chapel from The Hangover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/picture/2015/sep/03/world-view-tie-the-knot-at-the-hangover-chapel-madame-tussauds-las-vegas>
 this month, which “daring couples” can get married in – from $1,500. But the 
same brash image is a turn-off for many others.

“Hollywood has had a substantial influence on matrimonial tourism and tourism 
in general in Las Vegas,” says Ann Parsons, marketing director at VegasWeddings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/weddings>. “While The Hangover was a 
phenomenally positive influence for LasVegas in general, it was a negative for 
our wedding industry as it perpetuated the myth of the quick wedding for 
drunken tourists.”

Celebrity shotgun weddings have a similar effect: Mickey Rooney, Pamela 
Anderson and, most recently, Britney Spears, have all had weddings in Vegas 
with varying levels of longevity.

“Even though Britney Spears’ wedding didn’t last and isn’t a good example, we 
think her getting married here spiked the highest number of weddings in any one 
year.” says Parsons. “Either way, it’s still not the message we want to 
promote.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Flas-vegas-weddings-with-a-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718049712%2F753e1449-da80-4f31-8e08-bf44a11e81ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20Las%20Vegas%20lost%20its%20allure%20as%20the%20capital%20of%20weddings%20with%20a%20twist%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Flas-vegas-weddings-with-a-twist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20Las%20Vegas%20lost%20its%20allure%20as%20the%20capital%20of%20weddings%20with%20a%20twist%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Flas-vegas-weddings-with-a-twist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718049712%2F753e1449-da80-4f31-8e08-bf44a11e81ba-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The big yes! … 37 couples get married in a mass wedding ceremony at the 
Mandalay Bay Hotel in Las Vegas. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
It is hoped that the recent legalisation of same-sex marriage in Nevada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/08/las-vegas-same-sex-marriage-destinations-gay>
 will help boost the number of weddings, and increase the number of LGBT 
visitors to Las Vegas.

“The gay wedding market will be important to Las Vegas,” says Brandon Reed, 
general manager of Graceland Wedding Chapel. “Same-sex ceremonies were 
legalised here in Nevada last October, long before the Supreme Court legalised 
gay unions across the nation. I think Nevada was thinking proactively on this.”

However, for Reed the city has still “dropped the ball” when it comes to 
actively marketing itself as a wedding destination.


“There are many other states and countries that are engaged (no pun intended) 
in active marketing campaigns extolling the many and diverse beautiful 
locations in which to marry,” he says. “Places such as the Caribbean, the 
Mediterranean, and Europe [sic] all jumped on the wedding bandwagon years ago. 
A natural result of this would be diverted business.”

One person who is surprised to hear about the decline of weddings in Vegas is 
writerJamie Lafferty <http://jamielafferty.com/>, who got married there last 
year, choosing the city over a “grey day at a grey county building” in the UK.

“The idea that people get married because they won or lost a bet, or because 
they were blackout drunk, or high, definitely puts some people off Las Vegas,” 
he says. “But in the end, Vegas gives you incredible flexibility and minimal 
hassle: you can get married in a helicopter, underwater, by Darth Vader … and 
it can all be done within a couple of ours of landing at the airport.”

He adds: “There’s absolutely no kidding in that what you’re doing is unique, 
but if you want speed, a bit of fun and a fraction of the expense of a wedding 
at home, then go to Vegas. Plus, you’re virtually guaranteed sunshine.”
 