
In this era of dark, complex shows stuffed with anti-heroes, it can be hard 
for a new drama to make its mark. When Sky Atlantic first announced it had 
bought Ray Donovan,Ann Biderman <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0081189/>'s 
noir-ish show about a Hollywood fixer and his family, my reaction was: "It 
looks great, but do I really have room for anotherbrooding leading man 
<http://www.younilife.com/content/2627/walter-white-was-taught-how-to-cook-meth-for-real/>
 in my life?"

But with five episodes to go, I'm glad I stuck with it because Ray Donovan, 
while certainly flawed, is much more interesting than its initial premise – 
that our lead can fix the lives of celebrities but has no control over his own 
– suggested.

Whether you agree will largely depend on what sort of show you were hoping 
for. If you turned on Ray Donovan wanting a TV version ofHarvey Keitel's scenes 
in Pulp Fiction <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wWmRTjLRMfU> or a serious 
Entourage with more violence and lesswhining about dates with agent's daughters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/sep/10/entourage-jonathan-bernstein-wahlberg>
 then it may have been a disappointment. Indeed, one of the most notable things 
about the drama is how little Ray's work has featured as the series has 
progressed. Instead Biderman, the woman behind the bleakly brilliant cop drama
Southland 
<http://www.televisionwithoutpity.com/brilliantbutcancelled/gone-too-soon/2013/06/why-we-are-still-mourning-southland-tnt/>
, is far more interested in exploring the Donovans' poisonous family dynamic 
than she is in acerbic commentary about Hollywood's dream factory.

At times it can seem a little forced, as though Biderman and her writers are 
so desperately trying to write the new Sopranos that they forgot to bring 
anything original to the table (and in the process criminally wasted the 
wonderfulPaula Malcolmson <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0539155/> as Ray's wife 
Abby, who is reduced to nagging, whining and moping about her life – she'sa 
Carmela-redux without the warmth or vulnerability) 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a_N-KyMhkHc>. That is countered, however, by a 
sense of creeping menace and the writing team's willingness to take risks with 
tone, pace and payoffs.

One of the more interesting things about the show is its refusal to pull its 
punches where family patriarch Mickey is concerned. Mickey, played byJon Voight 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000685/> with the permanently present grin of a 
shark in a tank of goldfish,is not a good man 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=il2xMme-qpM>. More importantly, he has never 
been a good man. He gives loyalty to no one, is without an altruistic bone in 
his body and has screwed up his sons for so long and in so many different ways 
that it's a miracle any of them are actually functioning. From the casual 
cruelty of his remark that his abused son Bunchy won his million dollar payoff 
against the Catholic church "the hard way", to the revelation that he's working 
with an FBI agent to possibly bring down Ray, he lacks any redeeming qualities.

Yet if Mickey is a monster, then so too is Ray. As this series has progressed 
it has become increasingly clear that Ray (an enjoyably grumpyLiev Schreiber 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000630/> ) is no one's hero, not even his 
family's. Instead, what we are watching is a man slowly falling apart, thanks 
in part to his rage at the world. Despite his horrific past, it's not really 
the world's fault that Ray is angry – it's something innate. With each episode 
we increasingly feel as though Ray might be the problem rather than the 
solution; as though he, like his malignant father, might be the nightmare 
rather than the man who makes it go away.

That creeping sense of unease is assisted by a strong support cast – we 
genuinely care about poor Bunchy and fading boxer Terry (not least becauseDash 
Mihok <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005231/> and Eddie Marsan 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0550371/> are doing solid work in fleshing out 
their roles) whileJames Woods <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000249/> has brought 
hisusual slithering menace 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/straw-dogs-2011/news/1923565/total_recall_james_woodss_best_movies/>
 to the part ofWhitey Bulger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/12/whitey-bulger-boston-convicted>
-style gangster Sully. Ray Donovan compels in the quiet moments when 
sweet-natured Terry fumbles towards love or as the aimless Bunchy tentatively 
takes steps towards some sort of life. When the show takes a chance with its 
material, forgets about emulating past shows and concentrates instead on 
letting its outstanding cast play off each other, then glimpses of another, 
more coherent drama shine through.

This show isn't perfect. It can be clunky and occasionally plays a little too 
much like a send-up of a horrible Boston family, with the standard cliches 
(boxers, drink, fighting, big-haired women, abuse by priests) ticked off, but 
Ray Donovan still compels. Most intriguingly, with five episodes left, I have 
no real idea where it's going. Is it about Ray and Mickey and their inevitable 
confrontation or, as seems increasingly likely, does Biderman have some other 
more complicated endgame in mind? Will the whole thing end up a shaggy dog tale 
or is there one final sting? Despite the occasional misstep, I'm still 
desperate to find out.

Ray Donovan is on Sky Atlantic, Tuesdays, 10pm
 