
It is not wrong to assume that most development professionals are passionate 
about their work. Many are also good writers. But for those who need a little 
help to communicate their passion clearly in writing, this guide may be helpful.

Practically, our content is usually about 800 words long. Because pieces are 
written for a professional audience - not for the general public - the aim is 
that they share experiences, lessons learned, best practice orpractical tips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/how-to>
. Alternatively, you can file afield post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/series/field-posts>
 - and article about your personal experiences a development professional or 
humanitarian in the field.

How to develop your story

First, decide what you want to write about (eg: aid flows from the US).

You may have a rough idea (American aid isn't having the impact it should have 
– why?).

Try to put that in one line (why US aid is not reaching the people who need it 
most).

Then, put down the points that you want to discuss or highlight (historical 
bias, corrupt leaders in country, bureaucracy, lack of supervision and follow 
up, poorly targeted interventions etc).

Next, back up those points with links to evidence – numbers, statistics, past 
evidence or history, case studies or opinions – your own opinion, other 
opinions, those of your peers or people related to the topic. Put the link in 
brackets next to the relevant text instead of using hyperlinks or footnotes.

Once you have gathered facts and opinions, you have your basic material. Now 
go back to your title and check whether your material is enough to express your 
idea – is it adequate to write a blog? If 'yes', start writing.

Keep it simple

Good writing is simple writing. Even when writing for a professional audience, 
avoid clichés and jargon. Read, re-read and strike out repetition, avoid or 
explain cultural references and any acronyms you use.

And always remember George Orwell's six golden rules for effective writing 
<http://theorwellprize.co.uk/george-orwell/by-orwell/essays-and-other-works/politics-and-the-english-language/>
:

1. Never use a metaphor, simile, or other figure of speech which you are used 
to seeing in print.

2. Never use a long word where a short one will do.

3. If it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it out.

4. Never use the passive where you can use the active.

5. Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word, or a jargon word if you can 
think of an everyday English equivalent.

6. Break any of these rules sooner than saying anything outright barbarous.

Have an idea for us? To submit a pitch, or tell us your interest in writing 
for us, fill in this form 
<https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1Euh_FO3MFYwn0YPqss3d0VWWT36iH7LcHiBDPW7fjeg/viewform>
.

Community guidelines

Publishing a piece on the site is only the beginning of the debate – not the 
end of it. We actively encourage readers to comment, ask questions of our 
writers and share their own experiences in the comment threads.

To make the most of the site as a platform for debate, please remember the 
following:

1. Become a member of the network 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/global-development/?INTCMP=BACNETMPU5876I2>: 
the best way to find out the various ways you can get involved every week is to 
join the network. Our newsletter will keep you posted on what's been published 
and opportunities to contribute.

2. Use the site: have a point of view? Express it. Take our polls, leave 
comments on the articles, email us,tweet us <https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP>, 
proactively share content on ourLinkedIn 
<http://www.linkedin.com/groups?home=&gid=4729258&trk=anet_ug_hm> page and on 
Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/Guardian-Global-Development-Professionals-Network/112983875525796>
.

3. But be respectful of others' viewpoints: The Guardian has very high 
standards and we certainly welcome contrarians – as long as your views are 
relevant! That said, many of our readers in the global development professional 
community – the very people the site is here to engage – will not be used to 
our comment culture. So please disagree tactfully.

4. Read our community standards <http://www.guardian.co.uk/community-standards>
.
 