
The true cost of Heathrow airport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/heathrow-airport> expansion to the 
taxpayer is not being divulged by the government, according to a Conservative 
former transport minister, who said ministers needed to “come clean” over the 
probable £5bn-£10bn public cost for road and rail links.

Tory MP Stephen Hammond raised his concerns as it emerged that Heathrow 
executives would get millions in bonuses forsecuring approval for the £17.6bn 
third runway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/heathrow-airport-expansion-gets-government-approval-gatwick>
 scheme.

Hammond, a transport minister from 2012-14 when the airports commission was 
studying the scheme, said the government was misinforming the publicby 
announcing 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-decides-on-new-runway-at-heathrow>
 that: “Expansion costs will be paid for by the private sector, not by the 
taxpayer.” The transport secretary, Chris Grayling, had also omitted this in 
his statement to the house, he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fheathrows-third-runway-public-bill-hidden-tory-mp-stephen-hammond-taxpayer-cost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8265a00038f0e697b642b40e348f0c488c0dc69e%2F0_321_4171_2503%2F4171.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Heathrow%20third%20runway%3A%20public%20bill%20up%20to%20%C2%A310bn%20hidden%2C%20says%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fheathrows-third-runway-public-bill-hidden-tory-mp-stephen-hammond-taxpayer-cost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Heathrow%20third%20runway%3A%20public%20bill%20up%20to%20%C2%A310bn%20hidden%2C%20says%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fheathrows-third-runway-public-bill-hidden-tory-mp-stephen-hammond-taxpayer-cost%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8265a00038f0e697b642b40e348f0c488c0dc69e%2F0_321_4171_2503%2F4171.jpg>
 MP Stephen Hammond says Heathrow expansion costs will not fall to the private 
sector as ministers claim. Photograph: Julian Makey/Rex Features 
“There will be a number of specific things we will be doing for Heathrow. The 
government and Heathrow need to come clean on what the cost to the taxpayer is 
going to be. No one would be surprised if it is £5bn, but we should just be 
honest about it,” Hammond added.

While the commission report estimated a £5bn bill for new roads and rail 
links, Transport for London put the potentialcost as being as high as £18.4bn 
<http://content.tfl.gov.uk/landing-the-right-airport.pdf>.

Heathrow said it had earmarked just £1bn, and that it only accepted direct 
responsibility for works to the M25, which the third runway would cross, and a 
few minor roads. The airport contends that it will be cutting traffic, despite 
adding up to 55 million passengers a year, and that revenues could offset the 
bill.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fzac-goldsmith-heathrow-decision-an-outrage-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zac%20Goldsmith%3A%20%20Heathrow%20decision%20'an%20outrage'%20%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fzac-goldsmith-heathrow-decision-an-outrage-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zac%20Goldsmith%3A%20%20Heathrow%20decision%20%27an%20outrage%27%20%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fzac-goldsmith-heathrow-decision-an-outrage-video&media=>
Zac Goldsmith: Heathrow decision ‘an outrage’ – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/26/zac-goldsmith-heathrow-decision-an-outrage-video>
 Heathrow confirmed on Wednesday that executives would be paid bonuses, for 
securing a new runway, that would be expected to run into several million 
pounds. A spokeswoman said the bonuses would depend on also reaching targets on 
customer service and profitability.

The bonus scheme, devised by Heathrow’s chief executive, John Holland-Kaye, and
approved by shareholders last year, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/15/heathrow-airport-chiefs-bonus-third-runway>
 will mean senior managers getting rewards based on net earnings, passenger 
service and strategic targets for a third runway .

Holland-Kaye earned £2.06m last year including bonuses, more than doubling his 
basic salary of £885,000. The new scheme, linked to expansion, did not pay out 
in 2015, “as the performance in respect of this scheme is so uncertain at this 
stage”, according to the airport’sannual report 
<http://www.heathrow.com/file_source/Company/Static/PDF/Investorcentre/Heathrow-Airport-Holdings-Limited-31-December-2015.pdf>
.

In an unusual move, a further payment will depend on employee satisfaction and 
engagement scores, known as the “mojo bonus”, after“internal motivational 
practice” that was developed by Holland-Kaye 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/05/john-holland-kaye-interview-heathrow-airport-expansion-third-runway-airports-commission>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fheathrows-third-runway-public-bill-hidden-tory-mp-stephen-hammond-taxpayer-cost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35fa24545f508a2acc5df23f341622a9943e806b%2F276_82_2253_1351%2F2253.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Heathrow%20third%20runway%3A%20public%20bill%20up%20to%20%C2%A310bn%20hidden%2C%20says%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fheathrows-third-runway-public-bill-hidden-tory-mp-stephen-hammond-taxpayer-cost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Heathrow%20third%20runway%3A%20public%20bill%20up%20to%20%C2%A310bn%20hidden%2C%20says%20Tory%20MP&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fheathrows-third-runway-public-bill-hidden-tory-mp-stephen-hammond-taxpayer-cost%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35fa24545f508a2acc5df23f341622a9943e806b%2F276_82_2253_1351%2F2253.jpg>
 Nelson’s statue in central London wears a mask after Greenpeace action this 
April highlighting air pollution. Photograph: Matt Dunham/AP 
Mojo may be rising at the airport faster than in the surrounding boroughs, 
where concerns over noise and air pollution have been heightened by a 
Department forTransport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> report into 
air quality. Campaigners have highlighted an apparent admission that pollution 
is likely to rise in parts of London with a third runway, which they say 
potentially makes the scheme illegal.

The report, produced by Parsons Brinckerhoff for the DfT, said that Heathrow 
was “at risk of worsening exceedances of limit values alongside some roads 
within greaterLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, but this would be 
unlikely to affect the overall zone compliance”.

The truth about London's air pollution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/05/the-truth-about-londons-air-pollution>
However, this is likely to be contested. Legal opinion 
<https://www.ftbchambers.co.uk/barristers/robert-mccracken-qc> obtained by the 
Clean Air in London campaign, from Robert McCracken QC, states that worsening 
pollution in any areas that already exceed legal limits would break the law.

Grayling has said that the runway cannot go ahead without complying with air 
quality obligations, which the report suggests would be entirely dependent on 
proposed mitigation schemes from Heathrow.

A DfT spokesperson said: “The government believes that the Heathrow north-west 
runway scheme could be delivered without impacting on the UK’s compliance with 
air quality limit values, with a suitable package of policy and mitigation 
measures.“

Jenny Bates, Friends of the Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/friends-of-the-earth> pollution 
campaigner, said: “With 10,000 early deaths in the capital each year from air 
pollution this approach shows a callous disregard for people’s health. We 
believe this approach is at odds with EU rules on tackling air pollution.”

In the Commons, the prime minister, Theresa May, said the government had 
“looked very carefully at the air quality issues”. Challenged by Tanya Mathias, 
the Tory MP for Twickenham, on worsening air pollution and noise, May said: 
“The evidence shows that air quality requirements can be met.”

Build Heathrow third runway on ramp over M25, minister says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/26/heathrow-third-runway-ramp-over-m25-minister-says>
Earlier, Grayling endorsed the idea of building the third airport runway over 
the M25 using a bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/26/heathrow-third-runway-ramp-over-m25-minister-says>
 rather than digging a tunnel for Britain’s busiest motorway to pass underneath 
the runway. He said the scheme would minimise disruption to motorists and be 
cheaper than the tunnel, which has alarmed Highways England, the strategic 
roads authority.

While the so-called “ramp” has raised eyebrows, engineers insisted it was 
standard global practice. Chris Chalk, of the Institute of Civil Engineers 
transport expert panel, said: “Clearly there will have to be all sorts of 
simulations to ensure there is no risk of distracting drivers.” He said there 
would be a 150-metre width of bridge each side of the runway and that the 
gradient would be less steep than that on the runways at Manchester and 
Birmingham airports.
 