
With shades of Jamie Murray and Jelena Jankovic in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/feb/19/tennis>, Britain will once again 
have an interest in the Wimbledon mixed doubles final on Sunday. There was a 
carnival feel on No1 Court on Saturday afternoon as Guernsey’sHeather Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson> and Henri Kontinen from 
Finland blew past Oliver Marach and Jelena Ostapenko in their semi-final 7-6, 
6-3.

Watson and Kontinen, who had never played together in competition before this 
tournament, were smiling so much that it was hard to believe that aWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> final was at stake. “I’m pretty 
happy – OK, very happy,” Watson, 24, said later. “I don’t know what to say, but 
I’m having so much fun on the court with Henri.”

“It’s been a lot of fun,” Kontinen agreed, “and the results are following.”

Serena Williams beats Kerber in Wimbledon final to equal Graf record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/09/serena-williams-angelique-kerber-wimbledon-womens-final-report>
Watson met Kontinen through his coach, the British former player Chris Eaton, 
whose modest claim to fame was reaching the second round at Wimbledon in 2008. 
She admitted that she had tried to partner up with Kontinen for the French Open 
this year but her ranking had not been high enough to secure a place in the 
draw. At Wimbledon, which has more spots available, they made the cut. “God I’m 
glad we decided to play with each other,” she reflected, with a broad grin.

The progress of Kontinen and Watson to the semi-final had shown a mixture of 
skill and good fortune. The pair received a bye in the first round, and then 
won through again in the second round without hitting a ball when Elena Vesnina 
withdrew to concentrate on her surprise singles run. Next up though was Leander 
Paes and Martina Hingis, the reigning champions, and Watson and Kontinen showed 
their mettle in their first match together as they came through in three tight 
sets.

The semi-final against the Austrian veteran Marach and the 19-year-old 
Ostapenko, the 2014 Wimbledon junior champion from Latvia, did not begin 
propitiously. In the opening game Kontinen, a doubles specialist, surrendered 
his serve meekly with a double fault. They trailed for most of the set until 
they broke Ostapenko in the eighth game and held on for a tie-break. This was 
the turning point of the match: from 1-1, Watson and Kontinen won six points on 
the spin to take a decisive lead.

At this point, the volume of the crowd turned up a notch and Watson and 
Kontinen really started enjoying themselves. At each change of ends they were 
animated, laughing. What were they talking about? “Some pretty random stuff: 
sometimes it’s tactics, sometimes it’s life,” Watson said. When asked if she 
could be more specific, she demurred: “I don’t know if I can give you 
examples...”

Watson admitted that she has found the absence of pressure and expectation in 
the mixed doubles to be pleasantly liberating. She was bitterly disappointedto 
lose in the first round of the singles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/30/wimbledon-2016-heather-watson-knocked-out-by-annika-beck>
, going down 12-10 in the final set against Germany’s Annika Beck. Britain’s 
No2 singles player was two points away from victory and described the defeat as 
“one of the worst” she had experienced.

Watson, who has been a victim of Twitter trolls in the past, admitted later 
that she wenton to social media to “punish” herself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/30/heather-watson-hits-out-internet-trolls-wimbledon-defeat>
. There was, disappointingly, plenty of material to scroll through.

What a difference a week makes: now it’s Heather Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson>, Wimbledon finalist. “How 
does that sound?” she said. “Pretty damn cool.”

The next opponents for Watson and Kontinen are the 15th seeds, Colombia’s 
Robert Farah and Anna-Lena Grönefeld from Germany. They will play on Centre 
Court on Sunday afternoon directly after the men’s final between Andy Murray 
and Milos Raonic. Watson only learned this fact in her post-match press 
conference. “That shows you how prepared we are,” she said, with a giggle.

What about a double success for Britain? “Hopefully it will be a good day for 
the Brits. A British double is the aim, if you ask me and Andy.”

For now, though, Watson and Kontinen just plan to stay relaxed. “We just go 
with the flow,” Watson said. “Henri’s a dream to play with, he’s so good. I 
just have to make that first ball and he does the rest basically. So we’ll keep 
smiling, having fun. Go about it the same way because it’s working.”
 