
It has been a strange fortnight for Heather Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson>. Having begun with a 
whimper, it could end up with a first Wimbledon title.

The Briton will play on Saturday for a place in the final of the mixed 
doubles, after she and Henri Kontinen of Finland continued their surprise run 
with a fine 6-3, 6-2 win over the American Scott Lipsky and Alla Kudryavtseva 
of Russia.

“We played well again. I’m really enjoying my time on court. I think that’s 
why I’m playing so well. Henri makes me laugh.”

Andy Murray reaches Wimbledon final with straight-sets win over Berdych
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/andy-murray-reaches-wimbledon-final-win-tomas-berdych>
Having knocked out the favourites, Martina Hingis and Leander Paes, in the 
previous round, they played near perfectly in lovely afternoon sunshine to book 
their place in the last four, where they will meet Oliver Marach of Austria and 
the former juniorWimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> 
champion Jelena Ostapenko of Latvia.

After squandering three match points in losing in the first round of the 
singles and being fined $12,000 for damaging the court with her racket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/02/heather-watson-hit-with-wimbledons-second-biggest-fine-after-first-round-loss>
 Watson has looked a player transformed. On Friday they broke early in both 
sets and closed out in style. “Everybody stares at me at the net when the 
referee tells us, please don’t [damage] the court,” she said, laughing.

Watson’s run may yet have a double dividend as she prepares for next month’s 
Olympics in Rio. The 24-year-old was bitterly disappointed four years ago when
Andy Murray chose Laura Robson over her as his mixed partner, the pair going on 
to win the silver medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/andy-murray-laura-robson-olympic-silver>
. Though Watson is the British No2 behind Johanna Konta, her efforts here may 
influence Murray’s thinking, although Jamie Murray, the men’s doubles world 
No1, may also have a say.

“I’m not really thinking about that,” she said. “If I get the opportunity to 
play mixed I’ll take it but I’m happy this week with my partner.”
 