
Fiscal policy is edging back into fashion, after years, if not decades, in 
purdah. The reason is simple: the incomplete recovery from the global crash of 
2008.

Europe is the worst off in this regard: its GDP has hardly grown in the last 
four years, and GDP per capita is still less than it was in 2007. Moreover, 
growth forecasts are gloomy.In July, the European Central Bank published a 
report suggesting that the negative output gap in the eurozone was 6% 
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/economic-research/resbull/2016/html/rb160701.en.html>
, four percentage points higher than previously thought. “A possible 
implication of this finding,” the ECB concluded, “is that policies aimed at 
stimulating aggregate demand (including fiscal and monetary policies) should 
play an even more important role in the economic policy mix.” Strong words from 
a central bank.

Fiscal policy has been effectively disabled since 2010, as the slump saddled 
governments with unprecedented postwar deficits and steeply rising debt-to-GDP 
ratios. Austerity became the only game in town.

This left monetary policy the only available stimulus tool. The Bank of 
England and US Federal Reserve injected huge amounts of cash into their 
economies through quantitative easing (QE) – massive purchases of long-term 
government and corporate securities. In 2015, the ECB also started an 
asset-buying programme,which the ECB president, Mario Draghi, promised to 
continue “until we see a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation”. 
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2015/html/is150415.en.html>

QE has not been a magic bullet. While it helped stop the slide into another 
Great Depression, successive injections of money have yielded diminishing 
returns. The ECB’s announcement of its policy narrowed the gap in bond yields 
between Europe’s core and periphery.But a study by Thomas Fazi of the Institute 
for New Economic Thinking emphasises QE’s lack of influence on bank lending 
<http://www.pieria.co.uk/articles/qe_in_the_eurozone_has_failed>, the increase 
in non-performing loans, and the dire output and inflation figures themselves.

Moreover, QE has undesirable distributional consequences, because it gives 
money to those who already have it, and whose current spending is little 
influenced by having more.

Policymakers should have been alert to the likelihood of this mediocre 
outcome. When central banks try to reduce inflation by pumping liquidity out of 
the system, their policy is subverted by commercial banks’ ability to pump it 
back in by making loans. In today’s deflationary environment, the reverse has 
happened. Central banks’ attempt to pump in liquidity to stimulate activity is 
subverted by commercial banks’ ability to pump liquidity out by augmenting 
reserves and refusing to lend.

Helicopter money is closer than you think
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/apr/07/helicopter-money-is-closer-than-you-think>
That leaves fiscal policy. The logic of current economic conditions implies 
that governments should be taking advantage of ultra-low interest rates to 
invest in infrastructure projects, which would both stimulate demand and 
improve the structure of the economy. The problem is the climate of 
expectations.As the Oxford economist John Muellbauer says 
<http://voxeu.org/article/helicopter-money-and-fiscal-rules>, treasuries and 
central banks have been “hammering into the consciousness of the private sector 
the importance of reducing gross government debt relative to GDP”.

This orthodoxy arises from the idea that borrowing is simply “deferred 
taxation”. If the private sector believes that taxes will have to rise to pay 
for government borrowing, according to this view, people will increase their 
savings to pay the higher taxes, thus destroying any stimulative effect. The 
orthodoxy mistakenly assumes that government spending cannot generate any extra 
income; but so long as it prevails, debt-financed fiscal policy is ruled out as 
a means to revive economic growth.

As a result, analysts and policymakers have started mooting ideas for 
unconventional fiscal policy to supplement unconventional monetary policy. In 
particular, they are debating variations of so-called helicopter money, 
following a famous thought experiment byMilton Friedman 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/columnist/milton-friedman> in 1969, in which 
“one day a helicopter … drops an additional $1,000 in bills from the sky”. The 
former Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke, among others,has offered 
influential support for “helicopter drops” to revive flagging economies 
<https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2016/04/11/what-tools-does-the-fed-have-left-part-3-helicopter-money/>
.

Helicopter money comes in two forms, which could (and should) be dropped 
together. The first is to put purchasing power directly into the hands of 
consumers – for example, by issuing each voter or citizen with smart cards 
worth $1,000 each. The Swiss economist Silvio Gesell, who originally proposed a 
scheme of “stamped money” at the start of the last century, added a stipulation 
that balances unspent after a month should be taxed, to discourage hoarding.

Alternatively, helicopter money could be used to finance infrastructure 
spending. The advantage of such “monetary financing” is that such spending, 
while adding to the deficit and leading to a permanent increase in the money 
supply, would not increase the national debt, because the government would 
“owe” the money only to its own banker. This would eliminate the offsetting 
negative expectation of higher taxes.

Surely, issuing debt that never has to be repaid is too good to be true, 
right? There is indeed the obvious danger that governments might easily become 
addicted to monetary finance to pay for private and public spending, which is 
why it is unlikely to be tried openly unless economic conditions worsen 
significantly. But the political risk of doing nothing if we stumble into 
another recession (as seems quite likely) is worse. Like it or not, 
unconventional fiscal policy could well be the next game in town.

• Robert Skidelsky is an emeritus professor of political economy at Warwick 
University, a fellow of the British Academy in history and economics, and a 
member of the House of Lords.

 © Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>

 