
The first-round defeat of both Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi at the Foro 
Italico yesterday was, superficially at least, a considerable surprise but only 
a few years ago the news that two British players had reached the second round 
of a major clay-court tournament would have been much more surprising.

Both Tim Henman, who yesterday defeated Spain's Albert Costa 6-2, 3-6, 6-1 and 
Greg Rusedski, who won on Monday, have learned to survive on the surface, 
though without suggesting they will ever be completely happy, let alone ever 
mount a serious challenge for the greatest clay-court prize of all, the French 
Open.

Agassi famously made his indelible mark at Roland Garros two years ago, 
whereas Sampras, at least subconsciously, probably decided he would never 
himself collect the full clutch of grand slam titles - a feat only five 
players, including Agassi, have achieved - when he lost the 1996 French Open 
semi-final to Russia's Yevgeny Kafelnikov.

Since then Sampras has never come remotely close to success at Roland Garros, 
last year losing in the first round against Australia's Mark Philippoussis. 
Every year he makes encouraging noises during the spring United States 
hard-court tournaments in Indian Wells and Miami, but his heart is not really 
there, to say nothing of his body.

After losing 7-5, 2-6, 6-4 to Israel's Harel Levy yesterday, a match 
interrupted by rain on Monday, Sampras revealed that his clay-court 
preparations had been hampered by a viral infection. "I was looking forward to 
playing in Monte Carlo and I was doing a lot of training, probably too much, 
and I got sick from it."

The fact that he saw the need to push himself so hard "to get myself into the 
best shape possible", and that his body let him down, is further proof, if 
proof is necessary, that the multi-titled American simply does not have it 
within him to sustain the rigours of a fortnight on clay in Paris where 
inumerable specialists are always lining up to chop the great man off at the 
knees.

On any other surface, and the grass of Wimbledon in particular, Sampras takes 
it as read that he will generally be able to dictate the play and overwhelm his 
opponents with power, notably on his serve. But on clay, where his backhand so 
often sits up to be walloped and his serve loses its cutting edge, he is 
acutely vulnerable.

In 1996 he made the most supreme of physical efforts, but five-set victories 
against Spain's Sergi Bruguera and his fellow countrymen, Todd Martin and Jim 
Courier, the latter in the quarter-finals, left him physically drained by the 
time he met Kafelnikov.

He still talks of the need to be patient on clay, as he did after losing to 
Levy: "I need to stay back, not to rush things." But this is a smokescreen. The 
simple fact is that the longer Sampras is on court, the greater chance his 
opponents have. And the more so now that he is approaching his 30th birthday 
this August.

In contrast, Agassi's problems have always been mental rather than physical 
and, although he lost to Spain's Alex Calatrava in the match immediately 
following Sampras on the Campo Centrale, it was possible to keep the faith that 
he may again win the French title. It is possible rather than probable, but 
then the improbable has become second nature to Agassi over the past two years, 
during which time he has won four of the last eight grand slams: the French and 
US Opens in 1999 and the Australian Open this year and last.

He was certainly not in the least downbeat about this defeat. "Obviously it 
was not a good day but I felt pretty comfortable out there." Agassi is playing 
doubles with Australia's Lleyton Hewitt - who won his first-round match 6-1, 
2-6, 7-5 against Bohdan Ulihrach of the Czech Republic - and plays singles in 
Hamburg next week, as will Sampras.

For Henman it was his second successive victory against Costa, a considerable 
achievement even though the Spaniard's mind, as in Monte Carlo, has been 
somewhat distracted by his girlfriend giving birth to twins. Today Henman plays 
the Frenchman Julien Boutter, who defeated Martin, while Rusedski is up against 
Wayne Ferreira of South Africa, who beat Slovakia's Dominik Hrbaty.

Â• Great Britain will play Ecuador outdoors on red clay in the coastal city of 
Guayaquil in the Davis Cup World Group qualifier in September.
 