
The sign hanging on Main Street announces, “Crawfords Restaurant, Guns & Ammo” 
<http://www.fredericknewspost.com/news/arts_and_entertainment/crawfords-restaurant-guns-ammo/article_a2845018-089a-59f2-99ba-f38260db83fa.html>
. In the window an illuminated sign elaborates: “Breakfast, lunch specials; 
cards, gifts, toys, ammo, guns, groc.” Inside, there is an unpretentious cafe 
and shelves of gift cards, tinned food and other sundries as well as camo hats, 
firearms and ammunition. A deer’s head is mounted on the wall.

The family that helps run Crawfords, in downtown Boonsboro, Maryland 
<http://www.town.boonsboro.md.us/>, owns more than a hundred guns. Allen 
Crawford, Pam Rutherford and their four teenage daughters are deer hunters; a 
single kill yields around 80 to 90lbs of meat for their dinner table, and they 
donate the hide and antlers to be recycled as furniture. Come November’s 
presidential election, they will vote for Donald Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ee863706f56721601787768b3e064fd9593e93%2F0_250_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America's%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America%27s%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ee863706f56721601787768b3e064fd9593e93%2F0_250_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Crawfords restaurant, Boonsboro. Photograph: David Smith for the Guardian 
“You either have the common man with Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> or the privileged with 
Hillary Clinton,” Rutherford said this week. “Clinton’s supporters could go 50 
miles or less from their plush condos and elegant houses and find someone who 
has to hunt to support their family. I don’t think they realise that.”

In Britain it might be called a class divide. The nation premised on the 
American dream is more reluctant to accept such terms. Accent, dress sense and 
taste are not supposed to matter in the ultimate meritocracy. But the uniquely 
polarising candidacy of Trump has raised the prospect that, with important 
faultlines such as age, gender, geography and racerelatively settled from 
election to election 
<http://ropercenter.cornell.edu/polls/us-elections/how-groups-voted/how-groups-voted-2012/>
, socioeconomic class could swing the presidency in 2016.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d2e9b3907d67f1653a1219f9f74a60f868acbf7%2F0_221_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America's%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America%27s%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d2e9b3907d67f1653a1219f9f74a60f868acbf7%2F0_221_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Allen Crawford and Pam Rutherford. Photograph: David Smith for the Guardian 
One marker is education. In 1992, Republican voters were much better educated 
than their Democratic counterparts,according to the Pew Research Center 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/09/15/educational-divide-in-vote-preferences-on-track-to-be-wider-than-in-recent-elections/>
. Today registered voters with a college degree favour Clinton by 23 percentage 
points, while those without a college degree prefer Trump by five. This trend 
cuts across demographic groups, although it is most pronounced among whites.The 
Slate website noted: 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/politics/2016/09/trump_clinton_is_defined_by_an_educational_gap_among_white_voters.html>
 “The educational split among white voters is the defining characteristic of 
this election.” If this holds in November, it will be the widest educational 
divide at the ballot box for several decades.

Another marker is cultural and about optics. When Clinton recently referred to 
half of Trump’s supporters as a“basket of deplorables” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/hillary-clinton-trump-supporters--bigoted-deplorables>
, critics also seized on the context: she was addressing millionaires at a 
fundraiser headlined by the singer Barbra Streisand at the New York restaurant 
Cipriani Wall Street. And her backers include those other temples of coastal 
privilege, Hollywood and Silicon Valley.

Trump, by contrast, was anointed the “blue-collar billionaire” at the 
Republican national convention, where Willie Robertson of the TV reality show 
Duck Dynasty, wearing stars and stripes bandanna and bushy beard,declared that 
media pundits 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/07/18/duck-dynasty-star-willie-robertson-might-have-a-point-about-the-media/>
 “don’t hang out with regular folks like us, who like to hunt and fish and pray 
and actually work for a living. Heck, I don’t even know that they know how to 
talk to people from middle America. I mean, when I tell ’em I’m from Louisiana, 
they really start talking real slow and real loud.”

In Boonsboro, a town of 3,400 people steeped in revolutionary and civil war 
history, a giant Trump sign has been spraypainted with the word “love”. 
Opposite a Subway restaurant and closed-down bakery, theTurn the Page Bookstore 
<http://www.ttpbooks.com/>, owned by the romance novelist Nora Roberts, sells 
soy candles, handmade soaps and organic coffee. Its employees make little 
secret of their allegiance to Clinton. Two doors away, at Crawfords Restaurant, 
Guns & Ammo, a handwritten sign behind the laminated counter warns “No free 
refills on drinks” and the staff are for Trump.

As a reality show about hunting in the woods played on the TV, Rutherford, who 
is cashier, dishwasher, shelf stacker and much else, said of Clinton’s 
supporters: “I don’t think they realise the importance of small-town America 
and they don’t see the value of it. Everybody in this community loves this 
little store but big companies make it harder and harder for us.

“People say, ‘You must be doing well with Obamacare’. I say, actually, unless 
you have an astronomical salary or a company to pay for it, it’s crippling. Our 
health insurance is $900 per month for the family; that’s why I work. Obamacare 
sounds really good to people not close to the reality of it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F606aad5fd4eb169e6973d31f7f629e19f2ca8221%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America's%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America%27s%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F606aad5fd4eb169e6973d31f7f629e19f2ca8221%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Chevy Chase Village, Maryland. Photograph: Eric Kruszewski for the Guardian 
Rutherford, 47, who grew up Southern Baptist, has seen the urban-rural divide 
from both sides. She attended the prestigiousWinston Churchill high school 
<http://www.montgomeryschoolsmd.org/schools/churchillhs> in Potomac and still 
visits friends in the wealthy Chevy Chase area. But she moved to Boonsboro in 
2002, where the family keeps horses, dogs and chickens on 30 acres of land and 
hunts 80% of their own food. Her daughters, aged 13, 14, 15 and 16, “all hunt 
and play volleyball”.

Displaying a phone picture of herself with a deer she bagged, Rutherford said: 
“A lot of my friends don’t agree with what I do but they don’t have trouble 
wearing a full-length coyote coat to a fundraiser in January. They will wear 
leather shoes and carry an alligator handbag. The people of Washington don’t 
want to go out to the rural areas; no one wants to go out of their comfort 
zone. But I would love to go to a Clinton rally just to eavesdrop and hear the 
interaction.”

Along the street, at Marly’s Laundry, Wayne Stonesifer was waiting patiently 
as his clothes spun in a tumble dryer. In his spare time, the maintenance 
technician goes hunting and fishing or watches TV:Fox News 
<http://www.foxnews.com/> or children’s shows with his grandsons. He belongs to 
the National Rifle Association and intends to vote for Trump.

“Hillary Clinton won’t come round here,” the 48-year-old said. “We’re too low 
class for her.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05ccee6aa359478074fffa7f6cf4dcc910511095%2F0_126_3024_3780%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America's%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America%27s%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05ccee6aa359478074fffa7f6cf4dcc910511095%2F0_126_3024_3780%2F3024.jpg>
 Wayne Stonesifer. Photograph: David Smith for the Guardian 
Clinton’s followers would object to him hunting deer, Stonesifer believes. 
“They have their opinions and I have mine. As long as we don’t bother each 
other, that’s fine. If you try to interrupt me when I’m hunting, that’s 
different.”

The country has a bigger divide now than ever, he added. “You’ve got your gay 
rights, abortion laws, racism. Everybody’s split. It wasn’t this bad when I was 
growing up. Everybody’s afraid to say something ’cos you’re going to hurt 
someone’s feelings. The 80s were better. I think God needs to be back in the 
picture; everyone’s taking him for granted. Times are getting nearer.”

Kevin Dobereiner, 36, owns two small businesses and complains that taxes are 
too high. He is also supporting Trump. “He’s not a liberal and we’re $20 
trillion in debt and unemployment is too high and our healthcare is terrible. 
The community organiser-in-chief has no qualifications and Hillary Clinton is 
just an extension of that.

“I don’t care what Trump says; I care what he does and he’s not a billionaire 
because he’s stupid. I like a guy who puts his foot in his mouth because at 
least he tells the truth.”

Trump’s plain speaking has been identified as one of the sources of his appeal 
to voters angry at the status quo in general and Republican establishment in 
particular. Even his outlandish gaffes are said to humanise him, emphasising 
his status as outsider and non-politician. His anti-Mexican and anti-Muslim 
diatribes have disgusted liberals and been cheered at raucous rallies, where he 
declares his love for “the poorly educated”.

John Hudak <https://www.brookings.edu/experts/john-hudak/>, a senior fellow in 
governance studies at the Brookings Institution thinktank in Washington, said: 
“I think supporters look at Donald Trump and see a bit of an everyman, even 
though his biography completely opposes that worldview. Then they look at 
Hillary Clinton and see her as more elite than her background would actually 
suggest. Trump is the person you want to see on TLC; Clinton appears to live 
the way an average wealthy person lives.”

There is a crucial gender dimension, Hudak argues. “A female candidate would 
not be allowed to ramble like Trump does or Bill Clinton did. Only in a race 
between a man and a woman could her polish be a liability and his freewheeling 
be an asset.”

Trump has scrambled the orthodoxy of class, for example by tweeting a picture 
of himself eating McDonald’s fast food and drinking Coke on his luxurious 
private jet. He loves both boxing and golf. He has named Orson Welles’s 
masterpiece Citizen Kane as his favourite film but alsoonce told the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1997/05/19/trump-solo> that Bloodsport, a 
violent action flick starring Jean Claude Van Damme, is “an incredible, 
fantastic movie”. The music at his rallies ranges from Nessun dorma, an aria 
from Giacomo Puccini’s opera Turandot, to Elton John. His properties are 
crammed with chandeliers, gold leaf, mirrors and marble – tacky to some, 
aspirational to others. Both patrician and plebeian, his reading list is said 
to consist mainly of articles about himself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde463ffc89e6f9af955206d01524e1d9cb6c49bf%2F0_153_2624_1575%2F2624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America's%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America%27s%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde463ffc89e6f9af955206d01524e1d9cb6c49bf%2F0_153_2624_1575%2F2624.jpg>
 Bloodsport, starring Jean Claude Van Damme … right up there with Citizen Kane, 
according to Trump. Photograph: Everett Collection / Rex Feature 
Some would say he lacks class, in every sense. And there is a tenacious myth 
that, free of the ossified layers of agricultural and industrial Europe, 
America is a class-free land of opportunity, where someone born into poverty 
can become president. It is not so simple, according to sociologists. Arlie 
Hochschild of the University of California, Berkeley, and author of Strangers 
in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the American Right, said: “Class is 
profoundly important, imprinting all aspects of childhood, self, character and 
behind, and the denial of it is in the service of keeping alive the hope of 
lifting out of it. But America would be far better off talking about the 
realities of it.”

Robert H Frank <http://www.robert-h-frank.com/>, a professor of economics at 
Cornell University and author of Success and Luck: Good Fortune and the Myth of 
Meritocracy, added: “People here, if you ask them, will say they are ‘middle 
class’. Even relatively rich people will answer middle class because we deny 
there’s such a thing as class here, which is of course preposterous. The 
barriers are different from England but they’re real.”


Research suggests that Trump’s core support should not be simply characterised 
as the white working class. Many earn an average of $70,000 but are caught in 
the downdraft of deindustrialisation, losing jobs to factory or mine closures, 
lacking the skills for a digital economy, anxious that their children will be 
worse off than they were. Joe Sims, a member of the national board of the
Communist Party USA <http://www.cpusa.org/>, said: “My sense is that Trump’s 
support comes not so much from the white working class but the lower middle 
class and small business people who have been pushed into the ranks of the 
working class. The wages are flat and they’re pissed off.”

But in a supposedly classless society, there is often a gap between perception 
and reality. Sims added: “During the 1950s and 1960s there was a myth 
propagated about the American dream and the American way of life and the sense 
that everyone was middle class and upwardly mobile. Certainly during that 
period there was at least a steadiness in increase in income and their children 
were able to do a little better than them. But this idea of everyone being 
middle class has crashed on the rocks of reality. Wages have been stagnant 
since the 1970s.”

Numerous academic studies have found that the extent of social mobility was 
probably always exaggerated and, in the past generation, may have become 
deteriorated. Thesoaring cost of studying at university 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2015/06/16/why-college-costs-are-so-high-and-rising.html> 
has been blamed for stifling upward movement and allowing middle-class families 
to entrench their advantage. Pew’s research, published last week, found a 
growing ideological divide, with highly educated adults holding increasingly 
liberal attitudes, while under a third of the less educated held liberal views.

Stanley Greenberg <http://www.gqrr.com/stanley-b-greenberg>, a veteran 
political consultant and senior pollster for Bill Clinton, said: “I think we’ll 
see the biggest divide between working-class voters and those with a college 
degree in this election. It’s already there in the polls. Trump is reinforcing 
it by the nature of the campaign he’s running and the issues he’s running on. 
He’s driving away college graduates as well as the whole Republican party.”

In the Republican primaries, Trump the class warrior made Ted Cruz, the 
conservative Christian ideologue, look quaint. Greenberg admits that he was 
surprised. “The college-educatedRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> keep moving year after year 
more to the Democrats but this election has really accelerated it because it’s 
the first time we’ve had a candidate running on a straight working-class 
campaign. [George W] Bush was very much centred on faith; that’s legitimate but 
it wasn’t an economic argument.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5dc7a677059bc63c7fddeaebf61f57d116739e6%2F0_69_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America's%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America%27s%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5dc7a677059bc63c7fddeaebf61f57d116739e6%2F0_69_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Bernie Sanders stressed income inequality in the primary campaign but Hillary 
Clinton has yet to emulate his success with the issue. Photograph: Justin 
Sullivan/Getty Images 
However, he warned against an oversimplified binary split, pointing to the 
success of Bernie Sanders, the senator from Vermont, in the Democratic 
primaries. Sanders stressed issues of economic inequality and access to college 
education, to the extent that he wascriticised by some for neglecting race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/03/bernie-sanders-failure-diversity-hispanic-black-voters>
.

“There were a lot of Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> 
who were voting for somebody who was a self-described socialist, running 
against big money, getting big money out of politics, going after Wall Street 
and big banks, attacking Hillary for being a creature of the big banks, so you 
need a third bucket,” Greenberg said. “There are others who are not so focused 
on the racial and cultural issues who are quite ready to rally. Sanders, in the 
polls at least, was stronger than Hillary against Trump because he actually was 
winning both millennials and working-class voters.”

But now Sanders is out, there are two historically unpopular candidates and a 
fear of two classes, or tribes, or nations, mutually hostile and suspicious. 
Like theBrexit vote in Britain, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> a painful rift has been 
exposed and polling day itself will not necessarily heal it. If diehard Clinton 
and Trump supporters sat down to dinner tonight, would they find much to talk 
about?

In Chevy Chase, an affluent neighbourhood in north-west Washington DC, an area 
where deer roam audaciously in the gardens of multimillion-dollar houses, Trump 
fans are hard to find. The owner of the retroAmerican City Diner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/29/american-city-diner-owner-fights-trump-puns-signs-jeffrey-gildenhorn>
 has endorsed Clinton with a giant billboard and sign that says: “Trump 
exercise: lifting bags of money.” Up the road, the Avalon Theatre, an 
independent cinema that opened in 1923, sells organic ice cream and shows films 
including the French-language Les Cowboys.

Levon Avdoyan, a 69-year-old librarian strolling nearby, said: “There are 
people who live the life of the mind and people who live the life of emotion. 
Trump is a regrettable example of the latter. He has no politics and caters to 
the worst part of the American psyche. He caters to people who don’t know what 
fascism is.”

Asked his opinion of Trump’s supporters, Avdoyan replied: “They’re scared 
little people.”

And how would they regard him? “I’m gay. I’m an atheist. I have a PhD. It’s 
almost a trifecta.”

Howard Shaker, 64, had just been to see the Beatles documentary Eight Days a 
Week. He said: “Trump’s a vulgar man who knows nothing. He’s a very privileged 
individual who came from wealth. You’d think he would be cosmopolitan but 
there’s something primitive about him. I don’t think he would fit here in Chevy 
Chase but he should because of his background.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd963c7e00d36c614c5eebbe11c465c4914becdfd%2F331_260_2274_2842%2F2274.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America's%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America%27s%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd963c7e00d36c614c5eebbe11c465c4914becdfd%2F331_260_2274_2842%2F2274.jpg>
 Wendie Lubic. Photograph: David Smith for the Guardian 
The retired IT contractor added: “There’s a tremendous chasm in the US. In 
many respects it comes down to urban verus rural. The people who go to a Trump 
rally are a different crowd. There is a divide between them and other 
Americans. It confounds me that he’s doing so well in the polls.”

Sitting in the alfresco dining area of the Chevy Chase Lounge were Diana 
Blitz, a school counsellor, andWendie Lubic 
<http://www.collegeladydc.com/About_Wendie.html>, an education consultant, both 
of whom intend to vote for Clinton. Blitz, 59, rejected the notion of a class 
divide. “There are some poor people who are Clinton supporters; there are 
wealthy people who are Trump supporters,” she said. “He’s playing to a 
disenfranchised group in the US. After a black president, the idea of a woman 
president is abhorrent to them. They feel this isn’t their country any more.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67ef7a57a20382b8f204e244ad8419711ad80655%2F0_75_3024_3780%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America's%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hidden%20faultline%3A%20how%20Trump%20v%20Clinton%20is%20laying%20bare%20America%27s%20class%20divide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Ftrump-clinton-election-class-socioeconomic-divide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67ef7a57a20382b8f204e244ad8419711ad80655%2F0_75_3024_3780%2F3024.jpg>
 Ellen Anderton. Photograph: David Smith for the Guardian 
Lubic, 54, added: “I don’t think you can call it a class divide when you have 
people of colour that are not supporting him. It may come down to an education 
divide. Colleges try to encourage empathy with others. Many of the Trump 
supporters are lacking in empathy for people who are not like them.”

At another table, Joel Cohn, 52, a lawyer, and his partner Ellen Anderton, 50, 
a freelance writer, disagreed on one point. Anderton said: “I wouldn’t want to 
talk to people who were Trump supporters. I wouldn’t want to engage with them.”

Cohn responded: “I would, even if they’re ‘deplorables’. Bring them on. Those 
voting for Trump think it’s two different countries and two different cultures. 
They see liberals and Democrats as alien life forms. I grew up in a rural 
environment and it’s not like guns are totally alien to us. It’s part of class, 
educational, geographical resentment: it’s more their perception than my 
perception.”

America has been described as a split-screen nation and it is, of course, 
about much more than class: some polls show Trumpat 0% among African American 
voters 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/07/13/new-polls-in-pennsylvania-and-ohio-show-donald-trump-with-0-percent-of-the-black-vote/>
. But this is the year that a Republican, campaigning as an anti-intellectual 
vulgarian, won over many who feel neglected by what they view as the 
metropolitan intelligentsia. America, home of the class divide that dare not 
speak its name.
 