
Martina Hingis yesterday blamed an alleged stalker for an astonishing 
first-round defeat at Wimbledon.

The 20-year-old Swiss player told a Miami court that her shock elimination in 
1999, when she was top seed, was mainly due to Dubravko Rajcevic who, it is 
claimed, stalked her for more than a year. That Wimbledon upset at the time was 
put down to her temporary split with her mother and closest confidante Melanie.

But of that defeat by Jelena Djokic, the Wimbledon teenage sensation that 
summer, Hingis said yesterday: "I never do that. I never did in a grand slam 
tournament until that time. Part of it was because of him."

 The 46-year-old Rajcevic, a Croatian-born naval engineer and now an 
Australian citizen, is charged with one count of stalking and three of 
trespassing at last year's Ericsson Open in Key Biscayne, Florida. He faces up 
to a year in jail if convicted on all counts.

 Hingis told the court how she had been pursued with love letters, flowers and 
phone calls from Rajcevic and was forced to confront him in an attempt to end 
all contact.

"I told him he should go away and get out of my life," Hingis said, explaining 
that she spoke to Rajcevic through the gate of her Swiss home only weeks before 
that fateful Wimbledon. She was then 18.

 "He didn't believe Mario [Widmer, her manager] that I didn't want to tell him 
to stop showing up, that I didn't love him, that I didn't want to do anything 
with him," Hingis said. "He told me we were engaged. He was looking at me, 
smiling at me."

Yesterday, Rajcevic often laughed and shook his head as Hingis spoke. He was 
warned by the judge that he would be removed from the courtroom if he was not 
silent after making a series of outbursts and trying to engage Hingis in 
conversation.

"It must be love," Rajcevic at one point blurted out as she said that he had 
not stopped ringing the doorbell at her Swiss home.

Later, said Hingis, "I could not walk freely." She feared "the obsession and 
love for me might turn into hate and aggressiveness towards me, and that is 
what I am scared of most".

Rajcevic claims he wanted to start a romantic relationship and did not 
threaten Hingis. His lawyer Frank Abrams said: "I will be defending a man's 
right to love a woman and to pursue the object of his affection as a legitimate 
and non-malicious purpose in this world."

Rajcevic has spent the last year in custody in Miami after his arrest because 
he cannot pay the bail of Â£1.4m.
 