
Martina Hingis, without her mother on tour for the first time, has found 
another coach in her attempt to fend off Venus Williams' challenge to her world 
No1 status. Though that is not how the 20-year-old describes David Taylor, it 
is what the Australian has become, as the start of Hingis's European clay-court 
campaign made clear here yesterday.

"He has been with me before [as a hitting partner] and he knows the routines I 
was doing with my mum," she said of the 29-year-old from Bathurst in New South 
Wales after a strutting performance in trouncing Tathiana Garbin, an Italian 
just outside the top 50, 6-2, 6-2 in the German Open.

Those words are, in fact, a smokescreen for change. Hingis's forays to the net 
suggest she knows she must be more assertive if she is to resist her 
harder-hitting American rivals, and her coyness about Taylor's real role hides 
a wish not to upset the mum she still telephones every evening. "I will do 
anything not to give up being No1," said the top seed. "I want to stay where I 
am."

To that end here she was helped by a surprising 6-2, 6-1 victory for the 
Luxembourgian Anne Kremer over the 17-year-old Kim Clijsters, who beat Hingis 
in Indian Wells a couple of months ago.

Hingis had seemed likely to meet the fast-rising Belgian again in the 
quarter-finals but may find herself instead against the former world No1 
Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario, who was diligence itself in a 6-3, 6-3 victory against 
Ai Sugiyama of Japan.

Today Williams plays the Slovakian Karina Habsudova and Jennifer Capriati 
meets the Wimbledon semi-finalist Jelena Dokic, who fought back from 4-2 down 
in the final set to beat the former Wimbledon junior champion Cara Black 6-2, 
3-6, 6-4. The hunting of Hingis will begin.
 