
Málaga, Spain 

 Paseo Maritimo, Málaga. Photograph: Luis Fidel Ayerves/Getty Images 
Málaga’s credentials as a cultural city-break destination will get a serious 
boost this spring, when the Pompidou Centre opens its first outpost outside 
Paris there.The Cube <http://www.centrepompidou.es/> – a striking €5m glass 
building on the revamped marina – will house a permanent modern art collection 
and run a programme of arts events from dance to video. The birthplace of Pablo 
Picasso is also set to be home to a branch of the St Petersburg State Russian 
Museum, showcasing art from the 15th to the 20th centuries. The Museum of Fine 
Arts and Archaeology, opening later in the year, will complete the triple 
whammy of new attractions. Besides museums,Málaga has plenty for the foodie 
traveller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/may/24/malaga-andalucia-spain-food-restaurants-tapas>
, plus cheap flights, great shopping and nightlife, and access to some of the 
Costa’s best beaches – a winning weekend break combo. TheSoho Boutique hotel 
<http://www.sohohotelmalaga.com/> opened last year in the arty Soho barrio, 
south of the old town, with doubles from €63 room-only.

Kanazawa, Japan 


Kanazawa was one of the few Japanese cities to escape major destruction during 
the second world war. As a result, it is able to show off its heritage and 
traditional culture: from the Nagamachi quarter with its samurai residencies to 
the teahouses of Higashi Chayagai – a district with the only geisha community 
outside Kyoto. In March, a new high-speed train line will make the city more 
accessible than ever, cutting the journey time from Tokyo to Kanazawa from four 
hours to two-and-a-half. Inside Japan Tours offers a 14-nightTraditional Japan 
<http://www.insidejapantours.com/self-guided-japan-holidays/i-tje/traditional-japan/?holidaysearch=1&type=&sgt-depart-after=&sgt-depart-before=&sgt-price=&sgt-duration=&sgt-trip-code=&sgt-submit=&sga-theme=&sga-price=&sga-duration=&sga-trip-code=&epj-theme=&epj-price=&epj-duration=&epj-trip-code=>
 self-guided trip from £1,360pp (based on two sharing) including 14 nights’ B&B 
accommodation, some meals, and all domestic transport (excludes international 
flights).
 Photograph: JTB Photo/UIG via Getty Images 
Yosemite, California

 The view from Glacier Point down Yosemite Valley. Photograph: Alamy 
“It is by far the grandest of all the special temples of Nature I was ever 
permitted to enter.” So said John Muir, the Scottish-born conservationist whose 
passionate and influential writing helped persuade Congress to pass a bill 
leading to the declaration of Yosemite as the US’s third national park, in 
1890. This made the protection of 1,200 square miles of deep valleys, 
wild-flower meadows, giant sequoias and waterfalls a legal obligation. More 
than a century later,Yosemite <http://www.nps.gov/yose/index.htm> is still one 
of the crown jewels of the American national parks system. Visit in summer for 
hiking, rafting, fishing and rock climbing; in winter, some roads and trails 
are closed but there is the chance to enjoy the quiet splendour of the 
landscape without the crowds. Several events are planned to mark the125th 
anniversary on 1 October 
<http://www.nps.gov/featurecontent/yose/anniversary/index.html>, including 
tours led by an actor portrayingGalen Clark, 
<http://www.nps.gov/yose/historyculture/galen-clark.htm> who explored the park 
many times with Muir and was instrumental in its gaining protected status.

If you are planning to stay overnight, check out yosemitepark.com/lodging 
<http://www.yosemitepark.com/lodging.aspx> for accommodation: it lists options 
from permanent camps in the High Sierra to the hotel of choice for visiting 
dignitaries, the luxuryAhwahnee <http://www.yosemitepark.com/the-ahwahnee.aspx>
. For a longer trip, Yosemite Valley is also the start of the magnificent John 
Muir Trail, which passes through 211 miles of spectacular scenery in the Sierra 
Nevada mountains. It makes up part of the Pacific Crest Trail, a 2,650-mile 
path running from Mexico to Canada that is about to get its moment in the 
Hollywood limelight with the release, on 16 January in the UK, ofWild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/09/wild-a-two-hour-hallucinatory-montage-toronto-film-festival-review>
, based on a true story, in which Reese Witherspoon plays Cheryl Strayed, a 
troubled woman grieving after her mother’s death, who hikes 1,100 miles of the 
trail alone. Despite gory close-ups of blisters, the film is likely to inspire 
countless journeys into the wilderness.

Over in Colorado, the Rocky Mountains national park 
<http://www.nps.gov/romo/index.htm> is celebrating its centenary this year, 
with events from exhibitions and talks to free guided hikes.

Haiti

 Photograph: John Seaton Callahan/Getty Images/Flickr Open 
One for the adventurous traveller, Haiti is set to welcome more visitors in 
2015 with several operators, fromWild Frontiers 
<http://www.wildfrontierstravel.com/en_GB/destination/haiti/group-tours/master/2000351/haiti-the-undiscovered-caribbean>
 toG Adventures <https://www.gadventures.com/?gclid=CICrqb6D68ICFbMatAodCVUAbw> 
andExodus 
<http://www.exodus.co.uk/psearch?date_start[date]=&date_end[date]=&keywords=haiti>
, running trips for the first time. Five years on from the devastating 
earthquake, the country claims it is ready for tourism, offering an authentic 
Caribbean experience with a vibrant arts scene, the largest fortress in the 
Americas and distinctive Creole culture among the highlights.A 10-day trip with 
G Adventures <https://www.gadventures.co.uk/search/?f=201e69b17f93> costs from 
£1,599, excluding flights.


Cuba

 Photograph: Walter Bibikow/JAI/Corbis 
Last month, President Obama announced that America would be re-establishing 
diplomatic relations with Cuba – meaning change is sure to follow, so head to 
Cuba sooner rather than later to enjoy its unique old-school charms. With the 
government slowly allowing the development of non-state-owned tourism, there’s 
been a growth inprivate enterprise recently – particularly seen in Old Havana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/dec/06/old-havana-cuba-entrepreneurs-new-law>
, a thriving cultural hub, with new bars likeO’Reilly 304 
<https://www.facebook.com/Orreily304>, and recently opened stylish B&B Casa 
Alta (£19-25 a night) adding to the buzz.

To mark the 500th anniversary of the founding of the southern city of Santiago 
de Cuba on 25 July, a week of partying and a carnival has been planned.

World Expeditions 
<http://worldexpeditions.co.uk/index.php?section=trips&id=173200> has a new 
12-day cycling tour, exploring the country’s lesser-known spots, from £1,567pp. 
And Che Guevara’s son, Ernesto junior, has just launched six- and nine-day 
motorbike tours of the island – and leads some tours himself (from £1,999,
lapoderosatours.com <http://lapoderosatours.com/>).




Essaouira, Morocco

 Ramparts of Skala de la Ville, Essaouira. Photograph: Nikki Bidgood/Getty 
Images 
Essaouira has always felt a little exclusive. Not because it’s expensive (it 
isn’t) or super-smart (it’s extremely laid-back) but because, until now, it’s 
been a massive hassle to get there. British travellers have had to fly to 
Marrakech or Agadir, before taking a two-and-a-half-hour taxi transfer. Now, 
witheasyJet <http://www.easyjet.com/en/> launching direct flights from Luton in 
May, this atmospheric Atlantic port is set to be transformed into one of 
Morocco’s hottest destinations. The souks are relatively hassle-free, the 
restaurants have fabulous views of the crashing waves and the beaches are huge. 
Stay in the centre of town atDar Adul <http://www.dar-adul.com/> (doubles from 
£43 B&B), or in the countryside 15 minutes outside at the tranquilLes Jardin 
des Douars <http://www.lawrenceofmorocco.com/accommodation/le-jardin-des-douars>
(doubles from £79 B&B).

Nicaragua

 Concepcion volcano and Ometepe island, Nicaragua. Photograph: Alamy 
Though it’s been peaceful for 25 years, the largest Central American country 
remains one of the least-visited. It’s a land of rainforests (Indio Maíz 
biological reserve 
<https://vianica.com/attraction/55/indio-maiz-biological-reserve> is the 
largest area of virgin rainforest north of the Amazon), lakes and volcanoes, 
with deserted beaches, unspoilt colonial cities and incredible wildlife. Things 
look set to change, though, as the country opens up – an airport opened 
recently on Ometepe island, a Unesco biosphere reserve known for its twin 
volcanoes. A bridge is being built over the San Juan river, connecting 
Nicaragua with Costa Rica and, most controversially, work has started on an 
inter-oceanic canal to rival Panama’s, cutting through Lake Nicaragua on a 
173-mile journey between the Caribbean and the Pacific. There’s been a boom in 
luxury hotel openings, one of the latest beingMukul 
<http://www.mukulresort.com/> on the Emerald Coast. Journey Latin America 
<https://www.journeylatinamerica.co.uk/destinations/nicaragua/holidays/off-the-beaten%20track%20nicaragua>
 has a one-off group tour in May visiting Ometepe island and the Solentiname 
islands in Lake Nicaragua plus a cruise on the San Juan river. The 17-day trip 
costs £2,098pp, excluding international flights.

Dorset, UK ▼

 Seaside Boarding House, Dorset 
If hit TV drama Broadchurch, which starts a second series tomorrow, hasn’t put 
Dorset <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/dorset>on the map, the release of 
Thomas Vinterberg’s film ofFar From the Madding Crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jul/19/tom-sturridge-carey-mulligan-thomas-hardy>
 in May should have people flocking to this rolling landscape in, well, madding 
crowds. A new trail map,Exploring Thomas Hardy’s West Dorset 
<http://www.visit-dorset.com/about-the-area/areas-to-visit/west-dorset/> (the 
novelist used the ancient name Wessex for his “partly real, partly dream 
county”) will link places that inspired him, including his birthplace atHigher 
Bockhampton <http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/hardys-cottage/>. Those looking 
for a modern billet should be able to bed down at the eagerly anticipated
Seaside Boarding House <http://theseasideboardinghouse.com/> , whose opening 
was delayed from last year. On cliffs near Lyme Bay, it is the latest venture 
by Mary Lou-Sturridge and Tony Mackintosh, who founded the Groucho Club in 
London’s Soho in 1985.

Memphis, Tennessee

 Fans at Elvis’s grave, Graceland Photograph: Lucas Jackson /Reuters 
Memphis, Tennessee, is one of the world’s great music cities and in 2015, 
there’ll be even more reasons for fans of rock’n’roll, blues and soul to tune 
in to what’s happening. For starters, 8 January marks 80 years since the birth 
of the city’s most famous resident, Elvis Presley.Graceland 
<http://www.graceland.com/>, his home and now iconic museum, has a range of 
celebrations planned from 7-10 January, including an auction of memorabilia, a 
double-bill screening of Viva Las Vegas and Jailhouse Rock, a ceremony 
declaring the eighth as Elvis Presley Day, and a tribute concert. These will 
take place at Graceland and other venues around the city. Other highlights this 
year include the opening of two new music museums. TheBlues Music Hall of Fame 
<http://www.blues.org/foundation-programs/hall-of-fame/> is set to open in May 
at 421 South Main Street, while theMemphis Music Hall of Fame 
<http://memphismusichalloffame.com/> will be at 126 Beale Street, in a building 
shared with rock-star outfitter of choiceLansky Bros 
<http://www.lanskybros.com/>.

Marseille and Lyon 

 Musée des Confluences, Lyon. Photograph: Robert Pratta/Reuters 
The two contenders for the hotly disputed title of France’s second city will 
be drawn closer together and be more accessible from May, when Eurostar’s new, 
year-round direct service will link London with Marseille via Lyon and Avignon.

Marseille enjoyed the limelight when it was crowned European Capital of 
Culture 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/25/hottest-french-city-2013-marseille>
 – cue the largest urban renewal project in southern Europe with a budget of 
€7bn, including a facelift for the Vieux-Port. But the Mediterranean city will 
really start to see the fruits of its transformation as a major tourist 
destination when Eurostar starts running its 6.5-hour direct trains to 
Saint-Charles station on 1 May. New openings over the last year include the 
recently completedLes Voûtes de la Major <http://www.lesvoutes-marseille.fr/> 
precinct of boutiques and restaurants near the cathedral andles Halles de La 
Major market <http://www.leshallesdelamajor.com/en/>, underneath Cathédrale de 
la Major, dedicated to gourmet foods.C2 Hotel <http://www.c2-hotel.com/> 
features Modernist furniture by Le Corbusier and Frank Lloyd Wright (doubles 
from €189); and critics have given rave reviews to the tiny, 22-coverAM 
restaurant <http://alexandremazzia.com/>, owned by chef Alexandre Mazzia, which 
opened in June. Not new, but more reflective of the city’s diversity isLa 
Friche Belle de Mai <http://www.lafriche.org/>, a former factory converted into 
studios, exhibition spaces, theatres and cinemas, which often promotes the 
city’s rap and hip-hop heritage.

The bistros and bouchons of Lyon, the self-proclaimed French capital of 
gastronomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/feb/13/bill-buford-lyon-food-capital>, 
will be just over 4.5 hours away, come May. But there’s more to the city than 
food – a similarly ambitious plan to renovate its former dock area on the banks 
of the Rhône and the Saône rivers kicked off in 2007. The latest addition to 
the Confluence district – with its trendy restaurants, contemporary art 
galleries and designer boutiques – is theMusée des Confluences 
<http://www.museedesconfluences.fr/>, which opened in December. Conceptualised 
as “the Crystal and the Cloud” by its architects, because of its futuristic 
glass and stainless-steel construction, it stands on the headland at the 
confluence of the rivers and showcases the sciences and anthropology. Also in 
the Confluence district,La Sucrière <http://www.lasucriere-lyon.com/homepage> 
is a new venue for the arts and music which opened last summer in a renovated 
sugar warehouse. It is the principal site for theBiennale of Contemporary Art 
<http://www.labiennaledelyon.com/> (10 September-3 January 2016) and one of the 
venues for the annual electronic music festivalNuits-Sonores 
<http://www.nuits-sonores.com/> (13-17 May).

Madhya Pradesh, India

 A tiger in Bandhavgarh national park, Madhya Pradesh. Photograph: Getty Images
A new film adaptation of the adventures of Mowgli in Rudyard Kipling’s Jungle 
Book <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3040964/> will hit the big screen later this 
year, with a stellar cast including Scarlett Johansson, Bill Murray. It also 
happens to be 150 years since Kipling’s birth. For those inspired to seek an 
Indian jungle experience,Village Ways 
<http://www.villageways.com/india---madhya-pradesh/the-tiger-trail> has a new 
trip to the central state of Madhya Pradesh, staying in village-owned 
accommodation in the forest community at Sakata, with wildlife walks and 
safaris into the Pench tiger reserve. A five-night trip costs from £561pp 
full-board, including internal flights and transfers.

Costa Rica 

 Photograph: Alamy 
It’s tiny, and well-known for its amazing flora and fauna – more than half of 
the country is covered in lush forest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/feb/16/costa-rica-family-holiday-caribbean>
 and there are more than 60 national parks and reserves. Then there are the 
beaches along its two coasts, which rival any in the Caribbean. Getting there 
is going to be easier from November, whenThomson Airways 
<http://www.thomson.co.uk/> launches the first direct flights from the UK, 
flying to the northern city of Liberia from Gatwick (the usual, longer, route 
is via Miami or Madrid). A week at the beachfront Tamarindo Diria resort costs 
from £949pp B&B, including flights and transfers (thomson.co.uk 
<http://www.thomson.co.uk/destinations/the-americas/costa-rica/costa-rica/playa-tamarindo/hotels/tamarindo-diria.html>
).

Salisbury

 Salisbury Cathedral. Photograph: Alamy 
The unassuming city of Salisbury will draw history lovers this year as it 
takes a central role in celebrations for the 800th anniversary of the Magna 
Carta. There are just four original copies of the cornerstone for English law 
and first document to champion the rights and freedom of the common people – 
and the best preserved is in Salisbury Cathedral. Events include a week-long 
flower festival in September. Lincoln, too, will play a key part in the 
celebrations – the £22m Lincoln Castle Revealed project opens in April, with a 
new vault to display its own copy of the Magna Carta. Across the country, a 
series of trails have been developed visiting places withMagna Carta links 
<http://magnacartatrails.com/> , and the British Library in London will be 
staging amajor exhibition <http://bl.uk/magna-carta> from 13 March to 1 
September.

Tatra mountains, Slovakia

 Ski touring in the High Tatras. Photograph: Alamy 
For skiers seeking new terrain, the Tatra (or Tatry) mountains offer an easy 
getaway, thanks to recently launched direct flights withWizz Air 
<http://wizzair.com/en-GB/Search> from Luton to Poprad-Tatry (four times a 
week, from €20 one-way). Skiers and snowboarders of all levels are catered for 
in Jasná, the best-known resort in the Low Tatras, and Tatranská Lomnica, Starý 
Smokovec and Strbské Pleso in the neighbouring High Tatras. More than €200m has 
been invested to improve infrastructure – and theFreeride World Tour 
<http://www.freerideworldtour.com/> and World Snowboard Tour 
<http://www.worldsnowboardtour.com/> will make stops in the Tatras this winter. 
There are also three new aquaparks, which are open all year.Mountain Paradise 
<http://mountainparadise.co.uk/> offers Thurs-Sun weekend packages at the Vila 
Park & Pension Paula from £499pp including flights (8 Jan-22 Mar 2015).

Cáceres, Spain
 Prawn with seaweed bread at Atrio in Cáceres. Photograph: Alamy 
Move over Spanish foodie favourite San Sebastián. Gourmets in search of new 
delights will be heading to Cáceres, in Extremadura, western Spain, which has 
been named the country’s 2015 Capital of Gastronomy. The Unesco world heritage 
city centre is a picturesque maze of narrow, cobbled medieval streets and this 
year’s programme of food-focused events and festivals will shine the spotlight 
on this often-overlooked gem. Expect to try local specialities such asjamón 
ibérico, bread soup with paprika, rice with rabbit, and torta del casar, the 
subtly bitter local cheese made from raw sheep’s milk. Toño Pérez and José Polo 
are the guiding lights atAtrio <http://restauranteatrio.com/en/>, a 
forward-looking restaurant-with-rooms (from €250pn) in the city centre that is 
universally recognised as Extremadura’s best. Its wine list is also one of the 
best (and the longest) in Spain.Cáceres’ cheaper Parador hotel 
<http://www.paradores-spain.com/spain/pcaceres.html?gclid=COvMtY6R68ICFauWtAoddykAkg>
, housed in a 14th-century palace on a street at the top of the old town, 
emerged from a modernising refurb in 2013 as one of the finest in the luxury, 
state-owned chain. Spacious doubles cost from €95 a night without breakfast.

Bristol

 Ashton Court bike trail, Bristol. Photograph: Alamy 
Bristol has always had a proud, left-field edge to it; it’s the kind of place 
that lets its main road be transformed into agiant waterslide – as artist Luke 
Jerram did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/mar/11/artist-plans-bristol-street-giant-waterslide>
, to the public’s delight, last spring. So, it should be no surprise that 
Bristol has become the first UK city ever to win theEuropean Green Capital award
 <http://bristolgreencapital.org/european-green-capital-award/>, in recognition 
of its “progressive, creative and conscious approach to urban living”. This 
will manifest itself in a year-long programme of events and activities, 
including the launch of the world’s first solar-powered hot-air balloon, a 30m 
walk-in blue whale sculpture – to be made by locals from recycled materials – 
and a cultural festival that will invite writers, artists, filmmakers, poets 
and architects to take part. February also sees the return of Bristol’s biennial
In Between Time festival <http://inbetweentime.co.uk/>, which produces dramatic 
urban interventions around the city, including a 10-day installation during 
which Peros’ Bridge in Bristol Harbourside will “disappear” behind a veil of 
fog – a creative celebration of the city’s new Green Capital status. One of the 
greenest places to stay in the city is the aptly namedThe Greenhouse 
<http://www.thegreenhousebristol.co.uk/> in Southville (doubles from £105 B&B). 
For more information visit bristol2015.co.uk <https://www.bristol2015.co.uk/> 
andibt15.co.uk <http://ibt15.co.uk/>.

Leipzig, Germany

 The Spinnerei artists’ enclave, Leipzig. Photograph: Alamy 
The hype around Leipzig continues apace, with its flourishing arts scene 
earning it the“new Berlin” tag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/sep/11/is-leipzig-the-new-berlin>. In 
2015, the city is celebrating 1,000 years since it was founded, with events 
running all year. Among the highlights is a week-long festival from 31 May, 
with street theatre and music events, followed by theBachfest 
<http://www.bachfestleipzig.de/en/bachfest> from 12-21 June and open-air 
concerts by theGewandhaus Orchestra 
<http://www.gewandhaus.de/gewandhaus-orchestra/> on 10-11 July. Fans of Paul 
Klee can catch a retrospective at the LeipzigMuseum of Fine Arts 
<http://www.mdbk.de/en/search/> (1 March-25 May). The Spinnerei 
<http://www.spinnerei.de/>, a former cotton mill that now houses an enclave of 
artist’s studios, celebrates a 10-year anniversary with open days in January, 
May and September. Stay atMeisterzimmer <http://www.meisterzimmer.de/rooms.html>
, which offers self-catering rooms surrounded by artists’ studios, from €75 a 
night.

Rugby World Cup in England and Wales
 Photograph: Glyn Kirk/AFP/Getty Images 
Oggy, oggy, oggy! In case you hadn’t heard – the Rugby World Cup is coming to 
England (and Wales) later this year. The tournament lasts six weeks (18 
September-31 October) and the 10 host cities include Newcastle, Cardiff, Exeter 
and Brighton. The opening ceremony takes place at Twickenham, west London, on 
18 September ahead of England’s first game against Fiji. ButNewcastle 
<http://www.newcastlegateshead.net/rwc/visiting/itineraries> – where New 
Zealand’s All Blacks will be defending their title in the group stages against 
Tonga on 9 October (overnight package plus match ticket and match-day transfers 
from £299pp withenglandrugbytravel.com 
<http://www.englandrugbytravel.com/rwc2015/pool-c/new-zealand-v-tonga/94/>) – 
has reallygot into the spirit. There will be a large fan zone near St James’ 
Park <http://www.newcastlegateshead.net/rwc/visiting/itineraries>, offering 
music, food, drinks and, of course, all the action on big screens.

Pilsen, Czech Republic
 Photograph: Alamy 
Pilsen is known for beer, which has been brewed in the city since 1295, and a 
tour of thePilsner Urquell brewery <http://pilsnerurquell.com/uk> is great fun. 
There are also several microbreweries and abeer spa 
<http://pilsenbeerspa.cz/index.php/en/>. Beyond beer, Pilsen is one of two 2015 
European Capitals of Culture (along with Mons; see page 9), has a charming 
centre, and is seeing its rundown industrial areas revitalised, with artworks 
popping up in unlikely spaces. An artist-in-residence will transform an 
abandoned public bathhouse, and a former brewery-cum-barracks,Svetovar 
<http://plzen2015.bioport.cz/en/o-projektu/svetovar-kulturni-fabrika>, is being 
turned into a major cultural centre. TheHidden City project 
<http://www.plzen2015.cz/en/projects/flagship-project-hidden-city>, a free app, 
takes you on unusual sightseeing tours devised by locals including a student, 
an immigrant and a second world war veteran. Exciting events run throughout the 
year: circus, theatre and light festivals; live music in baroque buildings; and 
exhibitions of art, architecture and puppetry. But back to beer: the four-star
Hotel Rous <http://www.hotelrous.cz/pages.php?language=gb&page=intro> (doubles 
from €75), in a grand old house in the centre, brews its own.

Faroe Islands


A tiny 18-island archipelago roughly halfway between Iceland and Scotland, 
with nearly twice as many sheep as people, the Faroe Islands have a romantic 
appeal for travellers looking for a remote, back-to-nature experience. In 
March, the islands will be one of only two places in the world to see the total 
solar eclipse (the Norwegian islands of Svalbard being the other). It’s a great 
reason to visit the Faroes – a magical world of waterfalls and fjords and huge 
bird colonies. There’s a vibrant cultural scene, too – festivals and boat races 
in traditional Faroese boats fill the summer months – but among the most 
intimate and left-field isHoyma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/dec/07/faroe-islands-hoyma-music-festival>
, a new music festival held each November, which takes place in locals’ sitting 
rooms. Most hotels are booked now for the eclipse, but there are still B&B and 
camping options: seesolareclipse.fo <http://solareclipse.fo/>. Flights are via 
Copenhagen or Oslo withAtlantic Airways <https://www.atlantic.fo/en/>.

Lanzarote, Canary Islands

 Jason deCaires Taylor’s Isla Mujeres Underwater Art Museum. Photograph: Rex 
Features 
Artist Jason deCaires Taylor <http://www.underwatersculpture.com/> is known 
for his underwater creations: he was behind the world’s first underwater 
sculpture park, off Grenada in the Caribbean; a submerged museum off the coast 
of Cancún, Mexico; and Ocean Atlas, the world’s largest single underwater 
sculpture, in the Bahamas. This year, he will debut his latest project,Museo 
Atlántico <https://www.lanzaroteon.com/news-lanzarote/museo-atlantico-lanzarote>
, off the coast of Lanzarote – Europe’s first underwater museum. The first 
phase will open in September and, when complete, will comprise 10 separate 
large-scale installations and more than 300 individual sculptures, designed to 
create a marine habitat for endemic species, in a sheltered bay near Playa 
Blanca. Visitors will be able to swim and snorkel among the sculptures or view 
them from a glass-bottomed boat or a submarine – a magical experience. 
Elsewhere in the Canaries, Tenerife hopes to attract visitors to its natural 
volcanic beauty with a newwalking festival 
<http://www.tenerifewalkingfestival.com/home-en/> from 10-14 March.

Greece’s lesser-known Cyclades

 Church on Milos, Greece. Photograph: Gerhard Zwerger-Schoner/Corbis 
New flights to the islands of Santorini and Mykonos saw visitor numbers soar 
last summer. This year, other central Aegean islands are likely to see the 
knock-on effect. Tiny, rugged Folegandros, chic Sifnos and unspoilt Milos are 
three islands that look set to be the subject of more attention. On the 
mainland, Athens continues to rise from economic downturn, with a busy start-up 
scene, great new restaurants and theAcropolis Museum 
<http://www.theacropolismuseum.gr/en> celebrating its sixth birthday in June. 
Sunvil Holidays <https://www.sunvil.co.uk> has a 10-night island-hopping trip 
to the lesser-known Cyclades from £850pp with flights and B&B.

 Porto

 Photograph: Alamy 
We do love Lisbon, but Porto, Portugal’s second city, is going to be luring 
more visitors in 2015 aseasyJet 
<http://www.easyjet.com/en/cheap-flights/portugal/porto> launches direct 
flights from Bristol, Luton and Manchester in April. Set on the banks of the 
Douro in the north of the country, Porto’s historic centre has been 
Unesco-listed since 1996 and is a picturesque mish-mash of medieval churches, 
cobbled lanes, pretty squares, steep steps and beautiful buildings tumbling 
down to the river. The birthplace of port, it’s a must for wine lovers, and 
recent years have witnessed something of a cultural renaissance with galleries, 
restaurants and boutiques opening – the city rebranded itself last year to 
convey its “youthful, cosmopolitan” side. The newly openedWorld of Discoveries 
museum <https://www.worldofdiscoveries.com/> and theme park is worth checking 
out – visitors can trace the journeys of past Portuguese explorers, with boat 
rides recreating their epic voyages to South America, Africa and Asia. Among 
new accommodation options is the1872 River House <http://1872riverhouse.com/#>, 
a cute eight-bedroom B&B in the historic Ribeira district (doubles from £126, 
breakfast served until 1pm, book oni-escape.com 
<http://www.i-escape.com/1872-river-house/overview>).

Rodez, France

 Photograph: Christian Richters/Corbis 
The Musée Soulages <http://musee-soulages.grand-rodez.com/museum-soulages/> 
opened in Rodez in May 2014. After two months, 100,000 people had visited. 
Suddenly this out-of-the-way town in south-central France was on the cultural 
map. Pierre Soulages is France’s most famous abstract artist, a sort of Gallic 
Mark Rothko, with the emphasis on black. The spectacular, modern cuboid steel 
building is home to 500 of his works gifted by the artist to his home town. A 
bonus for the visitor is that local award-winning chefs Sebastien and Michel 
Bras have opened a cafe/brasserie within the museum. Places to stay includeLa 
Ferme de Bourran <http://www.fermedebourran.com/en/>, a converted 19th-century 
mansion with seven well-equipped, modern rooms from €89 to €200.Ryanair flies 
to Rodez 
<http://www.ryanair.com/en/cheap-flights/london-stansted-to-rodez/?out-date=2015-04-23>
 from Stansted and Dublin.

Margate

 Dreamland amusement park. Photograph: Nicholas Bailey/Rex Features 
When the Turner Contemporary <http://www.turnercontemporary.org/> opened in 
2011, it kick-started interest in this down-at-heel Thanet town. Visitors were 
drawn to the harbour-wall gallery and then across the road to the cafes and 
antique shops of the rebranded “Old Town”, where new ventures such asHaeckels 
<http://haeckels.co.uk/> sell beauty products made from local materials. The 
release ofMike Leigh’s Mr Turner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/mr-turner> 
last year helped maintain momentum and this year’s reopening of theDreamland 
<http://dreamland.co.uk/> amusement park – the first phase is scheduled for 
March despite storm damage last month – with its grade II-listed roller 
coaster, will boost interest further.

Namibia

 Photograph: Frans Lanting/Corbis 
Much of the long-awaited fourth Mad Max film, which will hit the silver screen 
later this year, was filmed not in Australia, but in the dramatic Namib desert 
in Namibia – and its starring role should win the country new fans. March will 
see the 25th anniversary of independence from South Africa, with widespread 
celebrations planned. Namibia is something of a pioneer in conservation and, 
unlike many areas of Africa, has seen wildlife populations increase. With the 
South African Rand (to which the Namibian dollar is pegged) weak against the 
pound, it’s better value than many African destinations.Expert Africa 
<http://www.expertafrica.com/namibia/trip/caracal-self-drive-safari> offers a 
two-week, self-drive safari from £2,439pp, including flights from Heathrow, 
accommodation, car hire and some meals.

Utrecht, Netherlands

 Photograph: Maria Swärd/Getty Images/Flickr RF 
As with many Dutch cities, Utrecht lives in Amsterdam’s shadow. But, having 
secured this year’sGrand Depart of the Tour de France 
<http://www.tourdefranceutrecht.com/en> – in part as an acknowledgement of its 
cycle-friendly outlook – the city is preparing for its day in the sun. Its 
appeal as a weekend break destination seems remarkably undersold. It has a 
historic, canal-lined centre, reminiscent of Bruges, plenty of modish cafes and 
restaurants, and an unpretentious urban intellectual vibe, the result of having 
the largest university in the Netherlands at its heart. To stay, try theMother 
Goose Hotel <http://www.mothergoosehotel.com/>, which opened in July and has 
stylish rooms from €105.

Zermatt 

 Photograph: Patrick Frilet/Rex Features 
The Swiss ski resort of Zermatt gets even more attention than usual as it 
celebrates the 150th anniversary of the first ascent of the Matterhorn. An 
open-air play about Edward Whymper’s ascent will join the dozens of regular 
events, such as music festivalZermatt Unplugged 
<http://www.zermatt-unplugged.ch/> in April. Most exciting for gnarly types is 
the reopening of theHörnlihütte 
<http://www.hoernlihuette.ch/hoernlihuette_18.html> (pictured), at the 
Matterhorn’s basecamp, in July. The improved hut (it dates from 1880 and has 
been closed since last summer) will have proper drains and heating, and be 
connected to the 100-year-oldMatterhorn mountain lodge 
<http://www.hoernlihuette.ch/home_15.html>, whose later extensions will be 
demolished.

Normandy coast 

 Trouville-sur-Mer, Normandy. Photograph: Alamy 
It’s not exactly difficult to reach the Normandy coast from the UK, but for 
those who can’t be bothered with the ferry and the drive, a newRyanair 
<http://www.ryanair.com/> flight (from £38 return) could be an incentive to go 
this spring or summer. The Stansted-Deauville flights will run from 3 April 
until 23 October on Fridays and Mondays, making a long weekend in the chic 
seaside town that inspired so many artists very doable. Colourful beach 
umbrellas and beach cabins for hire are dotted along the 2km-long beach, and 
there are a number of photography and film festivals running through the year. 
Nearby Trouville-sur-Mer, across the Touques river, has sandy beaches andbelle 
époque architecture, and Honfleur, a 30-minute drive east, is an attractive 
fishing port depicted by several impressionist painters, some of whose works 
are in theEugène Boudin museum 
<http://en.ot-honfleur.fr/discover-honfleur/arts-and-museums/eugene-boudin-museum/>
, in a former 19th-century chapel.

Croatia

 Photograph: Alamy 
Game of Thrones has done a lot to boost tourism to Croatia – and it will do so 
again in 2015, when season five hits our screens, with medieval Dubrovnik once 
again starring as King’s Landing. The country’s reputation as Europe’s festival 
capital grows ever stronger –Croatia Rocks <http://www.croatiarocks.com/> will 
be the new kid on the block next summer, brought to partygoers by the Ibiza 
Rocks Group. It will be held on Zrce beach on Pag island (the same location as 
theHideout festival <http://www.hideoutfestival.com/>), and tickets cost from 
£99. New flights for next year make access even easier, too –BA 
<http://www.britishairways.com/travel/home/public/en_gb> will fly to Split from 
Heathrow andeasyJet <http://www.easyjet.com/en/> from Belfast, both from May, 
for the summer season, andEuropean Coastal Airlines <http://www.ec-air.eu/en/> 
has new flights to Hvar and other islands. With the kuna more than 5% weaker 
than a year ago, it offers good value for UK holidaymakers, too.

Palm Springs, California
 Photograph: Kenneth Johansson/Kenneth Johansson/Corbis 
A great place to immerse yourself in Golden-era Hollywood glamour, Palm 
Springs ishome to the world’s best-preserved collection of modernist 
architecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/picture/2014/nov/28/palm-springs-desert-modernism-architecture-california>
. The showcase event for the city’s iconic design isModernism Week 
<http://www.modernismweek.com/>, which celebrates its 10th anniversary year 
(12-22 February), with a host of walking tours of iconic houses and 
neighbourhoods. But you don’t have to be in town for that week to soak up the 
atmosphere and style of the era. Whenever you visit, book into a classic 
modernist hotel, such as theHorizon <http://thehorizonhotel.com>, or the Ace 
<http://www.acehotel.com/palmsprings>, for a contemporary take on design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/apr/06/palm-springs-new-hotels>. 
Spring sees the opening of the 32-roomArrive hotel <http://www.arrivehotels.com>
 in the north end of the Design District. Paying homage to the local 
architectural heritage, it is aiming to become a social hub for locals as well 
as visitors. For more insight into the city’s architecture, join the excellent
Palm Springs Modern Tours <http://www.palmspringsmoderntours.com>, which offer 
expert guided visits to some of the 20th-century treasures, includingFrank 
Sinatra’s first Palm Springs home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2004/aug/28/culturaltrips.losangeles>. Ol’ 
Blue Eyes would have been 100 in 2015, so it’s perfect timing.

Northern Sri Lanka

 A beach at Nilaveli, north of Trincomalee. Photograph: Alamy 
Sri Lanka has golden beaches and swaying coconut palms in abundance, but some 
of the island’s most beautiful stretches of coast were off-limits for decades, 
lying as they did in territory controlled by the Tamil Tigers. Now, five years 
after the civil war ended, new luxury resorts such as those run byUga Escapes 
<http://www.ugaescapes.com/>, are springing up on lush and largely empty shores 
around the port of Trincomalee.

But for truly untrodden Sri Lanka, foreign visitors should apply to the 
country’s ministry of defence for permission (it seems to be a formality) to 
head north up the now repaired and demined A9 – once called the Highway of 
Blood. (Or enjoy a truly novel experience by taking the train that started 
running from Colombo to Jaffna this autumn – £7.50 one way in an 
air-conditioned carriage.) This northern city is now rebuilding its few hotels 
and opening its doors to the world. Stay in the centre of town, close to 
restaurants on Stanley Road (the Cosy and the Nila are both good, and 
astonishing value), at theSubhas Hotel <http://subhasgroup.com/#%21/page_Home> 
(doubles from £20 B&B). Only one wing has been rebuilt so far, but the welcome 
is friendly, and they’ll bring a delicious breakfast of roti or dosas, with 
spicy sambol, tropical fruits and tea, to your room. For somewhere less edgy, 
particularly if you’re a female traveller hoping for a hassle-free beer by the 
pool, try theGreen Grass <http://jaffnagreengrass.com/> (doubles from £27 B&B). 
It’s a walk or short tuk-tuk ride to the fort, and dinners are excellent.

Hotels – and indeed, tourists – are even rarer in the sunny, sleepy islands 
beyond Jaffna, reached by causeway and free ferry, but the intrepid traveller 
will find a ready welcome from people cut off from the west for a generation.

Patagonia, Chile
 Photograph: Bridget Besaw/Aurora Photos/Corbis 
The 40th anniversary of Bruce Chatwin’s first visit to Patagonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/dec/13/guide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay>
 andTop Gear’s recent controversial trip there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/29/top-gear-jeremy-clarkson-falklands-number-plate-tv-ratings>
 have drawn attention to this stunning part of the world. Towards the end of 
2015, a new national park is due to open in the Aysén region’s Chacabuco Valley 
– promising to protect an ecologically important corridor through the Andes 
between Chile and Argentina. Founded by conservationists Kris and Doug Tompkins 
(of North Face and Patagonia clothing company fame), it’s the fruit of a long 
struggle to turn a hugeestancia back to its natural state. Pura Aventura 
<http://www.pura-aventura.com/latin-america/argentina#argentina-uncovered> has 
an 11-day trip to Parque Patagonia and Mallin Colorado from £2,552pp, including 
internal flights from the Chilean capital Santiago, but not international ones.

Mons, Belgium 

 Photograph: Alamy 
Mons, a hilltop city and a place of pilgrimage since the seventh century, is 
the joint 2015 European Capital of Culture (with Pilsen in the Czech Republic, 
see above). It is planning lots of innovative urban art; at the opening 
ceremony on 24 January, 18,000 free silver ponchos will be given out to create 
live, glittering mirror balls. There’s a major Van Gogh exhibition atBAM 
<http://www.bam.mons.be/expositions/a-venir/van-gogh-au-borinage> (25 Jan-17 
May) and a maze of 8,000 sunflowers will bloom in the main square in July. 
Installations will appear on street corners: giant books cascading from a 
window; a huge red ball squeezed between buildings; and an enormous aquarium. 
New openings include a whopping five new museums, two concert halls (one with a 
meditation chapel, in a nod to Mons’s religious past) and a literary open-air 
cafe. There is also a focus on food, with barbecues, festivals, banquets and 
mystery dinners. Stay at the four-starDream hotel <http://www.dream-mons.be/en/>
, a converted neogothic convent with modern design and original features 
(doubles from €90). More atmons2015.eu <http://mons2015.eu/en>.

The Azores 
 Photograph: Ian Gethings/Getty Images/Moment Open 
Scattered across the Atlantic Ocean almost 900 miles off the coast of 
Portugal, the nine volcanic islands of the Azores are a remote haven boasting 
amazing wildlife (whale-watching’s among the best in the world) and lush, 
unspoilt landscapes fringed by dramatic black sand beaches. For the past 10 
years there has been a weekly direct flight from Gatwick to the main island of 
São Miguel withSATA 
<https://www.sata.pt/en/content/home-page?gclid=CJ6__dOw_8ICFQ6WtAodsysAvQ>. 
This yearRyanair  
<http://www.ryanair.com/en/cheap-flights/london-stansted-to-ponta-delgada/?out-date=2015-05-09>
becomes the first budget airline to fly to the islands, with weekly flights 
from Stansted to São Miguel in April, from £78 return. The other islands can 
then be reached by ferries and local flights. A great choice for walkers, 
divers and wildlife enthusiasts – and anyone who really wants to get away from 
it all (next stop is Canada, another 1,600 miles west).

Milan
 Mini cannelloni in a shop in Milan. Photograph: Alamy 
A hub of fashion, design, finance and industry, Milan has always been a city 
with big ideas. That seems set to continue with the metropolis hosting the next 
world fair,Expo Milano 2015 
<http://landing.expo2015.org/en/global-nutrition-event.html?gclid=CMOKk5O90sICFWjKtAodUgQAGA>
 (online tickets from €27). Over a six-month period, the expo will address the 
issue of feeding the planet, food security and biodiversity in events across a 
site laid out like a classical Roman city. Milan is also hosting Italy’s 
largest ever exhibition dedicated to Leonardo da Vinci. Held at the Royal 
Palace, it will include some of his most important paintings – such as the
Dreyfus Madonna <https://www.nga.gov/collection/gallery/gg7/gg7-41680-prov.html>
 – and an impressive selection of drawings. Just as da Vinci was known for 
bringing together science and the arts, this year Milan will be a key place for 
anyone interested in life, the universe and everything. For somewhere to stay, 
tryLaGare Hotel <http://lagarehotelmilano.it/en/>, a slick new pad with a roof 
garden, opening in February, with doubles from £120.

The Channel Islands
 View from a German bunker on Alderney, Channel Islands. Photograph: Alamy 
While 2014 saw commemorations for the centenary of the first world war, this 
year marks the 70th anniversary of the end of the second. This will have 
particular resonance in the Channel Islands, the only part of the British Isles 
to be occupied during the war. To celebrate, the islands are collaborating to 
hold afive-week Heritage Festival 
<http://www.visitchannelislands.com/HeritageFestival.aspx>, from 3 April-11 
May, which will remind visitors of what life was like under German rule. Some 
sites, such as tunnels and bunkers dug into the islands, will be open to the 
public for the first time, and there will be guided walks, bike rides and 
tours, including a kayak tour following the routes spies used to travel between 
the islands. The Liberation day carnival on May 9 includes a concert and 
firework display on Guernsey’s picturesque St Peter Port seafront. TheFarmhouse 
Hotel <http://www.thefarmhouse.gg/> has 14 rooms in a restored 15th century 
farmhouse from £75 a night.

New Zealand
 Skyline Rotorua MTB Gravity Park, New Zealand. 
Whether you visit the country’s North or South Island, attention is going to 
be lavished on NZ in 2015 – and it won’t all be Hobbit-related. Wellington will 
celebrate 150 years as a capital city with a week of festivities planned for 
July, and is to provide one of the venues (along with Auckland, Christchurch, 
Dunedin, Hamilton, Napier and Nelson) for theICC Cricket World Cup 
<http://www.newzealand.com/uk/icc-cricket-world-cup-2015/&cid=p:sem:uk:specialinterest/>
, which New Zealand is co-hosting


with Australia from 14 February to 29 March. And the country’s great-outdoors 
appeal is sure to get an added push from having the world’s first year-round 
gondola-accessed mountain bike park. TheSkyline Rotorua Mountain Bike Gravity 
Park opened <http://www.skyline.co.nz/queenstown/mountain-bike-season-passes/> 
last year and will be the first southern hemisphere venue for theCrankworx 
mountain biking festival 
<http://www.crankworx.com/whistler/info/media/crankworx-drops-in-to-southern-hemisphere>
, running from 25-29 March.

Brisbane, Australia
 Tryp Hotel, Fortitude Valley, Brisbane Photograph: PR 
Once an overgrown country town, the Queensland capital has changed beyond 
recognition in recent years: Lonely Planet named it Australia’s hippest city 
last year. Alongside hotel and bar openings and the rise of riverside 
restaurants such asPony Dining <http://ponydining.com.au/> (which, in an act of 
gastronomic symbolism, replaced a McDonald’s at Eagle Street pier) and
Stokehouse Q <http://stokehousebrisbane.com.au/> at Southbank, Brisvegas has a 
series of happening villages. Prime among them is Fortitude Valley, where the 
world’s firstTryp Hotel <http://www.trypbrisbane.com/> opened recently, as did 
Kwan Bros <http://www.kwanbros.com.au/>, a superb Japanese-fusion restaurant. 
Also on the north bank of the Brisbane river, once-seedy Caxton Street, near 
Paddington, is a new social hub, now home to the flamboyantGambaro hotel 
<http://www.gambarohotel.com.au/> and to Lefty’s Oldtime Music Hall 
<http://leftysmusichall.com/>, which has live bands, 100 rye whiskies, and was 
named Gourmet Traveller’s “best Australian bar 2014”.


• This article was amended on 6 January 2015. Ryanair is not the first airline 
to fly direct to the Azores. Portuguese airlineSATA 
<https://www.sata.pt/en/content/home-page?gclid=CJ6__dOw_8ICFQ6WtAodsysAvQ> 
already operate direct flights. 

 