
It's not all Mickey Mouse and beach-front posturing in the Sunshine State.

We've lined up a range of Florida travel experts, who can offer all manner of 
tailor-made advice for whichever style of holiday you prefer: cultural, active, 
relaxing, or a mix of all three. Want to know where to find the best margarita, 
key lime pie or cutting-edge fusion cuisine? Need an affordable place to base 
yourself for trips to the Everglades or the Keys? Perhaps you are even feeling 
brave enough to tackle Orlando's theme parks with the family, but need some 
insider info to make the day run without a hitch.

If you're looking for inspiration or advice for a trip to Florida, post your 
questions in the comments below and our panel will do their best to answer them 
between 3-4pm (BST) on Wednesday 24 April.

If you live in Florida or know the state well we'd love you to join in the 
chat and share your tips. Plus, from Monday 29 April, join Adam Gabbat on our 
inauguralTwitrip across Florida <>. 

The experts

Lauren (Lolo) Reskin is the owner of independent record store Sweat Records 
<http://www.sweatshopmiami.com> in Miami. Heavily involved in the local music 
scene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2012/may/15/miami-sweat-records-vinyl-cds-video>
, she can fill you in on options for nightlife, live music and events. Lauren 
also runsmeatlessmiami.com <http://meatlessmiami.com>, a guide to south 
Florida's vegetarian-friendly restaurants.

Laura Martone is a travel writer, who has covered various US destinations for 
Geographic Traveler, MotorHome, Route 66 Magazine, RV Journal and The 
Ecotourism Observer. One of her favourite regions is the Florida Keys. She's 
snorkelled amid the coral reefs near Key Largo, kayaked through the mangroves 
of Marathon and visited the former haunts of Ernest Hemingway – all of which 
she's covered in herMoon Florida Keys  
<http://www.moon.com/books/moon-handbooks/moon-florida-keys-first-edition>
guidebook. When not travelling, Laura divides her time between New Orleans and 
northern Michigan.

Melanie Gapany is a writer and photographer, who founded the website 
MiamiAlive.com <http://miamialive.com/>. Born in Rio de Janeiro but a long-term 
resident in South Florida, she is fully tapped into Miami's cultural scene. Her 
work has been published in Orlando Weekly's Drink Magazine, Urb Magazine, The 
Miami New Times and Smile for Camera. Her areas of expertise include 
alternative and budget nightlife, food and drink, and off-the-beaten-track 
entertainment. She is also a big fan of historical south Florida.

Jason Ferguson is an Orlando resident and the author of Moon Florida 
<http://www.moon.com/books/moon-handbooks/moon-florida-first-edition> and Moon 
Sarasota & Naples 
<http://www.moon.com/books/moon-handbooks/moon-sarasota-naples-first-edition>. 
He has yet to find a corner of his native state that doesn't hold some sort of 
surprise. With a background in alternative journalism and arts reporting, Jason 
enjoys discovering Florida's more unusual sights, including its diverse 
nightlife and art scenes. As a father of four, he also understands the infinite 
appeal of Florida's theme parks, beaches and outdoor opportunities.

Adam Karlin has written several guides to Fort Myers, Miami, the Keys and the 
Everglades, and was also the head author of Lonely Planet's first edition of
Discover: Florida 
<http://shop.lonelyplanet.com/usa/discover-florida-travel-guidebook-1/>. While 
his travel expertise focuses on south Florida, his extended family lives in the 
panhandle and he loves everything in between as well. Adam has authored over 30 
guidebooks for Lonely Planet, spanning the Americas, Africa and Asia. He lives 
in New Orleans.

Bonnie Gross and Bob Rountree are the founders of FloridaRambler.com 
<http://www.floridarambler.com/>, a website devoted to enjoying the natural, 
authentic, non-commercial sides of Florida. Bonnie lives in Fort Lauderdale; 
Bob in Deerfield Beach. After decades spent as news reporters in south Florida, 
they now write about hiking, biking, canoe and kayaking, camping and wildlife, 
plus lodging, dining and drinking. In addition to their website, they write for 
various travel publications, including the Miami Herald's travel section.

 <>Join our Twitter Trip

On Monday 29 April, the Guardian will start the first in a monthly series of 
TwiTrips across America. For the inaugural trip, Adam Gabbatt will be driving 
the length of Florida, starting in Jacksonville and ending in Key West. His 
only information tool will be his mobile phone – and access to Twitter.

For five days, he will be guided through the state by the tips and 
recommendations sent in by you, our readers. Where should he stop for lunch? 
What quirky attractions should he see en route? Where's the best place for a 
drink at the end of each day? Send your tips to@AdamGabbatt 
<https://twitter.com/AdamGabbatt> and he will retweet and curate a plan of 
action, giving live updates and feedback as he zooms across the blacktop. 
Follow his progress on Twitter (#roadtriptips), and on his liveblog on the 
Guardian Travel website from Monday.
 