
Hollywood Boulevard was closed to traffic and the crowds were gathering outside
Grauman's Chinese Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/29/cine-files-graumans-chinese-theatre>
 to spot the stars – Peter O'Toole, Tippi Hedren and Mickey Rooney among them – 
as they walked the red carpet and filed past hundreds of famous foot and 
handprints for the premiere of Gene Kelly's 1951 film, An American in Paris. 
Fans cheer and cameras flash.

At the TCM Classic Film Festival stars from yesteryear rub shoulders with 
paying guests who made their way past the pair of giant Chinese Ming Heavens 
dogs guarding the main entrance of the 85-year-old picture palace.

Home to the biggest film premieres in Hollywood since 1927, the theatre 
interior rises 90 feet to a bronze roof, two coral red columns sitting either 
side of a 30-foot dragon. The 1,161 plush red seats started to fill as patrons 
waited for the movie to start, just one of dozens of screenings that would take 
place over the next four days.

Initiated in 2010 by the US cable channel of the same name, TCM brings 
together 2,000 film fans from around the world to watch classic movies that are 
introduced by the people who made them.

The event is hosted by the channel's anchor, 79-year-old film historian Robert 
Osborne <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Osborne> (think Barry Norman meets 
Michael Parkinson), and passes range from $299 to $1,199, though $20 tickets 
can be bought on the door for many screenings. They sold out within weeks this 
year, as the festival's reputation has spread around the globe.

Ticket holders get access to movies, panels, receptions and the exclusive Club 
TCM at theHollywood Roosevelt Hotel 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hollywood_Roosevelt_Hotel>, one of LA's most 
popular venues for young Angelinos, most of whom have probably never heard of 
Roy Rogers and Trigger.

The Roosevelt hosted many a star in its heyday, including Marilyn Monroe, a 
resident here for two years, whose ghost is said to haunt a mirror which once 
hung in her room. But for this traveller the nearby Quality Inn, situated near 
an International House of Pancakes and an In-N-Out Burger joint, was as 
glamorous as things got last year.

My first film of the festival was inside Grauman's Multiplex, an ornately 
decorated group of cinema screens echoing the 1920s style of the main Chinese 
Theatre, where they screened Edmund Goulding'sThe Constant Nymph 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0035751/>, a 1943 film that hasn't been shown in a 
cinema for almost 70 years.

Introduced by the ever-dapper Osborne, the screening was accompanied by 
laughter, gasps and the occasional tear.

Over the next few days I listened to Peter O'Toole discuss his career, spotted 
Angela Lansbury being ushered into a taxi and managed to miss Hayley Mills 
introducing her 1961 Disney film,The Parent Trap 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0055277/> while I attended a screening of All 
About Eve <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0042192/>.

My Saturday night was spent at Grauman's Egyptian Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog+film/charliechaplin>
, which opened in 1922 and hosted Hollywood's first movie premiere, Douglas 
Fairbanks'Robin Hood <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robin_Hood_%281922_film%29>. 
To modern eyes the faux Egyptian hieroglyphics, which carry on into the foyer 
and through to the 616-seat auditorium, may appear more kitsch than classy, but 
there's an undeniable charm and faded Hollywood chutzpah about the place.

In the queue I met a woman who had travelled more than 500 miles to be here. 
The TCM channel is a constant in her life, a safe haven from reality TV and 
24-hour rolling news … a place where Bette Davis and Victor Mature are bigger 
than Simon Cowell will ever be.

Clutching my buttered popcorn and soda, the night kicked off with Buster 
Keaton's silent 1928 classic,The Cameraman 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0018742/> (some of which was filmed just a few 
hundred yards away in Cahuenga); continued with a 40th anniversary showing of
Shaft <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shaft_%281971_film%29>, introduced by star 
Richard Roundtree; and ended with a midnight screening of Boris Karloff's 1932 
version ofThe Mummy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mummy_%281932_film%29>, 
with a live introduction by Hellboy actor Ron Perlmann.

Between films there was a chance to meet people whose only connection is a 
shared love of classic cinema, leading to discussions on everything from Clara 
Bow's real-life exploits and Charles Boyer's career choices to the best place 
to get a sandwich between screenings (that would be theMusso and Frank Grill 
<http://www.mussoandfrankgrill.com/> at 6667 Hollywood Boulevard).

On the last day we headed home to our DVDs and cable TV, but until then we 
enjoyed our own movie premieres, followed by drinks at the Roosevelt, just the 
way they would have done in the Golden Age of Hollywood.

• The 2012 TCM Classic Film Festival (tcm.com/festival 
<http://www.tcm.com/festival/>, 12-15 April) is sold out. Dates for the 2013 
festival tbc
 