
McDonald’s has opened a franchise just steps away from the gleaming white 
marble dome of St Peter’s Basilica, giving indigestion to some cardinals and 
local business owners.

 There was no fanfare for the 30 December opening of the US fast-food firm’s 
new venue behind a subdued exterior on the picturesque Borgo Pio, just outside 
the spiritual home of the world’s 1.2 billion Roman Catholics.

Cardinals see red over Vatican McDonald's
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/cardinals-see-red-over-vatican-mcdonalds>
When the plan emerged last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/cardinals-see-red-over-vatican-mcdonalds>
, one of its most strident critics was Cardinal Elio Sgreccia, who said 
McDonald’s fare was far removed from Roman gastronomic traditions and not the 
healthiest of foods.

 “The mega sandwich shop on Borgo Pio is a disgrace,” Sgreccia told La 
Repubblica newspaper at the time.

 “It would be better to use those spaces to help the needy of the area, spaces 
for hospitality, shelter and help for those who suffer, as the Holy Father 
teaches,” Sgreccia said.

 Despite the holy outrage in some quarters, two nuns were spotted on Tuesday 
lunchtime going inside the branch.

In a statement, McDonald’s emphasised that the new restaurant was in a popular 
tourist area outside theVatican <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vatican>, 
although the building itself is Holy See property.

“As is the case whenever McDonald’s operates near historic sites anywhere in 
Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, this restaurant has been fully 
adapted with respect to the historical environment,” the company said.

 Some local business owners had written to Pope Francis to ask him to keep the 
chain out, for fear it would upset the artistic, culture and social identity of 
the neighbourhood.

 In the letter, consumer group Codacons and a committee set up to protect 
Borgo Pio said the area, full of restaurants and shops selling religious 
articles, was already “saturated” and bringing in more tourists could be a 
security risk.

 But some people who frequent the area welcomed the new arrival, including 
Raffaella Scarano, an Italian woman who works nearby.

 “Anything that is good for the economy of our country is fine by me,” she 
said.

 Cities across Italy have been turning up the heat on fast-food restaurants. 
McDonald’s filed a $20m (£16m) lawsuit against Florence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/mcdonalds-claims-20m-from-florence-over-piazza-restaurant-rebuff>
 after the mayor of the Renaissance city turned down an application to open one 
of its restaurants there.

 