
1000 First Avenue, Seattle (00 1 206 957 1000; hotel1000seattle.com 
<http://www.hotel1000seattle.com>)

On a fine day you can see across Elliot Bay, but when I arrive at the Hotel 
1000, fulfilling the cliche requirements of a trip to Seattle, it is raining, 
which means I can stand at my ninth floor window and gaze at a sodden army of 
runners streaming across the Alaskan Way in a charity race.

This is a rather retro activity in a hotel that bills itself the most 
technologically advanced in the world. So, when my schadenfreude quota has been 
filled, I turn my attention back to the room. On the surface, it's a temple to 
inoffensive good taste - a symphony of beige, brown and white - and not 
particularly memorable, apart from the fact that when you turn on the taps in 
the bath, the water gushes from the ceiling. Why this is so, I have absolutely 
no idea.

I think it comes under the 'clever touches' heading. The television morphs 
into a hi-tech art gallery that flicks through an Impressionist and Renaissance 
greatest hits compilation, which spares me having to battle with the elements 
to visit the Seattle Art Museum. Mostly, however, the cleverness is hidden: the 
telephones use the internet rather than the usual cabling which means that all 
calls, including long-distance ones in the US, are free. (Oh, and there's wi-fi 
- this is Seattle - and it's free, too.) The telephone can also tell me the 
weather forecast and rebook flights.

Do Not Disturb signs are redundant in the 1000. Instead each room has a heat 
sensor that tells staff when guests are in a room, and repeat guests will 
arrive to find their room has been chilled or heated to their perfect 
temperature. It's all a bit chilling. Still, the 'hotel of the future' has some 
pleasingly retro touches, including dying batteries in the TV remote and a full 
complement of friendly and efficient human staff, all of whom are probably 
working on the new Facebook in their spare time.

Later, I wander down to the hotel's golf club. It's actually a nondescript 
basement room, but in the brave new digital world, with the help of a screen, a 
patch of Astroturf and some real golf clubs, I can play any one of the world's 
top 50 courses in a variety of climatic conditions. To fufill a childhood 
ambition, I choose to play the Old Course at St Andrews in driving rain, purely 
so I can take pot shots at the windows of the Old Course Hotel.

My virtual vandal satisfied, I head to Boka, the hotel's restaurant. In 
vaguely futuristic surroundings, I make a somewhat belated bid to fit in with 
the healthy, wealthy and wise inhabitants of Seattle by dining on seared tuna 
and chicken with saut√©ed spinach, partnered with artisanal wine. I don't 
suppose I fit in any better than I did before, but at least I've stayed dry.

The cost: Hotel 1000's Staycation package, including two rounds of golf and 
accommodation, starts at $299 a night.
 