
In April 1815, weeks before Napoleon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/napoleon-bonaparte> was finally defeated at 
Waterloo, Mount Tambora, in what is now Indonesia, erupted. It wasone of the 
largest volcanic incidents ever recorded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/28/are-we-ready-for-the-next-big-volcanic-eruption-tambora-bill-mcguire>
 and could be heard up to 1,600 miles off. Ash fell 800 miles away, and for two 
days following the explosion the 350 miles surrounding the mountain were in 
pitch darkness.

Many people feared that the world was facing its apocalyptic end

By the following year, a huge and dense dust cloud had entered the atmosphere 
and was moving across much of the globe, disrupting the weather systems of the 
northern hemisphere, in particular, during 1816 and the three years that 
followed. The fallout was a thousand times greater thanthe recent Icelandic 
volcanic activity which, almost 200 years later, caused considerable 
disruptions to air traffic <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/8634944.stm>
. The sun’s frequent disappearances will have caused countless people to suffer 
the psychological effects of darkness as well as the physical consequences of 
extremely low temperatures during the volcanic winter that replaced the summer 
of 1816. It was the second coldest year on record since the middle ages and the 
1810s were the coldest decade ever recorded. The change in climate gave rise to 
exceptional rainstorms and crop failure across the world. Famine, disease, 
poverty, civil unrest and mass migration ensued.

In 1816 Ireland suffered one of the worst of its recurring potato famines: 
typhus fever broke out, infecting 80,000 and killing 44,000. In the Chinese 
province of Yunnan, where harvests were ruined for three years, they planted 
poppies as a more robust and profitable alternative to rice, which became one 
of China’s main sources of opium, with devastating and enduring human 
consequences at home and abroad. The repeated crop failures over the same 
period in North America caused its economy, driven by arable farming, to crash 
in 1819, again with far-reaching repercussions. Disrupted monsoons in India 
were another aspect of the Tamboran climate change, giving rise to a new strain 
of cholera which almost wiped out the British army in the Bay of Bengal: the 
epidemic spread overseas, including to Indonesia, where many more people were 
killed by the disease than the 90,000 direct fatalities from the original 
volcanic eruptions of 1815.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDLsaSm5iG9o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDLsaSm5iG9o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDLsaSm5iG9o&media=>
 Schubert’s presentiments found their ultimate expression inWinterreise 
<https://youtu.be/DLsaSm5iG9o?t=50s>. 
If Napoleon had been the real-life hero of 19th-century Europe, then 
Prometheus – giver of fire – was its favourite mythical one. By the end of the 
18th century, Goethe had penned his influential poem,Prometheus 
<http://poemsintranslation.blogspot.co.uk/2014/05/goethe-prometheus-from-german.html>
, and Aeschylus’s drama Prometheus Bound 
<http://classics.mit.edu/Aeschylus/prometheus.html> had been translated and 
enjoyed popular success. Beethoven’s only ballet, The Creatures of Prometheus 
<http://cso.org/uploadedFiles/1_Tickets_and_Events/Program_Notes/ProgramNotes_Beethoven_Prometheus.pdf>
, provided material for his Eroica Symphony in the early 1800s: the initial 
dedication of this masterpiece to Napoleon was subsequently erased by its angry 
composer, disillusioned by the emperor’s abandonment of his republican (and 
democratic) ideals. Beethoven’s sentiments were echoed by Byron who, having 
admired Napoleon sufficiently to have travelled through Europe once in a 
replica of his imperial carriage, wroteOde to Napoleon 
<http://www.bartleby.com/333/543.html> as a poetic diatribe against his 
erstwhile hero.

Byron left England in 1816 as a refugee from disgrace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/nov/09/classics.poetry> and 
humiliation, and the climatic consequences of Tambora’s eruptions enveloped him,
physically and psychologically, when he reached Switzerland that missing 
summer. There he met up with Percy Shelley and Mary Godwin, soon to be Mrs 
Shelley, beside Lake Geneva where, confined indoors by the bad weather, they 
passed their time playing ghoulish games and writing scary stories by the 
fireside.Mary’s contribution was to create the uncontrollable monster of 
Frankenstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/26/frankenstein-hour-creation-identified-astronomers>
; or the modern Prometheus.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2F1816-year-without-summer-dark-masterpieces-beethoven-schubert-shelley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd09bc688c5c21dd15a4f5a37b23b2788c8fd353%2F1044_917_4879_2927%2F4879.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20year%20without%20summer%20gave%20us%20dark%20masterpieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2F1816-year-without-summer-dark-masterpieces-beethoven-schubert-shelley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20year%20without%20summer%20gave%20us%20dark%20masterpieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2F1816-year-without-summer-dark-masterpieces-beethoven-schubert-shelley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd09bc688c5c21dd15a4f5a37b23b2788c8fd353%2F1044_917_4879_2927%2F4879.jpg>
 The modern Prometheus - Benedict Cumberbatch with Jonny Lee Miller as the 
Creature in Frankenstein by Nick Dear at London’s Olivier Theatre. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Mt Tambora fired up imaginations to interpret their environment, reflect the 
climate and capture the spirit of the age

Nobody at the time understood what was happening to the climate: it was only 
in the 1960s when scientists were able to explain the causal connections 
between volcanic activity and the weather. Many people feared that the world 
was facing its apocalyptic end, confidently prophesied for July 1816 by a 
Bolognese astronomer and depressively reflected in Byron’s poem,Darkness 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/43825>, conceived 
beside Lake Geneva during a particularly bad storm that same month.

The impact of what is now known as seasonal affective disorder 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/seasonal-affective-disorder/Pages/Introduction.aspx>
 is seldom identified and never analysed in artistic activity, particularly in 
music which tends to be more abstract than other art forms. Nevertheless our 
ears can tell us something about the states of mind of the world’s two greatest 
composers of the day,Beethoven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ludwig-van-beethoven> and the younger 
Schubert <https://www.theguardian.com/music/franz-schubert>, who were living in 
Vienna and affected in different ways during the year without a summer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2F1816-year-without-summer-dark-masterpieces-beethoven-schubert-shelley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17b9f82608c61c8efd9e56b97851552055c61434%2F978_256_2197_2737%2F2197.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20year%20without%20summer%20gave%20us%20dark%20masterpieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2F1816-year-without-summer-dark-masterpieces-beethoven-schubert-shelley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20year%20without%20summer%20gave%20us%20dark%20masterpieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2F1816-year-without-summer-dark-masterpieces-beethoven-schubert-shelley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17b9f82608c61c8efd9e56b97851552055c61434%2F978_256_2197_2737%2F2197.jpg>
 Ludwig Van Beethoven … influenced by gloomy atmospheric conditions? 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Life was not easy for either of them in 1816. Beethoven had been caught up in 
a lengthy legal battle with his widowed sister-in-law over the custody of his 
nephew; Schubert was upsettingly ignored by Goethe when he sent the great poet 
a beautiful present of his song-settings and, later in the year, his hopes for 
a regularly paid teaching post and his prospects of marriage were 
simultaneously dashed.


Beethoven had been going through a relatively fallow creative period in 
1815-16, but by late springtime he had managed to overcome his demons and 
create the first great song-cycle in western music, the perfectly formed and 
sublimely romanticAn die ferne Geliebte <https://youtu.be/KOk7EWYbyqk?t=2m40s>. 
The cycle depicts an arcadian landscape of lightness and gentle breezes that 
were a far cry from the climatic realities of mid-1816. Before the year was 
out, Beethoven had embarked upon his fabled “late period” of composition with 
hisPiano Sonata No 28 Op 101 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZsItzA34B1I>. The 
gloomy atmospheric conditions that prevailed seem not to have influenced the 
great composer’s own moods.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZsItzA34B1I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZsItzA34B1I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZsItzA34B1I&media=>
 The start of Beethoven’s late period …Piano Sonata No 28 Op 101 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZsItzA34B1I> 
Unlike the younger composer, the 19-year-old Schubert: in 1816, his prodigious 
output included two symphonies, choral music, chamber works and more than a 
hundred Lieder. Almost all of these songs reflected not only the wandering, 
wondering and passionate romanticism of the age but also the coldness and 
darkness of this mysterious period. In some of them we can clearly hear 
presentiments of what was to come much later in Winterreise, his great song 
cycle, in which Schubert captured the frosted landscapes that were a recurring 
feature during the year without a summer and the remainder of that uniquely 
cold decade.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2F1816-year-without-summer-dark-masterpieces-beethoven-schubert-shelley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f056912f192332869257e1cdc82f7dfe7eabbba%2F0_161_2651_2649%2F2651.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20year%20without%20summer%20gave%20us%20dark%20masterpieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2F1816-year-without-summer-dark-masterpieces-beethoven-schubert-shelley%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20year%20without%20summer%20gave%20us%20dark%20masterpieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2F1816-year-without-summer-dark-masterpieces-beethoven-schubert-shelley%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f056912f192332869257e1cdc82f7dfe7eabbba%2F0_161_2651_2649%2F2651.jpg>
 SAD sufferer? An engraving of Schubert, circa 1820 Photograph: Rischgitz/Getty 
Images 
In contrast to Beethoven, on the evidence of his choice of texts and our 
hearing of his musical moods, we can argue that Schubert may have suffered from 
SAD exacerbated by the appalling weather. We can say more surely that the 
volcanic winter had no negative effect on the quantities of their respective, 
very different outputs during this remarkable year.

It was in 1816 that Schubert received his first ever professional commission, 
for a tantalisingly long-lost cantata called Prometheus, and the only work for 
which he was actually paid all year. An amazing moment of creative 
synchronicity occurred during that missing summer: at exactly the same time 
when Schubert composed his cantata, Byron wrote his epic poem Prometheus, 
Frankenstein was born and the seeds of Percy Shelley’sPrometheus Unbound 
<http://www.bartleby.com/139/shel1160.html> were sown. Something was in the 
air. Mt Tambora, in her cataclysmic self-destruction, put more than just a vast 
cloud of volcanic ash into the atmosphere: she fired up the imaginations of 
artists to interpret their environment, reflect the climate and capture the 
spirit of the age.


 * Ian Ritchie <http://www.ianritchie.org/> is curator of 1816: the Year 
Without a Summer at Kings Place, London 17-18 June 
<http://www.kingsplace.co.uk/1816>.
 