
What has happened to the World Cup?

Money makes the World Cup go round: more teams means more cash | David Conn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/10/world-cup-48-teams-gianni-infantino-fifa-money>
Well, it’s still there last time we checked, and next year’s tournament in 
Russia is going ahead as planned. But enjoy the compact, in-no-way-sprawling, 
32-team month-long format for only another couple of tournaments. After a vote 
by theFifa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> congress on Tuesday, 
it’s going to get a lot bigger.

How much bigger?

50% bigger. In 2026, 48 countries will take part in the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/fifa-vote-expand-world-cup-48-teams-from-2026>
 and there will be 80 matches as opposed to the current 64 (the hosts are as 
yet undecided, but for argument’s sake let’s say it’s the Cayman Islands).

That’s a lot of teams 

It is indeed. The first World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> in Uruguay in 1930 
comprised just 13 countries. But football has grown since then, you may have 
noticed, and Fifa currently claims 211 national football associations as 
members. Fifa’s expressed ambition for this expanded tournament is that it will 
allow less celebrated footballing nations – think China and India – to join 
“the world’s greatest party” or whatever they call it nowadays.

That’s nice 

Isn’t it?

So nothing to do with money, then? 

Well there is the fact that by expanding the tournament Fifa can expect to 
raise an extra $1bn (£823m) in revenue. But given the organisation’s reputation 
as a bastion of fiscal probity, nobody’s going to be worrying about that.

Fifa approves Infantino’s plan to expand World Cup to 48 teams from 2026
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/fifa-vote-expand-world-cup-48-teams-from-2026>
Hooray! So how will the tournament work? 

Well here’s where things get truly novel. The current Fifa proposal will 
reformat the World Cup so that the opening stages comprise 16 groups of three 
teams. Each team will play each other – ie three games per group – and the top 
two will progress to a knockout round with 32 sides. From that point on, the 
format will be as you remember it from the glory days of your childhood.

OK … sounds a bit weird? 

Well it’s one group game fewer per team than we’ve been used to. But we’ve 
also been used to a lot of dead rubbers in the past, or at least rubbers where 
both teams were happy to settle for a draw. Fifa believe this version of the 
tournament will lead to fewer such games. Indeed no less of an expert in 
scintillating football thanJosé Mourinho declared last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/jose-mourinho-48-team-world-cup-finals-fifa>
: “I prefer groups of three. Two matches and then through to the knockout 
stages or go home. This way, the two group matches will be crucial.”

Either that or we’ll have a massive load of bus-parking like in Euro 2016 

Yes, maybe. And there’s also the risk of the two teams playing the last match 
knowing that a particular result would send them both through. Though one, 
currently unconfirmed, proposal that has been bouncing around the corridors of 
Fifa HQ is that every group game would have to end in a positive result. In 
other words, if you’re drawing at full-time, the game goes to penalties.

Is the 48-team World Cup a good idea?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/fifa-world-cup-48-teams-good-idea>
Jeez Louise.

Like I say, it’s yet to be confirmed.

Anyway, enough of all that, let’s get to the heart of the matter. Does it mean 
Scotland will qualify?

Current proposals, which look likely to ratified by Fifa, would mean Europe 
receiving three more places in the tournament, 16 in all (one per group). So 
I’d say there was still a strong chance of Scotland stuffing that up.

The proposed breakdown would comprise: Europe 16 teams (13 currently); Africa 
9 (5); Asia 8.5 (4.5), South America 6 (4.5), Concacaf 6.5 (3.5), Oceania 1 
(0.5), Host nation 1 (1).

That’s weird … Your figures suggest that South America, with nine World Cup 
wins, would have fewer places than the footballing hotbed of North America and 
the Caribbean. 

Yes it does, doesn’t it. Maybe 2026 will be in the Cayman Islands after all!
 