
When Storm Desmond <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/storm-desmond> broke 
the UK’s 24-hour rainfall record with 341.4mm (13.4in) of rain in 24 hours in 
the Honister Pass in Cumbria on 5 December last year, it did extraordinary 
damage to the Lake District.

The headlines were about homes and businesses flooded, roads collapsed and 
bridges washed away. But across this beautiful landscape, one fifth owned by the
National Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/national-trust>, there were many 
problems.

Rivers moved their courses, paths, fences and historic gardens were swept 
away, and wildlife havens destroyed.It has taken a whole summer of hard work 
<http://www.lakedistrict.gov.uk/aboutus/news/news-pages/cumbria-floods> to 
repair just some of the havoc caused, with each of the 14 historic bridges on 
Trust property that needed repair costing more than £10,000 to fix.

Flooding: the problem that will not go away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/jul/04/flooding-problem-not-go-away-weatherwatch>
Because most of the damage caused in this way is uninsurable, the Trust 
launched an appeal for funds to help with the repair work, and so far, £330,000 
has been donated. Since much of the labour is done by volunteers this goes a 
long way, but according to the Trust, is still nowhere near enough to make the
Lake District <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lake-district> resilient to 
future storms.


With the rain now falling in ever-heavier downpours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/may/27/meteorologists-are-seeing-global-warmings-effect-on-the-weather>
, adaptations are being made with large pieces of stone being used that will 
not be washed away, but culverts are also needed to divert flash flood from 
vulnerable areas. Sections of path are being rebuilt over pipes to create 
mini-bridges.

With continuing climate change the Trust predicts an ongoing battle with the 
elements to keep the Lake District both safe for visitors and to conserve its 
natural beauty and wildlife.
 