
Sadiq Khan is committed to being the most cycling-friendly mayor that the 
capital has ever had – and is already delivering real results. However, there 
have recently been anumber of inaccurate reports about his plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2016/nov/17/five-london-cycling-tests-for-sadiq-khan>
 and I’d like to take this opportunity to set the record straight.

Making cycling safer and easier will be a significantly higher priority for 
Sadiq than it was for the previous administration.

Sadiq committed to increasing the amount spent on cycling in his election 
manifesto and that is exactly what we intend to do. A new business plan will be 
published over the coming weeks that will fulfil this promise. After all, money 
talks – and we need to invest to create the new infrastructure we need to make 
cycling safer. This is a major victory for cyclists inLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> that despite good intentions, the 
previous administration was never able to achieve.

Five cycling tests for Sadiq Khan | Andrew Gilligan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2016/nov/17/five-london-cycling-tests-for-sadiq-khan>
Over the coming weeks, we will also be appointing a new walking and cycling 
commissioner for London. Unlike previous appointments to this role, we’ve run 
an open and competitive process. We’ve had over 150 brilliant applicants and 
I’m confident we’ll end up with the right person for the job.

The role is to be an advocate for active travel in London – raising the 
profile of both cycling and walking as fantastic ways of travelling around the 
city and working with TfL to create healthier streets – and to make cycling 
safer and easier.

Contrary to what some have said, the terms of the appointment are almost 
identical to those of the previous cycling commissioner, reporting into the 
deputy mayor of transport and having real access to the mayor.

We have quickly got on with the job of delivering the cycle superhighway 
projects that were left under way by Boris Johnson. Construction work is being 
planned to minimise disruption and congestion on the roads, with more work 
being undertaken at night. This was not a priority for the previous 
administration, which led to increasing resentment against cyclists and cycle 
superhighways. This has not helped the cyclists’ cause.

Sadiq has already given his endorsement to the next two superhighway routes – 
CS11 
<https://consultations.tfl.gov.uk/cycling/cs-11/user_uploads/cs11-consultation-report-final.pdf-1>
 and thenorth-south route 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/travel-information/improvements-and-projects/cycle-superhighway-north-south>
. We will be consulting on two more routes next year – CS4 and CS9. And we 
remain absolutely committed to delivering a new east-west route, although this 
was left in an unsatisfactory condition, requiring more work to do by the 
previous administration.

Work on the east-west superhighway 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/travel-information/improvements-and-projects/cycle-superhighway-east-west>
 has been ongoing since we arrived at city hall. The section in Hyde Park on 
West Carriage Drive was recently finished and is now open. Construction is 
underway at South Carriage Drive, Lancaster Gate and Constitution Hill, while 
the St James’s Park area will follow in the New Year.

I have visited Lancaster Gate, and it is clear the area will benefit 
significantly from improved cycling provision as well as pedestrian crossings. 
All of this is in line with our new approach to improve our streets for 
everyone; residents, pedestrians and cyclists.

However, we have had to undertake additional work to finalise the route of 
CS11 through Regent’s Park, as the consultation which was published on the last 
possible day before the mayoral election, left the council and community 
feeling their concerns had not been listened to or tackled.

We’re pushing on with bold improvements to safety at historically troublesome 
junctions across the capital. Work continues at pace at Stockwell and Archway, 
while work will start next year at Old Street, where improvements for cyclists 
were delayed under the previous mayor and his cycling commissioner’s watch.

We’ve also announced significant improvements for walkers and cyclists that 
will be introduced at Hammersmith gyratory and Highbury Corner.

We haven’t waited for the new walking and cycling commissioner to take post 
before getting on with implementing our bold new ideas to make cycling safer.

Our groundbreaking new direct vision standard, for example, is a much bolder 
proposal that anything planned by the last administration. We willban the most 
unsafe HGVs from London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/30/lorries-face-london-ban-plans-improve-safety-cyclists\>
 completely, removing thousands of dangerous off-road vehicles from London’s 
streets.

And by setting out our plans now, we expect many lorries will have been 
upgraded well before that ban comes into place.

More than that, the mayor and I have spent time changing Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London (TfL) itself – refreshing 
its policy to cover pedestrians, cyclists and improvements to the local 
environment.

We’ve streamlined some of its cumbersome internal processes that slowed up 
schemes without solving issues, such as the impact on bus routes, improving its 
ability to communicate and consult with the community, and finally ensuring the 
new commissioner will have a sound budget to work from.

The previous mayor’s model on promoting cycling led to a commissioner fighting 
a war with TfL. Our model is about making both cycling and walking a mainstream 
function. TfL should be the mayor’s agent to design and deliver these schemes 
in the best possible way, and our new commissioner will benefit from a better 
functioning machine behind them.

Making cycling safer is a very serious issue. It affects thousands of 
Londoners, and tragically too many people are still dying and getting injured 
on our roads every year.

Cyclists deserve a mayor on their side – which is what they have with Sadiq 
Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> – and they also deserve 
the truth about the work being done by city hall to make cycling in London 
safer and easier.

 * Val Shawcross is London’s deputy mayor for transport
 