
How easy is it to get help with mental health problems in the UK? It’s a 
topical issue, with reports oflong waiting lists 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-36038905> and some people being sent miles 
from home for treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/11/nhs-england-anorexic-patients-scotland-mental-health>
. Our mental health services are struggling to meet demand – and thegovernment 
has vowed to invest more money to make improvements 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/prime-minister-pledges-a-revolution-in-mental-health-treatment>
 in England.


The level of care you get appears to vary, depending on where you are. New 
guidelines recommend that people with anxiety and depression should get talking 
therapies within six weeks. Thisis happening in some places but not others 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-34583155>.


 We asked our readers, and people across Britain voiced the same concerns: 
long waiting times, care or therapy time-limited and not always tailored to 
individual needs. Many also spoke of a “postcode lottery”.

Here’s a selection of those responses – and we’re keen to hear more. 

Iris, 35, from Wales: Services have been reduced dramatically in the last 
decade. I feel abandoned

I have been in and out of mental health services for nearly a decade and have 
seen a dramatic decline in the support available. I have post-traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD), anxiety and depression. When I first sought help I was in 
London and because the borough boundary changed, the health authorities 
couldn’t agree which local authority service should treat me. After about a 
five-month delay I got into the system and things improved. However, waiting 
times for therapy sessions have increased since then from about about four 
months to 18 months.

Now I am in Ceredigion, Wales, which has no day services or after-hospital 
care. The only support is offered by a “local” charity some 35 miles away. As a 
family living on benefits and a pension we often can’t afford to drive to them.

My local care service has now discharged me because in London, I completed a 
more thorough version of the group therapy they offer in Wales. It hadn’t made 
much difference to my mental health and they had nothing else to offer. The 
good thing about mental healthcare in the UK is that it’s free, but because 
I’ve already had the only treatment offered in Wales and it didn’t work, they 
seem to have just given up on me. I feel abandoned.

Chama Kay, 25, from London: Only one of the many mental health professionals I 
saw engaged with race as an issue

My family moved from Zambia to the UK when I was 11 to pursue a better life 
through education. I grew up believing that the mental health system was for 
soft Europeans who didn’t know what real struggle was, so it was hard when I 
experienced difficulties at 16. I thought getting professional help was 
contrary to the values that made me a proud and successful African man and, 
when I did access care, the road to recovery was far from smooth.

I often felt mental health services didn’t quite know how to handle me, 
failing to engage with my personal experiences and how they impacted on my 
mental health. Yes, many of my issues were linked to my diagnosis of borderline 
personality disorder, but the symptoms of any mental illness are real to the 
person living them. Gender, race, sexuality and the way the world views you are 
realities for the individual. Only one of the many mental health professionals 
I saw over four years touched on race as an issue. Until then I never felt 
mental health professionals fully engaged with me, so I could not engage with 
them.

Cori, 31, from Southampton: I found getting help through my university 
straight-forward and really helpful

My mental health issues came to a head after a family member recovering from 
alcoholism relapsed. I was an American studying in the UK and feeling homesick. 
When I got the news I was already dealing with the stress of my course. I 
thought: “I need to get help.”

I was experiencing depression and anxiety but also guilt because I was so far 
away from home. An overall feeling of despondency and helplessness washed over 
me. The anxiety I was feeling seemed to be bigger than me and beyond my control.

I contacted the mental health services advertised at my university. On their 
website they clearly listed their resources and how they could help, and they 
directed me to their short-term counselling service. In the US counselling is 
not always easy to get and can be expensive. It was so comforting for me to 
have access to such a high-quality free service. I felt the university wanted 
to take care of me, and at last there was a safety net for me. For the first 
time I actually had access to care.

After I made the initial contact they screened me to find the most appropriate 
therapy. It was terrifying waiting in the lobby to finally talk about something 
I’d kept bottled up for years. I broke down during that initial visit, but the 
interviewer was incredibly encouraging and understanding; she told me how they 
could help and what to expect. I started counselling; it’s been really helpful 
and I’ve made progress. The only downside is that it’s short term – six to 
eight sessions per academic year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhelp-mental-health-problem-five-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28178b2111fcf6c31a90d3d971bbcae62423f439%2F423_0_4309_2586%2F4309.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20easy%20is%20it%20to%20get%20help%20for%20a%20mental%20health%20problem%3F%20Five%20different%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhelp-mental-health-problem-five-stories%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20easy%20is%20it%20to%20get%20help%20for%20a%20mental%20health%20problem%3F%20Five%20different%20stories&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhelp-mental-health-problem-five-stories%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28178b2111fcf6c31a90d3d971bbcae62423f439%2F423_0_4309_2586%2F4309.jpg>
 ‘Coping with a family member’s alcoholism and the pressure of work was hard.’ 
Hayley, 33, from London: I rent, so like most Londoners I often move about. 
Continuity of care is almost impossible

I was diagnosed with clinical depression when I was 16, and then with PTSD at 
28. I was able to access help for the PTSD around two years later and continue 
to live with clinical depression.

I moved to London in 2009 and experienced difficulties accessing care. When I 
first arrived I was added to a waiting list for mental health services and 
started seeing a counsellor. But then I had to move to a new flat in a 
different borough with a different primary care trust. I went to the bottom of 
a new waiting list. Many people in the capital face this problem because, for 
various reasons such as having to move out due to rent rises or being asked to 
leave by their landlord, renters move around, and continuity of care is hard to 
achieve.

Also, waiting times vary greatly between boroughs – from a few weeks to two 
years. I was always relieved and surprised if a borough said I need only wait a 
few weeks to see someone. Long waits would leave me in limbo, trying to hang 
on, often suffering very bad episodes and ending up off work or in hospital.

Hannah, 24, from Sheffield: It was only when I reached crisis point that I got 
the help I needed

I was carrying on with life as best I could after some traumatic life 
experiences. I am a positive and resilient person, but a series of events left 
me anxious and depressed. I had panic attacks and increasing difficulty 
sleeping and eating. I lost a lot of weight and ended up having a 
stress-induced psychotic episode.

Several times I went to my GP to explain my situation and ask for a referral 
to mental health services such as cognitive behavioural therapy; but I was on a 
long waiting list and it wasn’t until I went into crisis and had an acute 
psychotic episode that the NHS responded.

When they did, the care I received was incredible. I was looked after 
extremely well during my stay in a psychiatric hospital. I was visited every 
day by my care coordinator, a psychiatrist, doctor or support worker, I had 
three hot meals a day and was offered occupational therapy such as pottery, 
yoga and gym sessions in a supportive environment that helped me regain the 
strength to overcome adversity. After I was discharged I was visited regularly 
by my support worker. There was another waiting list to see a psychiatrist, but 
after about four months I was being seen twice a week every week.

My mood and hopes of recovery did dip, but once I received the service it was 
life-changing. In my experience the response to crisis such as psychosis is 
excellent, but more money needs to be put into providing access to mental 
health services when the problems first start so they don’t have to escalate to 
the point that mine did.

Tee, 45, from Coventry: It has taken over 20 years to get a diagnosis that 
makes sense

I first experienced mental health problems as a young person, but they went 
undiagnosed. The problems were marked by a serious depression and an inability 
to sleep. By 18, the depression had become ingrained and lengthy. I went to 
university, had a breakdown and was unable to finish my degree.

Now aged 45, I recently received the dual diagnosis of bipolar 2 and ADHD. I 
have tried most medications but they haven’t worked, and I now manage my 
condition without medication.


When I was 18, I had my first experience of therapy with a university 
counsellor who had a profound and positive impact on my life. I have seen 
various private therapists since then with varying levels of success.

 I’m afraid my experience of NHS services has been negative. It has taken over 
20 years to get a diagnosis that makes sense. My mental health problems haven’t 
always been taken seriously. I’ve found it almost impossible to get 
appointments with a mental health team and have often been told that I am too 
highly functioning for dedicated resources. I also feel that my gender has gone 
against me. There has been a definite attitude of “you’re a man, pull yourself 
together” from some mental health staff.

 * Some names have been changed
 