
When Gay Talese came to write the story of Floyd Patterson 
<http://thestacks.deadspin.com/the-loser-the-most-honest-sports-story-ever-written-772260237>
, he decided to call it The Loser. Which was an odd choice, since Patterson won 
a gold medal at the Helsinki Olympics in 1952 and the heavyweight championship 
of the world, twice. But then a champion’s legacy can be defined by the few 
contests he lost as well as the many he won. And Patterson was beaten twice by 
Sonny Liston, in the defining fights of his life, and twice more by Muhammad 
Ali. He was a great boxer who had the bad luck to live in an era when others 
were greater still. Talese’s profile was a study in defeat, of what happens to 
a champion when he runs into an opponent just that much better.

“It’s easy to do anything in victory,” Patterson once said, “it’s in defeat 
that a man reveals himself.” If Andy Murray’s career had ended in the summer of 
2013, he would still have gone down as one of the greatest of all British 
sportsmen. Like Patterson, he wasan Olympic champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/andy-murray-olympic-gold-great-britain>
, and he was thefirst British man to win Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/07/andy-murray-wimbledon-win-djokovic>
 since Fred Perry in 1936. But having scaled those heights, Murray travelled on 
in search of peaks beyond. And he found himself, like everyone else, chasing 
after Novak Djokovic. Murray beat Djokovic in the final when he won Wimbledon 
in 2013, then lost 12 of their next 13 matches.

The one victory was at the Canadian Open in 2015, in the middle of a good year 
for Murray. He won his first clay court titles, in Munich andMadrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/may/10/andy-murray-v-rafael-nadal-madrid-open-mens-final-live>
, ledGreat Britain to victory in the Davis Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/29/andy-murray-davis-cup-great-britain>
, and finished the year as the world No2. Trouble was, it was an even better 
one for Djokovic, who won the Australian Open, Wimbledon, the US Open, six 
Masters events, and lost only five matches all year. The question for Murray at 
the start of 2016 was what he could do to narrow the gap between himself and 
the player many reckoned to be one of the best of all time. And at first, he 
did not seem to have a ready answer.

Andy Murray's path to becoming world tennis No 1 – in data
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/datablog/2016/nov/25/andy-murrays-path-to-becoming-world-tennis-no-1-in-data>
In January Djokovic beat Murray in straight sets in the final of the 
Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-v-andy-murray-australian-open-final-live>
, a match Murray described as “the worst I’ve ever played”. It seemed,Kevin 
Mitchell wrote, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/31/australian-open-verdict-andy-murray-novak-djokovic>
 “that Djokovic does everything Murray does only better.” Murray had a lot on 
his mind. It had been a difficult fortnight. His father-in-law, Nigel Sears, had
collapsed while he was watching a match on Rod Laver Arena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/andy-murray-father-in-law-nigel-sears-collapses>
. Murray spent a night beside him in hospital, and would have withdrawn if 
Sears had not recovered as well as he did. All the while his wife, Kim, was 
back home, pregnant with their first child, who was born in early February.

It got worse. Murray lost to Federico Delbonis in Indian Wells 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/14/tennis-andy-murray-defeat-indian-wells-federico-delbonis>
, and Grigor Dimitrovin the Miami Open <http:>, when he smashed his racket on 
court. There was talk he hadfallen out with his coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/21/andy-murray-amelie-mauresmo-on-court-behaviour-split>
, Amélie Mauresmo. He denied it but they split after Murray lost to Djokovic 
again in the final of the Madrid Open. The fallout lingered until the French 
Open, when Mauresmo spoke about Murray’s grumpy manner on court, and left 
everyone trying to make sense of what had gone on between them. In the meantime,
Jamie Delgado took over as his coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/20/andy-murray-relaxed-french-open-tennis-jamie-delgado-coach>
. And at the Rome Masters, he helped Murray get some revenge.He beat Djokovic, 
6-3, 6-3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/15/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-italian-open-mens-final-latest-score>
, in an hour and 35 minutes.

Djokovic had played a three-hour semi-final the night before, and was furious 
about the state of the court. But still, here was some hope. Swiftly 
extinguished at the French Open, when Djokovic beat him again, 3-6, 6-1, 6-2, 
6-4.Murray had recently said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/29/andy-murray-grand-slam-daughter-fatherhood>
 “if the top players win the first set they’re winning 95% of the time”, but 
this was one of the rare exceptions. He seemed feverish all through the 
tournament, was pushed to five sets by Radek Stepanek in the first round, then 
again by the world No164Mathias Bourgue in the second 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/25/french-open-2016-svetlana-kuznetsova-v-heather-watson-live>
. It was around this time he was memorably described as“a walking existential 
crisis” 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/sporting-scene/andy-murray-versus-the-french> by 
Louisa Thomas in the New Yorker.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fandy-murray-novak-djokovic-world-no1-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2b522451789bfd220be36e6d4a51559a9b7ce44%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Andy%20Murray%20chased%20down%20Novak%20Djokovic%20to%20end%202016%20on%20top%20of%20the%20world%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fandy-murray-novak-djokovic-world-no1-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Andy%20Murray%20chased%20down%20Novak%20Djokovic%20to%20end%202016%20on%20top%20of%20the%20world%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fandy-murray-novak-djokovic-world-no1-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2b522451789bfd220be36e6d4a51559a9b7ce44%2F0_233_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Murray celebrates beating Tomas Berdych at Wimbledon. Photograph: Steve 
Paston/PA 
Murray asked Ivan Lendl if he was interested in working together again. Soon 
Lendl, inscrutable as rock, implacable as the tide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/25/ivan-lendl-andy-murray-wimbledon-novak-djokovic-tennis>
, was back in Murray’s box. He won hisnext 22 matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/andy-murray-marin-cilic-cincinnati-masters-us-open>
, a run that saw himsweep to a fifth victory at Queen’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-wins-queens-club>
, win histhird grand slam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/10/milos-raonic-v-andy-murray-wimbledon-mens-final-live>
 andhis second Olympic title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/14/andy-murray-v-juan-martin-del-potro-olympic-mens-tennis-final-live>
. At Wimbledon, everything changed on the middle Saturday,when Djokovic lost to 
Sam Querrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/02/wimbledon-2016-novak-djokovic-on-the-brink-against-sam-querrey>
. A different kind of pressure came down on Murray. For the first time in his 
life, he started the second week of a grand slam as the favourite to win the 
title. He was ready for it. He needed five sets to beat Jo-Wilfried Tsonga but 
only three apiece for Tomas Berdych and Milos Raonic.

Johanna Konta: Juan Coto is still very much a part of everything I do
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/johanna-konta-juan-coto-part-of-everything-i-do>
In Rio, Murray carried the Great Britain flag at the opening ceremony, and 
spoke about how much he loved to play for his country. “It’s brought the best 
out of me throughout my career,” he said. And it did again. Juan Martín Del 
Potro had seen off Djokovic in the first round. Then Murray beatDel Potro in 
the final, 7-5, 4-6, 6-2, 7-5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/14/andy-murray-v-juan-martin-del-potro-olympic-mens-tennis-final-live>
 over four hours of absorbing play in front of 10,000 raucous fans. He hardly 
had a chance to celebrate but sped from the stadium to the airport, muttering 
apologies that he had to catch a flight to Cincinnati. There he lost to Marin 
Cilic in the final, his first defeat since the French Open final. Then in New 
York the following week he was beaten in five sets by Kei Nishikori, his 27th 
match in 57 days.

Del Potro got his own back in the Davis Cup, when Great Britain were knocked 
out in the semi-finals. Murray took a short break, and then set off again, his 
mind fixed on overhauling Djokovic in the world rankings. He was in second 
place but almost 5,000 points behind, which meant he was closer to sixth-placed 
Raonic. Most felt he would not be able to catch up till next year. But from 
October through to December, Murray was unbeatable.He won the China Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/andy-murray-grigor-dimitrov-china-open-final-tennis>
, theShanghai Masters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/16/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-world-no1-shanghai-masters>
, theVienna Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-world-no1-jo-wilfried-tsonga-vienna-title>
, and theParis Masters, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/06/andy-murray-v-john-isner-paris-masters-final-live>
 where he overtook Djokovic and became the world’s top-ranked tennis player.

Finally, at the ATP World Tour Finals, Murray beat Cilic, Nishikori, Wawrinka, 
Raonic in short order and, at last, Djokovic himself, 6-3, 6-4. It was his 
eighth title of the year, and his fifth in a row. Twelve months earlier, Murray 
had been asked what he could possibly do to beat Djokovic. Not much, but “maybe 
he’ll have a drop off,” Murray said. And Djokovic did. Murray spotted the 
opening and pursued it mercilessly, with the best tennis of his career.

He is a great fight fan himself, and would appreciate the way Patterson put it 
all those years ago: “They said I was the fighter who got knocked down the 
most. But I also got up the most.”Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> kept coming, and in 2016, he was 
rewarded for it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fandy-murray-ends-successful-year-with-no1-status-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Murray's%20brilliant%20year%3A%20how%20he%20rose%20to%20world%20No1%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fandy-murray-ends-successful-year-with-no1-status-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Murray%27s%20brilliant%20year%3A%20how%20he%20rose%20to%20world%20No1%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fandy-murray-ends-successful-year-with-no1-status-video-report&media=>
Andy Murray’s brilliant year: how he rose to world No1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/nov/21/andy-murray-ends-successful-year-with-no1-status-video-report> 