
Deep in the Folger Library, in Washington DC, Heather Wolfe says that studying 
Shakespeare makes an ideal preparation for the onset of Trump’s America. You 
can see her point: Shakespeare would have revelled in the mad excesses, the 
sinister vanities and the pervasive stench of cronyism and corruption 
surrounding the president-elect as America makes the painful transition from 
Barack Obama.

Dr Wolfe is a willowy, bright-eyed manuscript scholar, a paleographer 
specialising in Elizabethan England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/08/manuscripts-online-volunteers-decipher-script>
 who in certain moods of candour might put you in mind of Portia or perhaps 
Cordelia. She’s also a Shakespeare detective who, last year, made the 
career-defining discovery that is going to transform our understanding of 
Shakespeare’s biography. In the simplest terms, Wolfe delivered the coup de 
grace to the wild-eyed army of conspiracy theorists, including Vanessa Redgrave 
and Derek Jacobi, who contest the authenticity, even the existence, of the 
playwright known to contemporaries as Master Will Shakespeare.

Wolfe is an accidental sleuth. Her scholar’s passion is as much for old 
manuscripts as for the obscurities surrounding our national poet. Project 
Dustbunny, for example, one of her initiatives at the Folger Shakespeare 
Library, has made some extraordinary discoveries based on microscopic fragments 
of hair and skin accumulated in the crevices and gutters of 17th-century books.

DNA forensics aside, Wolfe’s role as a curator at the Folger is to bring her 
expertise to bear on the tantalising mass of documents that survives from the 
late 16th century. And yet, despite a heap of legal, commercial and matrimonial 
evidence, Shakespeare the man continues to slip through scholars’ fingers. Four 
centuries after his death, apart from a handful of crabbed signatures, there is 
not one manuscript, letter or diary we can definitively attribute to the poet, 
sponsoring the pervasive air of mystery that surrounds his genius. Indeed, the 
most intimate surviving Shakespeare document remains that notorious will, in 
which he bequeathed his wife his “second best bed”.

Before Wolfe arrived on the scene, all that scholars could be certain about 
was that a man named Shaxpere, Shaxberd or Shakespear was born in Stratford in 
1564, and that he was an actor whose name is printed in the collected edition 
of his work published in 1623. We also know that he married Anne Hathaway, and 
died in 1616, according to legend, on his birthday, St George’s Day. The 
so-called “Stratfordian” case for Shakespeare rested on these, and a few other 
facts, but basically, that was it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fsherlock-holmes-of-the-library-cracks-shakespeare-identity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6251e6d5fcb1730f5af15ed91b9bdbc73e90caa9%2F0_0_2287_2985%2F2287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20%E2%80%98Sherlock%20of%20the%20library%E2%80%99%20cracked%20the%20case%20of%20Shakespeare%E2%80%99s%20identity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fsherlock-holmes-of-the-library-cracks-shakespeare-identity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20%E2%80%98Sherlock%20of%20the%20library%E2%80%99%20cracked%20the%20case%20of%20Shakespeare%E2%80%99s%20identity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fsherlock-holmes-of-the-library-cracks-shakespeare-identity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6251e6d5fcb1730f5af15ed91b9bdbc73e90caa9%2F0_0_2287_2985%2F2287.jpg>
 A painting believed to be the only image of Shakespeare made during his life. 
Photograph: Oli Scarff/Getty Images 
Into this vacuum, a bizarre fraternity, including Mark Twain, Charlie Chaplin 
and Sigmund Freud, have projected a “Shakespeare” written by a more obviously 
accomplished writer:Edward de Vere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/jun/08/anonymous-edward-de-vere>
 (the 17th earl of Oxford), Sir Francis Bacon and the playwright Christopher 
Marlowe, to name the leading contenders in a field that includes Sir Walter 
Raleigh, and even Elizabeth, the Virgin Queen herself.

In the absence of reliable data, a mountain of speculation has morphed into 
the weirdest fantasy, notablythe 2011 film, Anonymous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/10/anonymous-film-review-william-shakespeare>
. Wolfe has no time for this. Speaking exclusively for the first time to the
Observer, she says: “Without the evidence for other contenders, it’s hard for 
me to engage with this line of inquiry.”

Wolfe’s appetite for manuscript corroboration has led her into many dusty 
corners of the Elizabethan archives. It was this research instinct that first 
led her to reopen the file on the coat of arms granted to Shakespeare’s father, 
the small-town glover, in 1596.

John Shakespeare, from Stratford-upon-Avon, was ambitious to rise in the 
world. He was certainly not the first Englishman keen to put his origins as a 
provincial tradesman behind him. Among his contemporaries in Stratford, he was 
a figure of fun for his social climbing. English class snobbery has a long 
pedigree. His son, who would continue the quest for official recognition after 
his father’s death, also attracted metropolitan disdain as “an upstart crow 
beautified with our feathers”. In 1601, after his father’s death, Shakespeare 
the upstart returned to the college of arms to renew the family application for 
a coat of arms. He had made a small fortune in the theatre, and was buying 
property in and around Stratford. Now he set out to consolidate his reputation 
as a “Gentleman”. Under the rules that governed life at the court of Elizabeth 
I, only the Queen’s heralds could grant this wish.

A much-reproduced sketch for a coat of arms crystallised Shakespeare’s hopes 
for legitimacy in the antique jargon of heraldry: “Gould, on a Bend Sables, a 
Speare of the first steeled argent. And for his Crest, a falcon, his winges 
displayed Argent, supporting a Speare Gould …” The needy applicant also 
attached a motto: Non Sanz Droit (“Not Without Right”). All this, and much 
more, is buried in the archives of the college of arms in London.

Wolfe’s fascination with Shakespeare’s quest for a family crest grew out of 
her immersion in the manners and customs of late Elizabethan England, in 
particular the College of Heralds. These court officials were required to 
administer the complex rituals governing the lives of the knights, barons and 
earls surrounding Queen Elizabeth.

This is the nail in the coffin of those who can’t acknowledge the glover’s son 
was also the playwright
James Shapiro, author 
An adjunct to the court, the College of Heralds was not exempt from its own 
secret feuds. In 1602, the internecine rivalry between Sir William Dethick, the 
Garter King of Arms, and another herald, Ralph Brooke, burst into the open when 
Brooke released a list of 23 “mean persons” whose applications for crests (he 
claimed) had been wrongfully preferred by Dethick. When “Shakespeare the 
Player” found himself on this list, his campaign for social advancement seemed 
in jeopardy. A bitter row broke out at court between two factions. Shakespeare 
himself became an object of ridicule. Another rival, Ben Jonson, in his satire
Every Man out of his Humour, poked fun at him as a rustic buffoon who pays £30 
for a ridiculous coat of arms with the humiliating motto “Not Without Mustard”.

It’s at this point in the story that Wolfe discovered “the smoking gun”. In 
the Brooke-Dethick feud, it becomes clear that “Shakespeare, Gent. from 
Stratford” and “Shakespeare the Player” are the same man. In other words, “the 
man from Stratford” is indeed the playwright. Crucially, in the long-running 
“authorship” debate, this has been a fiercely contested point. But Wolfe’s 
research nails any lingering ambiguity in which the Shakespeare deniers can 
take refuge.

Wolfe is circumspect about making extravagant claims. Speaking carefully, she 
says that her manuscript discoveries fill in gaps, illuminating Shakespeare’s 
character. “They point to someone actively involved in defining and defending 
his legacy in 1602, shortly after his father’s death.”

For Wolfe, it’s Shakespeare the man who breaks cover here. “He’s defending his 
legacy not only as a playwright but, most importantly to him, as a gentleman.” 
The derogatory references to arms belonging to “Shakespeare ye player”, she 
says, show that “he’s playing the same game as everyone else in the period, 
purchasing land in Stratford to support his case to ‘ancient’ gentility, rather 
than through his astonishing professional success”.

James Shapiro, bestselling author of 1599 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jun/05/biography.shakespeare>, who is 
persuaded by Wolfe’s discoveries, compares her to “a Sherlock Holmes of the 
archives”. Shapiro says that Wolfe “has had the intellectual independence to 
see what others have overlooked, the skills to make sense of what she has 
stumbled upon and the modesty not to trumpet the larger implications of those 
finds. But make no mistake: they are enormously consequential.”

For Shapiro, Wolfe’s work suggests future breakthroughs. “I doubt that these 
are the last archival treasures she will unearth. Her recent finds sharpen our 
sense of Shakespeare’s dogged pursuit of upward mobility. And it is one more 
nail in the coffin of those who can’t bring themselves to acknowledge that the 
glover’s son from Stratford was also the successful man of the theatre who left 
us so many extraordinary plays.”

Wolfe says she looks forward to “poking about” in the archives, and is 
convinced that Shakespeare’s identity no longer needs re-confirmation. “There 
is such a wealth of evidence out there that he’s the playwright.” She adds: 
“I’m sure there’s more untapped material waiting to be uncovered. Additional 
finds will certainly help us understand his life – as much as we can understand 
anyone’s life from 400 years ago.”
 