
As is common in our world, those in Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico> with the least resources suffer the 
most. Low income and informal neighbourhoods have the least access to safe 
water, exposing them to high health risks, such as diarrhoea and parasitic and 
bacterial diseases. Many of them depend onpipas, or water trucks, which aren’t 
always reliable. The average Mexican family can spend up to 20% of its income 
on water.

Dry dams, leaky pipes and tanker mafias – Karachi's water crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/28/karachi-pakistan-water-crisis>
More than 10 million Mexicans lack access to safe water 
<http://www.conagua.gob.mx/CONAGUA07/Publicaciones/Publicaciones/EAM2015.pdf> 
and its capital, Mexico City, isranked third on the list of cities facing an 
extreme water crisis 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959378014000880>. But this 
is not because of natural water scarcity. In fact, Mexico City receives roughly 
five months of rain a year and is notorious for flooding.

The problem is due to the the city’s infrastructure and mismanagement of 
water. In Mexico City, around70% of water is extracted by aquifers 
<http://jpe.library.arizona.edu/volume_22/Delgado.pdf>, more than the amount 
that can be naturally recharged. The city was built over a lake bed and as 
such, hassunk 10 metres over the past 100 years 
<http://islaurbana.mx/contenido/biblioteca/investigaciones/aguadf/Tortajada2006WaterManagementfortheMXcitymetropolitanarea.pdf>
. What’s more, 30% of Mexico City’s water comes from 150km away through the 
Lerma-Cutzamala water system, located in an area where many indigenous people 
themselves face water scarcity. This process of pumping the water from far 
afield results in high energy costs and 40% of it is lost in transit due to 
leaky pipes. With roughly 20 million inhabitants, a water crisis in Mexico City 
is a threat to the whole country.

This is where Isla Urbana comes in. In 2009, the founding team of engineers, 
designers and sociologists designed a rainwater harvesting system to enable 
communities to catch rain, filter it and use it for the greater part of the 
year, without having to depend on an unsustainable system.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fcapturing-rain-save-mexico-city-water-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4946deeed9755d6c60c144d32340a5f3af2c8960%2F0_36_720_432%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20capturing%20rain%20could%20save%20Mexico%20City%20from%20a%20water%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fcapturing-rain-save-mexico-city-water-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20capturing%20rain%20could%20save%20Mexico%20City%20from%20a%20water%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fcapturing-rain-save-mexico-city-water-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4946deeed9755d6c60c144d32340a5f3af2c8960%2F0_36_720_432%2F720.jpg>
 Clara Gaytan, the first person to use Isla Urbana’s system. Photograph: Cate 
Cameron 
To better understand the needs of communities, the Isla Urbana team moved into 
and worked out of a building in Tlalpan, across the street from the first 
person to use its system, Clara Gaytan. From there, they began assisting her 
neighbours. The team conducted pre- and post-construction interviews, trained 
members of the community and hired local plumbers to install systems.

Cisterns are the most expensive component of the process but, fortunately, 
most homes in Mexico already have one. This has helped to keep the cost of 
installations low, from $500 for those who already had a cistern to $1,000 for 
those who do not. Isla Urbana, a hybrid social enterprise and non-profit, is 
funded through Mexican government entities, joint projects with NGOs, grants 
and the Isla Urbana Foundation. Households also contribute 15% towards 
installation of the rainwater harvesting system to promote ownership and 
responsibility.

11 ideas for urban water security in developing countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/27/11-ideas-urban-water-security-developing-countries>
I visited Isla Urbana and Clara’s neighbourhood during a research trip in 2011 
and she proudly showed us her system and told us in detail about how it worked. 
She said the system had changed her life and that she wanted to tell the world.

We also visited other areas of the community that had suffered from lack of 
water. Story after story was the same; people couldn’t count on thepipas, they 
had little resources to pay for water and the rainwater harvesting system had 
vastly improved their quality of life.

The community in Tlalpan became Isla Urbana’s laboratory, enabling the 
organisation to design an environmentally, socially and economically 
sustainable model. From the beginning, for example, plumbers were trained and 
hired from within the communities and the system was created to be 
low-maintenance, low-cost with easily replaceable parts. Working in urban and 
rural areas, this has been particularly beneficial for those who cannot easily 
access materials.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fcapturing-rain-save-mexico-city-water-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa9e62f8a0ffc81b8b3364217cd43efcbd354713%2F0_623_5041_3025%2F5041.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20capturing%20rain%20could%20save%20Mexico%20City%20from%20a%20water%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fcapturing-rain-save-mexico-city-water-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20capturing%20rain%20could%20save%20Mexico%20City%20from%20a%20water%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F06%2Fcapturing-rain-save-mexico-city-water-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa9e62f8a0ffc81b8b3364217cd43efcbd354713%2F0_623_5041_3025%2F5041.jpg>
 The Isla Urbana team start work to install a rainwater harvesting system. 
Plumbers are trained and hired from the communities in which the organisation 
works. Photograph: Pilar Campos/Cate Cameron 
Although their solution has the potential to increase water security for 
millions, and rainwater harvesting is not a new concept, there has been some 
resistance to Isla Urbana’s work. Some city officialssee it as a bandaid answer 
to a large-scale problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/nov/12/mexico-city-water-crisis-source-sewer>
. For others, the idea of catching rainwater and reusing it is new and seems 
complicated. But shifting from a linear to a circular economic approach always 
requires time for adjustment and for Mexico City, rainwater is an abundant 
resource that should not be ignored in the face of such a crisis.

Through workshops for the general public, educational materials, arts-based 
programmes and access to personal testimonials, Isla Urbana has been showing 
policymakers and others that rainwater harvesting is a viable solution.

As of 2016, Isla Urbana has installed 2,200 systems, harvested 170m litres of 
water and provided for 16,500 individuals. The team has doubled in size and the 
organisation has now worked throughout Mexico in areas including Jalisco, 
Durango, Oaxaca, Guerrero, Hidalgo and Chihuahua.

The communities of Cochabamba taking control of their own water supply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/09/communities-cochabamba-taking-control-water-supply-bolivia>
Earlier this year, various government branches agreed to plans for roughly 
1,000 systems to be installed throughout Mexico City. This was a significant 
step as Isla Urbana can start replicating and scaling-up a model developed over 
time, with the intent of working hand-in-hand with the community, policymakers 
and partnering NGOs – key steps towards solving the water crisis in Mexico.

Sol Garcia is the co-ordinator of the Isla Urbana Foundation 
<http://islaurbana.org/english/isla-urbana/>. Follow @sol_garcia 
<https://twitter.com/sol_garcia> and @IslaUrbana 
<https://twitter.com/IslaUrbana> on Twitter. 

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 