
It's quite astonishing how many film, music and interactive events the SXSW 
festival in Austin, Texas, manages to pack into nine days. Last year the music 
section of the event – created in 1987 with the aim of fostering new ideas and 
bringing creative types together – featured more than 2,000 acts, including 
headliners Bruce Springsteen and Jay-Z. And with the likes ofWavves 
<http://wavves.net/>, Nick Cave and Major Lazer <http://majorlazer.com/> at 
this year's event, from 8-17 March, Austin remains a vital destination for 
music fans.

Yet the festival can be overwhelming for the first-time visitor. While 
industry professionals lap up new developments across the music, film and 
technology sectors, the sheer number of shows, events and lectures can be 
intimidating to the casual tourist looking to have fun in the "live music 
capital of the world".

And high prices for tickets, or "badges", as advertised on the SXSW website 
<http://sxsw.com/>, can be a deterrent. Once you've stumped up the money to get 
to Texas in the first place, who can stomach another $1,000 for a platinum 
badge giving access to all the music, film and interactive events? Even more 
moderate ticket options, such as a music-only badge, cost around $600. So why 
do throngs of music lovers return every year?

What's been something of a secret to Austinites for years, but which others 
are now discovering, is that it's possible to enjoy SXSW without paying a 
dollar. You can eat, get drunk and see thousands of great bands for free. I 
didn't quite believe this until I attended my firstSXSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw> Unofficial Showcase last year.
 Photograph: Sarah Moore 
Arriving in Austin ticketless and with low expectations, I asked around for 
the best places to go. On the advice of an Austinite friend, I went to The 
Parish (214 East 6th Street,theparishaustin.com 
<http://www.theparishaustin.com/>), where National Public Radio (NPR) was 
hosting a free "unofficial" party on the first day of Music week. I arrived 
early and, to my surprise, was greeted at the door with a tequila shot, two 
beer tokens and a taco.

I washed down my complimentary lunch with the beers and was promptly tapped on 
the shoulder by a couple of bubbly PR staff, who proceeded to offer me as much 
rum as I could handle. Hazy after a couple of shots, I was then targeted by 
another rep, who convinced me to try some of the local ale – just asThe 
Magnetic Fields <http://www.houseoftomorrow.com/tmf.php>began to soundtrack my 
childlike delight at the free pleasures on offer.

A few more free drinks later, I vaguely remember stumbling out of The Parish, 
naively raving to my friend – an SXSW veteran – about the free booze and food, 
and the high calibre of musical acts. It was then she let me in on the secret: 
"Just stick to all the unofficial parties and screw paying for tickets – hardly 
anyone in Austin does." And so my week of complimentary hedonism began.

I continued to consume free beverages, acquired a surprising number of 
sunglasses, ate a lot of tacos and, most importantly, managed to catch a lot of 
great bands includingSBTRKT <http://www.sbtrkt.com/>, The War On Drugs 
<http://www.myspace.com/thewarondrugs/music>, Beach House 
<http://www.beachhousebaltimore.com/news> and Deerhoof <http://deerhoof.net/> 
among many others. Held in the daytime hours of SXSW Music week, the free 
unofficial parties have, in recent years, become as popular as the ticketed 
evening events. This is partly because big money companies use the shows to 
promote products. Brands such as Converse, Miller, Spotify and hundreds of 
others attempt to throw the best parties and – inevitably – give away lots of 
free stuff. Admittedly, this has led to the festival becoming increasingly 
corporate, and for some it has certainly lost a degree of its indie credibility.

But there is no denying the appeal of these corporate-sponsored shows. In the 
past three years, some of the unofficial parties have even featured headliners 
such as Jack White and Kanye West. Last yearA$AP Rocky <http://www.asapmob.com/>
 showed up to entertain at the small-scale events, held in various nooks and 
crannies in the city.

So, given that none of these parties is actually advertised on the official 
SXSW website, how do you find them? Social media is the answer.
 A crowd watching a free gig. Photograph: Sarah Moore 
Tweets and posts begin pinging back and forth in the weeks leading up to most 
of the free shows, generating a buzz on influential music blogs such asdo152.com
 <http://do512.com/>. Websites such as showlistaustin.com 
<http://showlistaustin.com/> and Facebook groups such as Unofficial SXSW Guide 
<https://www.facebook.com/unofficialsxswguide> and the SXSWPartyList 
<https://www.facebook.com/SXSWPartyList> focus on listing the unofficial events.

Quite often you have to RSVP to the parties online, which means the companies 
will add you to their mailing lists in return for providing complimentary 
entertainment for the day. If that sounds too much like hard work, pay $40 
(which, let's be honest, you'll probably make back in about an hour's worth of 
free drinking) andrsvpster.com <http://www.rsvpster.com/> will get you entry 
into almost all the free parties, and provide a spreadsheet detailing who is 
playing, who is sponsoring and any rumours of secret performances.

With the unofficial parties becoming increasingly popular and, in some cases, 
overblown, one may think they could begin to pose a threat to official ticket 
sales. But the music, film and interactive elements of SXSW have such a 
reputation with industry professionals that these tickets will always be bought 
by bigwigs.

It is also inevitable that some of the bigger headliners (such as Jay-Z and 
Bruce Springsteen last year) will simply refuse to play the daytime shows and 
keep themselves under wraps for the ticketed events. But still, for the music 
fan on a budget or a first-timer weary of pricey festival badges, it is 
definitely worth heading to Austin and signing up for the unofficial parties. 
Free music? Free beer? Free tacos? And it's usually sunny too? You can count on 
my RSVP.

• Festival details at sxsw.com <http://sxsw.com/>. Flights from London to 
Austin over festival dates from £540 atkayak.co.uk <http://www.kayak.co.uk/>. 
For advice on accommodation use ourAustin city guide 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/series/austin-city-guide> 
 