
Business was good for three years for Rosa Roberts and her company, Sketchout 
<http://www.sketchout.net/>. She’d found a marketing channel that drove hordes 
of new customers to her drawing workshops, held in world-renowned museums such 
as the Victoria and Albert, and the Tate Modern.

“We sold out of the first batch of vouchers on Groupon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/groupon> after 12 hours and I remember 
lying on my bed listening to Florence + the Machine, thinking that life had 
changed,” she says. “I once sold 700 vouchers before Christmas one year, which 
is business for six months for me and two staff. But it’s not like that any 
more.”

They can drive bums on seats, and they do it brilliantly. But I’ve always felt 
insecure with my business
Rosa Roberts 
The UK’s daily deals market (so called because the companies send out 
limited-time deal emails to users every day) wasworth an estimated £6bn 
<http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/news/article-2124480/Calls-grow-rein-aggressive-daily-deals-websites-like-Groupon-Living-Social.html>
 in 2011, with UK shoppers spending £3bn between July and December of that 
year. Groupon in particularhad an estimated 100 million users 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-15574954> worldwide and was valued at $13bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/feb/28/andrew-mason-leaves-groupon-coupon>
, just three years after it launched in the US in 2008. By 2012, 65% of online 
shoppers in the UK engaged with daily deal sites, according toresearch from 
Kantar Media 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/87646589/Kantar-Media-Compete-Online-Shopper-q42011-Daily-Deals>
.

But in 2013, Groupon’s founder and CEO, Andrew Mason, had been fired and the 
value of the company hadfallen to $3bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/feb/28/andrew-mason-leaves-groupon-coupon>
. Since then, it has focused its efforts on the 26 most profitable countries,
closing offices in 21 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/greatspeculations/2016/12/14/groupon-2016-in-review/#36c4ec1671a6>
 locations. In October, it bought its competitor LivingSocial –described as a 
“non-material acquisition 
<http://finance.yahoo.com/news/groupon-ceo-says-livingsocial-acquisition-230629490.html>
” – further shrinking this once-hot sector. Amazon, Barclaycard and Associated 
Newspapers, which owns the Daily Mail, have all once dabbled with their own 
deal offerings and/or investments but have since pulled out of the industry.
Experts point to deal fatigue 
<https://www.marketingweek.com/2013/03/07/daily-deals-market-cannot-stay-as-it-is/>
, with customers overwhelmed with similar offerings that no longer encourage 
spontaneous purchases.

There have been horror stories of small businesses overwhelmed with demand – 
oneReading bakery 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/retailandconsumer/8904653/Groupon-demand-almost-finishes-cupcake-maker.html>
 had to make 102,000 cupcakes at a loss after her Groupon deal proved overly 
popular – but many who have relied on these channels have been left in the 
lurch by the downturn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-small-business-owners-fell-out-of-love-with-deal-websites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01b1ced5499f59f8cc393528b08dd7f8d18d05c3%2F0_78_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20small%20business%20owners%20fell%20out%20of%20love%20with%20deal%20websites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-small-business-owners-fell-out-of-love-with-deal-websites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20small%20business%20owners%20fell%20out%20of%20love%20with%20deal%20websites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-small-business-owners-fell-out-of-love-with-deal-websites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01b1ced5499f59f8cc393528b08dd7f8d18d05c3%2F0_78_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Rosa Roberts, founder of Sketchout, says she was overly dependent on deal 
websites. Photograph: Caroline Arber 
Roberts has invested in search engine optimisation (SEO) to attract new 
customers and is slowly seeing sales pick up via Google search, but has found 
it expensive to do. The beauty of running an offer through these daily deal 
websites, she says, is that they are all based on commission – although this 
can range from 20-50%, depending on the agreement negotiated by the company. 
Roberts admits she’s unsure if other marketing channels can ever be as 
lucrative as daily deals once were.

“The fact is, I’ve built my business using them,” she adds. “You become 
dependent on them, totally … [and] because you fill places up with Groupon 
customers, you don’t really have room for other people. You [ignore] other 
avenues.

“They can drive bums on seats, and they do it brilliantly. But I’ve always 
felt insecure with my business. It’s always felt a little bit like a false 
market. When the sales aren’t what they were, it’s trouble for me. I need an 
influx of new custom all the time to keep things going.”

Focusing on customer loyalty

Entrepreneur Virginie Charles-Dear, who co-founded the children’s craft 
subscription companytoucanBox <https://www.toucanbox.com/> four years ago, says 
she has run a few deals with Wowcher, Groupon, and “all the usual suspects”. It 
suited them in the early days.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-small-business-owners-fell-out-of-love-with-deal-websites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe15d56e6e1407d527faf3312593338b3a8946e7c%2F99_201_1573_1965%2F1573.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20small%20business%20owners%20fell%20out%20of%20love%20with%20deal%20websites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-small-business-owners-fell-out-of-love-with-deal-websites%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20small%20business%20owners%20fell%20out%20of%20love%20with%20deal%20websites&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fhow-small-business-owners-fell-out-of-love-with-deal-websites%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe15d56e6e1407d527faf3312593338b3a8946e7c%2F99_201_1573_1965%2F1573.jpg>
 Virginie Charles-Dear, co-founder of toucanBox. 
“We didn’t have any marketing budget. The good thing about daily deals is 
there’s no cost up front. If they don’t sell, you don’t pay, which is great 
when you’re starting out. It was fairly small volumes at the time, but good to 
get our first customers.”

Running these types of campaigns didn’t work for them long term for two 
reasons, she adds. The deal companies kept insisting on bigger and bigger 
discounts and the type of customers they attracted weren’t right. Commercially, 
it stopped making sense.

“They were bargain hunters and didn’t necessarily buy into the product,” she 
says. “They just wanted something discounted. Compared to other channels where 
we advertised, they were definitely not as good.”

For toucanBox, which has tripled in size every year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/facebook-partner-zone/2016/nov/23/every-year-weve-tripled-in-size-the-power-of-digital-marketing>
 since its launch and today sends 100,000 boxes around the UK every month (as 
well as distributing abroad), social media, investing in SEO and developing 
partnerships with schools were better marketing channels. “So many of the 
parents we talk to today are recommending us to their friends or family,” she 
says.

This is where James Lewis, creative development and marketing manager for 
restaurantGauthier Soho <http://gauthiersoho.co.uk/>, has also found success. 
The restaurant tried one limited-time campaign with Bookatable in 2010, but 
weren’t impressed with the calibre of customer. Since then, Lewis adds, they 
have been inundated with offers from competing platforms trying to sign the 
restaurant up.

“As a marketer, there was definitely a temptation to use [deal websites],” he 
says. “But all that happened is we filled it up with people who complained non 
stop and we never saw them again. Since that day we’ve never done another offer 
on a booking site.”

Lewis argues that small businesses by their nature, should be looking to build 
real relationships and loyalty among their customers. The restaurant has 
instead invested in its own email marketing list and publicises seasonal offers 
directly to people who’ve been before – emailing those who’ve been most 
frequently first to advertise, for example, their two-for-one tasting menu.

Small business marketing: lessons from the experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2015/mar/16/small-business-marketing-lessons-from-the-experts>
“The discount sites and deal platforms are killing the one thing small 
businesses have on their side, which is that they’re small,” he says. “That’s 
what people want to connect with, and what the big chains are desperate to seem 
like. We concentrate very hard on making our regulars feel like they want to 
come again and they then tell their friends.”

Guaranteeing an excellent customer experience, understanding your customers 
and building that brand story is exactly what Maria Heckel, marketing director 
of theChartered Institute of Marketing <http://www.cim.co.uk/>, insists small 
business owners would be wise to focus on – particularly if they have found 
themselves over reliant on business from discount marketing channels.

“These websites can bring new people, but they don’t become customers. It’s a 
one-time transaction [and] actually the websites’ focus on price tends to 
devalue, rather than add value to your business.

“In the social age, the power of advocacy has never been stronger … Look at 
building your brand, building value and building loyalty. What is it you want 
your brand to stand for? There’s a real opportunity for small businesses to 
tell their story and attract customers, who are probably prepared to pay a 
little bit more because they value what you’re offering.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 