
“What inspired you to write this piece?” It is the question most creative 
people dread. If you’re composing music, you must somehow be in a trance, in 
some sort of mystical, transported condition suspending all rational thought 
processes. It comes as a severe jolt to many that creative activity is 
generally done like any other job, with hard work, craft, intelligence and a 
dose of cunning.

In my experience, a composer most often gets creative energy from working with 
performers. That gives you the buzz to write music, especially for performers 
you know. You imagine them playing every phrase, characterising it, pulling the 
music about, making it their own. It spurs you on. When the performers areSimon 
Rattle <https://www.theguardian.com/music/simon-rattle> and the Berlin 
Philharmonic <https://www.theguardian.com/music/berlin-philharmonic>, the 
temptation is to just go berserk – like stout Cortez upon a peak in Darien. But 
there were challenges ahead: I’d not worked with Rattle nor the orchestra 
before, and I’d never been inside the Berlin Philharmonie concert hall where 
they were to give the premiere. There were a lot of unknowns.

Rattle described the Berlin Phil’s sections in detail – the colours of the 
woodwinds, sustained lyricism of the strings

I met with him twice to discuss it. First he enthusiastically described the 
Philharmonic’s sections in detail – the colours of the woodwinds, the sustained 
lyricism of the strings, and so on. We agreed the duration: around 10 minutes. 
(“What happens if I overrun?” I asked. “We’re sunk!” he replied.) Rehearsal 
time was tight, a good discipline for a composer. A few months later, he amazed 
me with the news that he had already programmed additional performances of the 
new piece for three concerts on the orchestra’s summer tour – in Rotterdam, 
Lucerne and London. This time I asked how he and the orchestra would feel if I 
went against the norm for a “showpiece” and wrote them something slow and 
quiet. He grinned, the more so when I mentioned as possible models Vaughan 
Williams’sFantasia on a Theme by Thomas Tallis and Ives’s The Housatonic at 
Stockbridge.

While enthusing about the many fine soloists in his orchestra, Rattle had 
mentioned Dominik Wollenweber, who plays the cor anglais – that fascinating 
reed instrument, lower and rounder than the oboe (it plays the famous theme, 
best known from the Hovis adverts, in Dvořák’sNew World Symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/sep/02/symphony-guide-dvorak-9th-new-world-symphony-tom-service>
). In the Berlin Phil concerts in London last year, Wollenweber displayed a 
wonderfully sustained, almost golden tone, the like of which I had never heard: 
my new piece would feature a major part for this instrument.

I couldn’t visit the Philharmonie, so I continued listening to as many 
recordings of the orchestra playing there as I could. Then, last summer, I 
visited Tanglewood, the summer home of the Boston Symphony in the Berkshire 
Hills, to hear their students play myString Quartet No 2. One afternoon, I 
heard Christoph von Dohnányi and the players give the most lucid and 
transparent rendition I’d ever heard of Mozart’sJupiter Symphony. Its finale 
features five musical ideas rotating around each other, like planets in orbit. 
As soon as it was over, my own piece became clear. It would feature five 
musical areas. They would never all meet at once, but none would be absent for 
more than a few seconds – we would always be aware of them. A long tune for the 
cor anglais; high, soaring melodies for the violins; bells, real and imaginary; 
long, slowly unfolding chords in the bass; plus a fluttering dance in wind and 
strings. I jotted these down rapidly on a large sheet of paper. More things 
fell into place as the BSO and the Royal Philharmonic Society in London came on 
board to co-commission the work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcompose-showpiece-proms-listen-mozart-incantesimi-julian-anderson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F341ffcaa190ea0bd83b4cf55f0493e3e5bb5bf8e%2F0_347_1802_2252%2F1802.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20you%20compose%20a%20showpiece%20for%20the%20Proms%3F%20Start%20by%20listening%20to%20Mozart%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcompose-showpiece-proms-listen-mozart-incantesimi-julian-anderson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20you%20compose%20a%20showpiece%20for%20the%20Proms%3F%20Start%20by%20listening%20to%20Mozart%20%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F26%2Fcompose-showpiece-proms-listen-mozart-incantesimi-julian-anderson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F341ffcaa190ea0bd83b4cf55f0493e3e5bb5bf8e%2F0_347_1802_2252%2F1802.jpg>
 Julian Anderson. Photograph: John Batten 
My next thought was: “You’re crazy! You can’t model a slow movement on the 
finale of theJupiter Symphony of all things. You can’t model anything on the 
finale of theJupiter Symphony!” But something had happened that afternoon and I 
couldn’t stop it: call it, for want of a better word, inspiration. Now I had to 
apply my technique. It wasn’t easy. The piece had to survive the intimidating 
Mozart model, the exciting but equally intimidating excellence of all the 
performers involved, a busy teaching schedule and my own self-doubt. But 
gradually it came into being. Then I had to find the title.

This proved testing. I’d never previously written such a slow and intense 
orchestral work. My sketchbook shows a number of hopeless attempts –Shekinah 
(pretty but obscure);La Naissance du Bouddha (culturally dubious and too spaced 
out);Quaker Music (accurate but too specific); Peace Piece (don’t pun in a 
title – even if the “peace” of the music is partly a protest at UK foreign 
policy). Then someone mentioned an Italian word I’d never heard of:Incantesimo 
– spell, incantation, enchantment. That seemed nearer the mark. There are five 
ideas in the piece, so what about the plural:Incantesimi? As is the way when 
you find the right title, the word stuck to the piece like a limpet.

Rehearsals with the Berlin Phil and Rattle could not have been easier or more 
positive. Wollenweber played his cor anglais like a god, the strings smoothly 
fitted their higher melodies around his, the wind and brass were supple and 
perfectly balanced; the percussion instruments (few but important) bound the 
whole thing together. We found the right place to put the two trumpeters, who 
play from a distant gallery at the end.Incantesimi finally came to life, 
ringing around the Philharmonie just as I had imagined months before. Was I 
inspired? Who wouldn’t be?

 * The Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra perform Incantesimi at the Royal Albert 
Hall, London SW7, on 3 September.bbc.co.uk/proms. 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e2nzc8>
 