
After starting out as a researcher for Football Manager when he was just 15, 
Matt Neil <https://twitter.com/mattneil_>’s eye for talent was picked up by 
Plymouth Argyle. He now works as the League Two club’s lead first team analyst, 
providing data on player performance, opposition reports and potential transfer 
targets. Here’s Matt’s story, as told toMatt Stanger 
<https://twitter.com/MatthewStanger>:


I initially applied for the Truro City researcher job eight years ago, which 
was advertised on the Football Manager website. I went to five or six Truro 
games a season back then because it was only about three quid on the train and 
the ticket was about six quid. I already knew quite a bit about some of the 
players because they’d been at Argyle, so I thought I’d try to help out in that 
area because nobody had been doing it for a couple of years.

I got the job and had been following Truro for about six months when I noticed 
that the Argyle position had become available. I sent an email off to say I 
think I could do a good job. I’d been watching Argyle for years and Football 
Manager were impressed with what I’d been doing at Truro. Based on what I sent 
over – which included an excel spreadsheet with all the players’ histories, 
stats, etc – and considering I had a season ticket at the time, I was promoted 
to researcher for Argyle. It was just before I turned 16, so instead of 
revising for my GCSEs I was spending all my time on Football Manager.

Football quiz: name the Championship Manager 93-94 players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/quiz/2015/feb/10/football-quiz-championship-manager-93-94>
I’ve always played Football Manager. My greatest achievement was having a 
stadium named after me at Huddersfield. If I looked at the hours I’ve played 
over the past five years or so, I’d be quite worried to be honest. It’s around 
600 to 700 hours a year. The time just flies; you don’t notice when you’re 
playing it. I’ve never managed Plymouth because after becoming a researcher it 
feels like I know too much. I know every single piece of data for all the 
players and everything that’s hidden in the background of the game. It makes it 
too easy.


I’m now an analyst at Plymouth Argyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/plymouthargyle>. We’ve signed the 
goalkeeper Marc McCallum, who some Football Manager players will remember was 
an incredible prospect at Dundee United as a kid. I used to sign him all the 
time. When he came for a trial this summer, he walked in and it was one of the 
strangest moments in my life. I’ve never met him in person – I’d only ever seen 
his face on a computer game – but straight away I knew it was him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-set-pieces-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Ffootball-manager-2017-sport-plymouth-argyle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F191691f516da2b6d004b1d679458af67cd704a45%2F0_70_1600_1130%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20an%20obsession%20with%20Football%20Manager%20could%20earn%20you%20a%20career%20in%20the%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-set-pieces-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Ffootball-manager-2017-sport-plymouth-argyle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20an%20obsession%20with%20Football%20Manager%20could%20earn%20you%20a%20career%20in%20the%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-set-pieces-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Ffootball-manager-2017-sport-plymouth-argyle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F191691f516da2b6d004b1d679458af67cd704a45%2F0_70_1600_1130%2F1600.jpg>
 Matt surveys the pitch. Photograph:Green on Screen 
<http://greensonscreen.co.uk/> 
I spoke to him at a pre-season game the next day. We got around to the subject 
of Football Manager and he’d been in charge of Argyle on the last game, getting 
them to the Premier League and signing himself. I asked him what he did when he 
first took over, and he said he got rid of all the staff. So I said: “Did you 
sack me?” And it turned out he’d actually sacked me as well. It was a strange 
opening conversation to have with someone.

I’m only the second person under 16 to become a team researcher for Football 
Manager. They normally prefer people in their twenties who usually have a bit 
more knowledge, but I’d had a season ticket for four seasons at the time I 
became a researcher and watched the youth team every other week. I remember 
watching Lloyd Saxton in the Under-18s, who’s now at GIF Sundsvall in Sweden; 
Christian Walton, who’s now at Brighton; Lloyd Jones and Sam Gallagher, who are 
now in the Premier League with Liverpool and Southampton; and Joe Mason, who’s 
now at Wolves. If I remember rightly I rated them quite highly and they’ve gone 
on to do alright. When I started Mason was regarded as a Conference player at 
best in the game, so I increased his potential straight away. A few years later 
he scored the opening goal in the League Cup final for Cardiff against 
Liverpool.

Matt Neil (@mattneil_) 
Ready to go @Only1Argyle <https://twitter.com/Only1Argyle> #pafc 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/pafc?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/QQDyAvWpc1 
<https://t.co/QQDyAvWpc1>
 <https://twitter.com/mattneil_/status/757983267538731008> July 26, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mattneil_/status/757983267538731008> 
When I watch players I don’t ever judge them on their Football Manager ratings.
 If someone has got a passing attribute of 17, I don’t immediately think 
they’re going to be an unbelievable passer, because that might be after 
someone’s watched them for three games. It normally only takes a couple of 
games to tell physical attributes, but when you’re getting into the finer 
details, such as concentration, that takes a while. Some games a player might 
switch off against good opposition and some games they might not be tested at 
all. It’s the same with workrate and seeing which players chase absolutely 
anything or those who know when to press and close down. There are a lot of 
things I see now that I didn’t before.

Before I started at Plymouth I volunteered for an organisation called Green 
Taverners when the club was in administration. Before every game there was a 
fan fest, which cost around a fiver to get in, and all of the proceeds went to 
the staff who weren’t being paid at the time. We were basically set up to help 
the staff out when they desperately needed the money. After six months, every 
staff member was getting £100 a week because of the amount of fundraising we 
did, which may not seem like a massive amount, but when you’re not getting paid 
anything it’s huge.

I got to know a lot of the players and the staff because I was around the club 
four or five days a week – helping the kit man, helping set up the hospitality 
suites and so on. Carl Fletcher, the manager, always seemed really 
approachable. One day I was speaking with the club secretary and told him there 
was a player scoring a load of goals in the Conference South who was relatively 
young and could be a good signing. He passed it on to Fletch and then got back 
to me asking for a statistical and video overview to present to the manager.

I made a DVD with the player’s profile on it and went back a few days later. 
Fletch was quite impressed and said the club analyst was leaving at the end of 
the season, did I want to go in and see what the role is about. I watched a 
couple of matches from the top of the stand and he asked for my thoughts after 
the game.

After we played Morecambe away he asked me to prepare clips for all the 
players. It’s an easy job to do now but back then I had to go through the match 
and write down all the times for each player, all the incidents, and so on. I 
got all the clips together, stuck them into iMovie and produced a 15-minute 
overview for each player. I was 19 at the time and about a month later he 
offered me the job. My friends and family were delighted for me but a lot of 
them didn’t really know what the job entails because it isn’t really a 
publicised role.

In my first meeting with Fletch I mentioned my role as a Football Manager 
researcher and that was another plus point in getting the job. He knew I’d been 
looking for data and information on players for the past four years, so I 
already had a few good sources to check people out. He wanted me to work 
closely with our chief scout to make sure we had all opposition and recruitment 
analysis spot-on. The scout was only 21 at the time too, so we were quite young 
and new to it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-set-pieces-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Ffootball-manager-2017-sport-plymouth-argyle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8d0049a55b68896a936fe57dd0145d1a8e32bd4%2F0_69_1770_1062%2F1770.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20an%20obsession%20with%20Football%20Manager%20could%20earn%20you%20a%20career%20in%20the%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-set-pieces-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Ffootball-manager-2017-sport-plymouth-argyle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20an%20obsession%20with%20Football%20Manager%20could%20earn%20you%20a%20career%20in%20the%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fthe-set-pieces-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Ffootball-manager-2017-sport-plymouth-argyle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8d0049a55b68896a936fe57dd0145d1a8e32bd4%2F0_69_1770_1062%2F1770.jpg>
 Matt with the players. Photograph:Green on Screen 
<http://greensonscreen.co.uk/> 
Given our ages a lot of people looked at us and were perhaps a bit sceptical, 
but we learned a lot about football in the first six months. Fletch left six 
months after I came in and it taught me about the harsh reality of football and 
whether there were things we weren’t doing right. Managers have very 
contrasting styles. Fletch wanted every single detail on every single player, 
but when John Sheridan came in he wanted to focus on the set plays with just a 
bit of information on individual opponents. It was a bit more old school. It 
taught me a lot because when I came into the role I expected it to always be 
the same. So I had to step back a little bit and understand there’s a lot going 
on in football and people see the game differently. I wasn’t as active under 
Sheridan, but it was a really important time to learn about working in a 
football environment.

After the first weekend of this season I’d already watched six matches 
including our own. I don’t know how my mum and dad don’t understand why I don’t 
have a girlfriend – they should know how much time I spend working on my 
laptop. I went for dinner on the Saturday after the first game against Luton 
and I think I had 25 WhatsApp messages from other analysts just while we were 
having food. It was ten o’clock at night but football never stops.

Transfer window: exposing the widely held myths about how clubs sign players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/the-set-pieces-blog/2016/aug/24/transfer-window-market-myths>
I still play Football Manager. I haven’t played it for a couple of months 
because I made the stupid decision of leaving my Champions League-winning Ajax 
side to join Man City, and everyone knows when you join City the game gets 
boring because you have too much money.

We’ve started our final phase of research for the new game so it’s pretty much 
ready, although there are still lots of tests to be done. I try to keep it 
quiet that I still give ratings for the Argyle players as I don’t know what 
they would say. I’ve had a few comments that this should be higher, or that 
should be lower. A physio turned around once because someone had shown him his 
profile and he asked “Why do I only have 10 for physiotherapy?” I couldn’t 
really answer that question.

Last season we had a game on the coach with a few players when we were playing 
Hartlepool away because we knew it was a long trip. We all started as Burnley 
and the aim was to get them promoted. Me and [Plymouth striker] Louis Rooney 
ended up winning the league, while a couple of the players ended up getting 
sacked by Christmas.

• This is an article from The Set Pieces <http://thesetpieces.com/>
• Follow Matt Stanger <https://twitter.com/MatthewStanger> and The Set Pieces 
<https://twitter.com/thesetpieces> on Twitter
 