
The words “budget” and “safari” are not often found in the same sentence. 
Safaris <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/safaris> are a notoriously 
expensive holiday choice. But there are ways to enjoy a bush experience for 
under (sometimes well under) £150 per person per night, if you do as the locals 
do. Despite the fall in sterling’s value, the rand/pound exchange rate means 
that South African safaris, paid for in the local currency, continue to offer 
the continent’s best value. While many African lodges in Botswana, Kenya and 
Tanzania, for example, quote only in US dollars, many excellent options in 
South Africa do not.
All prices correct at time of writing but approximate because of fluctuations 
in currency exchange rates
Safari South Africa map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/travel_south_africa/giv-1406cyRt4XoSQmKp/>
Explore the national parks


SANParks (South African National Parks, sanparks.org 
<https://www.sanparks.org/>) is responsible for 20 parks across the country, 
and its properties are much cheaper than privately operated lodges, including 
those that have their own concessions in the national parks.

The most traditional South African family holiday is a self-drive trip from 
Johannesburg to the 19,500 sq km (approximately the size of Wales) Kruger 
national park. Entrance for foreign adult visitors, called the standard 
conservation fee, is £18 a day (child £9). Bookings should be made online in 
advance (fee £1.20).

Accommodation options in the national parks range from campsites, huts and 
chalets to cottages and guesthouses, all bookable through the parks’ central 
website. In Kruger, sociable types can self-cater in one of the rest camps. The 
largest of these,Skukuza <https://www.sanparks.org/parks/kruger/camps/skukuza/>
, offers cottages of various sizes, shops, a decent steakhouse chain 
restaurant, as well as play areas and swimming pools for families. A cottage 
for four costs from £138 a night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4ce14c832608e85434f85b93d832ad93403f589%2F0_353_5250_3150%2F5250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4ce14c832608e85434f85b93d832ad93403f589%2F0_353_5250_3150%2F5250.jpg>
 Biyamiti bush camp, in the Kruger national park, is a good place to see 
cheetahs. Photograph: Alamy 
Those who dream of a truly isolated bush experience might prefer an 
electricity-free tent at one of the wilderness camps, where only a low fence 
separates people from animals. AtTamboti 
<https://www.sanparks.org/parks/kruger/camps/tamboti/>, on the Kruger’s western 
edge, a two-person tent costs from £32 a night.

If getting that intimate with wildlife is too daunting, but regular camps are 
too big and crowded, a good compromise might be one of Kruger’s many bush 
camps: three of the most popular areBiyamiti 
<https://www.sanparks.org/parks/kruger/camps/biyamiti/>, Shimuwini 
<https://www.sanparks.org/parks/kruger/camps/shimuwini/> and Talamati 
<https://www.sanparks.org/parks/kruger/camps/talamati/>. A bush cottage at 
Biyamiti, on the banks of the Mbiyamiti river, which comfortably sleeps a 
family of four, costs from £150 a night. Wild dog, white-tailed mongoose, 
cheetah and leopard are often seen around this camp.

Shimuwini is Shangaan for “home of the baobab” and refers to the huge 
3,000-year-old trees that line the Letaba river. Cottages along the Shimuwini 
dam cost from £66 a night for two. At Talamati, residents enjoy the bonus of 
privacy, as only they are allowed to use its access roads, waterhole and hide. 
Cottages sleeping two cost from £66 a night. Giraffe, kudu, eland, impala, 
zebra, rhino and buffalo are all often to be seen from the cottages’ verandas.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44c9e788dd56fbc48d3fa58ce3a54d0b4f12ead3%2F0_192_5700_3420%2F5700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44c9e788dd56fbc48d3fa58ce3a54d0b4f12ead3%2F0_192_5700_3420%2F5700.jpg>
 White rhino are relatively plentiful in South Africa’s game reserves. 
Photograph: Alamy 
The Kruger, like all the SANParks, is set up to make self-driving and 
self-catering holidays easy, even for novices. Managers and support staff are 
available around the clock at rest and bush camps, to ensure guests’ comfort 
and safety. Rangers are available to guide walks or drives, with rates from £12 
per adult for a night drive from Skukuza. While groceries are available in the 
rest camps, the towns of Komatipoort and Malelane, with their supermarkets and 
off licences, are close by. Water at the bush camps comes from boreholes and is 
drinkable, but salty.

Visitors should note that the Kruger is in a malaria-risk area and that 
booking is recommended at least 11 months in advance, as the camps are very 
popular. Cancellations do occur, though, so it’s worth monitoring the site.

Fly to major airports


Internal flights in South Africa, especially to airports close to remote bush 
destinations, such as Skukuza, Hoedspruit, Hazyview, Hluhluwe and Richard’s 
Bay, are expensive. Picking a safari close to a big city airport served by 
local low-cost airlines (Mango, Kulula, Safair) will bring the cost down 
significantly. Car hire all over South Africa is reasonably priced.

The malaria-free Pilanesberg national park 
<http://www.pilanesbergnationalpark.org/>, for example, is just two hours’ 
drive from central Johannesburg and 1½ from the city’s Lanseria airport. It is 
one of the most beautiful parks in the country, though its proximity to the 
huge Sun City holiday resort means it can be extremely busy at weekends and 
during school holidays. Visit during the week, when prices dip and the 550 sq 
km park is much less crowded. TheBlack Rhino Game Lodge 
<http://www.pilanesbergnationalpark.org/accommodation/black-rhino-game-lodge/> 
has 18 detached suites overlooking a busy waterhole, from about £123pppn (low 
season), including two game drives and three excellent meals a day.

Walk in the morning

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74f196e7251dced3db6c95f43c982675b19bc3fd%2F0_78_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74f196e7251dced3db6c95f43c982675b19bc3fd%2F0_78_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Lions lope towards a visitor-laden jeep in Klaserie private nature reserve. 
Photograph: Em Gatland 
Africa on Foot <http://www.africaonfoot.com/>, in the Klaserie private nature 
reserve <http://klaseriereserve.co.za/>, bordering the Kruger, is six hours’ 
drive from Johannesburg. The basic but comfortable camp offers guided big-five 
walking safaris every morning, and guided game drives in the evening. The 
Klaserie shares unfenced borders with the Kruger and guests can expect to 
encounter the big five, as well as wild dog, cheetah, honey badger, porcupine, 
aardvark, plus small cats – civet, caracal and serval. Guests can also request 
a night sleeping under the stars in the lodge’s treehouse. Rates for 2017 are 
from £150pppn including three meals a day, a walk and a bush drive each day.

Travel out of high season 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f6b157dc45dce0d79776dd0b3a484e3f3df6be3%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f6b157dc45dce0d79776dd0b3a484e3f3df6be3%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 A leopard tortoise at Samara private game reserve. Photograph: Alamy 
Rates for most lodges are also significantly cheaper off peak. South Africa’s 
dry winter (between May and September) is considered low season, even though, 
in the north of the country, it is the best time for game viewing. During the 
drier months, animals congregate around waterholes, making game viewing much 
easier than in the hot, rainy summers, when they are dispersed and harder to 
spot in the long grass.

In the north of the country, close to the Botswana border and a 3½-hour drive 
from Lanseria airport, the family-owned and runMosetla Bush Camp and Eco Lodge 
<http://www.thebushcamp.com/>, in the malaria-free, game-rich Madikwe reserve, 
offers great value for money and reliable game viewing year-round. This rustic 
camp has no electricity and is lit at night by romantic paraffin lamps; water 
is provided by wood-fired “donkey boilers”. The fence around the camp keeps the 
elephants out, but sightings of hyena, civet and buffalo around the huts are 
common. Rates are at about £150pppn. This includes two ranger-guided safaris 
and three meals a day.

The 283 sq km Samara game reserve <http://www.samara.co.za/> is a 2½-hour 
drive from Port Elizabeth in the Eastern Cape. Off peak, it’s possible to stay 
in the reserve’s Sibella suite in its upmarket and luxurious Karoo Lodge for 
£139pppn. Samara, in the dramatically beautiful Camdeboo national park, is 
famous for its vistas. An ideal addition to a trip up theGarden Route 
<http://www.gardenroute.co.za/>, it’s malaria-free and home to cheetah, black 
and white rhino, giraffe, buffalo, enormous herds of eland, wildebeest, zebra 
and, most uniquely, the timid and seldom-sighted aardvark. Samara does not 
offer large predators, as it is focused on cheetah conservation.

Stay just outside the national parks
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6a7cb9dd48314af601b4c4770dc12007103bb7e%2F0_243_5364_3220%2F5364.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6a7cb9dd48314af601b4c4770dc12007103bb7e%2F0_243_5364_3220%2F5364.jpg>
 Photograph: Søren Rasmussen 
It is easy and often more affordable to stay outside the parks and self-drive 
or book guided game drives once inside, via SANParks or the individual park.
Addo Elephant national park <https://www.sanparks.org/parks/addo/>, an hour’s 
drive from Port Elizabeth and its airport, is a typical example. The 540 sq km 
park boasts more than 600 elephant, 400 Cape buffalo and 48 black rhino. 
Transvaal lion and spotted hyena have also recently been reintroduced. There 
are also plenty of restaurants and supermarkets in the area.

Stylish B&B Halstead Farm <http://halsteadfarm.com/> has four en suite 
bedrooms for £60pppn and is just 10 minutes’ drive from the park gates. Its 
sister property,Camp Figtree <http://www.campfigtree.com/>, inside the park, 
costs £98pppn (sharing) as part of a two-day package. DB&B, and one game drive 
a day, are included. Entrance to the park is £12 adult, £6 child.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82a45de9b2190d28a4458cda332772a16013f142%2F0_172_5171_3102%2F5171.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82a45de9b2190d28a4458cda332772a16013f142%2F0_172_5171_3102%2F5171.jpg>
 A nile crocodile at Kruger national park. Photograph: Alamy 
Through the park’s Eyethu Hop-on Guide programme, guests can contribute to the 
local community by paying around £19 for a park-trained local guide from one of 
the villages to join them in their own car for a two-hour safari. A 
conventional guided safari in a park vehicle costs £17pp for approximately two 
hours. It is advisable to book drives in advance, particularly in the 
October-to-March high season (sanparks.org <https://www.sanparks.org/>).

On the outskirts of the Kruger, a luxury self-catering tent at Crocodile 
Bridge Safari Lodge <http://crocbridge.co.za/>, 200 metres from the Crocodile 
Bridge entrance in the south of the park, costs from £37pppn. Tents are en 
suite and air-conditioned with views of the river, which is home to a rich 
diversity of birdlife, crocodile and hippo.

Book directly through an online discount site

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f870c21747a85b1699890b0ed19e7a5d67ebb64%2F0_45_2658_1595%2F2658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f870c21747a85b1699890b0ed19e7a5d67ebb64%2F0_45_2658_1595%2F2658.jpg>
 Honeyguide Ranger Tented Camp. Photograph: Søren Rasmussen 
In these camps, two three-hour game drives a day, three meals and selected 
drinks are included in the rate.

Discount sites act as a clearing-house for unsold rooms in some of the 
country’s best lodges. And there are even better deals if you are prepared to 
wait until a week before departure before booking.

BushBreaks <http://www.bushbreaks.co.za/> recently offered late bookers a 41% 
discount (£85pppn) at boutiqueElephant Rock Lodge 
<http://www.elephantrocklodge.co.za/> in KwaZulu Natal’s malaria-free Nambiti 
reserve, 2½ hours’ drive from Durban. The lodge overlooks a waterhole, and 
there are two 40-metre waterfalls on the Sundays river nearby. The site also 
offered £130pppn (the standard is £360) at Addo Elephant park’s Kuzuko Lodge, 
in a private section of the northern part of the park, with valley and 
waterhole views.

If booked a week before arrival, a night in the comfortable tents at the 
Honeyguide Ranger Tented Camp (honeyguidecamp.com 
<http://honeyguidecamp.com/waterberg-entabeni-reserve/>), in the Waterberg 
Entabeni reserve, 3½ hours’ drive from Johannesberg’s Lanseria airport, would 
cost £80pp. Normal rates start at £104pppn in low season.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20b6c646072f7d7372430acdcbbca3deb60c268d%2F0_50_2085_1251%2F2085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20safari%20in%20South%20Africa%20on%20a%20budget&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fhow-to-safari-south-africa-on-a-budget-holiday-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20b6c646072f7d7372430acdcbbca3deb60c268d%2F0_50_2085_1251%2F2085.jpg>
 Clifftop Lodge 
On LastMinuteLodges <http://www.lastminutelodges.co.za/index.php> recently, 
Clifftop Lodge, an exquisite property in Limpopo’s Welgevonden private game 
reserve, 2½hours’ drive from Johannesburg, offered a mid-week rate of £134pppn 
if booking was made within seven days of arrival (normal rate £241pp). 
Overlooking the Sterkstroom river, Clifftop is eco-conscious and stylish. The 
reserve is part of a 1,000 sq km conservancy incorporating Marakele national 
park and is home to over 50 mammal species, including the big five.
 