
Andrew Ritchie, inventor

It’s the same old thing lots of people have dreamed of having – a magic carpet 
you can keep in your pocket. Of course, what I achieved was rather chunkier, 
but it was still pretty manageable compared with other fold-up bikes out there. 
Before the Brompton, most portable bikes were fold-in-half things, not 
something you’d want to carry around.

I’d been dabbling with inventing, having studied engineering at Cambridge, but 
it was nothing serious. Then I tried out a fold-in-half bike called theBickerton
 <http://www.bickertonportables.co.uk/>. I found it awkward and I had nothing 
to do that night, so I thought: what other ways could a bike fold? I introduced 
a hinge at the front so the handlebars tucked down, and one at the back that 
doubled as a suspension point – you need that with small wheels or you bump 
about. The first one looked pretty awful. I wanted it to be slick, so that when 
you pushed the saddle down everything swung into place, but the cables 
stretched too much and would have needed constant replacing. That version was 
quite underengineered. It was a non-starter.

I got the patent in 1976. My backers were friends of mine. We didn’t want to 
do the manufacturing ourselves: we wanted a business to take on the idea, make 
the bikes, and bring us riches beyond the dreams of avarice. But after several 
years, we were nowhere. Eventually, I got into production on a small scale, 
after doing a proto-Kickstarter kind of thing and pre-selling 30 bikes. They 
were all duly delivered, then my hinge supplier went out of business.

That was a hiccup, followed by even more years of looking for money. In 1986, 
however, a man called Julian Vereker came on board. He’d bought a lot of the 
early bikes and had business kudos. Things began to snowball: backers came 
forward and soon we had enough to get our own factory going.

I felt like giving up quite often. I had to work as a gardener, a builder, a 
messenger – anything noncommittal since, at any minute, the Brompton might have 
taken off. The fact that we didn’t get proper backing early on probably spared 
us. My first bikes started breaking after four years. If we’d had thousands out 
there, it could have ruined the company.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fhow-we-made-the-brompton-folding-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430147397128%2Fa14abce5-c6d6-4f79-9221-8a78cae3d71d-2060x2044.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20we%20made%20the%20Brompton%20folding%20bike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fhow-we-made-the-brompton-folding-bicycle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20we%20made%20the%20Brompton%20folding%20bike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fhow-we-made-the-brompton-folding-bicycle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430147397128%2Fa14abce5-c6d6-4f79-9221-8a78cae3d71d-2060x2044.jpeg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
By 1987, I’d nearly got it right. I reinforced the points where it was weak: 
three spots on the frame that were susceptible to snapping. I danced around 
with design, coming up with the simplest and least inelegant solutions, and 
that’s where we’ve been for 30 years now. But it’s still crying out for petty 
improvements. I know – I use one every day and get irritated. I spent months 
making the cables go the right way, but the front ones wear out because they go 
through a big loop. We should get rid of that. The cables get snagged, too, 
then the brakes and gears don’t work.

People have been trying to make wheels fold for years. I’ve thought about it, 
of course, because that’s the obvious way to get the bike smaller still. But it 
seems silly to start reinventing the wheel. I might be wrong; maybe someone 
will come up with a way. But I haven’t got the energy.

Today, folk take Bromptons for granted and think they’ve been around for ever, 
but it was a pretty perilous journey into existence. I can’t say if it was all 
worth it – but what else would I have done?

Will Carleysmith, head of design

We’re not really interested in selling to cyclists. I know that’s an odd thing 
to say. But if you live in a city, a Brompton is like a can-opener: an ugly way 
of getting around and quite hard to use. We want it to become accessible to 
everybody, not just people who like technical products. As it stands, the 
folding isn’t that intuitive, and you have to carry it of course. Think about 
suitcases becoming so easy to roll and move – we’d like to do that, and make it 
lighter, too. If you live on the fourth floor, you’ve got to schlep it up. Our 
lightest bike is 9.4kg. There’s at least a kilo to come out, probably more.

And the news is squeaking out about another project of ours: electric drive. 
We want to have a powered bike so you don’t get hot and sweaty. If you think 
about someone on their Brompton, in their work clothes going to a social event, 
they don’t want to turn up in head-to-toe Lycra, steaming.

When I joined as a graduate 10 years ago, our biggest problem was that we 
couldn’t make enough bikes. Our lead time was pretty huge: up to five months, 
given our one-bike-at-a-time production line. So we went to look at the 
factories of Triumph and Toyota, and essentially copied what they did. Now, we 
more than meet demand, making a bike every three minutes.

It’s taken 30 years to get established by word of mouth. Now, we export 80% of 
our bikes. The weirdest place we’ve sent a Brompton to is the south pole. A 
research scientist’s instruments were a mile away from where he lived, so he 
cycled across the surface of the Antarctic to work. He sent us a great picture 
of himself on his bike in full polar gear.

In Japan, we’re now a lifestyle product. We’re British in that Burberry, Paul 
Smith kind of way. They customise their bikes to outdo their mates, replacing 
mudguard flaps, say, with ones made of fine leather or bits of plastic with 
machined titanium. They’ve turned our utilitarian product into a thing of 
luxury. But that’s part of the fun.
 