
Almost two billion cups of coffee are sold in the UK every year – and the 
market shows no sign of slowing down, with85% of us visiting a coffee shop at 
least once a week 
<http://www.londoncoffeefestival.com/Blog/February-2014/20-February-UK-Coffee-Scene-Infographic.aspx>
. Good coffee, and the establishments that serve it, have become an integral 
part of UK culture.

The good news for small business owners is that when it comes to coffee 
brands, indie and artisan are the buzzwords of choice. Despite a crowded 
marketplace, this is one industry where bigger is not better: according to 
figures compiled by theLondon Coffee Festival 
<http://www.londoncoffeefestival.com/home.aspx>, independent coffee shops 
outnumber branded outlets by two to one.

A quick look at the figures proves this is a healthy market, and a potential 
growth area. Think you’re ready for the grind? We spoke to some of the 
country’s caffeine entrepreneurs to see what they had to say about making it in 
the coffee industry.

Don’t fear the competition

You shouldn’t assume that because you are a small business, you can’t compete 
with the big players. The things that make you different are also the things 
that could attract a potential customer. “We love to open right next to big 
long-established players,” says Gabe Shohet ofBlack Sheep Coffee 
<http://www.leavetheherdbehind.com/>. “Our typical customer cares about the 
quality of what’s in the cup, the expertise of the barista, and consciously 
avoids large chains that are unable to deliver the same attention to detail and 
quality.”

David Abrahamovitch, CEO and co-founder of Grind & Co 
<http://www.grindandco.com/>, agrees. “Every year more and more people are 
seeking out a better coffee, as well as going out of their way to avoid the big 
chains,” he says. “Small independents have been the driving force of this 
change, and it’s been such an exciting movement to be a part of in the last few 
years.”

A high margin doesn’t always equal big profits 

“Everybody seems to think that there is lots of money in coffee, that ‘the 
margins are so high’,” says Alex Galatino, founder of Italian espresso barLa 
Bottega Milanese <http://www.labottegamilanese.co.uk/>. However, the reality is 
that “having a high margin on a small-ticket value is not the same as having a 
low margin on a high-ticket value. You need volume, and a lot of it,” he says. 
“If then you start talking about specialty coffee, it’s an expensive product. 
The practice, done properly, involves a lot of calibrating, testing, tasting 
and wastage.”

Do something different

The downside of a booming market is that competition will be fierce. If you 
want to stand out, try to find a unique selling point that differentiates your 
brand from the hundreds of other household names. Shohet says Black Sheep made 
a name for itself as the first coffee company to develop a specialty grade 100% 
Robusta coffee “at a time when everyone believed 100% Arabica to be the only 
premium species of coffee”.

James Dickson, founder of Workshop Coffee <http://www.workshopcoffee.com/> 
focused on creating a new customer experience. “Within our flagship store we 
make a name for ourselves by conducting on-site roasting – a first for London,” 
he says.

For Grind & Co, changing the proposition after dark expanded their customer 
base. “By day, we serve the best coffee in the city, and by night we serve 
cocktails, including a killer Espresso Martini,” says Abramovich.

Quality is everything

With the abundance of sophisticated blends and speciality products comes a 
discerning consumer. “Independent does not necessarily mean ‘good by default’” 
emphasises Galatino. A slick brand may draw in consumers, but they won’t come 
back if the product isn’t up to par.

“Coffee is a simple product that should first and foremost taste good,” says 
Shohet. “The majority of our regular customers don’t know that their coffee was 
hand-picked, sun-dried, double-washed and shade-grown, but they come back every 
day because they love the taste and that’s the most important thing to us.Coffee
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/coffee> should taste great every 
time. It’s that simple.”

The right team creates the right atmosphere 

Customers want baristas who know their stuff, and create the welcoming, 
personal environment that is often lacking in big chains. Staff should be well 
informed, friendly and a good fit with your brand and customer base. “We have 
an amazing team of dedicated lovely staff, but they were hard to find,” says 
Phil Ross ofThe Roastery <https://twitter.com/theroastery>. “Our team create a 
warm welcoming environment that you just want to hang out in, and that is one 
of the reasons why the customers come back.”

Know your niche

For a small business, it is often better to focus on a niche offering and do 
it really well, rather than trying to be a jack of all trades. “I am a believer 
in having an uncompromising approach to what you set out to do – not an easy 
thing to achieve,” says Jorge Fernandez ofFernandez and Wells 
<http://www.fernandezandwells.com/>. “For me this has always been offering a 
limited range of simple yet quality products. A good example would be our 
coffee range, which is very small.”

Be realistic

In the hospitality industry, work doesn’t stop when you put up the “closed” 
sign. If you want your business to be a success you need knowledge, passion and 
an unshakeable work ethic: this is a 24/7 business, and you must be realistic 
about the sacrifices it involves.

“You need to be at the top of your game to encourage new customers and retain 
existing ones. This requires a relentless approach to robust retailing, backed 
up by the product and service,” says Fernandez.

Ross adds: “It never stops, even when we are closed, there is something else 
that needs to be done. You need to love coffee, and love customers as they are 
your business. As a lot of our business is wholesale [of roasted beans] we see 
a lot of cafe startups that fail – that’s the untold story.”

 * Getting started 
 * 

 * John Richardson, known as one of the Coffee Boys, has developed a variety 
of coffee shop businesses and is speaking at the Caffè Culture Show in London 
on Thursday. Here are his tips: 
 * 

 * 1) Be ruthlessly realistic and honest about your budget. The vast majority 
of coffee shops go over budget, which can spell disaster for the business 
before it has a chance to find its feet.

 * 

 * 2) Great quality food and drink requires great care and attention to detail 
in terms of sourcing and supply. And never forget, in the early days at least, 
you need the great suppliers more than they need you. Treat them well.

 * 3) Do not ignore the financial and legislative side of the business. No 
matter how unexciting, you must immediately get to grips with VAT, national 
insurance, rates and paying HMRC. 
 * 

 * 4) From week one, produce a weekly profit and loss for your business. You 
absolutely must have a firm grasp of how much (or little) money you’re making 
from day one. 
 * 

 * 5) Start building your operational systems and processes manual from the 
first moment of the first day. Make sure you’re not fixing recurring issues 
more than once yourself. Problems should be logged and a system created to 
ensure the issue is dealt with smoothly and effectively - whether you are 
present or not. 
 * 

 * Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.  