
Are you struggling to keep on top of your small business’s finances? Perhaps 
you’re feeling overwhelmed by the array of technology solutions on offer. Or 
maybe you’re interested in growth but are bogged down by rising business costs.

Good cashflow is the lifeblood of any successful business, but with 53% of 
small firms owed an estimated £255bn 
<http://insider.zurich.co.uk/risk-management/smes-owed-225bn-from-late-payments/>
, managing the flow of money can be a juggling act. Many entrepreneurs will 
also not have the resources to hire professional help, but will add bookkeeper 
to their ever burgeoning list of tasks.

Technology can help – from accountancy software and money management apps, to 
smart meters and mobile payment tools. But how do you know which to invest time 
and money in?

If you are struggling with questions of cash management, such as how to 
automate payments to suppliers or chase late payers, how to make efficiencies 
in your business to cut costs or budget better, and how to boost revenue while 
on the move, join us from 1-2pm on Tuesday 29 November when our panel of 
experts will be available to take your questions.

Taking part is simple: just register to comment 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/register?skipConfirmation=true&INTCMP=HEADER_GU_REG&returnUrl=https%3A%2F%2Fmembership.theguardian.com%2Fjoin%2Ffriend%2Fenter-details>
. Once you have signed up, you can post your questions in the comments thread 
below this article. Alternatively, tweet@GdnSmallBiz 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSmallBiz> with your questions, or email them to 
smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com> and we will put them to the panel 
on the day. Comments are open and we welcome questions in advance.

Our panel

Erik Fairbairn is a serial entrepreneur and founder of POD Point 
<https://pod-point.com/>, which was named one of the fastest-growing tech 
companies in the UK by the Sunday Times and now turns over £6.5m a year.

Charlie Carne is an entrepreneurial chartered accountant 
<http://charliecarne.com/> who is used to running his business on the move. He 
has found technology invaluable when it comes to having a real-time view of his 
and his clients’ finances.

Paul Swift works as a sustainability consultant at the Carbon Trust 
<https://www.carbontrust.com/home/>, assisting organisations to understand the 
business case of energy-saving opportunities. He recently appeared as the 
Energy Doctor, working with Smart Energy GB to discuss energy consumption with 
small businesses in Manchester.

Ali Golds is an experienced business coach 
<http://www.creativebizdev.co.uk/new-page/>, supporting female founders to 
develop their businesses and achieve success. She is also a published author: 
her book How to Be Your Own Boss As a Single Mum reached number eight in the 
Amazon download chart on its release.

Philip King is the chief executive of the Chartered Institute of Credit 
Management <http://www.cicm.com/> and author of the organisation’s collection of
managing <http://www.cicm.com/resources/cashflow-guides/>cashflow guides 
<http://www.cicm.com/resources/cashflow-guides/>, written in partnership with 
the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS).

Paul Haydock is the co-founder of DueCourse <https://www.duecourse.com/>, a 
technology solution that allows entrepreneurs to release money tied up in 
unpaid invoices. The business expects to release £16.5m of advances by the end 
of 2016.

Jessica Zoo is the co-founder and creative director of Zoo Riot 
<http://www.zooriot.co.uk/>, a London-based fitness class company that also 
provides party activities and team-building workshops.

Sean Drake is the founder of The Wealth Project Holdings PLC 
<http://www.twpplc.co.uk>, a sustainable investment business that supports and 
invests in entrepreneurs through education, technology and capital.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 