
Many trekkers arrive at Mount Kilimanjaro dreaming of a grand wilderness 
adventure on the world’s tallest freestanding mountain. At the very least, they 
expect some peace and quiet to contemplate the toughest physical challenge they 
might ever face. Finding a circus instead of solitude can be mighty 
disappointing.

While Africa’s contribution to the seven summits ranks high on the to-do list 
of serious mountaineers, scaling the 5,895-metre (19,341 ft) dormant volcano 
requires no technical skill. Climbers with a moderate level of fitness, 
positive attitude, and a body that adapts reasonably well to altitude have a 
good chance of success. It’s no surprise to learn that the number of people 
attempting the climb is high.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a9e42989396678db25e25f3d2cc4a50ab74b24f%2F0_0_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a9e42989396678db25e25f3d2cc4a50ab74b24f%2F0_0_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
 Looking to summit of Kilimanjaro 
According to Tanzania National Parks <http://www.tanzaniaparks.go.tz/>, 
Kilimanjaro attracts 50,000 climbers a year, up 25% from 2008 and about 50 
times the number attempting either Everest or Denali (formerly Mount McKinley) 
in Alaska. Managing the impact of so many boots stomping up and down one 
mountain is a serious challenge, so hikers are required to stick to formal 
routes and to sleep at designated camps. On one route –Marangu 
<http://www.climbingkilimanjaro.com/marangu-route-kilimanjaro> – camps feature 
permanent huts. On the others, elaborate tent villages are erected each 
afternoon, only to disappear the following morning as climbers come and go, 
sometimes in their hundreds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a8276c434aec493c68cd1397ba530952d65ff57%2F0_152_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a8276c434aec493c68cd1397ba530952d65ff57%2F0_152_3648_2189%2F3648.jpg>
 Crowd pleaser … a group approaches the summit of Kilimanjaro. Photograph: Alamy
Despite, or perhaps because of, increasing visitor numbers, Kilimanjaro 
national park has cleaned up its act. Each camp now features a weigh-station 
where guides and porters check in. Weigh-ins protect porters from carrying too 
heavy a load and also protect the mountain from litter. Groups must weigh their 
rubbish to ensure what goes up Kilimanjaro, and is not eaten along the way, 
comes back down. Previously, weary porters often stashed their rubbish in the 
bushes.

However, human waste is an ongoing problem. Digging new latrines is 
challenging in the rocky terrain, and cold temperatures slow the decomposition 
process.

Luckily, I was forewarned about Kilimanjaro’s crowds and the pollution – 
noise, rubbish and excrement – left in their wake. I planned my climb to avoid 
the busiest areas on the mountain and learned additional crowd-avoidance 
tactics along the way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96e69eee50ac3b48f2a9c32f035ecdbefe8303b9%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96e69eee50ac3b48f2a9c32f035ecdbefe8303b9%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Porters in the foothills of Kilimanjaro. Picking the right route is vital for 
crowd avoidance. 
On Kilimanjaro, hikers choose from six well-trodden ascent routes, which 
converge towards the summit. Two-thirds opt for Marangu orMachame 
<http://www.machame.com/>, routes so popular they’re nicknamed Coca-Cola and 
Whiskey. The quieter reputation of the longer routes,Rongai 
<http://www.climbingkilimanjaro.com/rongai-route-kilimanjaro>, Lemosho 
<http://lemosho.com/> and Shira 
<http://www.mountkilimanjaroguide.com/kilimanjaro-shira.html>, has ironically 
made them popular. The steepest route,Umbwe 
<http://www.ultimatekilimanjaro.com/umbwe_route.htm>, draws few climbers but 
offers limited potential for crucial altitude acclimatisation. All but Rongai 
ascend the southern face of the mountain, and all climbers descend to the south.

Picking a route is vital for crowd avoidance, so my climbing partner and I 
tested the TK Lemosho – developed in 2008 by mountaineers from the family-owned 
tour operatorTeam Kilimanjaro <https://teamkilimanjaro.com/lemosho/>, it is a 
combination of existing routes. By taking a scenic, little-used detour known as 
the Northern Circuit to join a portion of Lemosho with a portion of Rongai, it 
avoids the busiest areas on the mountain. The extra few days this requires 
enables hikers to explore more of the mountain and allow more time to 
acclimatise, but it also adds to the route length (about 86km) and the cost, in 
excess of £2,000 all-inclusive for the seven-day trip with Team Kilimanjaro. 
Costs of treks vary greatly according to the number of days, group size, 
operator reputation, quality of equipment and food, number and experience of 
guides and porters, and add-ons such as transport and hotel nights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2620d5776afba8dd993d98906bed53cffd287b80%2F809_0_5591_3338%2F5591.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2620d5776afba8dd993d98906bed53cffd287b80%2F809_0_5591_3338%2F5591.jpg>
 A camp on the Lemosho route at dawn. Photograph: Alamy 
After a bouncy three-hour drive from Arusha (hub of northern Tanzania’s safari 
and tourist circuit), our trek started from the west at Lemosho Gate along the 
Lemosho route through some of the best rainforest on the mountain. Amid 
birdsong and monkey hoots, a gentle three-hour climb led us to Big Tree camp. A 
Sykes monkey and a small, tented village housing about 15 other hikers greeted 
us under the namesake big tree as rain settled in for the evening. The rain 
continued the next day, but only added to the fairytale atmosphere of huge 
trees dripping with old man’s beard lichen amid flowering St John’s wort. 
Eventually, we emerged from the forest into short heather, a moody landscape of 
grey-green shrubs, before reaching Shira camp set along a stream. A cold fog 
had us huddled in our dining tent, but the clouds parted briefly in the 
evening, revealing a first look at the still far-off peak.

On the third day, our route peeled away from Lemosho, heading north to Moir 
camp on the Northern Circuit. This 8km walk took us away from the busy southern 
face of the mountain and into a windy alpine desert. In the afternoon we hiked 
up a nearby ridge and explored a waterfall fringed with alpine plants including 
spikey giant lobelias. The waterfall was frozen the next morning when we set 
off to skirt the entire peak from west to east. This 22km section can be split 
over two days, but the terrain is flat and easy. The Northern Circuit affords 
incredible views up to the peak and an expansive panorama downslope through the 
heathlands and forests, and on to the Kenyan savannah andAmboseli national park 
<http://www.amboseli.com/>. Fresh buffalo and eland tracks crisscrossed our 
path through one of the most wild and remote sections of the mountain’s trail 
network. After a long day of hiking, we settled in at Third Cave camp.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b9464ed2db0a71e1db8e70bca377caf5e33b788%2F0_49_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b9464ed2db0a71e1db8e70bca377caf5e33b788%2F0_49_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
 A quieter trail on the remote Northern Circuit. 
The fifth day brought a steep climb high above the vegetation line to the camp 
called School Hut, where a bearded vulture soared overhead. From School Hut, TK 
Lemosho makes its bid for the summit, converging with the Rongai and Marangu 
routes on the arduous climb to Gillman’s Point before meeting up with the 
remaining routes at Stella Point just beneath the spectacular Uhuru Peak.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71c3913352666a783131f6f4aebd570033197dd0%2F0_0_5128_3076%2F5128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71c3913352666a783131f6f4aebd570033197dd0%2F0_0_5128_3076%2F5128.jpg>
 Scandinavian-style huts on the Marangu Route. Photograph: Alamy 
It’s not just the 50,000 annual visitors that crowd Kilimanjaro. The average 
tourist employs between four and six people to guide, cook, clean and carry 
equipment on the mountain. My climbing partner and I enjoyed a 12-person 
entourage that made the trek luxurious compared with our usual backcountry 
experiences. Instead of sleeping on hard ground, lugging heavy packs and eating 
rehydrated food, we relished thick roll-up mattresses, light loads, and good 
meals: oats, eggs and bacon for breakfast and three-course lunches and dinners 
including soup, a main dish, such as chicken and chips, and fruit for dessert. 
All of this pampering helps with altitude adaptation; however, the trade-off 
was 12 extra people arguing politics in camp and passing us on the trail each 
day. Not many people realise that it’s possible to forgo the support staff. 
Only a guide is mandatory. Of course, not many people could manage the climb 
without porters either, nor would they want to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F347a11375e35435909ad9eafd6bf71df22969be5%2F0_195_5212_3207%2F5212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F347a11375e35435909ad9eafd6bf71df22969be5%2F0_195_5212_3207%2F5212.jpg>
 A group of porters. The average tourist employs four to six people to guide, 
cook, and carry their equipment on the mountain. 
Guidebooks suggest climbing Kilimanjaro in January-February or 
August-September, when warmer temperatures and clear skies are most likely. But 
these are also the most crowded months. Climbing in March or October, just 
before each of two rainy seasons, is the best hedge to avoid both crowds and 
foul weather.

For the final summit bid from the highest camps, guides recommend starting the 
seven-hour slog shortly after midnight. Many people can’t sleep at the high 
camps anyway, so walking through the night means less time at dangerous 
altitudes and a full day to descend to safety. Our guide, Frank Gebra, 
explained that “summiting” at sunrise is the best chance for clear skies and 
scrambling up loose scree is easier when it’s frozen. After trudging for hours 
through darkness and sub-zero wind, I realised, too, that Frank’s hypnotic, 
rhythmic Swahili chanting probably works better to coax suffering clients 
onwards when they can’t see how far they have to go. In the blackness, I could 
barely discern the stars from 30 other hikers’ twinkling headlamps, seemingly 
miles above us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feba2c49ca64c72bfc10d8675a47de02117d9bf57%2F0_0_2200_1464%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feba2c49ca64c72bfc10d8675a47de02117d9bf57%2F0_0_2200_1464%2F2200.jpg>
 Sunrise view of Kilimanjaro’s glaciers 
At this extreme altitude, many hikers suffer from stomach problems, but the 
terrain is too dangerous for delirious climbers to move off the path when 
nature calls. Unfortunately, in my headlamp’s narrow beam, I saw things I 
wished I hadn’t, scattered amid carelessly discarded hand warmers and tissues. 
The going was tougher than I imagined – my hands and feet went painfully numb, 
my head pounded, my water bottle and camera battery froze, and nausea got the 
better of me a few times.

 But shortly after the most spectacular sunrise I’d ever seen, we stood, 
elated, at the summit in a moonscape of loose scree, pockmarked by thousands of 
boot prints somehow resisting the whipping wind. Above us was nothing but clear 
sky. The glaciers glowed blue against a still-pink horizon as we waited our 
turn for a picture in front of the iconic summit sign.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1e407f39928e3d5fa30a538735dd9791f0ebb4f%2F0_113_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20climb%20Kilimanjaro%20without%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fhow-to-climb-kilimanjaro-without-crowds-tanzania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1e407f39928e3d5fa30a538735dd9791f0ebb4f%2F0_113_2200_1319%2F2200.jpg>
 The writer’s climbing partner at the summit of Kilimanjaro. 
 I didn’t fully appreciate the value of our route for avoiding the crowds 
until our descent. Heading down the south slope, we passed a throng of climbers 
struggling towards the summit along a choked trail. I felt incredibly lucky 
when we bypassed sprawling Barafu camp, where nearly 100 tents housed climbers 
prior to their summit day, and groups were still streaming in. By comparison, 
we had shared Moir Hut with one party of three climbers and Third Cave and 
School Hut with two climbers who hardly made a peep.

Would I climb Kilimanjaro again? Sure, though I’d trade the constricted 
headlamp view and cloud-free sunrise for a daylight climb, wide vistas and 
deserted summit. With the transcendent view from the roof of Africa 
surprisingly accessible to mere mortals of moderate fitness, even a 
nature-loving misanthrope is better off joining the crowds than blaming them.
 