
Fashion has a new version of the chicken-and-egg question, and it goes like 
this: which came first, the crop top or the ab crack?

If you don’t know what an ab crack is, allow me to enlighten you. It is the 
hollow that runs vertically down the centre of the abdominal muscles, from the 
breastbone to the tummy button – but only if those abdominal muscles are 
extremely toned, and the shape of the musculature revealed by very low levels 
of body fat. If you want to see an ab crack in all its glory, head to the 
Instagram pages ofEmily Ratajkowski <https://www.instagram.com/emrata/?hl=en>, 
orKendall Jenner <https://www.instagram.com/kendalljenner/?hl=en>, or either 
Hadid <https://www.instagram.com/gigihadid/?hl=en> sister 
<https://www.instagram.com/bellahadid/?hl=en>. Although, be warned: you may 
find yourself overwhelmed by nostalgia for the relatively forgiving age of the 
thigh gap.

In 2016, statement abs are fashion’s favourite body part. The 00s were all 
about legs (the rise of the denim cut-off) and the 90s were all about cleavage 
(Hello Boys, the 1994 Wonderbra ad starring Eva Herzigova, wasvoted the most 
iconic advertising image 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/hello-boys-voted-greatest-poster-ever-created/1063405#>
 of all time). But this decade, across the spectrum of fashion from celebrity 
to streetstyle to catwalk, focus has shifted to the mid-section.Taylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift>, whose wholesome and 
accessible style has made her a huge influence on young fashion consumers, made 
crop tops worn with shorts or mini skirts her signature look on last year’s1989 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/24/taylor-swift-1989-review> tour 
and has kept it since. At the Grammys in February,she wore an orange bandeau top
 
<http://www.billboard.com/files/media/Taylor-Swift-grammys-2016-red-carpet-billboard-1000.jpg>
 that finished way clear of the waist of her fuchsia skirt. Streetstyle stars 
have pushed the look further:Danish blogger Marie Jensen 
<http://nemesisbabe.dk/> sometimes wears a crop top-style Nike sports bra with 
a full midi skirt to Paris fashion week. On the catwalk, slivers of waist-level 
flesh have shown up everywhere fromDior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/christian-dior> to Dolce & Gabbana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/dolce-and-gabbana>, Versace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/versace> to Jacquemus. Even bridalwear is 
getting in on the act. Last year on the Reem Acra bridal catwalk, a lace blouse 
that ended at the lower ribs, exposing four inches at the waist above a formal 
ivory silk skirt, was just one of severalab-exposing wedding gowns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/22/would-you-flash-your-midriff-on-your-wedding-day>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fab-crack-taylor-swift-serena-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc8e05b3798d9f4caef2979c393e5a3e14f1baee%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20statement%20abs%20became%20the%20new%20thigh%20gap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fab-crack-taylor-swift-serena-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20statement%20abs%20became%20the%20new%20thigh%20gap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fab-crack-taylor-swift-serena-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc8e05b3798d9f4caef2979c393e5a3e14f1baee%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 What? You mean your abs don’t look like this? Photograph: Nadya Lukic/Getty 
Images 
The 90s revival, a slow-burn influence on fashion for most of the last decade, 
was the prime mover behind the crop top’s rise to catwalk status. In the first 
series ofFriends <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/friends>, in 1994, 
sassily tied-above-the-waist plaid shirts were a signature look for Rachel. 
Low-slung trousers and shrunken vests were a favourite of 90s pin-ups from
Britney Spears <https://www.theguardian.com/music/britneyspears> and Christina 
Aguilera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/christinaaguilera> to the Spice 
Girls <https://www.theguardian.com/music/spicegirls>. The crop top momentum 
snowballed with the arrival of high-waisted jeans, which crossed over from 
Shoreditch-hipster to Topshop-mainstream – because a crop top will ensure 
everyone in the club notices your newly-purchased high-waisted jeans. Having 
been consigned to market-stall partywear for a decade, its rehabilitation into 
high fashion society was confirmed at 2014’s Met Gala, whenCara Delevingne 
<http://www.gotceleb.com/wp-content/uploads/celebrities/cara-delevingne/2014-met-gala-in-ny/Cara-Delevingne:-Met-Gala-2014--09-720x1125.jpg>
,Rihanna <http://i.huffpost.com/gen/1777783/thumbs/o-RIHANNA-900.jpg?16> and 
Margot Robbie 
<http://www.gotceleb.com/wp-content/uploads/celebrities/margot-robbie/2014-met-gala-in-ny/Margot-Robbie:-Met-Gala-2014--06-720x1111.jpg>
 all chose outfits that bared a toned slice of ab.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fab-crack-taylor-swift-serena-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff78d73a314822d2c83e2c352533ebbcb761004ae%2F0_153_2238_3256%2F2238.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20statement%20abs%20became%20the%20new%20thigh%20gap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fab-crack-taylor-swift-serena-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20statement%20abs%20became%20the%20new%20thigh%20gap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fab-crack-taylor-swift-serena-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff78d73a314822d2c83e2c352533ebbcb761004ae%2F0_153_2238_3256%2F2238.jpg>
 Serena Williams displaying her enviable abs. Photograph: 
MediaPunch/Rex/Shutterstock 
But fashion is only half the story here. The catwalk show that has had most 
influence on this trend doesn’t happen during New York, London, Milan or Paris 
fashion weeks. It is, instead,the Victoria’s Secret show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/11/victorias-secret-show-2015-six-things-we-learned>
. Because when you wear a crop top, its purpose is to frame what lies just 
beneath: specifically, the abs. In a culture obsessed with fitness, toned abs 
are the ultimate prize. “Strong is Sexy” proclaimedthe cover of September’s 
Self magazine 
<https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-7L_RswbBHyw/V6CwV1uGMmI/AAAAAAADBZM/thT6HNB0cZIMbk3UriQ8nVj_IuAjDWDUQCLcB/s1600/Untitled.png>
, on whichSerena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> 
bared her six-pack in a crop top and tiny sprint shorts. Many of the most 
fashionable exercise trends of the decade – Pilates, and ballet-based barre 
classes, for instance – target a tight, zipped-in ribcage and pancake-flat abs 
as key goals.

Abs have become the acceptable face of body perfectionism. We are more 
sensitive now to the damage wrought by endless images of unhealthily thin 
bodies. Twenty years ago, it was normal for magazines to suggest ways to get 
“thin thighs”. This would be frowned upon now, but having “toned abs” is still 
an acceptable public goal, because it foregrounds exercise, strength and hard 
work. (Never mind that you can tone your abs as much as you like, but the 
effect won’t be visible unless you lose any fat that lies on top.) And in 2016, 
abs are also the respectable way to signal sexiness: bothKim Kardashian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> and Beyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> often accent their curves by 
wearing a tight skirt and a clingy-but-not-revealing top, with a belt-width 
strip of flesh visible at the waist. The silhouette is similar to that created 
by a corseted cocktail dress: but instead of squeezing herself into a corset, 
the wearer must spend two hours a day in the gym. Progress? Now, there’s a 
question.
 