
Spoiler alert: this article recaps the season four finale of Please Like Me, 
which aired on Wednesday 15 December. Do not read on if you’re not up to date

Josh Thomas’s Please Like Me has quietly become one of the most surprising, 
honest and devastating shows on television.

This should come as no surprise to anyone who has been watching from the 
beginning. Here is a series that starred a comedian, which many expected to be 
a comedy – but which began with a suicide attempt from the protagonist’s mum. 
If you’re 20 years old, as Thomas’s lead character Josh is, what do you do with 
that?


Over four seasons, the series has traversed all manner of topics that other 
shows with bigger budgets fear to cover, and delivered them with sensitivity, 
nuance, frankness and frequent hilarity.

Josh Thomas on Please Like Me season four: 'We're doing so many sex scenes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/09/josh-thomas-on-the-new-season-of-please-like-me-the-hardest-thing-now-is-being-surprising>
The show has dealt with homophobia and racism, depression and workplace 
harassment, breast cancer and STDs. There was an abortion which, in a 
refreshing turn, was treated not with kid gloves but with openness and no 
regrets. There was commendably realistic gay sex – a lot of it. And in the 
second season, many of the scenes and three of the main characters – Hannah 
(Hannah Gadsby), Arnold (Keegan Joyce) and Josh’s mum Rose (the brilliant Debra 
Lawrance) – were based in a mental health institution.

When Rose’s friend Ginger (Denise Drysdale) killed herself in the same 
institution, Please Like Me didn’t gloss over it. Instead, they bundled Josh 
and his mum off to the bush on a five-day camping trip to deal with it, and 
handed us one of the most affecting episodes of the entire series.

They share a tent on that trip, and each night Josh lies awake listening to 
the sobs that wrack his mother’s body until – hilariously, and weirdly 
cathartically – she farts. And for the first time, the pair have a frank 
conversation about the three suicide attempts that led her to this point.

“I don’t understand how you never got angry with me,” Rose says, looking out 
over the Australian bush dusk. “I’m so angry with Ginger.”

Josh answers slowly. “The third time you tried to kill yourself, there was a 
day where we didn’t know if your stomach had been pumped in time. If it had 
been pumped in time they assured me you would be fine. But if it hadn’t, you 
were going to die slowly, over two weeks.


“You’re my mum,” he says. “Imagine if I had to watch you die slowly over two 
weeks. Watch you kill yourself over two weeks.”

Instead, he watches her kill herself over three years. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjosh-thomass-please-like-me-became-one-of-the-most-honest-and-devastating-shows-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa563fadc4e446753a8d5774fece57ca9c1ccfe37%2F0_0_5521_3680%2F5521.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Please%20Like%20Me%20became%20one%20of%20TV's%20most%20honest%20and%20devastating%20shows%20%7C%20Steph%20Harmon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjosh-thomass-please-like-me-became-one-of-the-most-honest-and-devastating-shows-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Please%20Like%20Me%20became%20one%20of%20TV%27s%20most%20honest%20and%20devastating%20shows%20%7C%20Steph%20Harmon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjosh-thomass-please-like-me-became-one-of-the-most-honest-and-devastating-shows-on-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa563fadc4e446753a8d5774fece57ca9c1ccfe37%2F0_0_5521_3680%2F5521.jpg>
 Josh (Josh Thomas) and Rose (Debra Lawrance) and Alan (David Roberts) in 
season four of Please Like Me. Photograph: Kelly Gardner 
The penultimate episode of series four, which may be the show’s last – its US 
network, Pivot, was shut down this year, and ABC did not announce a new series 
as part of its 2017 slate – features a scene of the type Please Like Me 
executes so well. There’s a teasing, fun phone call between Josh and his 
friends Tom (Thomas Ward) and Ella (Emily Barclay), who are eating ice cream to 
celebrate the fact that Ella doesn’t have cancer after all. Josh hangs up when 
he gets to his mother’s door, and runs through the house buoyantly, looking for 
her: “Hi Ma?”

He finds her lying on the floor dead, grasping a note in her hand, with his 
name on the envelope.

If the scene felt familiar, that’s because it was. In season one, back when 
Rose was on suicide watch and wasn’t picking up the phone, Josh rushes through 
the same house, in the same shots, to find her lying on the couch, asleep. At 
the end of that season, there was the same scene again – but this time she was 
collapsed on the kitchen floor after another attempt.

What do you do if your mum dies? What do you do if she kills herself, after 
repeated attempts, after you let her live alone? How much do you blame 
yourself, and for how long?

What do you even do without your mum?

When last week’s episode finished, I was a mess. It wasn’t just the death 
itself, but the way it was handled by Josh’s family and friends. In shock, his 
bumbling but well-meaning dad, Alan (the heartbreaking, wonderful David 
Roberts), drops a burrito bowl in a fast-food joint, and tries to lap it up 
from the floor with his fingers. When the police leave Rose’s house, Alan 
immediately turns to clear out the fridge. “Do you want that milk? There’s 
still a few days left,” he mumbles. “Smoked salmon, there’s no point wasting 
that.”

Josh tries to stop him, with increasing urgency. “Dad. I need you to stop 
clearing out the fridge,” he says, and then: “Just stop clearing out the fridge
.” He’s crying so hard he can hardly breathe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjosh-thomass-please-like-me-became-one-of-the-most-honest-and-devastating-shows-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b24e3f62f04e7895e318f2f0a3278e1000622f8%2F0_0_5365_3576%2F5365.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Please%20Like%20Me%20became%20one%20of%20TV's%20most%20honest%20and%20devastating%20shows%20%7C%20Steph%20Harmon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjosh-thomass-please-like-me-became-one-of-the-most-honest-and-devastating-shows-on-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Please%20Like%20Me%20became%20one%20of%20TV%27s%20most%20honest%20and%20devastating%20shows%20%7C%20Steph%20Harmon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjosh-thomass-please-like-me-became-one-of-the-most-honest-and-devastating-shows-on-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b24e3f62f04e7895e318f2f0a3278e1000622f8%2F0_0_5365_3576%2F5365.jpg>
 Ella (Emily Barclay) reads to Josh’s dog in season four of Please Like Me. 
Photograph: Kelly Gardner 
Tom and Ella, meanwhile, attempt in vain to keep it light with Josh around the 
dinner table; all of the show’s key emotional scenes seem to centre around 
food. “Tom will give you a handjob if you like,” Ella offers, but when Josh 
leaves to go to bed, Tom – so pathetic, hapless and irritating in season one, 
but trying so hard now to be a better man – crumples. “That was just the most 
difficult thing I’ve ever done,” he says. It’s a deeply felt performance from 
Ward. “I feel so useless and small.”

The line reads like a cliche, but for the character it’s perfect. Tom has 
always found it so difficult to communicate what he wants, to describe how he 
feels, to understand other people. “Why do I never notice things?” he asks in 
the final episode. Turning to cliches in such an overwhelming moment might be 
the only option.

Flopped on the living room couch, Claire (Caitlin Stacey) asks Josh what 
losing his mum really feels like.

 “Today mostly I feel isolated because nobody cared about her as much as I 
did,” he says. “I get it, I get it, she’s actually not very interesting – in 
the scheme of the world she was an average lady. But she was a very big, very 
special thing to me.”

And then comes that moment of humour, to cut through the sadness like a fart 
in a tent: “Are you crying Claire? Stop crying, it’s gross.”

• Please Like Me season four is available to watch in full on iView 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/please-like-me/?>
 