
As the author of the original “reaping the whirlwind” blogpost 
<http://www.chris-floyd.com/Articles/2531-age-of-despair-reaping-the-whirlwind-of-western-support-for-extremist-violence.html>
 that was briefly reposted (without my knowledge and with a tweaked headline) 
by the Stop the War Coalition, I can assure Tristram Hunt and all the other MPs 
who have used the piece as a political football that it did not say or imply 
that the people of France or “French policy” were to blame for the Paris 
attacks (Corbyn rejects call to pull out of Stop the War event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/06/corbyn-stop-the-war-fundraiser>
, 6 December). Every public reference to the post has been a complete 
mischaracterisation of its content.

The post states clearly that we in the west, all of us, are paying for the 
consequences of many decades of collusion with – and manipulation of – 
religious extremism by our leaders in order to advance various geopolitical 
goals. Is this even a controversial or “disreputable” statement? For example, 
does anyone, even the prime minister, dispute that the rise of Isis stems 
directly from 2003 invasion of Iraq by the US and UK? The post also dealt with 
other historical follies, such as creating an international jihad army to draw 
the Soviets into Afghanistan (a ploy thatZbigniew Brzezinski 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zbigniew_Brzezinski> has proudly admitted), and 
the decades-long support of religious extremists such as Saudi Arabia.

Even some supporters of bombing Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>
 say that our past crimes and follies in the region make us responsible for 
taking action now to rectify their horrific consequences. One can argue whether 
new military action is the best way to do this; I don’t think it is. But the 
views in the blogpost are not beyond the pale of human decency, to be shunned 
at all cost. On the contrary, they have been part of mainstream political 
debate for years.

I’m not a member of the Labour party or StWC or Momentum or any other 
political group. It has been disheartening – though highly instructive – to see 
how the opinions of a private citizen can be so twisted by a political system 
that puts the struggle for petty partisan advantage above all else.
Chris Floyd
Oxford
 