Which country has won the Africa Cup of Nations the most times (seven)?  Ghana  
EgyptIn 1957, 1959, 1986, 1998, 2006, 2008 and 2010.  Ivory Coast  South Africa 
When was the first tournament?  1951  1957 There were only three participating 
nations: Egypt, Sudan and Ethiopia.  1965  1971 Who has scored the most goals 
in Africa Cup of Nations history?  Roger Milla  Frédéric Kanouté  Didier Drogba 
 Samuel Eto’oEto’o scored 18 goals in the African Cup of Nations, which he won 
in 2000 and 2002 The 2015 final between Ivory Coast and Ghana finished in a 
goalless draw and was decided by a penalty shootout. How many penalties were 
taken in the shootout?  Four  10  16  22 Ivory Coast won 9-8 on penalties Which 
country did Avram Grant lead to an Africa Cup of Nations final?  Cameroon  
Ivory Coast  Angola  Ghana Grant has been in charge of Ghana since 2014. His 
team lost to Ivory Coast in the 2015 final. How many times has Didier Drogba 
won the tournament?  None Drogba played in the 2006 and 2012 finals, which 
Ivory Coast lost on penalties. They won the tournament in 2015 but he had 
retired from international football the year before.  One  Two  Three Which two 
Premier League players were sent home from the 2004 tournament for indiscipline?
 Yakubu and Celestine Babayaro'They did not respect the rules of the camp,' 
said the general secretary of the Nigerian Football Association.  Aliou Cissé 
and El Hadji Diouf  Geremi Njitap and Eric Djemba-Djemba  Joseph Yobo and Isaac 
Okoronkwo Gabon are hosting this year's tournament. With which country did they 
co-host the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations?  Cameroon  Equatorial Guinea  Angola  
Republic of the Congo Which of these countries has never qualified for the 
tournament?  Somalia  Namibia  Benin  Cape Verde Which squad at this year's 
tournament contains two players from the same Premier League club?  Ivory Coast 
 AlgeriaRiyad Mahrez and Islam Slimani of Leicester City  Egypt  Senegal  You 
got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  