
Peter Sellars, director

I had heard Lorraine Hunt singing Theodora 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7R60K3NWvlY> in a concert performance, and was 
overwhelmed by the drama and sheer beauty of Handel's music. The story is basic 
tabloid fare, and Handel treats it almost entirely as interior drama. [An 
oratorio in three acts, it concerns the Christian martyrdom of Theodora and her 
Roman lover Didymus.] When Glyndebourne asked me where they should begin with 
staging Handel, it was easy. At that time, people didn't quite know what 
Theodora was: we were in a secret cathedral, discovering a masterpiece the 
world did not know.

The staging flowed in an extremely organic way. Visionary works such as this 
wait for another era in which they are allowed to speak in their own language 
and not have to ventriloquise the conventional wisdom of the day. A lot of it 
was done as in medieval or byzantine art – as simply as possible: the emotional 
and spiritual aura of each character was what we were concerned with.

The work is a soundtrack for two people leaving this world that is as chilling 
as anything Handel ever wrote. A lot of opera focuses on execution. It's a huge 
question: when we take people's lives as a society; when and how we justify 
killing. In the US, execution had been illegal for a period and then [in 1976] 
the Supreme Court decisionturned it around 
<http://www.clarkprosecutor.org/html/death/usexecute.htm>. It was decided that 
lethal injection was "humane", but it was hidden away. I thought it was 
important to see what the process was. We investigated and were incredibly 
literal, down to the timing.

The effect was profound. During most performances, people had to be carried 
from the auditorium; there were emergency medical services standing by. I am 
not proud of putting people into an emergency medical van, of course, but I do 
think that's why the Greeks invented theatre: to put these things in front of 
citizens and say, how do we feel about them?

There was an incredible rehearsal where we ran the first act for the first 
time in the darkened theatre, and the piece just rose up, like some majestic 
host and said, "I'm here." We were weeping, holding each other, truly 
overwhelmed. The production remains a high point of all our lives.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAAVrDbkmY1A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAAVrDbkmY1A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAAVrDbkmY1A%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
William Christie <http://www.arts-florissants.com/site/accueil.php4>, conductor

Glyndebourne's general manager had asked if there was a Handel piece I would 
like to do. They had never staged anything of his there before. I wanted an
oratorio 
<http://www.lcsproductions.net/MusicHistory/MusHistRev/Articles/HandelOratorio.html>
, something that would use Glyndebourne's chorus, rather than anopera 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opera_seria> – and Theodora 
<http://www.handelhouse.org/discover/george-frideric-handel/opera-synopses/theodora>
 had stuck in my mind as incredibly moving. He said: "That's curious, the 
fellow we've asked to direct said the exact same thing!"

I had not met Peter <http://www.laphil.com/philpedia/peter-sellars> before 
although of course I knew of him: he's a fellow of great notoriety 
<http://www.mediahex.com/Peter_Sellars>, in the best sense of the word. You 
knew that he wasn't going to give you anything other than a controversial, or 
at least a very personal, sense of the drama. The fact that this Christian 
woman and her converted lover find themselves on a gurney in a Texas military 
hospital awaiting execution was incredibly shocking, but I found it horribly 
moving. We were talking about martyrdom, a word that's existed as long as 
humans have. Peter was hellbent on making a political statement, registering 
his dismay and revulsion about aspects of America, but also making music that 
was written several hundreds of years ago more relevant.

The starting point of any successful lyric piece is giving the singers a long 
leash. I gave space to them as well as to the music. We had so many happy 
moments in the casting. I wanted desperately to haveLorraine Hunt 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2006/jul/06/guardianobituaries.usa>: the role 
of [Theodora's friend] Irene is strong and forthright, as Lorraine was as a 
singer and a human being.Richard Croft 
<http://www.richardcroft.net/templates/tyTP_standard.php?topic=home> [as 
Didymus's friend Septimus] was also someone I particularly wanted; there is
great honesty in the way he sings <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6aKqCCH389s>.

It's an incredibly emotional piece. We were all caught up in it. I remember 
Lorraine not being ableto mark 
<http://www.tips4singingstudents.com/post/19287426186/how-should-we-save-our-voice-in-long-rehearsals>
 in rehearsals [sing in a way that rested her voice]. She'd be singing full 
voice at 11am.

• A DVD of the production is available from glyndebourne.com 
<http://glyndebourne.com>
 