
HSBC has been forced to insist its plan to install more than 1,000 key staff in
Birmingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> is on track, after the 
process was reportedly described as “in crisis” by an official monitor at 
Britain’s biggest bank.

The monitor – who is overseeing the bank’s attempts to overhaul its systems 
after a £1.2bn fine for money laundering offences from the US in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/dec/11/hsbc-bank-us-money-laundering>
 – is reported to have been concerned about the number of staff willing to move 
from London to Birmingham, which the bank has selected as the headquarters of 
its main UK operations.

However, the monitor, Michael Cherkasky, is reported to have been convinced by 
the bank to eventually change his assessment of the operation as “in crisis”.

HSBC calls for Theresa May to clarify status of EU nationals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/hsbc-profits-fall> 
HSBC refused to comment on the monitor’s work while Cherkasky would not 
comment either. But the bank respondedto the report in the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/money-laundering-fear-over-hsbc-move-m6c0xcqmd>
 (£) by insisting that the aim to move 1,000 staff to a new head office in 
Birmingham was not behind schedule.

The Birmingham move has been prompted by rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/24/hsbc-to-base-ringfenced-retail-banking-operation-in-birmingham>
 requiring UK banks to ringfence their high street operations from their 
investment banking arms,as outlined by Sir John Vickers in his report on 
banking in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/12/vickers-report-banks-given-until-2019>
.

Dame Clara Furse <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dame-clara-furse>, the 
former chief executive of the London Stock Exchange, is to become chair of the 
operation. Other banks are also racing to comply with the rules which comes 
into force at the start of 2019.

Nigel Hinshelwood, head of HSBC’s UK bank, said: “We always knew that moving 
more than 1,000 roles from London to Birmingham was going to be a major 
undertaking. We also understood that not everyone would want to or be able to 
move due to personal commitments. That’s why we have phased this over three and 
a half years. We’re ahead of where we planned to be by this point in the 
project and by the end of this year, more than a quarter of the roles will 
already be based in Birmingham.”

By the end of the year, the remaining 700 or so London-based staff will have 
to inform the bank whether they intend to move. Those who decide not to do so 
could face redundancy. Last year only 13% of those staff earmarked for 
relocation had indicated they were ready to take on the move, although that 
figure is said to be increasing.

A report by estate agents Knight Frank published last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/10/move-over-manchester-midlands-motor-birmingham-uk-hotspot-business>
 said Birmingham was enjoying a renaissance, fuelled by manufacturers and the 
arrival of big banks and professional services firms, as well as the planned 
HS2 rail link.

The monitor makes an annual report to regulators in the UK and US, and HSBC 
admitted in February –when it published its results for 2015  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/22/hsbc-full-year-profits-edge-up-to-132bn-as-chief-stuart-gulliver-takes-pay-cut>
– that “significant concerns” had been raised about the slow pace of change to 
its procedures to combat crime.
 