
A five-year investigation by competition authorities in Brussels into rigging 
of interest rates drew to a close on Wednesday when three major banks – 
includingHSBC <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> – were fined 
€485m (£412m) for colluding to manipulate a crucial benchmark rate.

The three banks, which also included JP Morgan Chase and Crédit Agricole, did 
not agree to an earlier settlement 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-4304_en.htm> involving a seven-bank 
cartel over the setting of the interest rate known as Euribor. All three deny 
wrongdoing.

JP Morgan was fined €337m, HSBC €33m and Crédit Agricole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/credit-agricole> €114m. The levels were 
based on the time they participated in the cartel and the value of products 
involved.

Margrethe Vestager, the EU competition commissioner, said: “A sound and 
competitive financial sector is essential for investment and growth. Banks have 
to respect EU competition rules just like any other company operating in the 
single market.”

Four other banks – Royal Bank of Scotland, Barclays, Deutsche Bank and Société 
Générale – settled with the commission in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/04/banks-rate-rigging-libor-euribor-rbs-citigroup-jpmorgan>
 for €820m.

Those penalties came at a time when the industry was reeling from the 
rate-rigging scandal and the announcement on Wednesday served as a reminder of 
the misconduct matters that continue to plague the industry.

The three banks fined on Wednesday had not participated in the 2013 settlement 
andJP Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/jpmorgan> said it was 
considering a possible appeal to the European court. Crédit Agricole said it 
would appeal. HSBC said it was considering its legal options.

Vestager said the commission had found “chats” between traders congratulating 
themselves on setting the rate to levels that suited their means in a cartel 
which operated between September 2005 and May 2008.

She described it as “a closed community with a very free language”. Financial 
regulators have previously published electronic correspondence with traders 
using colourful language as they encouraged each other to move interest rates.

Euribor is the eurozone’s version of Libor – the London interbank offered 
rate, which is ultimately used to value a range of financial products ranging 
from interest rates swaps between companies to mortgage products for households.

“The traders’ aim was to distort the normal course of pricing components for 
euro interest rate derivatives. They did this by telling each other their 
desired or intended Euribor submissions and by exchanging sensitive information 
on their trading positions or on their trading or pricing strategies,” the 
commission said.

“This means that the seven banks colluded instead of competing with each other 
on the euro derivatives market. This market is very important not only to banks 
but also to many companies in the single market, which use euro interest rate 
derivatives to hedge their financing risk,” the commission added.

The rate-rigging scandal erupted in June 2012 when Barclays was fined £290m by 
regulators on both sides of the Atlantic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/27/barclays-chief-bob-diamond-bonus-fine>
, unleashing a wave of public anger about banks and sparking the parliamentary 
commissions into banking standards. It also led to a wave of other fines on 
banks and prompted the Treasury to change the rules so that the fines went to 
the exchequer rather than back to the regulator.

The way the benchmarks are set has also been overhauled while criminal 
investigations have been launched.

A spokesperson for JP Morgan said: “We have cooperated fully with the European 
commission throughout its five-year investigation. We did not engage in any 
wrongdoing with respect to the Euribor benchmark. We will continue to 
vigorously defend our position against these allegations, including through 
possible appeals to the European courts.”

HSBC said the decision related to “purported conduct” during one month in 
early 2007. “We believe we did not participate in an anti-competitive cartel. 
We are reviewing the European commission’s decision and considering our legal 
options,”it said.

“Crédit Agricole firmly believes that it did not infringe competition law,” 
the French bank said.

Just months after fines for Libor rigging were slapped on banks, it emerged 
that other markets were being manipulated. Vestager said an investigation into 
the manipulation of foreign exchange markets was continuing and was “a very 
large complex case with many participants”.
 