
The annual Hugo awards <https://www.theguardian.com/books/hugoaward> for the 
best science fiction of the year have once again been riven by controversy, as 
a concerted campaign by a conservative lobby has dominated the ballot.

The Sad Puppies and Rabid Puppies movements, which both separately campaign 
against a perceived bias towards liberal and leftwing science-fiction and 
fantasy authors, have managed to get the majority of their preferred 
nominations on to the final ballot, announced today.

The Hugo awards hijack is nasty and dishonest – but it just proves 
progressives right | Helen Lewis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/18/hugo-award-hijack-just-proves-progressives-right>
This means that voters on the prestigious awards will now be choosing from a 
shortlist which includes SJWs Always Lie, an essay about “social justice 
warriors” by Rabid Puppies campaign leader Vox Day; a self-published parody of 
erotic dinosaur fiction called Space Raptor Butt Invasion, by Chuck Tingle; and 
My Little Pony cartoon The Cutie Map.

Since 2013, the Sad Puppies has posted recommendations of works to combat the 
Hugo tendency to reward works that writer Brad Torgersen deemed “niche, 
academic, overtly to the left in ideology and flavour, and ultimately lacking 
what might best be called visceral, gut-level, swashbuckling fun”. Supporters 
are encouraged to buy memberships to the annual World Science Fiction 
Convention, which enables them to nominate works chosen by the campaign and 
vote on the final selection for the Hugo awards.

'No award' sweeps the Hugo Awards following controversy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/23/no-award-hugo-awards-following-controversy>
A breakaway, more political faction called the Rabid Puppies 
<http://voxday.blogspot.co.uk/2015/02/rabid-puppies-2015.html> was formed in 
2015, the year the prize was most rocked by the twin campaigns. After the 
shortlist was dominated by nominations from the Sad and Rabid Puppies’ lists, 
Game of Thrones author George RR Martinsaid the Hugos were “broken” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/09/george-rr-martin-right-wing-broken-hugo-awards>
, while previous Hugo winner Connie Willis pulled out of presenting a prize, 
saying her presence would “lend cover and credibility to winners who got the 
award through bullying and extortion”. In the end, members of the World Science 
Fiction Society rejected finalists in an unprecedented five categories,voting 
for “No Award” rather than any of the nominees backed by the campaigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/26/george-rr-martin-relieved-after-sad-puppies-hugo-awards-defeat>
.

Led by Beale – who writes under the name Vox Day and was once dubbed “the most 
despised man in science fiction” by the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/the-culture-wars-invade-science-fiction-1431707195>
 – the Rabid Puppies has been successful in getting its nominations on the 
shortlist again this year; out of 80 recommendations posted by Beale on his 
blog, 62 have received sufficient votes to make the ballot.

The shortlist for best novel is Ancillary Mercy by Ann Leckie (Orbit); The 
Cinder Spires: The Aeronaut’s Windlass by Jim Butcher (Roc); The Fifth Season 
by NK Jemisin (Orbit); Seveneves: A Novel by Neal Stephenson (William Morrow); 
and Uprooted by Naomi Novik (Del Rey). Of these two, Butcher and Stephenson, 
were on the Rabid Puppies’ slate, while both of those plus Leckie’s Ancillary 
Mercy were recommended by the Sad Puppies group.

British author Alastair Reynolds, whose novella Slow Bullets was featured on 
both the Sad Puppies’ and Rabid Puppies’ lists despite his request they remove 
him, is on the novella shortlist alongside Brandon Sanderson and Nnedi 
Okorafor. Other well-known names include horror iconStephen King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking>, nominated in the novelette 
category for his story Obits, and fantasy writer Neil Gaiman, who is nominated 
for the latest volume in his Sandman graphic novel series, The Sandman: 
Overture.

At MidAmeriCon II this year, it was announced that more than 4,000 nominating 
ballots were cast for the 2016 Hugo awards, almost double the previous record 
of 2,122 ballots. This news was initially greeted with cautious optimism, but 
the shortlist shows that the Puppies and their supporters have redoubled their 
efforts to “game” the awards.

The Hugo Awards: George RR Martin, Vox Day and Alastair Reynolds on the 
prize's future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/26/the-hugo-awards-george-rr-martin-vox-day-and-alastair-reynolds-on-the-prizes-future>
The shortlist will be voted upon and the winners revealed at the forthcoming 
Worldcon in Kansas City, Missouri, in August.

The Puppies factions will undoubtedly be celebrating their successes on the 
ballot, but for many people engaged in the science-fiction and fantasy genres 
this news will not be well-received. The Hugo awards, once the watchword of 
quality in the SFF world, appear to have been utterly derailed for the second 
year running.

2016 Hugo awards finalists

Best novel (3,695 ballots)

Ancillary Mercy by Ann Leckie (Orbit)

The Cinder Spires: The Aeronaut’s Windlass by Jim Butcher (Roc)

The Fifth Season by NK Jemisin (Orbit)

Seveneves: A Novel by Neal Stephenson (William Morrow)

Uprooted by Naomi Novik (Del Rey)

Best novella (2,416 ballots)

Binti by Nnedi Okorafor (Tor.com)

The Builders by Daniel Polansky (Tor.com)

Penric’s Demon by Lois McMaster Bujold (Spectrum)

Perfect State by Brandon Sanderson (Dragonsteel Entertainment)

Slow Bullets by Alastair Reynolds (Tachyon)

Best novelette (1,975 ballots)

And You Shall Know Her by the Trail of Dead by Brooke Bolander (Lightspeed, 
Feb 2015)

Flashpoint: Titan by Cheah Kai Wai (There Will Be War Volume X, Castalia House)

Folding Beijing by Hao Jingfang, trans. Ken Liu (Uncanny Magazine, Jan-Feb 
2015)

Obits by Stephen King (The Bazaar of Bad Dreams, Scribner)

What Price Humanity? by David VanDyke (There Will Be War Volume X, Castalia 
House)

Best short story (2,451 ballots)

Asymmetrical Warfare by SR Algernon (Nature, Mar 2015)

The Commuter by Thomas A Mays (Stealth)

If You Were an Award, My Love by Juan Tabo and S Harris (voxday.blogspot.com, 
Jun 2015)

Seven Kill Tiger by Charles Shao (There Will Be WarVolume X, Castalia House)

Space Raptor Butt Invasion by Chuck Tingle (Amazon Digital Services)

Best related work (2,080 ballots)

Between Light and Shadow: An Exploration of the Fiction of Gene Wolfe, 1951 to 
1986 by Marc Aramini (Castalia House)

The First Draft of My Appendix N Book by Jeffro Johnson (jeffro.wordpress.com)

Safe Space as Rape Room by Daniel Eness (castaliahouse.com)

SJWs Always Lie: Taking Down the Thought Police by Vox Day (Castalia House)

The Story of Moira Greyland by Moira Greyland (askthebigot.com)

Best graphic story (1,838 ballots)

The Divine, written by Boaz Lavie, art by Asaf Hanuka and Tomer Hanuka (First 
Second)

Erin Dies Alone, written by Grey Carter, art by Cory Rydell (dyingalone.net)

Full Frontal Nerdity by Aaron Williams (ffn.nodwick.com)

Invisible Republic Vol 1, written by Corinna Bechko and Gabriel Hardman, art 
by Gabriel Hardman (Image Comics)

The Sandman: Overture, written by Neil Gaiman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman>, art by JH Williams III (Vertigo)

John W Campbell award for best new writer (1,922 ballots)

Pierce Brown

Sebastien de Castell

Brian Niemeier

Andy Weir

Alyssa Wong

Read the 2016 Hugo nominations in full 
<http://midamericon2.org/home/hugo-awards-and-wsfs/2016-hugo-finalists/>

• This article was amended on 27 April 2016. An earlier version said the 
Worldcon in August was happening in Kansas. That has been corrected to say 
Kansas City, Missouri.
 