
Hulu <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/hulu>, the internet video 
streaming service, is planning to take on the traditional cable and broadcast 
networks with a live TV offering. The service will expand beyond Hulu’s 
broadcasts of recent reruns of broadcast and cable shows and make it a direct 
competitor of traditional pay-TV providers and new digital entrants, including 
Netflix.

TV networks battle new media threat as Facebook looms over ad war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/01/tv-advertising-facebook-google-viacom-netflix-youtube-vice-hulu>
Multiple reports citing Hulu executives published Monday confirmed the 
additions to the streaming service, which is owned by a consortium of competing 
television production companies including NBCUniversal, Disney and Fox 
Broadcasting.


When they debut in the first quarter of 2017, both the format of the new 
networks and the ads delivered through them would be tailored to the user, an 
executive told theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/03/business/media/hulu-is-said-to-plan-full-cable-and-broadcast-channel-streaming.html?_r=0>
. Cable companies and TV providers have made efforts in the recent past to 
escape from the old-fashioned channel-surfing model associated with cable TV 
and appeal more broadly to the youth market, which has refused to adopt costly 
cable subscriptions.

11.22.63 review – sumptuous Stephen King adaptation bodes well for Hulu
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/112263-review-hulu-stephen-king-books-jfk-assassination>
Executives told the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/hulu-is-developing-a-cable-style-online-tv-service-1462150982>
 that Fox and Disney were closest to deals to bring networks in their 
respective stables to the service.


Like its streaming video competitors, Hulu has invested heavily over the last 
three years after the ouster of founding CEO Jason Kilar – under new CEO Mike 
Hopkins, the company has commissioned programs including anexpensive adaptation 
of Stephen King bestseller 11/22/63 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/112263-review-hulu-stephen-king-books-jfk-assassination>
, from JJ Abrams, and an upcoming miniseries version ofMargaret Atwood’s novel 
The Handmaid’s Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/30/the-handmaids-tale-hulu-tv-series-margaret-atwood-women>
.

But Hulu has also bucked conventional understandings of the way it would 
compete in the market against Netflix and Amazon Prime, where it was initially 
seen as an ad-filled version of popular ad-free streaming services that simply 
got content earlier. Instead, Hulu launched its own ad-free tier at a higher 
premium and agreed not to trim cinephile prints of classic films from boutique 
movie distributor the Criterion Collection to fit ad breaks.

Now, Hulu is flirting with a model tested by services including PlayStation 
Vue and Sling TV: traditional ad-supported television networks streaming 
alongside its proprietary shows and the back catalog of television offered on 
demand.
 