
New Zealand’s landscapes are well-known on the silver screen. The Lord of the 
Rings films showed off the majestic mountainous scenery so well they sparked a 
tourism boom – and 13% of travellers still cite Peter Jackson’s cinematography 
in their decision to visit. Out next Friday (16 September), Hunt for the 
Wilderpeople, a comedy-drama directed by Taika Waititi and starring Sam Neill 
as Hec, grumpy foster uncle to Ricky (newcomer Julian Dennison), shines the 
spotlight on the country once again. The story of a city kid’s adventures in 
the wilderness broke box office records at home and had rave reviews at the 
Edinburgh International Film Festival (winning the coveted Audience Award). It 
was filmed largely in the North Island’s Auckland region, where beaches, 
rainforest and vineyards surround New Zealand’s biggest city. For those 
inspired to book a Kiwi adventure, here are five of the best film-related 
options.

Bush survival
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1903a74a5686c25584c2442cf10d488ee2bb4e5e%2F0_0_3264_2035%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hunt%20for%20the%20wilder%20side%20of%20New%20Zealand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hunt%20for%20the%20wilder%20side%20of%20New%20Zealand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1903a74a5686c25584c2442cf10d488ee2bb4e5e%2F0_0_3264_2035%2F3264.jpg>
 Bush survival training near Auckland 
Stu Gilbert from SOS Survival Training coaches anyone from airline crews to 
schoolchildren, so a session with him is a good start for would-be 
Wilderpeople, as Ricky dubs himself and Hec. A former air force instructor, Stu 
shows rookies the ropes in a fun session out in the bush on a large property in 
Muriwai, 45 minutes’ drive from Auckland. After tuition on the basics, he has 
participants foraging for logs, branches and bracken to build a makeshift bed 
and shelter) and trying to light a fire using cotton wool, flint and steel (a 
dead phone battery can also work, apparently). We found the flint and steel 
worked fine, with the right mix of tinder and kindling, and were sparked up in 
no time. Overnight and three-day packages of full bush immersion are available, 
too.
• Adult full-day course NZ$180ppus (£100), sossurvivaltraining.com 
<http://www.sossurvivaltraining.com/>

Horse riding
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f93ccbd5070fb12af046c4c18857b3b6c8d205b%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hunt%20for%20the%20wilder%20side%20of%20New%20Zealand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hunt%20for%20the%20wilder%20side%20of%20New%20Zealand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f93ccbd5070fb12af046c4c18857b3b6c8d205b%2F0_0_640_480%2Fmaster%2F640.jpg>
 A Waiheke Horseworx tour, taking in the Piritahi Marae Maori community centre 
A 35-minute ferry ride from downtown Auckland is beautiful, bohemian Waiheke 
island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/06/48-hours-on-waiheke-island-new-zealand-where-to-go-what-to-do>
. Most tourists get around by car, bike or even zip-lining – but the 
Wilderpeople way would be to jump on a horse like Ricky’s friend Kahu (Tioreore 
Ngatai-Melbourne).Waiheke HorseWorx <http://waihekehorseworx.co.nz/> is a new 
operator that tours the beaches and bush tracks, taking in traditional Maori 
culture and Waiheke’s famous wineries. Some of their steeds are film stars too: 
ask for Shaman if you’re a Hobbit fan (she was dwarf king Thorin’s mount). A 
typical four-hour tour will begin with basic instruction, followed by a ride 
along beaches to Piritahi Marae community centre for a traditional Maori 
welcome, before a tea break and a ride toCable Bay  <http://cablebay.nz/>
vineyard for food and wine. Alternatively, in the middle of North Island, 
adventure companyRiver Valley <http://www.rivervalley.co.nz/> in Taihape offers 
two- to four-day horse riding holidays from £430pp.

Hiking
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c1740f38d7939a11baec4c0b907ecab0dcc66d5%2F0_0_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hunt%20for%20the%20wilder%20side%20of%20New%20Zealand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hunt%20for%20the%20wilder%20side%20of%20New%20Zealand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c1740f38d7939a11baec4c0b907ecab0dcc66d5%2F0_0_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Bethells Beach 
The 8km coastal walk from Bethells Beach to Muriwai takes in breathtaking 
views of the coast west of Auckland and is a winner with locals and visitors 
alike. TheTe Henga Walkway 
<http://www.doc.govt.nz/parks-and-recreation/places-to-go/auckland/places/muriwai-and-te-henga-area/tracks/te-henga-walkway/>
 is part of the Hillary Trail, which connects a number of tracks in the 
Waitakere Ranges. It takes in grass tracks, coastal bush, beach and clifftops. 
It’s waymarked from Bethells Beach and continues through the Waitakere Ranges 
to a steep flight of steps known as the Devil’s Staircase. It’s a three- to 
four-hour trek that passes near several locations used in the film: local 
landowner Vicky Bethell’s house was used as Kahu’s home, and many outdoor 
scenes were shot in the land nearby. Hikers should mind their language, though: 
Vicky says the acoustics are so good she can hear every word from far above.

A trail running and walking event, Speight’s West Coaster 
<http://www.thewestcoaster.co.nz/> (entry from £20pp) takes place on the Te 
Henga track on 10 December. For a longer walk,Adventure South NZ 
<http://www.adventuresouth.co.nz/> has a five-day trek in the Auckland area 
<http://www.adventuresouth.co.nz/New-Zealand/Trekking/Hiking/Northland-Discovery>
 from £910.

Birdwatching
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F762bd1ddd5cbf598874ff81e7898790113732b7d%2F0_17_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hunt%20for%20the%20wilder%20side%20of%20New%20Zealand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hunt%20for%20the%20wilder%20side%20of%20New%20Zealand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F762bd1ddd5cbf598874ff81e7898790113732b7d%2F0_17_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 A flightless takahe on Tiritiri Matangi. Photograph: Alamy 
Those who are, like Ricky, keen on rare birds, will find the Auckland region 
bursting with opportunity. The volcanic island of Rangitoto (west of Waiheke) 
is home to protected species including the tieke, or saddleback, brought back 
from the brink of extinction by a 2011 breeding programme. Ferry operatorFullers
 <https://www.fullers.co.nz/> runs tours to Rangitoto for £36pp, while tribal 
companyTe Haerenga <http://tehaerenga.nz/> offers tours with specialist Ngai 
Tai guides (from £83pp). Serious twitchers could head to Tiritiri Matangi, an 
island north of Auckland that’s home to many birds, including long-tailed 
cuckoo, takahe, kokako and that New Zealand favourite, the little spotted kiwi.

Cabin stay
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a345bfb79c1014897e60485789f6b06c609114d%2F0_377_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hunt%20for%20the%20wilder%20side%20of%20New%20Zealand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hunt%20for%20the%20wilder%20side%20of%20New%20Zealand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fnew-zealand-hunt-for-wilderpeople-adventure-tours%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a345bfb79c1014897e60485789f6b06c609114d%2F0_377_4608_2765%2F4608.jpg>
 Sika deer near the Lahar Alpine retreat 
A 45-minute flight from Auckland, the volcanic lakeside town of Taupo is a 
relaxing destination, and gateway to Mount Tongariro national park, the site of 
three mighty mountains including Ngauruhoe, (Mount Doom in The Lord of the 
Rings). The area is also used in Hunt for the Wilderpeople: Waititi and crew 
stayed for a few days at Lahar Farm, a vast property with herds of sika deer 
and plenty of bush to explore. Owners Noeline and Brent Bishop rent outLahar 
Alpine Retreat <http://www.laharsika.co.nz/accommodation.html>, a self-catering 
log cabin for six (from £69 a night). There is hiking, biking, rafting and 
skiing in the national park.

• The trip was supported by the New Zealand Film Commission and Vertigo 
Releasing. For more on the Auckland area, see aucklandnz.com 
<http://www.aucklandnz.com/int>
 