
Nearly three years ago 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/sexism-for-the-win-could-prejudice-bring-it-home-for-hillary-clinton-in-2016/2014/01/24/ee61eb00-8450-11e3-bbe5-6a2a3141e3a9_story.html?utm_term=.88bfe920002c>
, I predicted that the sexism surrounding the 2016 presidential election would 
be “more sly than straightforward”. I thought Republicans would never want to 
repeat the mistakes of 2008 – the “iron my shirt” moments and comments about 
Hillary Clinton’s cackle.

A vote for Trump is also a vote for the bigoted company he keeps | Jessica 
Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/29/voting-for-trump-bigoted-campaign-steve-bannon>
“If Clinton runs again,” I wrote, “it’s doubtful that we’ll see the same level 
of sexist vitriol.” Well, the joke is on me!

In this election, we’ve seen the Republican presidential nominee brag about 
the size of his penis on a debate stage, defend calling a woman “Miss Piggy”, 
suggest women who have abortions be “punished” and claim that a female 
moderator must have been on her period. Let’s not even get into Trump’spast 
disgusting comments on women 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/2778a6ab72ea49558445337865289508/ap-how-trumps-apprentice-moved-capitalism-sexism>
. Or, as was the case when he talked about finding 12-year-old Paris Hilton 
attractive <https://twitter.com/JessicaValenti/status/781889956360912897>, his 
past disgusting comments about little girls.

It’s hard to imagine a more sexist candidate or an election that hinged more 
on gender politics.

I was naive to think this could go any other way. That Americans could elect 
the first female president withoutT-shirts calling her a bitch 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2016/07/20/misogyny_is_alive_and_well_at_the_republican_national_convention.html>
, jokes about sex tapes and insults about women’s bodies. That we could make 
this happen without embarrassing ourselves. Instead, we chose to confront the 
possibility of a historic moment for women with a candidate whose misogyny is 
so mythic he could have sprung fully-formed from Freud’s skull. Trump is more 
symbol than person at this point, representing just how juvenile and ridiculous 
America is when it comes to the way we think about women and leadership.

I’m not too hard on myself for the early error in judgment, though. After all, 
a few years ago Republicans were proactively trying to downplay the party’s 
sexism. The anti-abortion group Susan B Anthony List, for example,started a 
training program 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2013/01/gop-looks-for-ways-to-stop-the-rape-comments-086082?o=1>
 to keep candidates from making gaffes about women’s health. And Republicans 
looked to pollster Kellyanne Conway to give them advice about how tostop saying 
stupid things about rape. 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2013/01/gop-pollsters-stop-talking-about-rape-086358>
 Poor Conway, now Trump’s campaign manager, should be awarded a lifetime supply 
of Xanax to get her through the next few weeks.

One thing I was right about, however, was that sexism would help Clinton win 
the presidency. The gender gap in this election is expected to be historic, and 
the more Trump doubles down on his misogyny, themore female voters dislike him 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2016-election/poll-after-debate-women-think-less-trump-better-clinton-n656321>
.

Alicia Machado told the truth about Trump, and the backlash is terrifying | 
Lucia Graves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/30/alicia-machado-donald-trump-backlash-smear>
Instead of trying to mend that relationship, the Republican establishment has 
abandoned all efforts of securing women’s support. In the vice-presidential 
debate this week Mike Pence refused to condemn Trump’s comments on women, 
preferring to simply deny they ever happened. And after Trump once again 
insulted Alicia Machado’s weight, Newt Gingrichchimed in 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/newt-gingrich-miss-universe-alicia-machado-228884>
 by saying “you’re not supposed to gain 60 pounds during the year that you’re 
Miss Universe”. Now Trump says that his comments about women over the years 
were for“the purpose of entertainment” 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/10/trump-insulted-womens-looks-for-purpose-of-entertainment.html?mid=twitter_nymag>
.

We are not laughing. 

It would be nice to think that a Clinton win in November will mean the end of 
all this. That we’d finally be done with men making unprompted comments on 
women’s bodies, or that we’d never hear a woman shamed for her sexuality or 
called a “bitch” because she dared to have an opinion. But that’s just me being 
naive again.
 