
When you meet a virtuoso pianist, the temptation is to stare at their hands. 
The night before our interview,Igor Levit had played a recital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/21/igor-levit-review-rzewski-pianist-wigmore>
 of such violence, pounding the keys as he performed the monumental music of 
American experimentalistFrederic Rzewski 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q_mQiL19XmI>, that it seemed impossible for 
the young Russian-German’s fingers not to end up red and raw. “Well, it’s much 
easier since I stopped biting my nails!” Levit says, laying out smooth, 
unknotty hands with long spatulate fingers and closely clipped nails. “Doing a 
glissando up and down the keyboard is way less tricky now.”

Igor Levit review – this pianist has got it all
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/29/igor-levit-review-wigmore-hall-london>
At 28, Levit’s career has not been impeded by his childhood habit – nor, it 
seems, by anything else. Superlatives have flowed thick and fast from critics: 
he’s the “most fascinating young pianist around 
<http://www.sueddeutsche.de/thema/Igor_Levit>”, already the “pianist of the 
century 
<http://www.hbdirect.com/album/2591110-beethoven-the-late-piano-sonatas-opp-101-106-109-110-111-igor-levit-piano.html>
”, with “tonal allure, intellectual drive and technical brilliance 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/04/14/seance-3>”. His first recording, 
of Beethoven’s late sonatas, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/21/beethoven-piano-sonatas-review> 
caused jaws to drop. He won the 2014 newcomer categories in both the BBC Music 
Magazine and Royal Philharmonic Society awards. Followinghis second disc, of 
Bach’s six Partitas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/24/bach-partitas-bwv-825-830-igor-levit-review-crackles>
, he was nominated in two categories of this year’sGramophone awards 
<http://www.gramophone.co.uk/classical-music-news/the-gramophone-awards-shortlist-2015-free-digital-magazine>
. And a recent review in the LA Times began by asking if the world really could 
accommodate another dazzling young “Russian” pianist – the implication being 
all showers of notes and broken piano strings – but at the end acknowledged 
droolingly: “He is the future 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/arts/la-et-cm-igor-levit-pianist-music-review-20150423-column.html>
.”

Levit was born in Gorky (now Nizhny Novgorod 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nizhny_Novgorod>) in 1987. The family moved to 
Hanover in 1995, prompted by chancellor Helmut Kohl’s invitation to ex-Soviet 
Jews, post-unification, to take up permanent residency in Germany. “I was 
eight. I learned German in a couple of months. For my sister, who was about 14, 
it was much harder. At her school, they said if you cannot speak the language 
in six months, we must throw you out.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHOPItVHr9_s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHOPItVHr9_s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHOPItVHr9_s&media=>
They remain a close family, all still based in Hanover. Levit has just bought 
a flat near his parents, with space for his piano and his vast collection of 
CDs and LPs (ranging from early music to Sting and Bob Dylan). He has few 
memories of Russia beyond sitting first under, then at, his mother’s piano – 
she was head of keyboard in the local conservatoire and still teaches. He began 
playing when he was three. “I have no idea why I started – first by ear, but 
reading music too. I remember sight-reading [the Khachaturian ballet]Spartacus 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PpRbjyVEyPU>. One of my favourite pieces was 
Tchaikovsky’s Queen of Spades <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wz8ddUqj9Jg>.” 

His father, a construction engineer, “had no choice but to train himself in 
music by listening”. Levit chuckles. “He is wonderful. A friend was telling him 
that I must be – in a good way! – crazy and asked my father how he coped with 
all this music around him. He said, ‘I am the normal one.’”

Levit does admit to a sometimes obsessive outlook on life, all of which feeds 
back into the big projects that characterise his career so far. His next 
release, a three-CD set of variations, is a case in point: Bach’s Goldbergs, 
Beethoven’s Diabellis and Rzewski’s The People United Will Never Be Defeated 
(which he played at the Wigmore Hall, London).

He recently gave himself a physical makeover, not only saying no to the 
fingernail nibbling, but cutting out other bad dietary habits, too, losing more 
than 70lb (“recalibrating his body” as he puts it) and putting his trust in a 
close friend, a physiotherapist, for any of the physical problems that result 
from constant travel and sitting for hours at a piano. He is lean and healthy 
looking now, hair close cropped, wearing sharp jeans and a slim-fitting, 
open-necked white shirt. “It totally changed how I worked at the piano, and 
made me understand better what I was trying to do.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL8fG7x8tiAA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL8fG7x8tiAA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL8fG7x8tiAA&media=>
Impatient with the idea that musicians, or any artists, are somehow above the 
rough and tumble of daily life – “That’s a huge mistake. We are all responsible 
for the world we live in” – Levit follows current events closely and has an 
insatiable curiosity for journalism, on or offline. “I am one of the few of my 
age who still buys newspapers and magazines – the physical, paper thing. I am 
addicted.”He tweets <https://twitter.com/igorpianist>, uses Spotify and, as a 
teenager, emailed several composers directly – includingRzewski 
<http://composers21.com/compdocs/rzewskif.htm>, now a great friend – asking 
them for advice about how to play their work and even commissioning pieces from 
them.

Beethoven and Bach are pre-eminent for Levit, with Schubert, Debussy, Ravel, 
Busoni and Stockhausen close behind. However, he avoids playing Chopin. “Why 
should I?Rafał Blechacz plays it brilliantly 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i7oVpm0JjTA>.” Polish-born Blechacz won all 
five prizes in the 2005 Chopin piano competition at the age of 20. But it’s not 
just about Levit feeling outgunned. “When I sit down and play Chopin I find it, 
or maybe it is me, dumb.” He speaks generously of several other pianists but
András Schiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/sep/04/classicalmusicandopera> – not 
surprisingly, given his choice of repertoire (Rzewski aside) and the 
unremitting seriousness of his approach – is Levit’s role model.

Whereas some pianists retain a physical detachment from the instrument, Levit 
is the opposite, bending near the keyboard, crouching, leaning in, head down as 
if in reverie or embrace. In his case, there is an additional reason for 
proximity, as became clear at the previous evening’s recital at the Wigmore 
Hall, when he reappeared on stage to take his bow – wearing glasses. “Oh yes. I 
was looking for Fred [Rzewski] in the audience. I can’t see beyond the first 
couple of rows. When I play [without glasses] I am in my own sort of cloud. I 
like that.”

Does he have a particular routine before a performance, or any fetishes he’ll 
admit to? “No. Last night I suddenly realised I needed to eat or drink 
something, but what? So I went to the pharmacy next door, looked around, saw a 
big carton of coconut water and bought it. That was my pre-concert dinner.” Nor 
is he temperamental about the pianos he plays. “I’ll play on anything. I trust 
the technician. If they ask me what I want, I don’t know what to answer. I 
don’t care as long as it’s basically OK. I don’t like all that fuss.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJBDFCTF0Di4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJBDFCTF0Di4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJBDFCTF0Di4&media=>
Having performed in a Cadogan Hall chamber Prom in 2012, Levit will make his 
main-stageProms debut <http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/events/performers/20310> on 2 
September as soloist in Mozart’s late piano concerto,No 27 in B flat K595 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uvRE2wIFbW8>, with the Royal Scottish National 
Orchestra. “I’ve never seen the Royal Albert Hall. No, not even from the 
outside! Somehow I have been in London all these times and missed it.” In 
December, he will collaborate with the performance artistMarina Abramović in a 
staging of Bach’s Goldberg Variations 
<http://www.armoryonpark.org/index.php/programs_events/detail/goldberg>, 
details of which are still a closely guarded secret.

Levit works hard, plays hard, argues hard and laughs hard. “I am curious about 
life. I would rather not sleep than miss something,” he says, gathering up his 
smart wheelie case, checking his phone and disappearing into the London throng.

• Prom 63 
<http://www.royalalberthall.com/tickets/proms/2015/prom-63-messiaen-mozart-and-bruckner/>
 is at the Royal Albert Hall, London, on 2 September. The concert will be live 
on Radio 3 and available on iPlayer for 30 days.
 