
The leaders of the International Monetary Fund  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/imf>and the World Bank  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/worldbank>have launched a strong defence 
of open markets and free trade, as concern grows that the Brexit vote and calls 
for protectionism in the US presidential election represent a backlash against 
globalisation.

Christine Lagarde <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christine-lagarde>, the 
IMF’s managing director, said international trade had been a force for good in 
the past few decades but that without a more equal division of the benefits of 
growth there was a risk of barriers going back up.

As part of a concerted push back against protectionism, the World Bank’s 
president,Jim Yong Kim <https://www.theguardian.com/business/jim-yong-kim>, 
said China had lifted 700 million people out of poverty as a result of trade 
and opening its economy to competition.

Britain will be fastest growing G7 economy this year, says IMF
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/britain-fastest-growing-g7-economy-imf-international-monetary-fund-brexit-vote>
Kim said the UK’s vote to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, the US presidential race and looming 
elections in Europe were adding to uncertainty. “These are all risks. 
Uncertainty is normally very bad for most developing countries.”

Outlining her global policy agenda, Lagarde said: “Policymakers should act and 
use a balanced mix of all policy levers to revive demand and raise 
productivity, and ensure the gains from technology and globalisation – which 
have led to unprecedented global welfare gains in recent decades – are shared 
more broadly.

“A retreat from globalisation and multilateralism is a serious risk at a time 
when international cooperation and coordination are as critical as ever.”

Lagarde said governments should press ahead with attempts to secure 
multilateral trade deals, despite the difficulties involved, while providing 
help for workers adversely affected by globalisation and technological change.

She refused to comment on the American election, but made clear her opposition 
toDonald Trump’s <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> demand that 
protectionism should be used to repatriate jobs to the US.

“The rhetoric against trade would do harm to the economy. I call it economic 
malpractice,” she said.

The IMF believes the political shifts that have led to huge support for Trump 
and the shock Brexit vote are the biggest current threat to a fragile global 
economy.

Lagarde welcomed the UK’s better-than-expected performance since the Brexit 
vote.

Ahead of the EU referendum, she said the outcome would either be “pretty bad 
or very, very bad”, but speaking in Washington on Thursday she said the IMF had 
envisaged both mild and adverse scenarios.

“I am encouraged that, because of good policies and the cooperation of central 
banks, it is currently the mild scenario and not the adverse scenario.”

She has welcomed the government’s announcement that negotiations on Britain’s 
departure from the EU will begin by March next year, but said this week’s sharp 
fall in the pound was the result of uncertainty about what Brexit would mean 
for the financial services sector and for trade.

Following Theresa May’s attack on ultra-low interest rates and quantitative 
easing, Lagarde said: “We currently observe that monetary policy has been under 
a lot of pressure to act. It has been the first port of call. It has acted in 
many countries in isolation, which is not helpful.

“All policies – monetary, fiscal and structural – have to come together. It 
can’t just be left to central banks. They have used unconventional policies to 
explore unchartered territories with benefits so far. But it can’t just be 
monetary policy.”

Kim said heightened political uncertainty coincided with the highest number of 
poor countries in recession since the global slump of 2009.

He said growth in sub-Saharan Africa was expected to be 1.6% this year and 
2.9% in 2017, insufficient to keep up with population growth of 3% a year. “If 
growth can’t keep up with population growth it is essentially negative growth”, 
he said.
 