
There must be more to it than just good luck. Over the past four decades, the 
City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/city-of-birmingham-symphony-orchestra> has 
established a reputation for selecting the right conductors to become its music 
directors at exactly the right moment in their careers, a record that any 
orchestra in the world would envy.

The success story began in 1980 with the arrival of the 25-year-old Simon 
Rattle <https://www.theguardian.com/music/simon-rattle>, who took over the 
reins in Birmingham after a turbulent period in the orchestra’s history, during 
which the previous chief conductorLouis Fremaux 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louis_Fr%C3%A9maux> had left precipitately. 
Rattle stayed in Birmingham for 18 years, in which time his reputation and that 
of the orchestra grew exponentially.Sakari Oramo 
<http://www.harrisonparrott.com/artist/profile/sakari-oramo> then followed him 
and was there for a decade, whileAndris Nelsons <http://www.andrisnelsons.com/> 
stepped down last summer after seven seasons during which he rose to the very 
top of the conducting tree. It all adds up to a succession of conductors who 
were little, if at all, known internationally when they made their debuts with 
the orchestra, but whose careers blossomed during their time in the city, and 
who have continued to prosper ever since.

It’s too early, of course, to be sure that the CBSO has repeated the trick 
with the appointment of 29-year-old Lithuanian-bornMirga Gražinytė-Tyla 
<http://www.rbartists.at/en/dirigenten_dtl.php?id=775>. But it was clear from 
her concert in Symphony Hall last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/12/cbso-grazinyte-tyla-review-symphony-hall-birmingham>
 that she had already established an excellent rapport with the orchestra, 
which resulted in performances of crisp detail and real dramatic presence, 
while reports from the US west coast, where she has been assistant conductor 
with the LA Philharmonic, have been glowing too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmirga-grazinyte-tyla-conductor-cbso-have-got-it-right-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34f0deb262adf990c9bc2b2f5027fc2b5a5d1d4c%2F0_37_2000_1199%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20Mirga%20Gra%C5%BEinyt%C4%97-Tyla%20it%20looks%20like%20the%20CBSO%20have%20got%20it%20exactly%20right%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmirga-grazinyte-tyla-conductor-cbso-have-got-it-right-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20Mirga%20Gra%C5%BEinyt%C4%97-Tyla%20it%20looks%20like%20the%20CBSO%20have%20got%20it%20exactly%20right%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2Fmirga-grazinyte-tyla-conductor-cbso-have-got-it-right-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34f0deb262adf990c9bc2b2f5027fc2b5a5d1d4c%2F0_37_2000_1199%2F2000.jpg>
 Excellent rapport … Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla 
And though Nelsons was always going to be a hard act to follow, the way in 
which the orchestra has handled the appointment has been very sensible. If it 
did Oramo no favours to have to take over immediately when Rattle stepped down 
in 1998, so that it took him a couple of seasons to stamp his distinctive 
musical personality on the orchestra and its programming, the process of 
Nelsons’ successor has been a more measured one. When Gražinytė-Tyla takes up 
the reins in September there will have been a whole season’s interregnum, so 
that in orchestral terms, the new music director will effectively have a blank 
slate to work on. Which all suggests that the CBSO might have got it exactly 
right once again.

 