
In 1989, when Norfolk-born writer Jonathan Raban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jonathan-raban> first set foot in Seattle, 
it took him less than a day to realise that he had found a city in the United 
States where he could "actually imagine living". Within a year, he had become a 
full-time resident, and remains so to this day.

His initial six-week stay would be documented in a chapter of Hunting Mister 
Heartbreak (1990), a personal discovery of America in which he elegantly 
sketches a portrait of the city before the ascent of local corporate leviathans 
Starbucks, Microsoft and Amazon, and memorably describes how he came to trick 
out his short-let Second Avenue apartment with a cache of furniture last used 
by Elvis Presley. "By the end of the 1980s, Seattle had taken on the dangerous 
lustre of a promised city. The rumour had gone out that if you had failed in 
Detroit you might yet succeed in Seattle – and that if you'd succeeded in 
Seoul, you could succeed even better in Seattle ...Seattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/seattle> was the coming place. So I joined 
the line of hopefuls."

Since then, Seattle has become for him "a perch from which to look at the rest 
of the United States, to write about American politics", and a setting for 
fiction – most recently his novel of paranoia and homeland security, 
Surveillance (2006). Raban knows the city inside out, has championed its 
successes and eloquently taken aim at its failings. He has agreed to show me 
around.

The tour starts at the valet parking slot of downtown's newish Hotel Max 
<http://www.hotelmaxseattle.com/> (formerly the Vance) on Stewart Street, into 
which he steers his reassuringly unbuffed two-seater Mazda, the sort of vehicle 
a Hummer could accidentally reverse over without really noticing. Raban, 65, is 
instantly recognisable from his most recent dust-jackets: weathered baseball 
cap, matching complexion, the hallmarks of a man who has spent long periods of 
his life breathing salted air. By way of introduction to the city, he drives me 
a couple of blocks due north, into a neighbourhood called South Lake Union, now 
the province of billionaire Paul Allen, co-founder of Microsoft: "Paul Allen is 
kind of the Duke of Westminster around here. He owns great chunks of land."
 A mural of Seattle's fishermen. Photograph: Mike Hodgkinson 
Primed before his virgin footsteps in Seattle (by a fondly nostalgic Gore 
Vidal) to expect "the city that San Francisco says it is but isn't", Raban now 
has cause for nostalgia of his own, of the wry rather than the dewy-eyed 
variety. The city has changed a great deal during his residency, no more 
noticeably than here in South Lake Union. "You see this old brick warehouse," 
he says. "This place used to be just full of them. Now it's all fast 
architecture, like fast food. It used to be really charming. It was the part of 
the city where you'd find all those people who do very strange things that you 
read about in the Yellow Pages."
 Seattle’s Fishermen’s Terminal. Photograph: David Samuel Robbins/Corbis 
The tour continues, as Raban skirts Queen Anne Hill a shade to the north-west 
– noting his fondness for the Washington State light that "falls at the right 
angle" and "slowly goes from the sky" at sunset – en route toFishermen's 
Terminal <http://www.portseattle.org/seaport/marinas/fishermensterminal/>, home 
to Seattle's Alaskan salmon fishing fleet. Here, he habitually buys cigars and 
likes to hang around for a contemplative smoke at the water's edge. It seems 
there are less gill-netters – small boats, typically husband-and-wife 
operations – than usual, he tells me, before unravelling the city's unique 
political structure.

"Seattle is this curious liberal "island". Last time our leftie congressman, 
Jim McDermott, was elected, it was for his 10th term – and he got 79 per cent 
of the vote. It's that solid. And that tells one something about Seattle."
 Seattle Central Library. Photograph: Arcaid/Corbis 
Seattle was formerly a union stronghold grounded in its working class, a 
radicalised city, the heart of what Roosevelt-era strategist James Farley 
called the "Soviet of Washington", but is now, in Raban's words, "top-heavy 
with PhDs". That reversal, coupled with mountains of software-boom money, 
ultimately produced – in 2004 – one of Seattle's greatest architectural 
projects: theCentral Library 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seattle_Central_Library> at Fourth and 
University, designed by Rem Koolhaas.

"It's a terrifically fun and interesting building," says Raban, now setting 
about a lunchtime plate of halibut and chips atRay's Café 
<http://www.rays.com/new/>, overlooking Salmon Bay. "I had thought that Seattle 
was becoming a junkyard for every famous architect's worst piece of work. First 
of all it was Robert Venturi designing the Seattle Art Museum, and producing a 
building that I think has absolutely no merit to it at all. Then [Frank] Gehry 
– he produces "the haemorrhoids" (aka the Experience Music Project). But Rem 
Koolhaas comes along and designs this absolute bloody gem of a building. Simply 
as a writer of books I'm thrilled and proud that Seattle should have raised, on 
a public vote, sufficient money to build a central library, and moreover to 
rebuild every other library in the city: 28 of them."

Raban's enthusiasm for the Central Library is unqualified and, when pressed 
for additional city highlights, he obliges. A restaurant calledLampreia 
<http://www.lampreiarestaurant.com/> is singled out for praise: "It's admirably 
quiet, and the devotion to food by the chef is extraordinary: he's an original, 
the cooking is eclectic and inventive, and I only ever eat there when I'm being 
entertained by people with expense accounts. It's the sort of restaurant where 
food comes slowly: you expect to sit around for two hours over dinner. The wine 
list is terrific."

He's also pretty keen on Campagne <http://www.campagnerestaurant.com/>, just 
above Pike Market ("A place where a lot of Seattle-ites eat, not a tourist 
thing"), favours wine merchantMcCarthy and Schiering 
<http://www.mccarthyandschiering.com> ("The guy who runs that place is an 
expert: he spends half his time in France, and Washington vineyards, and the 
rest of his time at his wine shop") and thinksHattie's Hat 
<http://www.hattieshat.com/> restaurant in the trendy Ballard district merits a 
visit, not just for its hand-carved bar, shipped from France in 1904, but also 
for its healthy links with the local fishing workforce – people who have been 
marginalised in still-developing tech-wealthy Seattle.
 Seattle at dusk. Photograph: Paul Edmondson/Corbis 
A cigar later, and we're heading for our final stop, to digest the big picture 
from the overlook known asKerry Park 
<http://www.seattle.gov/parks/park_detail.asp?ID=342>, a vantage point that 
takes in the skyscrapers of downtown (winning their face-off with the Olympic 
mountains, thanks to cloud cover) and its tightly adjacent container port, the 
bridge-like curve of Safeco (baseball) Field, Bainbridge Island across Puget 
Sound, Frank Gehry's glinting haemorrhoids, the "frivolous" Space Needle ... 
and something my guide had mentioned at the beginning of the day returns to 
mind:

"At night, what you see is a city, because all you see is lights. By day, it 
doesn't look like a city at all. The trees out-number the houses. And that's 
completely typical of Seattle. You can't quite tell: is it a city, is it a 
suburb, is the forest growing back? I feel happier about it at night than I do 
in the daytime. There is in Seattle a kind of schizophrenia about whether this 
is a big city, or whether it's a small town."

From here, the big city is just about edging it, and Raban's decision to stay 
in Seattle, made back there in the distance of 1989, looks to have been a wise 
one.

Getting there

Northwest airlines fly from London Heathrow to Washington Seattle from around 
£297.80rtn. Seetravelsupermarket.com <http://www.travelsupermarket.com/flights/>
 to search and book flights

Car hire from holidayautos.co.uk <http://www.holidayautos.co.uk/> from around 
£20 a day
 