
The 20th century, declared Aldous Huxley 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aldous_Huxley> in 1946, had been “the Age of 
Noise. Physical noise, mental noise, and noise of desire – we hold history’s 
record for them all.” As a pacifist, Huxley blamed the war. But he also blamed 
technology for the “assault on silence”.

The first use of a PA (public address) system was for a Christmas carol 
concert at San Francisco city hall on 23 December 1915. But despite being 
something of a futurologist, Huxley could scarcely have predicted the way in 
which the later generations would crank up the dial on the noise of the world. 
In the UK, theNoise Abatement Society <http://noiseabatementsociety.com> was 
founded in 1959 after its founder, John Connell, wrote to the Times complaining 
that “noise is the forgotten pollutant in our society”.

His society was responsible for rubber dustbin lids and plastic milk crates – 
but it was a rearguard action, with places that had long been pools of silence 
and tranquillity being swiftly overwhelmed by a world of technological clatter: 
engines, phones, intrusive advertising, jingles and muzak, pneumatic drills, 
amplification. And now we are assailed on every side.

Silence is not a luxury. It is crucial to our physical and mental heath. We 
need it to think, to sleep, to recover from life’s frenzy. My particular 
interest is thatsilence has been at the heart of the spiritual life of the 
church for centuries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/29/silence-christian-history-macculloch-review>
. For many religious traditions, silence is the great proving drawer of prayer. 
And continual noise is an assault on the soul as much as the ear. But it’s also 
important for the arts, indeed even for music itself. Creativity, 
concentration, contemplation all demand it. It is little wonder that being 
constantly bombarded with noise was used as a torture technique during 
interrogations at Guantánamo Bay. The military and the police understand that 
“sound bombs” are highly effective at disrupting civilian populations. A world 
without silence is a world that is inhospitable to human flourishing.

So yes, I have much sympathy with the residents of Richmond Park and elsewhere 
as they contemplate the effects ofanother runway at Heathrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/17/heathrow-protests-climate-campaigners-locals-third-runway>
. London is already one of the noisiest cities in the world, a beleaguered 
environment of continual mechanical roar and clatter. As studies have shown, 
those living under the flight path – and there are going to be many more of 
them now – will suffer long-term consequences for their health, and children in 
schools will find it more difficult to concentrate. No wonder they will 
re-elect Zac Goldsmith innext week’s byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/05/labour-elects-transport-expert-to-stand-against-zac-goldsmith-in-byelection>
, despite hisnasty campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/07/zac-goldsmith-racist-campaign-london>
 to be mayor.

But of course, there is no such a thing as absolute silence. When the composer 
John Cage <https://www.britannica.com/biography/John-Cage> experimented with an 
anechoic chamber <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anechoic_chamber> in 1951, a 
place in which there was supposed to be no sound, he could still hear the 
workings of his own body. And listening to his famous 1952 silent composition
4’33” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/feb/20/john-cage-4minutes33-seconds-silence-app>
 only forces the audience to be more alert to the noises around them. Silence 
is not zero decibels, it is the volume of human tranquillity.

And one cannot celebrate silence uncritically. Being silenced is what happens 
to those who are victims of abuse. Moreover, what counts as bad noise is often 
controversial. The Israeli Knesset is currently passing legislationto silence 
the Muslim call to prayer 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/israel-palestine-mosque-call-to-prayer-banned-bill-passes-a7416121.html>
, legislation that has been recently redesigned not to effect the Jewish 
Shabbat siren. “How silently, how silently the wondrous gift is given,” goes 
the carol about the city of Bethlehem. Hmm. Even silence has its politics.

Nonetheless, standing on Oxford Street this week, assaulted on every side by 
the soul-sucking retail ennui of Christmas shopping – Huxley’s “noise of 
desire” –I recall a passage from the great German novelist WG Sebald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/aug/13/the-rings-of-saturn-by-wg-sebald-walking-through-history>
. It describes Norfolk fishermen sitting on the sea shore, not caring all that 
much about the catching of fish. “They just want to be in a place with the 
world behind them, and before them nothing but emptiness.” And as someone else 
jostles past me to grab another bargain, I understand exactly how they feel.
 