
At the crossroads in La Latina, the old-town barrio at the heart of Madrid, a 
scruffy blue-and-white painted fence of corrugated steel runs the curve of the 
corner. Peer through a porthole, and you’ll find yourself looking down into a 
wide, space of poured concrete and graffiti, scattered with tiered benches, a 
basketball hoop at either end. This is El Campo de la Cebada, a community space 
createdpor y para los vecinos – for and by the neighbours – when the local 
authority demolished the swimming pool. The money for a new one ran out early 
in the project, leaving a gaping 5,500-metre scar.

Here, raucous, friendly teenagers gather on the benches, watching street 
performers practising their juggling. Couples sprawl between the 
railway-sleeper garden boxes, sharing bocadillos de calamares (squid rolls). A 
homeless man finds a place to sit, away from the road. Solitary readers, such 
as myself, inch around, following the sun, occasionally looking up to listen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmadrid-la-latina-district-el-campo-de-la-cebada-a-great-little-place-i-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F773c17b75fe0c1501010f494a6888fd84bc9b804%2F786_0_3889_2336%2F3889.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20heart%20of%20Madrid%2C%20El%20Campo%20de%20Cebada%20offers%20a%20space%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmadrid-la-latina-district-el-campo-de-la-cebada-a-great-little-place-i-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20heart%20of%20Madrid%2C%20El%20Campo%20de%20Cebada%20offers%20a%20space%20for%20all&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmadrid-la-latina-district-el-campo-de-la-cebada-a-great-little-place-i-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F773c17b75fe0c1501010f494a6888fd84bc9b804%2F786_0_3889_2336%2F3889.jpg>
 A performer entertains the crowd at El Campo de la Cebada. Photograph: Martha 
Sprackland 
I attended Podemos <https://www.theguardian.com/world/podemos> rallies here in 
the last drawn-out weeks of summer, the sun hot into late October, and heard 
impassioned calls for change in a country with the second-highest youth 
unemployment in Europe. Another day, I came down to find slapstick musical 
comedy playing here, and paid €4 for a share in a hot-tub-size paella and a 
cold can of Mahou. Salsa dancing, fitness sessions, outdoor cinema, the list of 
activities goes on.

I hear the days of Campo de la Cebada are numbered – though the city is 
threatening a garish, unwelcome shopping mall in place of that much-needed 
swimming pool. Withvecinos as organised, ambitious and community-minded as 
this, I hope they’re ready for a fight.

 * Calle de Toledo, 56, Madrid 
Martha Sprackland <http://www.marthasprackland.co.uk/> is an editor and poet
 