
Dioxins, the highly toxic chemicals produced by waste incineration and 
industrial processes which tests have shown to be lingering in the bodies of 
people all over the planet, have been identified as the cause of many cancers 
in a new report from the US Environmental Protection Agency.

A draft of the EPA report, leaked yesterday to the Washington Post, has taken 
the US by surprise and is likely to send shockwaves throughout the rest of the 
world, forcing an upgrade in the assessment of the hazard posed by dioxins. It 
had been thought that the risk was diminishing because levels of the chemicals 
in the environment were dropping.

The report will fuel mounting opposition in communities across Britain to a 
new generation of up to 160 major waste incinerators that the government is 
expected to encourage over the next 20 years.

Dioxins are chemical compounds unintentionally released by incinerators 
burning sewage sludge and household, hazardous and medical waste. They are also 
released in industrial processes such as steel making.

Among the most poisonous man-made chemicals, they accumulate in fat and milk 
and work their way up the food chain. Even low-level exposure is known to 
interfere with the immune, reproductive and endocrine systems. The latter is 
involved in the secretion of hormones. Dioxins also effect the early growth and 
development of humans and animals.

By far the greatest dioxin producer in Britain, according to the Environment 
Agency, is British Steel, whose works at Llanwern, Port Talbot, Scunthorpe and 
Teesside pump out almost as many dioxins as the next 15 most polluting 
companies.

That dioxins are already widely present in the environment and food supplies 
of all industrialised countries is well-known, but evidence has been slowly 
accumulating about how widespread and carcinogenic some are. Yesterday's EPA 
report is remarkably similar to a more low key report from a group of German 
scientists, which last year concluded that dioxins might be responsible for 12% 
of human cancers in industrialised countries.

The British government is gradually accepting that dioxins pose real health 
threats.

In 1994, the Department of Health published a report saying that "despite 
insufficient evidence for clear causal links", it would be prudent to regard 
dioxins as possible human carcinogens".

 Health hazard


 The proposed incineration plants will be needed, it is claimed, to handle the 
growing mountains of household waste that the EU is banning from landfill 
sites. In response to the EU directive, the government is expected to announce 
that by 2020 it will recycle a third of household waste and burn a third.

Some communities are already arguing that these incinerators will pose a 
health hazard and that money should be spent on more expensive recycling and 
composting schemes.

Such alternatives, say Friends of the Earth, would be popular, provide more 
jobs and be easy for people to understand. They say that Â£250m collected yearly 
in waste tax could be used to build new recycling centres.

Chris Pilbury, who works with a coalition of 25 community groups in north-east 
Wales that oppose a massive proposed incinerator and cement kiln expansion 
scheme near Wrexham, said: "People will not tolerate these risks. Feelings are 
running high and this report con firms that we are right to to be concerned."

The document, nine years in preparation, says that for those who eat large 
amounts of fatty meat and dairy produce the risk - on top of any others they 
may be exposed to - of getting cancer could be as high as one in 100.

Yesterday the EPA said that at least one scientist involved disputed the 
statistic and that there was a possibility it would be amended before official 
publication in June. But there will be no dilution of the message of acute 
concern about dioxins in the report, which for the first time names the most 
toxic of the group, TCDD (the infamous Agent Orange of Vietnam) as a human 
carcinogen.

In 1997, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) categorised 
TCDD as a "known human carcinogen" after analysing the epidemiological 
evidence. In 1998, the World Health Organisation decided to slash the safe 
level for human exposure. Even at the new level of between one and four 
picograms per kilogram of body weight (a picogram is a millionth of a millionth 
of a gram) - they were still anxious that "subtle effects may already occur in 
the general population in developed countries".

Cancer is not the only worry, and other health damage from dioxins has been 
slightly easier to substantiate. The EPA report will link low-grade dioxin 
exposure to a variety of problems, including hormonal changes and developmental 
defects in babies. It states: "It is likely that part of the general population 
is at, or near, exposure levels where adverse effects can be anticipated."

 Risk to babies


 Rick Hind, the legislative director for Greenpeace's toxics campaign, which 
yesterday wrote to the EPA demanding a Dioxin emergency action plan, said: 
"This means that dioxin levels in the bodies of newborn babies are already at 
levels that put them at risk of serious illness."

There have been concerns for some time about the high levels of dioxins in 
human breast milk, although environmental and health groups continue to urge 
women that the risks do not outweigh the benefits of breastfeeding.

Experts from the Imperial Cancer Research Fund (ICRF) and the Cancer Research 
Campaign (CRC) in London yesterday agreed that dioxins were a cause of anxiety.

"We know that dioxins are in general highly toxic and can cause cancer," said 
Tim Key of the ICRF cancer epidemiology unit in Oxford. But more is unknown 
than known.

"The whole area is full of uncertainty and particularly in relation to 
cancer," said Lesley Walker of the CRC.
 