
The gap between the rich and poor remains at record levels, according to the 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
<http://www.oecd.org/social/income-distribution-database.htm> as the poorest 
10% have been unable to recover from the blow dealt by the financial crisis.

The Paris-based thinktank said while the richest 10% had rapidly bounced back, 
long-term unemployment, low-quality jobs, and greater job insecurity had 
disproportionately hit low-income households.

World Bank renews drive against inequality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/02/world-bank-renews-drive-against-inequality-imf>
Publishing the latest analysis of the OECD’s 35 member countries, the 
organisation said: “By 2013/14, incomes at the bottom of the distribution were 
still well below pre-crisis levels while top and middle incomes had recovered 
much of the ground lost during the crisis.”

In the UK, income inequality has fallen since 2007 but remains one of the 
highest in the OECD. It ranks seventh highest of 35, according tothe Gini 
coefficient measure of income inequality 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs-magazine-monitor-31847943>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fincome-inequality-oecd-financial-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F911c9dd05b278b2d5da8b132fe859f0e25ea26ff%2F0_0_1252_440%2F1252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Income%20inequality%20still%20at%20record%20levels%2C%20says%20OECD&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fincome-inequality-oecd-financial-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Income%20inequality%20still%20at%20record%20levels%2C%20says%20OECD&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fincome-inequality-oecd-financial-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F911c9dd05b278b2d5da8b132fe859f0e25ea26ff%2F0_0_1252_440%2F1252.jpg>
 Inequality in the UK has fallen since 2007 but is still among the highest in 
the OECD. 
Weak wage growth in the UK has prevented incomes from fully bouncing back, the 
OECD said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/datablog/2014/nov/19/uk-workers-suffer-sixth-year-of-falling-real-pay-in-2014>
. “Despite strong job creation, including among poorer households, falling real 
wages limited the increases in labour incomes,” it added.

Between 2007 and 2010, average real incomes fell by 2.1% across the OECD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd>, with the bottom 10% suffering the 
sharpest declines at 5.3%, and the top 10% seeing a 3.6% drop.

Since 2010, average incomes improved but more so among the richest 10%, who 
saw growth of 2.3% compared with 1.1% among the poorest 10%, increasing 
inequality.

The organisation said that more broadly across its member countries, the 
redistribution through taxes and benefits which cushioned the impact of the 
crisis in the early years had diminished in a majority of countries.
 