
Three years ago Ian Rosenblatt went into his local music shop in Muswell Hill, 
north London. He came out having bought a couple of CDs and, to his own 
surprise, the shop. Rosenblatt, a city lawyer and classical music lover, had 
been chatting with the owner and learned he was planning to close it down.

In the 60s this shop sold the Davies bothers - Ray and Dave, of the Kinks, who 
lived nearby – their first guitars

Today, Les Aldrich Music <http://www.lesaldrichmusic.co.uk>, which has had 
premises on that spot since May 1945, the optimistic month the war ended, is 
one of the last surviving music shops in north London, an Aladdin’s cave where 
you can buy vinyl, CDs, sheet music and instruments. In the 1960s it sold the 
Davies brothers Ray and Dave – ofthe Kinks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/18/how-we-made-waterloo-sunset-the-kinks-ray-davies-mick-avory>
 – who lived nearby, their first guitars. Today it employsEnrico Savoncelli 
<http://lesaldrichmusic.co.uk/instrument-repairs/enrico-savoncelli/>, a 
luthier, repairer of stringed instruments. And, if you play or just listen to 
music it is a place to visit and cherish, an unlikely hold-over from a 
vanishing era when notes were held in physical places: wood, strings, paper, 
grooved black plastic or a shiny silver disc.

Across Britain, the high street has become a series of identikit 
thoroughfares. You could be in York or St Albans and you’ll find the same 
predictable outlets selling the same goods, all of which you could buy online 
anyway. Retail’s tactile skills – of “feel the quality” and expert advice – 
seem to be dying out. It’s been years since there was a bricks and mortar store 
in my neighbourhood that sells CDs, perhaps because I’m part of a dwindling 
number of people who still prefer to retain a hard copy of the music I 
purchase, having been burnt too often by iTunes, which summarily deletes my 
music library with each software upgrade.

A few years ago my local bookshop closed down. In its heyday I could read a 
review of theCollected Stories of Isaac Babel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/feb/10/brief-survey-short-story-isaac-babel>
 in the Guardian, walk in to ask if they had a copy, and the manager’s 
assistant would say: “Mary ordered two copies. She said Linda Grant would buy 
one and someone else would buy the other.” And reaching to the reserve shelves, 
he would produce a copy of a book which I had not heard of until half an hour 
earlier.
 Vinyl retailers band together for Record Store Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/record-store-day>. Photograph: 
urbancow/Getty Images 
A combination of high commercial rents and Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> murdered that shop. Up for sale 
for months, no one was interested in taking it over, and so it became an 
ice-cream parlour and cafe. After it shut I heard that people would come in to 
browse, take a note of the ISBN, then go home and order online at a deep 
discount that a tiny place could not afford, unable to sell at sufficient 
volume. Its location opposite a supermarket was excellent, but that in turn 
contributed to its failure: the freeholder could always find a new enterprise 
to absorb the costs of running a retail outlet in a popular shopping district. 
An interiors shop a block away (started, ironically, by a couple who had been 
made redundant from their jobs in publishing) told me that customers would come 
in brandishing a printout of the lowest online price for a Philippe Starck 
Ghost chair 
<http://hivemodern.com/public_resources/full/louis-ghost-chair-philippe-starck-kartell-1.jpg>
 and ask them to match or even beat it.

Independents of all kinds are being driven from the high street. Can small 
shops like these, run by individual enthusiasts in a seven-day-a-week trading 
environment,survive in the internet age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/oct/11/data-strategy-help-independent-retailers-thrive>
?

Rosenblatt had already rescued a series of opera recitals in 1999 
<http://www.rosenblattrecitalseries.co.uk> when its original sponsor had pulled 
out, and founded a summer music festival atBranscombe in Devon 
<http://www.branscombefestival.co.uk/>. He was determined not to allow Les 
Aldrich, where he had shopped for 25 years, to go out of business, and nor was 
it enough for him to buy the shop and install a manager and assess the balance 
sheets. Every Saturday morning he comes to work behind the counter. CDs sales 
continue to decline, he says, but sheet music and instruments are thriving.
 Shop! Broadcaster Petroc Trelawny, left, and pianist Charles Owen outside Les 
Aldrich Music in Muswell Hill. 
This month as part of a campaign to persuade people to get off the internet 
and into the shops, Rosenblatt is hosting a series of instore Christmas shows. 
When I turned up last Saturday, composerThomas Hewitt Jones  
<http://www.thomashewittjones.com/> and pianist Charles Owen 
<http://www.charlesowen.net/> had dropped in to give short recitals from their 
new CDs among the free mince pies and Quality Street chocolates. Serving behind 
the counter was surely one of Britain’s most knowledgeable classical music shop 
assistants, Radio 3 presenter Petroc Trelawny, whose last stint in sales was as 
a teenager in Cornwall, knocking out coffees and croissants. The customers 
ranged from the elderly types one sees at Sunday morning Wigmore Hall concerts, 
young players both amateur and professional, and schoolchildren learning their 
first instruments, with their mothers.

What will it take for classical music to survive as an art form in the digital 
era? Hewitt Jones admitted, with great embarrassment, that he no longer bought 
CDs. Clearly there aren’t enough entrepreneurs to go round to save the dying 
high street trade in recorded music even if the customers were there, but the 
business of sheet music andinstrument sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/dec/04/which-musical-instrument-easiest-to-learn>
, hire and repairs – which require the advice and assistance of skilled and 
knowledgeable salespeople – can’t exist exclusively on the internet. For the 
next two Saturdays,Les Aldrich <http://lesaldrichmusic.co.uk/> will be hosting 
more musical open days. Put the internet away and come down, or go seek out 
your local music store and visit it while you still can.

 * Linda Grant <http://www.lindagrant.co.uk/>’s new novel The Dark Circle is 
published by Virago.
 