
Down one of the hundreds of dusty lanes that make up Gandhi Nagar market, 
Delhi’s largest textile bazaar, the small factory where Neeraj Sharma produces 
girls’ jeans is quiet.

“Normally you couldn’t walk in here,” he says, ambling across the concrete 
shop floor, past dormant sewing machines and piles of unfinished denim.


Kashmir militants suspected of bank heists as rupee recall hits funds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/kashmir-militants-suspected-bank-heists-rupee-recall-india-demonetisation>
Sharma estimates around 80% of his workforce have left Delhi for their 
villages in the past month. “It’s good that they left,” he adds. “Because of 
this demonetisation problem, there’s no work for us either.”

India’s vast informal economy has been reeling since 8 November, the morning 
after India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi,announced the sudden voiding of the 
country’s two most-used bank notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/rupee-note-cancellation-panic-in-india-banks-500-1000>
.

It is the largest-scale financial experiment in Indian history: gutting 14 
trillion rupees – 86% of the currency in circulation – from the most 
cash-dependent major economy in the world.

More than a month on, India’s Reserve Bank has issued around 1.7 billion new 
notes 
<http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/new-notes-rbi-mystifies-with-its-mixed-up-math/articleshow/56035147.cms?from=mdr>
, with less than one-third the value of what was removed. The sixth-largest 
economy in the world is runningon 60% less currency 
<http://www.livemint.com/Money/o1Mhli1mgzK5eaFqD34G2H/Economy-running-on-60-less-currency.html>
 than before. Lines outside banks continue to stretch, and India’s small 
business lobby says its members are facingan “apocalypse” 
<http://scroll.in/article/823231/interview-demonetisation-has-hit-80-of-small-businesses-the-sector-is-staring-at-apocalypse>
. But Modi insists he isn’t done.

Initially intended to flush out the “black money” said to be hoarded by elites 
and criminals, the government now frames demonetisation as the first step in a 
“cashless” revolution to shift the billions of transactions undertaken each day 
inIndia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> online – and onto the radar 
of tax authorities.

This week, labour minister Bandaru Dattatreya announced it would soon be 
mandatory 
<http://scroll.in/latest/823935/cashless-payments-to-employees-across-sectors-will-be-made-mandatory-soon-says-labour-minister>
 for employers to pay their staff into bank accounts, a hugely ambitious step 
in a country where as many as 90% of workers are paid in cash.

Already struggling, businessmen such as Sharma are dreading the prospect of 
more enforced digital migration.


“How do you think I can pay the workers with a cheque if they don’t have a 
bank account?” he asks, in a tiny office thick with incense smoke. “And it 
takes three days to clear a cheque. What will they eat during those days?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Findian-businesses-demonetisation-apocalypse-biggest-financial-experiment-in-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a951cf4de380e248766d77e3a82f49cb71e6815%2F0_369_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India's%20small%20businesses%20facing%20'apocalypse'%20amid%20biggest%20financial%20experiment%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Findian-businesses-demonetisation-apocalypse-biggest-financial-experiment-in-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%27s%20small%20businesses%20facing%20%27apocalypse%27%20amid%20biggest%20financial%20experiment%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Findian-businesses-demonetisation-apocalypse-biggest-financial-experiment-in-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a951cf4de380e248766d77e3a82f49cb71e6815%2F0_369_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 Mohan Sharma, who owns a textile factory with his brother Neeraj in Gandhi 
Nagar, Delhi’s largest textile market Photograph: Michael Safi for the Guardian 
His reasons are not just altruistic. Apart from potentially raising his tax 
bill – in a country where just 1% pay income tax – paying salaries 
electronically would mean giving staff Delhi’s mandated minimum wage, currently 
9,724 rupees (£114) per month for unskilled workers.

“Right now no one pays the minimum wage that the government decides,” Sharma 
says. “It will only make things expensive: we will charge the customer.”

Outside his workers’ earshot, he adds: “If someone is doing the work of 
Rs.2000, why should we pay them Rs.15,000?”

But workers too are wary of the big push online. Tens of millions of Indians 
have been given zero-deposit bank accounts in the past two years under a 
government scheme to boost financial inclusion. But even after demonetisation 
prompted a rush of new deposits,23% of the accounts 
<http://www.ndtv.com/india-news/23-per-cent-jan-dhan-accounts-without-balance-1636582>
 still lie empty.

Asha Devi sits spread-legged on the Sharma factory’s floor, using fine 
scissors to cut loose threads from piles of jeans. A migrant labourer from 
Bihar state, she has a bank account, but has not been able to access her money 
since early November.

“I’ve been standing in [bank] queues from 7am until 5.30 in the evening,” she 
says. “I still cannot withdraw money, and I lose a day of work each time.”

The experience has heightened her scepticism about being paid online. “I am a 
daily wage worker and I’m not sure if I’ll have a job tomorrow,” she says. “If 
I get [the cash] in hand, I know I have the money.”

Cash has a cold, hard certainty that still matters to itinerant workers. 
“There are many factory owners who will make these daily wage workers into 
fools,” Devi adds. “They’ll tell them they have deposited the money when they 
haven’t.”

“In theory, it’s a great idea to actually ensure that workers actually get the 
wage they’ve been promised,” says Aparna, the president of the Indian 
Federation of Trade Unions, who like many Indians uses only one name.

“The downside is: we can’t do it. It’s a bit like say the government has 
announced the end to all poverty by tomorrow. It’s not taking into account any 
of the obvious constraints that even a child in India could see.”

Your money's no good: rupee note cancellation plunges India into panic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/rupee-note-cancellation-panic-in-india-banks-500-1000>
Around one in three Indians still don’t have bank accounts, she says, many of 
them put off by the need to navigate banking bureaucracy. “For people who don’t 
have matching identity cards – say, if somebody made a mistake typing their 
name – then it’s a nightmare,” she says.

Nagendra Sarkar, another of Sharma’s employees, has been trying to open an 
account in Delhi, but keeps running into an obstacle: he has no fixed address. 
“The bank people are asking for papers to prove that it’s my account,” he says.

It is one of many points at which the digital salary plan, and the entire 
“cashless” vision, butt up against the stubborn reality of Indian working life.

“Take an example of rickshaw puller who transfers goods from my shop to the 
factories,” says Pyarlal, a lace factory owner in Gandhi Nagar.

“For one trip I pay him 100 rupees. Does the government expect me to give him 
a cheque? I mean, how do I pay him?”

Such a major reform, even one that might benefit workers, can’t be enforced 
overnight, Aparna says. “You have to do it gradually, let the system be put in 
place, create the infrastructure first.”

Mihir Sharma, a senior fellow at the Delhi-based Observer Research Foundation, 
agrees. “The law might well be passed,” he says. “But it would likely be widely 
ignored, which is the fare of most labour regulation in India.”

Digital payments might be novel, but the ambitious plan is “an old Indian 
pathology”, he says. “The belief that if you legislate something, it happens.”
 