
Birja’s story is typical – and to an outsider, confounding. The 32-year-old 
works as a housemaid in Delhi, and like more than one billion Indians, has seen 
her cash evaporate since November, whenIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india> suddenly recalled its two-highest 
value banknotes.

“Poor people like me are in trouble,” she says. Two of her employers have been 
able to pay her only in expired currency, which needs to be deposited or 
exchanged at banks. That presents a problem: “I do not have a bank account,” 
she says.


Nor can the 32-year-old spend hours waiting in the long lines that formed 
outside banks and ATMs the morning after demonetisation was announced, and 
linger still. “If I stand in queue everyone will be angry,” she says of her 
bosses. “They will count it as my holiday.”

The prime minister, Narendra Modi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/narendra-modi>, has implored Indians to 
allow 50 days for the the estimated 22bn notes that were removed from the 
system on 8 November to be gradually replaced.

Deadline looms for Indian cash overhaul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/india-cash-deadline-rupees-demonitisation-narendra-modi>
That self-imposed deadline ended on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/india-cash-deadline-rupees-demonitisation-narendra-modi>
 withthe majority of the country’s 
<http://www.livemint.com/Industry/qMXU36CLxvR3GfqlS0wnsL/How-ATMs-have-been-impacted-by-demonetisation.html>
 ATMs still bare, and people such as Birja still struggling. “My husband is an 
auto-rickshaw driver, who earns 300 rupees [£3.60] every day after rent,” she 
says. “But for last seven days he has not earned anything.”

Yet the rupee recall might only be the second most extraordinary political 
phenomenon India has observed in the past seven weeks. The first is that 
support for Modi’s scheme, especially among those it has hit hardest, appears 
to be holding – for now.

“I will vote for him again,” Birja says. “He is doing this for poor people. If 
the black money goes from the market, then everybody will have a better life. 
He works for the people.”

As chief minister of Gujarat, one of India’s wealthier states, Modi cultivated 
a reputation as a master administrator. But the execution of demonetisation – 
planned in secret,reportedly by a handful of bureaucrats 
<http://in.reuters.com/article/india-modi-corruption-insight-idINKBN13X2PY> 
working from Modi’s residence – has been badly botched.

Design changes in the new 500- and 2,000-rupee notes have meant that each of 
the 220,000 ATMs in India had to be reconfigured one-by-one. Even if they could 
dispense new cash, there isn’t enough to give: reprinting the equivalent value 
of physical notes that were eliminated from India’s economywill take until 
mid-February 
<http://fingfx.thomsonreuters.com/gfx/rngs/INDIA-CORRUPTION/010030K516L/index.html>
, at least.

India's small businesses facing 'apocalypse' amid biggest financial experiment 
in history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/indian-businesses-demonetisation-apocalypse-biggest-financial-experiment-in-history>
Digital payments have reportedly soared 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/business/india-business/Digital-payments-soar-by-up-to-300-after-demonetisation/articleshow/55902284.cms>
, but offer limited relief in a country where 40% still lie “outside the ambit 
of formal banking”,according to government figures 
<http://pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=145892>.

“The shock has been tremendous and widely spread,” says Anil Bhardwaj, the 
secretary general of the Federation of Indian Micro and Small & Medium 
Enterprises.

India’s cash economy is estimated to account 
<https://thewire.in/80564/modis-demonetisation-move-may-have-permanently-damaged-indias-informal-sector/>
 for 80% of the country’s employment and 45% of its GDP. “And that’s where the 
impact is biggest” says Bhardwaj.

“Because more and more cash is involved in buying raw materials and paying 
wages to workers. And of course, your customers are paying for your products in 
cash.”

Delhi alone has witnessed an exodus of up to 60% of the migrant workers 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/cities/delhi/our-surveys-show-60-per-cent-workers-have-left-delhi-since-note-ban-says-govt-4451025/>
 who laboured for cash in the city’s building sites and factories. In rural 
areas, villagers havereportedly reverted 
<https://www.ft.com/content/f5bd1bbc-b243-11e6-a37c-f4a01f1b0fa1> to bartering 
or credit. The expected impact has led economists to reduce India’s growth 
forecast for the quarter from 7.8%, the highest of any major economy in the 
world, to 6.5%.

Worse still for Modi are indications the policy has not unearthed the hoards 
of “black money” he promised. While the operations of some criminal networks,
especially human traffickers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/22/india-currency-note-ban-sparks-dramatic-fall-sex-trafficking>
, appear to have been disrupted, about90% of the cancelled notes 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/90-of-scrapped-notes-back-in-system-big-dividend-unlikely/articleshow/56210235.cms>
 in circulation have been returned to banks, far more than what the government 
had estimated. That suggests either that Indians were hiding less untaxed 
wealth than first believed, or that the money is being stashed in property or 
gold instead of cash.

India currency note ban sparks ‘dramatic fall’ in sex trafficking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/22/india-currency-note-ban-sparks-dramatic-fall-sex-trafficking>
Few democratic leaders could survive such a bungling of their signature 
policy, especially one that strands virtually every citizen from their money.

No reliable polling has been done on Modi’s standing among Indians since the 
demonetisation announcement, but public unrest has been relatively contained, 
and Indian media have not struggled to find supporters of the scheme, even 
among those waiting in long bank queues.

The ruling Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) has also won several local elections 
in the country’s western and norther states in the past month, despite the 
ongoing cash shortages.

“It speaks to Modi’s enormous political capital,” says Prashant Jha, an 
associate editor with the Hindustan Times. Halfway through his term, the Indian 
prime minister’s popularity is still enormous, measured at81% by a Pew poll 
<https://www.google.co.in/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&ved=0ahUKEwjKyqTI76DRAhUKso8KHagUBH0QFgglMAI&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.pewglobal.org%2F2016%2F09%2F19%2F2-how-is-modi-doing%2F&usg=AFQjCNEk4ObrjUQ7szmKFnNneO7MKuBzfw&sig2=7lMHRe_m8eTUZ6h0LUqBZQ&bvm=bv.142059868,d.c2I>
 in September.

The policy and its subsequent hardships have also been masterfully framed, 
says Modi biographer Nilanjan Mukhopadhyay. “Modi presented the entire idea of 
demonetisation as a highly moral act,” he says.

He recalled how Modi, in his first address after demonetisation, appeared to 
break down before the crowd 
<http://www.thenewsminute.com/article/know-forces-are-against-me-may-not-let-me-live-i-am-prepared-pm-modi-demonetisation-52837>
 in Goa, saying he had left behind “my home, my family, everything for the 
nation” and that “the forces up against me ... may not let me live”.

“He wore a cloak of morality, presenting that he had risen above personal 
ambitions for the cause of the nation, and inviting Indians to also sacrifice a 
little bit for the nation,” Mukhopadhyay says. “He asked them to participate in 
the process of nation-building by standing in queues.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Findias-bank-note-ban-how-modi-botched-the-policy-yet-kept-his-political-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dcbfea1c78bfea66659bd9bcd1062e3423d411b%2F21_263_6007_3603%2F6007.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India's%20banknote%20ban%3A%20how%20Modi%20botched%20the%20policy%20yet%20kept%20his%20political%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Findias-bank-note-ban-how-modi-botched-the-policy-yet-kept-his-political-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%27s%20banknote%20ban%3A%20how%20Modi%20botched%20the%20policy%20yet%20kept%20his%20political%20capital&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Findias-bank-note-ban-how-modi-botched-the-policy-yet-kept-his-political-capital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2dcbfea1c78bfea66659bd9bcd1062e3423d411b%2F21_263_6007_3603%2F6007.jpg>
 No reliable polling has been done on Modi’s standing among Indians since the 
demonetisation announcement but the most resounding judgment of the scheme will 
be delivered early this year when elections are held in Uttar Pradesh. 
Photograph: ddp USA/Rex/Shutterstock 
Demonetisation has also been cast as decisive blow against the elites who 
profit from India’s endemic corruption, a source of deep resentment among the 
country’s poor and aspirational classes, who are routinely made to pay bribes 
for basic government services.

“That’s why the majority of the poor are still in favour of this move,” says 
Bhardwaj, from the small enterprise lobby.

“Even while going through the pain, they see it as a leveller, and that at 
least one powerful political leader has taken a decision that rattles the 
bigwigs and elites.”

The most resounding judgment of the scheme will be delivered early this year 
when elections are held in Uttar Pradesh. As India’s largest state, with a 
population the size of Brazil’s, it offers enough seats to secure or scuttle 
the rest of Modi’s first-term agenda.

One close observer, Sharat Pradhan, a veteran political journalist based in 
the state, suggests Modi might be vindicated. “In this state demonetisation has 
created a divide between the rich and poor,” he says.

“The poorer classes seem to be getting some kind of vicarious pleasure from 
thinking: ‘I’m facing difficulties by standing in a queue, but the rich people 
who acquired wealth by dubious means, all their black money is gone.’”

Whether these same people feel the pain was worth it, once money starts 
flowing again, will decide the fate of India’s seemingly indomitable prime 
minister.

“Modi has become a larger-than-life leader,” Pradhan says. “And he is tied up 
with demonetisation. Everyone down on the street knows that this thing was done 
by Modi.”
 