
ING’s plans to shed 7,000 jobs and invest in its digital platforms to make 
annual savings of €900m by 2021 has drawn swift criticism of the Netherlands’ 
largest financial services company from unions.

 The layoffs represent slightly less than 12% of ING 
<https://www.ing.com/en.htm>’s 52,000 workforce, because nearly 1,000 are 
expected to come at suppliers rather than at the bank itself.

 But they are the heaviest since 2009, when ING was forced to restructure and 
spin off its insurance activities after receiving a state bailout during the 
financial crisis.

 Unions were highly critical. “I don’t think this was the intention of the 
[government] when it kept ING afloat with bailout money,” Ike Wiersinga of the 
Dutch unionCNV <https://www.cnv.nl/english/> said.

In Belgium <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belgium>, where the number of 
jobs lost will be highest, labour leader Herman Vanderhaegen called the 
decision a “horror show” and said workers would strike on Friday 7 October.

 Although other large banks have announced mass layoffs at branch offices in 
the past year to boost profitability, ING said the job cuts were partly to 
combine technology platforms and risk-control centres, as well to help it to 
contend with regulatory burdens and low interest rates.

 “You have to announce these programmes and these intentions at a time when 
you can afford them,” Ralph Hamers, chief executive, said. “We’re strong right 
now, we have good results, we are growing and then you have to do the repairs, 
and not when you don’t have any choice any more.“
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fing-job-cuts-7000-union-bank-netherlands-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd8436ed73748b11fe53160c98074c3b1aec5ed1%2F0_0_4096_2851%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ING%20announces%207%2C000%20job%20cuts%20as%20unions%20condemn%20'horror%20show'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fing-job-cuts-7000-union-bank-netherlands-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ING%20announces%207%2C000%20job%20cuts%20as%20unions%20condemn%20%27horror%20show%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fing-job-cuts-7000-union-bank-netherlands-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd8436ed73748b11fe53160c98074c3b1aec5ed1%2F0_0_4096_2851%2F4096.jpg>
 Rik Vandenberghe, CEO of ING Belgium, addresses the media. Photograph: 
Stephanie Lecocq/EPA 
 ING said it would invest €800m (£698m) in its technology platform, to be 
rolled out over the next five years in Spain, Italy, France, Austria and the 
Czech Republic.



ING has had success, especially in Germany, with a business model focused on 
maintaining little physical presence and conducting its retail business 
entirely online, and has won customers from Deutsche Bank.

In the Benelux countries, where most of the job cuts will fall – 3,500 in 
Belgium and 2,300 in theNetherlands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> – the company is integrating 
its Record Bank subsidiary, Belgium’s third largest pure retail bank, with ING.

 The company plans to take €1.1bn in charges, of which €1bn will be in the 
next quarter, for redundancies.
 