
The horse is sparkling. It prances around the ring, head held high, its 
features exaggeratedly pretty, like an equine version of thoseBig Eyes 
<http://keane-eyes.com/> paintings or a cartoon. When the light catches the 
animal’s back it seems to shimmer. And that’s when I realise the horse is 
wearing body glitter.

Welcome to Wayne’s world, where even the animals sparkle. Wayne is Wayne 
Newton, the American crooner known as Mr Las Vegas who first played the city as 
a teenager and who, at 73, still sports the nuclear tan and disconcertingly 
white smile of an old-school headliner and continues to perform around the 
country. His world is Casa de Shenandoah, a 52-acre oasis 15 minutes from the
Las Vegas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/las-vegas> Strip that, until 
2013, was Newton’s actual home. In September it opened as a tourist attraction, 
a place for Wayniacs (as his obsessive fans are called) and, so far, around 400 
curious visitors a day have come to peer into the life of the veteran performer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwayne-newton-las-vegas-mansion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e4819f295616d081514e158903aefac26dbec9%2F0_218_3000_2029%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Wayne%20Newton%E2%80%99s%20Las%20Vegas%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwayne-newton-las-vegas-mansion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Wayne%20Newton%E2%80%99s%20Las%20Vegas%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwayne-newton-las-vegas-mansion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e4819f295616d081514e158903aefac26dbec9%2F0_218_3000_2029%2F3000.jpg>
 Wayne and his wife Kathleen McCrone in their former home. Photograph: Denise 
Truscello/WireImage 
I am no Wayniac. I came of age long after Newton’s heyday, after he’d 
descended from primetime to punchline. Still, as a Vegas local, I spent years 
driving past the estate’s high walls, imagining what sort of wonderland lay 
beyond. So, on a blazing fall morning I depart the Casa de Shenandoah visitors 
centre - where guests can watch a video about Newton’s life and pick up 
souvenirs emblazoned with his eerily smooth face - and watch as an ornate, 
gilded gate swings open to an alternate universe. Inside this strange kingdom 
the landscape is carpeted in verdant grass with spewing fountains and pure-bred 
Arabian horses grazing lazily in the sunshine. It’s so idyllic it feels like 
stepping into a postcard sent by your grandmother.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXpSv4WiJXyI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXpSv4WiJXyI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXpSv4WiJXyI&media=>
 Wayne performing in 1972 
The first stop on the regular tour ($17.50-$35) is a new museum exhibiting 
letters from NASA astronauts, photos of Newton serenading American troops, a 
papal blessing in grandiose script, even a Western Union telegram from 
President Ronald Reagan wishing the singer a happy birthday. On scattered 
screens, Newton narrates the exhibits himself, flashing that showman’s grin and 
sounding genuinely forlorn over the decommissioning of his private plane, which 
visitors can now climb aboard, planting their butts on his plastic-wrapped 
cushions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwayne-newton-las-vegas-mansion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a34f1444d261029fcbe1229bbff7bff15b00f30%2F0_0_5414_3251%2F5414.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Wayne%20Newton%E2%80%99s%20Las%20Vegas%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwayne-newton-las-vegas-mansion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Wayne%20Newton%E2%80%99s%20Las%20Vegas%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwayne-newton-las-vegas-mansion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a34f1444d261029fcbe1229bbff7bff15b00f30%2F0_0_5414_3251%2F5414.jpg>
 Wayne’s collection of Rolls Royces. Photograph: Sara Bayer 
I stroll past Rolls Royces with gold-plated hood ornaments, a decaying couch 
that appeared in Gone with the Wind, gifts from fellow performers, and costumes 
from Newton’s early days in showbiz – tiny fringed western outfits embroidered 
with musical notes.

But the memorabilia isn’t Newton’s only collection. He also breeds Arabian 
horses, 65 of which live on the Shenandoah campus. I watch an eight-year-old 
mare go for a guided swim in an special pool, paddling its narrow legs and 
swishing its tail like a rudder while a trainer explains the benefits of equine 
water sports. And in the “exotics” area, African cranes guard a nest of eggs, 
while neighbouring cages hold wallabies, penguins and Boo the capuchin monkey. 
A parrot whistles cat calls as I walk by, and free-range peacocks hop in and 
out of the pens. Why assemble this bizarre menagerie? Because Wayne wanted to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwayne-newton-las-vegas-mansion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffe0ff2bc7da9d9bae24bb5c64259727cbc53815%2F0_0_3000_1997%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Wayne%20Newton%E2%80%99s%20Las%20Vegas%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwayne-newton-las-vegas-mansion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Wayne%20Newton%E2%80%99s%20Las%20Vegas%20wonderland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fwayne-newton-las-vegas-mansion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffe0ff2bc7da9d9bae24bb5c64259727cbc53815%2F0_0_3000_1997%2F3000.jpg>
 Inside Casa De Shenandoah. Photograph: Denise Truscello/WireImage 
For $95, visitors can peak inside Shenandoah’s modest original home, tour one 
of the horse barns and wander inside the “Mansion,” (also available as an 
upgraded package for $24.50-$49), a 1970s wedding cake of a house, with grand 
white pillars and Grecian statues out front. Inside, the place is appropriately 
gaudy - crystal chandeliers and curving staircases, a pool table on lucite legs 
and heavy wooden furniture with golden accents. It feels lavish but lived in, 
with family photos atop the grand piano and expensive heels still on the 
shelves of the closet of Newton’s wife Kathleen. This is exactly how you 
picture Wayne’s home, a gilded throwback to a previous era of luxury, bold and 
flashy and unabashed in its cheesiness.

And that, I realise, is the key to Casa de Shenandoah’s appeal.

“Every single part of the ranch is Wayne Newton,” says Kathleen, in the video 
that plays inside the visitors’ centre. That’s exactly how it feels. Not hip or 
shocking, just authentically Wayne – beaded suits, velvety vocals and 
gold-trimmed everything. In fact, the biggest shock is this: it’s all rather 
charming.

• Tour packages $17.50-$95, 3310 East Sunset Road, Las Vegas, +1 702 547 4811, 
casadeshenandoah.com <http://casadeshenandoah.com/>
 