
Lights flashing, three police cars showed up to Bill Montes-Pack’s quiet 
suburban street on the morning of 15 December 2015. The Benicia,California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, man had stayed up all night 
waiting for the sheriff’s office to evict him from the house his grandparents 
had owned since 1971.

Steven Mnuchin nominated for US treasury secretary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/steven-mnuchin-expected-to-be-named-us-treasury-secretary>
“It was really, really traumatic,” Montes-Pack recalled one year later. 
Standing outside the locked front door, the 49-year-old peered into the empty 
living room that holds his earliest Christmas memories and surveyed the 
overgrown ivy damaging the house’s facade.

The foreclosure – which he said was based on a predatory loan and improper 
paperwork – originated with lender OneWest Bank, at the time run by chairman 
and CEO Steven Mnuchin. The veteran Wall Street financier’s foreclosure 
practices are receiving fresh scrutiny this week after president-elect Donald 
Trump announced him as thenominee for US Treasury secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/steven-mnuchin-expected-to-be-named-us-treasury-secretary>
.

“Rather than shaking up Wall Street, he installs the very person that was part 
of the financial mess,” said Montes-Pack, who has effectively been homeless 
since the foreclosure. “I’m just thoroughly disgusted.”

‘It’s elder financial abuse’

Mnuchin, who is also a Hollywood movie producer 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/arts-and-entertainment/wp/2016/11/30/trumps-treasury-pick-steven-mnuchin-is-behind-some-of-hollywoods-biggest-movies/?utm_term=.d227bddde05e>
, earned the nickname “foreclosure king 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/steven-mnuchin-expected-to-be-named-us-treasury-secretary>
” after he purchased distressed mortgages during the financial crisis and 
evicted thousands of homeowners.


The former Goldman Sachs banker, worth an estimated $40m, has no government 
experience, and critics worry that, as Treasury secretary, hispolicies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/steven-mnuchin-expected-to-be-named-us-treasury-secretary>
 couldbenefit the wealthiest people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/trump-tax-plan-cuts-wealthy-low-income-inequality>
 and roll back criticalbank regulations 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2016/11/30/dodd-frank-place-after-finanical-crisis-targeted-bytrump-and-mnuchin/94684080/>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fsteve-mnuchin-profile-donald-trump-treasury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F336e7d7bb6080f1bafcea5b2baadc604056ed665%2F0_173_5185_3111%2F5185.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Trump%20Treasury%20nominee's%20past%20life%20as%20'foreclosure%20king'%20of%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fsteve-mnuchin-profile-donald-trump-treasury%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Trump%20Treasury%20nominee%27s%20past%20life%20as%20%27foreclosure%20king%27%20of%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fsteve-mnuchin-profile-donald-trump-treasury%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F336e7d7bb6080f1bafcea5b2baadc604056ed665%2F0_173_5185_3111%2F5185.jpg>
 Steve Mnuchin talks with reporters in the lobby of Trump Tower in New York. 
Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
One controversial source of OneWest foreclosures is the corporation’s reverse 
mortgages, which areloans to elderly homeowners 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-11-22/trump-treasury-contender-mnuchin-found-profits-in-mortgage-mess>
 that enable them to borrow against their home equity. These types of mortgages 
have beenaggressively marketed to seniors 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/15/business/reverse-mortgages-costing-some-seniors-their-homes.html>
 as a way to help them stay in their homes, but some don’t understand the risks 
andcan’t afford associated fees 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/social-issues/older-people-with-reverse-mortgages-were-charged-unnecessary-fees-suit-claims/2016/05/26/91bfbf38-1d34-11e6-9c81-4be1c14fb8c8_story.html?utm_term=.9be94af9439a>
.

In 2006, Montes-Pack’s grandparents bought a reverse mortgage from IndyMac 
Bank, the predecessor to OneWest, which he said took advantage of his 
grandfather, who suffered from dementia.

After his grandparents died in 2012, Montes-Pack moved in, but the corporation 
– by then OneWest and run by Mnuchin – quickly began foreclosure proceedings.

The bank’s case, he said, relied on a document signed with the name “Bryan 
Bly”, who has beenwidely reported 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-foreclosure-banks-idUSTRE76H5XX20110718> in 
numerousinvestigations 
<https://www.propublica.org/blog/item/ahead-of-congressional-hearings-robo-signer-scrutiny-spreads>
 as a so-called “robo-signer 
<http://www.tampabay.com/news/on-video-alleged-robo-signers-describe-assembly-line-work/1133687>
”. Robo-signers are individuals whose signatures are wrongfully used to 
automaticallyauthenticate thousands of mortgage documents 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/16/business/borrowers-beware-the-robosigners-arent-finished-yet.html?_r=0>
 that they haven’t read and are in some cases falsely notarized.

The document, which an auditor determined was improper, makes his foreclosure 
illegitimate, Montes-Pack said, adding: “It’s elder financial abuse.”

His family is still fighting the foreclosure, but in the meantime 
Montes-Pack’s mother has been forced to live in a nursing home.

The California Reinvestment Coalition, a non-profit that has scrutinized 
OneWest, found through public records requests that the bankdisproportionately 
foreclosed on seniors 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/11/29/trump-picks-foreclosure-king-mnuchin-for-treasury-secretary.html>
. The firm was allegedly responsible for39% of reverse mortgages 
<http://calreinvest.org/news/new-data-reveals-cit-group%E2%80%99s-financial-freedom-is-responsible-for-nearly-40-of-hecm-reverse-mortgage-foreclosures-more-than-twice-its-estimated-share-of-the-market-since-april-2009>
 in recent years even though it only has 17% of the market.

From 2009 to 2015, the bank was responsible for more than 36,000 total 
foreclosures in California,according to the coalition 
<http://calreinvest.org/system/resources/W1siZiIsIjIwMTUvMDYvMDgvMjJfNDVfMzJfNDQxX1RvcF9UZW5fQ2l0aWVzX2FuZF9Db3VudGllc19vZl9PbmVXZXN0X0ZvcmVjbG9zdXJlc19BcHJpbF8yMDA5X3RvX0FwcmlsXzIwMTUucGRmIl1d/Top%20Ten%20Cities%20and%20Counties%20of%20OneWest%20Foreclosures%20April%202009%20to%20April%202015.pdf>
.

Julie Cheney, a California resident whose parents lost their home to a OneWest 
foreclosure stemming from a reverse mortgage,testified against 
<https://calreinvest.wordpress.com/2015/03/05/inside-financial-freedom-one-west-bank-reverse-mortgage-nightmare-one-familiys-story-federal-reserve-office-of-the-comptroller-of-the-currency/>
 OneWest before itmerged 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-onewest-cit-20150804-story.html> with a 
company called CIT Group last year. (Mnuchinearned millions 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/mnunchin-treasury-foundation-trump-232016>
 from the sale).

“It’s so wrong,” Cheney said, explaining that the bank sold her parents a 
mortgage they didn’t need while her father was dying of cancer and on pain 
medication and her mother was suffering from Alzheimer’s disease.

Her family’s unsuccessful court battle against OneWest was a huge strain on 
her mother right before she died, Cheney added. “It was the worst time of my 
life.”

Maeve Elise Brown, executive director of Housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> and Economic Rights Advocates, 
said some of the cruelest OneWest evictions she has observed involve 
foreclosures against recently widowed homeowners.

“It’s unimaginable. People are still traumatized from the death of their loved 
one,” she said, “and then they are faced with the second largest loss, which is 
the roof over their head.”

CIT Group and Trump’s transition team did not respond to requests for comment. 

Turning homes into ‘trash’

Foreclosures aren’t the only way OneWest has inflicted harm on vulnerable 
people, according to critics.

In November, two non-profits filed a complaint 
<http://calreinvest.org/news/cit-group-accused-of-redlining-and-violating-fair-housing-act>
 against the bank, alleging that it has violated the Fair Housing Act by 
failing to locate branches in communities of color and providing 
disproportionately low rates of loans to Asian Americans, African Americans and 
Latinos in California.

In non-white neighborhoods, OneWest was far more likely to foreclose on homes 
than make loans available, according tothe charges 
<http://calreinvest.org/system/resources/W1siZiIsIjIwMTYvMTEvMTYvMjJfMTBfMzNfNjM0X0NvbXBsYWludF9TdWJtaXR0ZWRfdG9fSFVELnBkZiJdXQ/Complaint%20Submitted%20to%20HUD.pdf>
, which claim that in 2014 and 2015, the corporation offered only two loans to 
black borrowers.

The complaint, which calls for an investigation by the US Department of 
Housing and Urban Development, further accuses the corporation of allowing 
foreclosed properties to become blighted and abandoned in communities of color, 
while properly maintaining and marketing homes in white neighborhoods.

“There is a very high price to pay in terms of the health and safety of the 
neighborhood,” said Caroline Peattie, executive director of the Fair Housing 
Advocates of Northern California, which filed the complaint alongside the 
reinvestment coalition.

In white neighborhoods, OneWest properties generally had “manicured lawns, 
securely locked doors and windows, and attractive, professional, ‘for sale’ 
signs posted out front”, according to the complaint. In communities of color, 
the foreclosed houses “were more likely to have trash strewn about the 
premises, overgrown grass, shrubbery, and weeds, and boarded or broken doors 
and windows”.

Blighted properties can attract garbage, crime and public safety hazards, she 
said, adding thatstudies have found 
<http://newsroom.heart.org/news/living-near-foreclosed-property-linked-to-higher-blood-pressure>
 that living near foreclosures is linked to higher blood pressure.

“It’s as if a lender has turned the person’s home into a piece of trash,” said 
Brown. “Any lender who does not maintain the property is victimizing the entire 
neighborhood.”
 