
Albertine <http://www.albertine.com/> is a foundation that opened in September 
in 2014, hosted by the Cultural Services of the French Embassy in New York. The 
store was opened to help promote French culture in New York, especially the 
literary arts. But also to make books more easily available to Francophone 
people in New York, especially since the store that had been in Rockefeller 
Center closed several years ago. The store has been profiled inThe New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/albertine-reparue-french-bookshop-new-york>
,The New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/10/books/french-embassy-starts-a-festival-and-albertine-a-bookstore.html>
 and all over the French media.

What is your favorite section of the store?

Tom Roberge (Deputy Director): For me it has to be the Philosophy/Sociology 
corner. I love that the French so clearly distinguish between the two fields, 
whereas an American store is far more likely shelve Jean Baudrillard with 
Michel Foucault. Of course it also helps that due to the importance of these 
disciplines over the course of French history, we have plenty of books to fill 
out each section.

François-Xavier Schmit, (Director): Contemporary French literature.

Miriam Bridenne (Communications Manager and Bookseller): The children corner. 
Early morning, or mid-afternoon on weekdays, parents come, read stories to 
their kids, and cuddle on the green cozy bench. It’s heartwarming to see them 
completely engrossed by fiction, and to see the pleasure of reading being 
passed from one generation to another.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-albertine-a-little-paris-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cbde6bd13e1757d8f5ac934e29a2c8866b939d5%2F0_61_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Albertine%2C%20a%20little%20Paris%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-albertine-a-little-paris-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Albertine%2C%20a%20little%20Paris%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-albertine-a-little-paris-in-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9cbde6bd13e1757d8f5ac934e29a2c8866b939d5%2F0_61_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘I love that the French so clearly distinguish between Philosophy and 
Sociology, whereas an American store is far more likely shelve Jean Baudrillard 
with Michel Foucault.’ Photograph: John Bartelstone Photography/John Bartelstone
What would you do if you had infinite space in the store?


Tom: The section that’s dying to be expanded, and with good reason, is poetry. 
I’d love more space to showcase the wonderful things that the smaller, 
letter-press French publishers are doing.

François-Xavier: It would be great to have more books from independent 
publishers, the ones taking risks.

Miriam: I would add a section for used books: there are so many books I 
cherish that are out of print, and it is frustrating to recommend a title to a 
customer, and then realize that you can no longer order it. Plus, I love the 
atmosphere in bookstores that also offer used books (Strand, Shakespeare & Co. 
in Paris). They draw an interesting crowd.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Tom: As a team, even with one of us being an American, we know more about 
French literature and literary tradition than any other store in the US. It’s 
why we’re here.

Miriam: We have the biggest selection and do the most to promote French 
literature in English.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-albertine-a-little-paris-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72946d0e093864b2ea96dd9a55f4a27a832725b8%2F0_0_1027_1200%2F1027.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Albertine%2C%20a%20little%20Paris%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-albertine-a-little-paris-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Albertine%2C%20a%20little%20Paris%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-albertine-a-little-paris-in-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72946d0e093864b2ea96dd9a55f4a27a832725b8%2F0_0_1027_1200%2F1027.jpg>
 ‘A Senegalese livery cab driver stops by every Saturday to pick up the books 
he’s specially ordered, and to order more.’ Photograph: John Bartelstone 
Photography/John Bartelstone 
Who is your favorite regular?

Tom: For me it’s a Senegalese livery cab driver who stops by every Saturday to 
pick up the books he’s specially ordered, and to order more. Over the course of 
the year, I think I’ve discerned that he’s working towards establishing some 
sort of environmental NGO, and man is he doing a lot of research.

François-Xavier: There’s a journalist who stops by once a week or so to buy 
two types of books: serious history, and graphic novels. I like the combination.

Miriam: We are lucky to have a lot of great regulars. I have two favorites 
though: a man, always very elegantly dressed, who visits us every Saturday 
morning, between 11:30 and noon. He always starts by browsing our shelves, then 
he chooses a few titles before sitting in our reading room. He reads there for 
about an hour, and leaves. Albertine has obviously become a part of his weekend 
routine. Another one is young woman with a radiant smile who always complains 
that she is buying too many books, but never leaves without ordering and buying 
a few titles. A joyful book addict!

What’s the craziest situation you’ve encountered?

Tom: Night of Philosophy 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/27/arts/a-night-of-philosophy-12-hours-of-a-mental-marathon.html>
.

François-Xavier: Probably the customer who took over the entire counter to buy 
$1500 worth of history books.

Miriam: A customer stormed into the store one day, asking where we shelve the 
books that were discussed on a famous French talk show. We had to explain to 
her that books were organized by sections, and within each section, by 
alphabetical order by their authors’ names. She then looked at us, horrified, 
saying: “Then, you mean that I have to remember the names of the authors 
invited on the show? In terms of customer services, let me tell you, that’s not 
handy at all!”

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
What’s your earliest memory of visiting a bookstore as a child?

Tom: I remember insisting, at a pretty young age, maybe eight or nine, that my 
mother buy me an illustrated (meaning with reproductions of the color plates) 
edition of William Blake’sSongs of Innocence and Songs of Experience. I have no 
idea why.

François-Xavier: As a child I visited a used store that was about as 
disorganized as an attic, but I stayed there for hours

Miriam: I don’t really remember my first time in a store, but I have very fond 
memories of an atrium at my grandparents, who used to run a small bookstore. 
The walls where covered with shelves packed with books. It was my personal 
cave. I remember hiding there for entire days. Adults would completely forget 
about me, and I was free to read whatever I wanted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-albertine-a-little-paris-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa23397fd5fe0e5c970767b72b34baada8772f46f%2F0_0_1200_970%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Albertine%2C%20a%20little%20Paris%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-albertine-a-little-paris-in-new-york%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Albertine%2C%20a%20little%20Paris%20in%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-albertine-a-little-paris-in-new-york%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa23397fd5fe0e5c970767b72b34baada8772f46f%2F0_0_1200_970%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘A man, always very elegantly dressed, who visits us every Saturday morning, 
between 11:30 and noon. He always starts by browsing our shelves, then he 
chooses a few titles before sitting in our reading room.’ Photograph: John 
Bartelstone Photography/John Bartelstone 
If you weren’t running a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Tom: I suppose the default answer is publishing, since I worked at New 
Directions and loved it there, love their books and their approach. But I might 
also like to run a bar in some far-flung town.

François-Xavier: I wouldn’t do anything else. Books are my passion.

Miriam: Running a Bed & Breakfast somewhere along the costal of Maine. (I’ve 
never seen so many bookstores per capita as in Maine.)

What’s been your biggest surprise about working in a bookstore?

Tom: Prior to working here, I worked at McNally Jackson, and then in 
publishing, and at those jobs it became painfully obvious that most American 
readers (most, not all) don’t really pay attention to which publisher has 
published which book. Most casual readers have no idea who published their 
favorite book. But the French, I’ve learned, definitely pay attention, and know 
the distinctions between various imprints and houses very well.

François-Xavier: The interest among New Yorkers for French culture and 
especially literature is very encouraging.

Miriam: How much fun it is!

The staff shelf

What are Albertine’s booksellers reading?

 * Sphinx <http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/23129715-sphinx> by Anne Garréta 
(2015). Recommended by Tom (deputy director): “What begins as a romp through 
seamy Paris nightclubs quickly becomes an exacting portrait of a passionate 
affair, and Garreta’s exploration of both milieus with a deft mixture of 
immediacy and intellectual detachment is mesmerizing. Oh, and the entire thing 
is gender-less, and Emma Ramadan’s translation is superb.” 
 * In the Shadow of Silent Majorities 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/927447.In_the_Shadow_of_the_Silent_Majorities>
 by Jean Baudrillard(1983). Recommended by Tom (deputy director): “This is by 
no means Baudrillard’s most famous tract, but it is one of his more searing 
works, laying waste to decades of fruitless attempts by intellectuals and 
politicians to solve any of the problems created by and within the 
post-industrialized, capitalist world. Lacking any real capability for change, 
he says, we’re left to ‘enjoy the spectacle.’” 
 * Have Mercy on Us All 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/have-mercy-on-us-all.html> by Fred Vargas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/jul/17/fred-vargas-deserves-prizes>
(2001). Recommended by François-Xavier (director): “Still the best novel by 
Fred Vargas, and it’s not even a contest. In the Parisian suburbs, primal fear 
sets in when buildings begin to be covered with a mysterious reversed ‘4,’ 
announcing the return of the black plague. Comissaire Adamsberg and his 
unlikely team investigate … Outrageous characters, well-crafted intrigue, a 
noir masterpiece.” 
 * Pedigree <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/325477/> 
by Patrick Modiano (2005). Recommended by Miriam (bookseller): “As Modiano 
recollects facts about his past in the clear and sober style that has become 
his trademark, it becomes impossible not to notice the contrast between the 
simplicity of his sentences and the strength of the emotion that they trigger 
in us. Nostalgia is missing from the text, and instead, a remote and almost 
silent pain is brought to the surface.” 
 * The Woman Destroyed 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/woman-destroyed-2.html> by Simone de Beauvoir 
(1969). Recommended by Miriam (bookseller): As her husband walks out on their 
twenty-year marriage to live with Noëllie, a young and brilliant lawyer, 
Monique’s world is shattered. So much so that she comes very close to losing 
her sense of self. If not for its subtle construction, The Woman Destroyed 
would be a classic novel of love’s labors lost. Later, as she was writing The 
Coming of Age, Simone de Beauvoir defined her narrative technique in The Woman 
Destroyed as an attempt ‘to make silence speak.’
 