
1) Defensively frail England should go for broke

Argue about the Danny Rose handball and the charge on Phil Jagielka all you 
like, but you’ll be dancing on the head of a pin. Bottom line, this England 
defence just isn’t very good at defending. Jagielka paid the ultimate price for 
world-class passive faffing; Rose was caught out of position on more occasions 
than he’ll care to recall; and John Stones’ Beckenbauer tribute actneeds a 
couple more years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/john-stones-england-holland-friendly>
 in the workshop (sometimes, you just have to put your foot through it). This 
needn’t matter though. Rose, Stones and Kyle Walker are all impressive 
contributors to an England attack able to ping the ball around in a very 
aesthetically pleasing manner. So the solution is obvious. Pile forward! 
There’s absolutelyno way England can win Euro 2016 by trying to keep it tight; 
attempting to outscore everyone else is surely the only possible option. Turn a 
shambles into a plus point. If you’re going to fail, it might as well be fun. 
And if you think that sort of carry-on would be exciting now, just wait until 
Brendan takes over from Roy!Scott Murray

 * Match report: England 1-2 Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/england-holland-international-friendly-match-report>
 * Rooney excited by competition for places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/wayne-rooney-england-competition-places-excites-me>
 * Jacob Steinberg: five things we learned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/england-holland-five-things-we-learned>
 * Nick Ames’ player ratings from Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/29/england-holland-player-ratings-jamie-vardy>
2) France’s Deschamps is spoilt for choice going forward

The generation of young French attackers Didier Deschamps has at his disposal 
is so extraordinary, a handful of very talented forwards are going to have to 
watch the European Championship on television. The France manager, who has 
integrated Anthony Martial into the team since the youngster joined Manchester 
United, suddenly had some seriously delicious food for thought when 19-year-old 
Kingsley Coman came on as Martial’s second half replacement. The Bayern Munich 
attacker made Russia’s defence look foolish. Audacity was an understatement, 
and the mix of direct running with a dash of panache left a big impression. He 
had a sort of assist with the run that earned Dimitri Payet his free kick, then 
scored a scorcher of a goal himself. Deschamps also has an assortment of 
promising youthful attackers to consider who were not even in this squad - new 
sensation Ousmane Dembélé of Rennes and his clubmade Paul-Georges Ntep, plus 
the Lyon pair of Nabil Fekir and Alexandre Lacazette who are returning to form 
and fitness.France <https://www.theguardian.com/football/france> expects some 
of these fresh faces to dazzle in the summer. The only question is which ones.
Amy Lawrence

 * Amy Lawrence: France comes together for attacking masterclass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/france-russia-didier-deschamps-stade-de-france>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8e8155b190482ba1809e442767619c503c1a7bc%2F0_62_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8e8155b190482ba1809e442767619c503c1a7bc%2F0_62_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Dimitri Payet and Kingsley Coman both impressed in France’s 4-2 win over 
Russia. Photograph: Franck Fife/AFP/Getty Images 
3) Conte struggles to find positives in loss to Germany


Italy were completely overrun by Germany in Munich, Antonio Conte’s 3-4-3 
formation having no answer to Joachim Löw’s experimental set-up with three at 
the back and two attacking full-backs in Jonas Hector and Sebastian Rudy. True, 
Conte had made five changes to the side that impressed inthe 1-1 draw against 
Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/italy-spain-international-friendly-match-report>
 last Thursday and gave full debuts to Francesco Acerbi and Federico 
Bernardeschi, but it did not work. The former Sunderland player Emanuele 
Giaccherini struggled on the left of midfield while Simone Zaza had very, very 
little to work with up front. “It is good to have important games [against top 
nations] to make an evaluation of where we are,” said Conte. “Losing is never 
fun but playing Spain and Germany means we have played the best and therefore 
understood the distance to the top teams. There is a gap to bridge to some 
teams and we know that.” To make matters worse, Leonardo Bonucci was carried 
off on a stretcher and could be out for some time. It was better news for 
Germany and Löw after Saturday’s defeat against England. Toni Kroos, Mario 
Götze, Hector and Mesut Özil scored the goals in Germany’s 4-1 win before a 
late reply by Stephan El Shaarawy. Götze will be particularly pleased to have 
started – and scored – but he was still criticised on the night by the former 
Bayern Munich midfielder Mehmet Scholl, who said the 23-year-old must train 
“much, much more. He used to be an arrow, so quick...”Marcus Christenson

 * Löw hopeful Götze can turn his season around 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/joachim-low-mario-gotze-germany>
 * Round-up: Ronaldo hits Portugal winner, Germany thrash Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/international-friendly-roundup-portugal-belgium>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fgermany-beat-italy-4-1-in-munich-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Germany%20beat%20Italy%204-1%20in%20Munich%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fgermany-beat-italy-4-1-in-munich-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Germany%20beat%20Italy%204-1%20in%20Munich%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fgermany-beat-italy-4-1-in-munich-video-highlights&media=>
Germany beat Italy 4-1 in Munich – video highlights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/mar/30/germany-beat-italy-4-1-in-munich-video-highlights>
4) Suárez’s Uruguay return tastes sweet

If Luis Suárez felt that the reaction to his bite on Giorgio Chiellini was 
over the top, he may now reflect that redemption tastes sweet. In the 20 months 
since Fifa banned the Uruguayan for sinking his teeth into Chiellini, the world 
governing body has been exposed as a hive of scum and villainy while Suárez has 
confirmed that he is the best striker on the planet. And, on Saturday, he 
finally returned to the international stage and, naturally, scored for his 
country. Uruguay’s 2-2 draw inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/brazil> was a highly creditable result 
bearing in mind that the hosts produced their best attacking performance for a 
while and the visitors were deprived of their first-choice centre-backs, the 
superb Atlético Madrid pairing of Diego Godín and José Giménez. Suárez, mind 
you, should probably have scored more than once, as he also missed a couple of 
good chances, and the goal of the game was scored by Renato Augusto, who 
flummoxed the opposing keeper with a magnificently cool dummy, before smashing 
the ball into the roof of the net.Paul Doyle

 * Jonathan Wilson: Suárez returns to a thriving Uruguay camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/24/luis-suarez-uruguay-brazil>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d015ef56e566f96f8ab4399780d9fbdb16aca86%2F0_66_1587_952%2F1587.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d015ef56e566f96f8ab4399780d9fbdb16aca86%2F0_66_1587_952%2F1587.jpg>
 Luis Suárez grapples with Barcelona team-mate Neymar during Uruguay’s draw 
with Brazil. Photograph: Paulo Whitaker/Reuters 
5) Washington’s first strike timely for Northern Ireland

Conor Washington’s first international goal was one to savour for a former 
postman and St Ives Town striker. “It’s one of the highlights of my career,” 
said the Queens Park Rangers forward. “A fairytale.” For Michael O’Neill, 
however, its value lay beyond victory over Slovenia on Monday, or securing the 
longest unbeaten run in Northern Ireland’s history. Tournament football tests 
the resources of the strongest nations andNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland>, for all their superb 
organisation, team spirit and the momentum of a 10-game unbeaten record, will 
be stretched on that score at the European Championships. The loss of Chris 
Brunt to a cruciate knee ligament injury and Kyle Lafferty’s inactivity at 
Norwich City – something O’Neill desperately needs him to rectify while on loan 
at Birmingham City – represent major headaches.

Washington’s emergence and impact in only his second international appearance, 
therefore, plus his understanding alongside the impressive Jamie Ward at 
Windsor Park, assumes added importance with France approaching. Not that 
O’Neill accepts the argument that Northern Ireland’s qualification forEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> was all about Lafferty’s 
finishing. The manager said: “Kyle scored seven hugely important goals in 
qualification. Would we have been there without him? It is debatable whether we 
would have been. But we scored 18 goals overall so we found 11 goals from 
somewhere else. This team has proven that, at the big moments, we’ve had 
players who have stepped up – Gareth [McAuley], Josh [Magennis] and now Conor, 
a player we believe can affect games at key moments for us. We’re also getting 
competition for places. Maybe in the past we’ve been too reliant on too few key 
players. As our key players grow, equally we’ll be stronger for that.”Andy 
Hunter

 * Match report: Northern Ireland 1-0 Slovenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/28/northern-ireland-slovenia-international-friendly-match-report>
 * Washington eager to deliver at Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/conor-washington-northern-ireland-euro-2016>
6) Concern over Scotland’s next generation is unfounded

Perhaps it came as a consequence of such a subdued build-up to Scotland’s 
no-man’s-land friendly fixtures, but the country’s under-21 side found itself 
just as much the subject of any national team debate and discussion this week. 
While the rest of the United Kingdom is preparing for Euro 2016,Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland> is seemingly tearing itself 
apart over preparations for the next generation. Rather bizarrely, the 
jumping-off point came in last week’s European Under-21 Championship 
qualification defeat to France, with one tabloid column in particular prompting 
sharp Twitter responses from two members of Scotland’s Under-21 squad, Ryan 
Gauld and Callum Paterson.

If concern over the promise of Ricky Sbragia’s team is justified, it can only 
be because Gordon Strachan has fast-tracked the country’s best young talent 
into his senior side. Kenny McLean, Tony Watt, Kieran Tierney, John McGinn and 
Oliver Burke were all handed debuts over the past week’s two fixtures, with not 
one youngster floundering in back-to-back 1-0 winsagainst Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/24/czech-republic-scotland-international-friendly-match-report>
 and Denmark. Scotland might not be on the brink of a golden generation, but 
they’re not quite sifting through the scrap metal.Graham Ruthven

 * Match report: Scotland 1-0 Denmark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/scotland-denmark-international-friendly-match-report>

 * The Dozen: the best photos from international week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/mar/30/the-dozen-the-best-photos-from-this-weeks-internationals>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb81a81cc931616204aca3dca9a4d5acf11fb9e6e%2F0_0_2649_1590%2F2649.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb81a81cc931616204aca3dca9a4d5acf11fb9e6e%2F0_0_2649_1590%2F2649.jpg>
 Oliver Burke battles for the ball with (it says here) Denmark’s Pierre-Emile 
Hojbjerg. Photograph: Russell Cheyne/Reuters 
7) Huws makes late case for Wales inclusion

The meetings with Northern Ireland and Ukraine gave Chris Coleman confirmation 
of a couple of things that he already knew: his team need to fine-tune their 
defending of setpieces; and Joe Allen remains an excellent player for Wales 
even ifhe does not play regularly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/liverpool-joe-allen-jordon-ibe-watford-summer-transfer>
 at Liverpool. Coleman does not seem inclined to make many changes to the squad 
that performed so well and with such formidable spirit during the qualifiers, 
but one player who may have made an irresistible late case for inclusion in the 
Euro 2016 travelling party is Emyr Huws, especially with doubts over David 
Edwards’ fitness. The 22-year-old Wigan midfielder, currently on loan at 
Huddersfield Town, has appeared only fleetingly since gaining his first cap in 
2014 but in Kiev he gave such an accomplished display that he suggested he 
could become a valuable squad member in France.PD

 * Match report: Ukraine 1-0 Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/28/ukraine-wales-international-friendly-match-report>
 * Allen: Bale and Ramsey return will revive Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/joe-allen-says-return-of-gareth-bale-and-aaron-ramsey-will-revive-wales>
8) Super Eagles have their wings clipped again

Nigeria should have been kicked out of the Africa Cup of Nations as punishment 
for the dangerous stupidity that led to some 40,000 people being encouraged to
cram into a 16,000-capacity stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/25/diaster-avoided-nigeria-egypt>
 in Kaduna on Friday. As it turned out, they were eliminated anyway, as, 
following Mohamed Salah’s last-minute equaliser in Kaduna, Egypt went on to 
beat the Super Eagles 1-0 in Alexandria on Tuesday. It was a deserved win for 
the nifty hosts, although Nigeria, in fairness, improved towards the end of 
that match – especially after Alex Iwobi came on – and Victor Moses had a shot 
come back off a post, as he did in the first match. Nigeria were also unlucky 
that Chad withdrew from the qualifiers midway through, meaning all goals and 
wins against them were expunged and Nigeria cannot qualify as one of the best 
runners-up. The 2013 African champions will, then, miss their continent’s 
showpiece for the second time in a row.PD

 * How Alex Iwobi became England’s loss and Nigeria’s gain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/mar/26/arsenal-alex-iwobi-england-nigeria>
 * Infantino says World Cup could grow to 40 teams in 2026 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/world-cup-finals-expansion-plans-gianni-infantino-fifa>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04758c6f946cd3b96a4a33c9ab94ea1b6fdca976%2F61_115_2415_1448%2F2415.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=International%20football%3A%2010%20talking%20points%20from%20all%20the%20latest%20action&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Finternational-football-10-talking-points-from-all-the-latest-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04758c6f946cd3b96a4a33c9ab94ea1b6fdca976%2F61_115_2415_1448%2F2415.jpg>
 Photographers snap away as Mohamed Salah and Victor Moses tussle for 
possession. Photograph: Amr Abdallah Dalsh/Reuters 
9) Gourcuff is building a dazzling Algeria side

Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> scored 10 goals in 
their two meetings with Ethiopia in the last week, winning 7-1 at home before 
drawing 3-3 on a bobbly pitch in Addis Ababa. After opening the scoring in the 
first match, the Algerian players showed what they thought about persistent 
rumours that Christian Gourcuff will be replaced as their manager by running to 
celebrate with him. The Frenchman has had an unsettled relationship with the 
Algerian federation and is continually linked with a return to Ligue 1, 
although he claims he has never considered quitting his current post. And what 
a pity for him it would be if he did. Because, as his players went on to 
demonstrate, he is in charge of a team with wonderful attacking talent.

The results against Ethiopia went a long way towards ensuring their 
participation in next year’s Africa Cup of Nations, and came on the back of a 
7-0 win over Tanzania in World Cup qualification. The matches with Ethiopia 
also featured some particularly delicious goals, including a superb 20-yard 
volley goal from Saphir Taïder in the first game and a slamming header from 
Islam Slimani in the second – following a dinky pass from Riyad Mahrez and a
gorgeous tee-up from Walid Mesloub <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EYyPa4rHJcY>
. With players like those – and Yacine Brahimi and Sofiane Feghouli – Algeria 
have the potential to do damage to any team in the world. In recent months 
Gourcuff, always a nurturer of flair, has learned to introduce more flexibility 
into his tactics; it would be a shame for he and this team to go separate ways 
now.PD

 * Quiz! Around the football world in 80 questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/football-quiz-around-the-world-in-80-questions>
 * South Africa’s Kenana scores wonder goal against Cameroon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/south-africa-hlompho-kekana-beckham-goal>
10) Given could profit from rivals’ woe

It has been quite the few days for Shay Given, despite the once 
internationally retiredRepublic of Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/republicofireland> goalkeeper having not 
played. First, Jack Butland – who is ahead of him in the pecking order at their 
club, Stoke City – suffered serious injury on England duty against Germany on 
Saturday, and then Newcastle United’s Rob Elliot did likewise in the Ireland 
goal against Slovakia on Tuesday. With perfect timing, Given himself is now fit 
and available after a long-term knee problem and the 39-year-old can spy 
opportunity, most immediately at Stoke and, in turn, Ireland. “It is a window 
for me to play and I feel I could play at the weekend against Swansea City,” 
Given said. “It has given me a lift. Martin [O’Neill, the Ireland manager] is 
hoping I get into the Stoke team to make the decision more difficult for him.”

Elliot’s misfortune means that Given looks assured to be one of O’Neill’s 
three goalkeepers at the European Championship, alongside Darren Randolph and 
David Forde. Randolph stands to be the No1. Previously, O’Neill looked like he 
would have to choose between Given and Forde for the third-choice spot. And, if 
Given could impress between now and the end of the season for Stoke, the 
possibilities are obvious. Given was a TV pundit during the Slovakia game and, 
weirdly, when O’Neill was interviewed post-match, the goalkeeper’s analysis and 
criticisms were put to him by the reporter. “Shay came into the dressing-room 
after the game,” O’Neill said. “Butland’s injury has maybe hastened things on a 
bit. Shay looked remarkably good and I think he’s ready to play now, which is 
great.”David Hytner

 * Match report: Republic of Ireland 2-2 Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/republic-of-ireland-slovakia-international-friendly-match-report> 