
I opened a bookstore for personal survival and to share my knowledge and love 
of books with my community (Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts). There wasn’t a 
dedicated independent bookstore in my neighborhood and instead of just wishing 
someone else would do it, I took matters into my own hands, asked for help, and 
made it happen.

–Kate Layte (owner)

---

What’s your favorite section in the store?

John Cleary (bookseller): My favorite section is Fiction – the stories there 
are what got me hooked on books.

Katie Eelman (media and events coordinator): It’s hard to pick a favorite 
section, but I do love the New Arrival shelves. Seeing brand new, face-out 
books never fails to make me giddy with excitement.

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Kate: I hesitate to say more books – because I’m awfully overwhelmed with the 
knowledge that I’ll never be able to read all the books currently in my store 
and I’m aware that there are many things that I haven’t discovered. So if you 
really mean infinite I would want to add an outdoor garden with lots of reading 
nooks, a rooftop bar with a space observatory,tumbleweeds, 
<http://lithub.com/molly-crabapple-my-life-in-a-parisian-bookstore/> a small 
stage with blue velvet curtains for live events, a recording studio to produce 
and podcast our events, oh and some more practical things that I don’t 
currently have would be nice, like office space, a receiving area, and a dog.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-papercuts-jp-the-smallest-bookstore-in-boston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb19a051740b68c6af7e4386043028785726c8544%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Papercuts%20JP%2C%20the%20smallest%20bookstore%20in%20Boston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-papercuts-jp-the-smallest-bookstore-in-boston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Papercuts%20JP%2C%20the%20smallest%20bookstore%20in%20Boston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-papercuts-jp-the-smallest-bookstore-in-boston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb19a051740b68c6af7e4386043028785726c8544%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 ‘Some more practical things that I don’t currently have would be nice, like 
office space, a receiving area, and a dog.’ Photograph: Jennifer Waddell 
One little girl did get a paper cut from a book. Then her father came into the 
store and started laughing

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Katie: We’re smaller than any other bookstore, and with only three people on 
the team, I think our community feels that they can get to know the shop and 
the people behind it. Our hope is that our neighbors learn about us, see how 
our tastes may align, and let us help them find new books. Because we have only 
500 square feet, we simply can’t afford to stock books that we don’t like or 
feel excited about. I don’t know of any other bookstores that can say that.

Who’s your favorite regular?

Kate: I hate to pick favorites, but I’ve got a few. One is an older gentleman 
and voracious reader who spontaneously recites poetry that never ceases to 
amaze me. Yesterday it wasDylan Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dylanthomas> upon seeing my displayed copy of
A Child’s Christmas in Wales 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/child-s-christmas-in-wales.html> and last 
week was Wallace Stevens, upon seeing the new Banville. He’s a critical reader 
and will always fill me in on how a book was once he’s read it. He just readThe 
Mare 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/29/books/review/mary-gaitskills-the-mare.html?_r=0>
 by Mary Gaitskill – he said it was “reallyvery good. Not sentimental at all.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-papercuts-jp-the-smallest-bookstore-in-boston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3e28080f75068ee55506964ea211e7bcfe79fb2%2F0_0_801_1200%2F801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Papercuts%20JP%2C%20the%20smallest%20bookstore%20in%20Boston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-papercuts-jp-the-smallest-bookstore-in-boston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Papercuts%20JP%2C%20the%20smallest%20bookstore%20in%20Boston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-papercuts-jp-the-smallest-bookstore-in-boston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3e28080f75068ee55506964ea211e7bcfe79fb2%2F0_0_801_1200%2F801.jpg>
 Kate Layte, owner of Papercuts JP. Photograph: Jennifer Waddell 
What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Kate: I’ve been lucky so far, nothing awful has happened – one little girl did 
get a paper cut from a book, she started crying loudly and her mom was trying 
to quiet her down as I rummaged around for Band-Aids. Then her father came into 
the store and started laughing that she had got a paper cut at Papercuts. I 
found a Band-Aid eventually, but she was disappointed it wasn’t a Hello Kitty 
one and cried a bit more. I’ve since gotten cooler Band-Aids.

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Katie: I grew up in Doylestown, PA, an idyllic town outside of Philadelphia. 
Once, when I was very young, my mom took me a nearby book store for kids. When 
I was scolded by the bookseller for touching the books, my mom vowed never to 
go back, and from that point on we shopped at Doylestown Bookshop almost 
exclusively. She would let me spend as much time as I wanted in there, touching 
and smelling and stacking and restacking all of the books that caught my eye.

If you weren’t running/working at a bookstore what would you be doing?

Kate: I really like what I’m doing, but the nature of my work is that I’m 
interested in so many things! I’d like to study cosmology and give 
whale-watching tours, but I’d never want to give up slinging books. If I could 
combine them all somehow – that’d be ideal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-papercuts-jp-the-smallest-bookstore-in-boston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8a5e72e2451ff5104d277b990d2baa3f2043362%2F0_0_1000_1499%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Papercuts%20JP%2C%20the%20smallest%20bookstore%20in%20Boston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-papercuts-jp-the-smallest-bookstore-in-boston%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Papercuts%20JP%2C%20the%20smallest%20bookstore%20in%20Boston&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F23%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-papercuts-jp-the-smallest-bookstore-in-boston%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8a5e72e2451ff5104d277b990d2baa3f2043362%2F0_0_1000_1499%2F1000.jpg>
 Photograph: Lauren Harms 
What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Kate: How patient, kind, compassionate, generous, supportive, and encouraging 
everyone has been with me during my first year. People get a bad rap – but 
readers? They’re the best kind of people, and I’m so happy to have met so many 
this past year. 

Katie: The wonderful and dynamic people we’ve met! They’ve been supportive 
from day one and have made so many dreams a reality, including the inaugural 
Papercuts JP anthology:What Happened Here <http://www.papercutsjp.com/thebook>, 
which we’re publishing on July 12, 2016.

The staff shelf

What are Papercuts JP’s booksellers reading?

 * Eileen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/20/eileen-by-ottessa-moshfegh-review-bell-jar>
 by Otessa Moshfegh (2015). John (bookseller) recommends: “Set in a juvenile 
detention center outside of Boston, Eileen is a novel of obsession, madness, 
and violence narrated by Eileen five decades after the events of the story take 
place. Moshfegh writes with the poetic elegance of Lydia Davis and the 
gripping, emotionless turpitude of Cormac McCarthy, but is still uniquely 
Moshfeghian(her voice definitely deserves an eponym). This book is exhilarating 
and darkly witty, and I wanted to sink into each sentence but also felt 
propelled onward.”

 * The Last Love Song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/15/the-last-love-song-a-biography-of-joan-didion-tracy-daugherty-review>
 by Tracy Daugherty (2015). Katie (media + events coordinator) recommends: 
“This biography of the iconicJoan Didion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/joan-didion> is a superbly written work of 
research. Of course you know Joan from her provocative essays on culture, her 
careful novels, and her pieces that, as Daugherty says, ‘teach us how to live.’ 
Now, through this magnetic story of her life, know her fascinating western 
background and her reflections on writing her work. This stunning book is, I 
promise you, not your dry and merely factual biography. Daugherty traces 
Didion’s intellectual and creative growth, which is an opportunity that those 
who love to read and write would be remiss to forego.” 
 * The BreakBeat Poets: New American Poetry in the Age of Hip-Hop 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/20949617-the-breakbeat-poets>, ed. Quraysh 
Ali Lansana (2015). Katie (media + events coordinator) recommends: “Compared to 
the work of the breakbeat poets, the poetry you’re reading is outdated. The 
poetry in this book is not ‘modern’ in the sense of being more highly evolved, 
but rather a true and accurate reflection of a large part of our world that’s 
often neglected in publishing, especially in poetry. These pieces, with sound 
and rhythm that will move you (at least have your foot tapping), are not 
hindered by the expectations of structure or form. The poems in this collection 
are some of the most honest works of writing I’ve read recently – they read 
like a beat in the chest of the poet – raw, spontaneous, and simply written 
because it needed to be. The world needs more books like this.” 
 * The Complete Stories of Clarice Lispector 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/23365262-the-complete-stories> by Clarice 
Lispector (2015). Kate (owner) recommends: “I discovered the genius of Clarice 
Lispector a few years ago and am elated that this gorgeous book – with perhaps 
the most stunning cover of the year – is finally with us! All you gotta know is 
Elizabeth Bishop says, ‘Better than Borges.’” 
 * Katherine Carlyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/06/katherine-carlyle-rupert-thomson-review>
 by Rupert Thomson (2015). Kate (owner) recommends: “Reading this I wrote down 
these two sentences. The first sums up the plot. The second, my feelings while 
reading it. ‘A story with two beginnings and no ending.’ ‘My heart dilates with 
a pleasure that is pure and undiluted.’ Don’t miss this book—if you don’t trust 
me, it’s got blurbs from James Salter, Phillip Pullman, and Margaret Mead.”  