
Fear of internet crime is now more prevalent than concerns about more 
conventional crimes such as burglary, mugging and car theft, according to a 
report published today. And criminals are increasingly targeting cyberspace as 
more and more people shop online and use internet banking services.

The study was conducted by Get Safe Online, a UK internet security awareness 
campaign launched last year by the government, the Serious OrganisedCrime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> Agency and big online companies.

More than a fifth of internet users (21%) feel more vulnerable to electronic 
crime than any other type of criminal activity. It is second only to bank card 
fraud (27%) as the type of crime to which survey respondents felt most exposed. 
Internet crime has overtaken burglary (16%) as one of the crimes people feel 
most at risk of.

Big online threats include phishing, where a hoax email asks the recipient to 
update his or her account details. Losses from online phishing scams in the UK 
almost doubled to Â£23.2m during 2005.

Pharming is another online scam, in which hackers download "crimeware" to the 
user's computer. The rogue software gathers personal information. Other 
internet threats include identity theft, viruses, hacking and cyber-bullying.

More than half of internet users do their banking online, with roughly the 
same volume using community and social networking sites, according to the 
report. Nearly a third (32%) pay their utility bills online and 23% buy their 
groceries online. But fear of internet crime is preventing some customers from 
carrying out any transactions on the internet.

Almost a quarter (24%) of respondents had been put off internet banking, while 
18% would not shop online because of fear of crime. Another 17% had been 
deterred from using the internet altogether.

Commenting before the report's launch, Patrick McFadden, a junior minister at 
the Cabinet Office, said: "Fear of online crime is an important issue that must 
not be ignored. Otherwise we will lose out on the enormous economic and social 
benefits that the internet provides. Provided they take sensible precautions to 
protect themselves, there is no reason why the overwhelming majority of people 
should not be able to enjoy the internet safely."

Get Safe Online's managing director, Tony Neate, said it was vital to make 
people aware of resources such asGetsafeonline.org 
<http://www.getsafeonline.org> to ensure they continue to use the internet 
safely and confidently.

"Get Safe Online is committed to this long-term awareness campaign," he said. 
"It is about education and making people aware that ... armed with the right 
knowledge, we can all continue to enjoy using the internet securely."

The report commissioned an ICM survey of 1,317 adults with internet access, 
which was carried out last month.

This week marks the start of Get Safe Online Week, which will involve a series 
of events, roadshows and training sessions nationwide. Experts will be giving 
advice and information on online protection programmes and systems.
 