
Lawrence Ferlinghetti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/04/lawrence-ferlinghetti-interview-poets>
, poet laureate of Coney Island, cofounder of perhaps America’s most famous 
bookstore, wrote of his adopted city:

 The changing light / at San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> / is none of your East 
Coast light

 none of your / pearly light of Paris

 The light of San Francisco / is a sea light / an island light

There are moments in the afternoon, when the fickle coastal weather allows, 
that the upstairs poetry room atCity Lights <http://www.citylights.com/> – the 
bookstore Ferlinghetti founded in 1953 with Peter D Martin – fills with a 
perfect San Francisco light. It becomes easy, then, to forget you’re reading at 
the epicenter of mid-century counterculture, where the first bullets were fired 
in a literary revolution that would change America, the world.

Named for the Charlie Chaplin movie (Martin was a film buff, and would soon 
move to New York to open a bookstore specializing in cinema), City Lights would 
grow quickly – both as bookstore and press – subsuming the adjacent flower 
shop, and then taking over the entire Artigues building on Columbus Avenue.

We had a chance to talk with Executive Director Elaine Katzenberger, along 
with several booksellers, about City Lights then and now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb860b241a08c34c1d531da1d6729f36833a002e0%2F0_0_2796_4236%2F2796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20San%20Francisco's%20historic%20City%20Lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20San%20Francisco%27s%20historic%20City%20Lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb860b241a08c34c1d531da1d6729f36833a002e0%2F0_0_2796_4236%2F2796.jpg>
 City Lights and Vesuvio, a cafe frequented by the Beat writers back in the 
day. Photograph: Rachel Royse/Corbis 
Why did Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Peter D Martin open City Lights?

Elaine: The idea was to open an all-paperback bookshop, which was an 
intentionally democratizing move at a time when most books were still sold in 
hardcover only. Quality paperbacks were very new at the time, and mostly 
unavailable outside of news racks in New York and spinners in drugstores here 
and there. Bookshops in San Francisco at the time kept banker’s hours, serving 
a businessman’s downtown clientele, and the atmosphere wasn’t particularly 
welcoming for the young writers and readers who wanted a place to congregate 
and engage with books – and with each other. The idea from the beginning was to 
create a “literary meetingplace,” which became the City Lights masthead.

How is the legacy of the Beats reflected in the store today?

Elaine: In a nutshell, the writers of the Beat Generation were responding to 
the political conservatism and cultural conformism of mid-century America. The 
writings and the lifestyles we associate with the Beats were a conscious 
attempt to break out of scripted roles and models for “success.” The desire was 
for greater personal authenticity and individual voice, for an expanded realm 
of choice and for some form of freedom from the capitalist treadmill. Of 
course, a critical part of that ethos was to experiment with literary forms – 
both fiction and poetry, and later, non-fiction. Poetry in particular became a 
means to vividly interact with the zeitgeist, and it was a conscious decision 
to popularize the form, make it “speak” directly to readers (and sometimes huge 
live poetry audiences) in their own vernacular. It was also a time when 
non-Western spiritual and cultural influences were finding their way into the 
culture, and the literature and practice of Zen Buddhism in particular played 
an important role in motivating the desire for an “expanded consciousness.”

Every aspect of those aspirations – the attempts to throw off oppressive or 
repressive forces, both external and internal; attempts to open the mind and to 
engage politically; the commitment to creativity as a potent form of 
revolutionary thinking and action – all of this is still central to our sense 
of mission and purpose.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2b6b844a5d338f913d40f9406846cef17978c4c%2F0_0_1000_664%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20San%20Francisco's%20historic%20City%20Lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20San%20Francisco%27s%20historic%20City%20Lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2b6b844a5d338f913d40f9406846cef17978c4c%2F0_0_1000_664%2F1000.jpg>
 ‘Bookshops in San Francisco at the time kept banker’s hours, serving a 
businessman’s downtown clientele, and the atmosphere wasn’t particularly 
welcoming for the young writers and readers who wanted a place to congregate 
and engage with books.’ Photograph: Courtesy of City Lights 
A young woman surreptitiously placed her father’s ashes in various nooks and 
crannies throughout our poetry room

What’s your favorite section in the store? 

Andy Bellows, Store Manager: I have a soft spot for our Surrealism section. It 
was here before I arrived (over 20 years ago) and has been surprisingly vibrant 
over all these years. It not only has the well-known French texts, but it also 
incorporates Surrealist descendants from all over the world.

Layla Gibbon: Oulipo or Topographies.

Vanessa Martini, Receiving Supervisor: Our fiction sections are almost too 
broad to really have those as my answer, so I will go a little smaller and pick 
Topographies and Commodity Aesthetics. These two sections face each other and 
are the clearest examples, to my mind, of both academic publishing and 
bookstores adapting to meet the discourse around digital culture. Topographies 
started as a space/place/body section; it has since expanded to include digital 
humanities and the closest City Lights comes to computing books. Commodity 
Aesthetics can seem grab-bag at times but includes books ranging from race 
theory to critiques of fashion to histories of piracy into the Internet era. I 
love shelving them and always discover something rad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27b4cfb4b1ab4009db261136800ed69448bc1eb2%2F0_0_960_1198%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20San%20Francisco's%20historic%20City%20Lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20San%20Francisco%27s%20historic%20City%20Lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27b4cfb4b1ab4009db261136800ed69448bc1eb2%2F0_0_960_1198%2F960.jpg>
 ‘The bookstore has become a destination, the physical space where people come 
to experience something of what they perceive to be the mission and aesthetics 
of our project.’ Photograph: Courtesy of City Lights 
If you had infinite space what would you add?

Andy: Actually, not having infinite space is a blessing. The relatively small 
space allows us to concentrate on carrying only what we want.

Tân Khánh Cao: Books in French and more room to display art books.

Layla: Perhaps more space for art/photography monographs or an escape hatch 
for when drunks and/or maniacs harass.

Vanessa: More gender theory. A nap chair for the staff.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?


Andy: I think our poetry room is unrivaled. We’ve dedicated our entire 
upstairs floor to poetry. It’s a beautiful space that begs you to grab a book 
and read bathed in afternoon light.

Tân: Our commitment to issues of race and class is not only present, but also 
essential to the way the store is curated. We also stock an unusually large 
selection of backlist titles.

Vanessa: My favorite thing is when someone comes to the counter and says 
either “I’ve been looking for this book everywhere and nobody’s had it but you” 
or “I have never seen this book anywhere else; never even heard of it, so I’ve 
got to get it.” That’s the best feeling.

Who’s your weirdest regular?

Andy: We recently received a letter from a young woman who wanted us to know, 
and hoped we wouldn’t be mortified by the fact, that she had surreptitiously 
placed her father’s ashes in various nooks and crannies throughout our poetry 
room. She said it was her father’s favorite place in the world and she was 
comforted in knowing he was there. He’s now a regular.

Tân: I don’t want to talk about him as the “weirdest” because he is brilliant 
and fascinating and sweet. He is more marvelously strange than weird.

Layla: Maybe the endless stream of frustrated business people who are furious 
that we do not stock books about leadership/the 40-hour workweek, etc.

Vanessa: Regular customers tend not to be so outlandishly weird. Weird regular 
visitors, though, we get a lot of. It feels a bit wrong to describe most of 
them though as they’re usually people who’ve been screwed over by the shameful 
lack of mental health care in this country. I guess, by extension, Reagan is 
the weirdest regular.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedc1cf24fbff3e9d5cc1786453c20e799a6ae82c%2F0_0_5100_3061%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20San%20Francisco's%20historic%20City%20Lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20San%20Francisco%27s%20historic%20City%20Lights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-by-literary-hub%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-san-francisco-city-lights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fedc1cf24fbff3e9d5cc1786453c20e799a6ae82c%2F0_0_5100_3061%2F5100.jpg>
 ‘We once had a customer complain that someone was smoking in the basement. 
When we went down to check it out we discovered a woman “servicing” a man who 
then complained to the woman, “I told you not to smoke!” As if that was the 
only problem.’ Photograph: Alamy 
What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Some German tourists said “Excuse me, did you know there is a duck in here?” 
No, no I did not know.

Andy: We once had a customer complain that someone was smoking in the 
basement. When we went down to check it out we discovered a woman “servicing” a 
man who then complained to the woman, “I told you not to smoke!” As if that was 
the only problem.

Tân: For a while there was a woman who used to sneak in a staff door, and 
slide down the wooden chute into the room we receive books in. She made herself 
a bed out of bubble wrap at the bottom of the chute and was found asleep 
several times.

Layla: We are open from 10am to midnight and I tend to work night shifts, so 
some of the “crazy situations” I have had to deal with aren’t that fun to 
recount. Not sure if these are “crazy” enough, but since working at City Lights 
I have had a curse put on me by a European “count,” befriended one of the 
cinematographers onBoris Karloff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/04/screen-legends-boris-karloff>’s 
last movie, found out the ladies who worked at the Lusty Lady peepshow (RIP) 
staged a photo-shoot in the Poetry Room, and listened to a guy explain to his 
kids that “that Jack Carroway guy was born here.”

Vanessa: Definitely the duck. I can’t see the floor of the entrance when at 
the counter and some German tourists said “Excuse me, did you know there is a 
duck in here?” No, no I did not know. To make a long-ish story short, the duck 
came, saw, freaked out, flew around, waddled out, was eventually caught by some 
good Samaritans, and for all I know is paddling around Golden Gate Park now. 
I’ll never forget the sound of its quacks drifting up from the basement, though.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Tân: Best. After cashing my first paycheck at 15, I came to City Lights. 
Browsing, I foundGiovanni’s Room 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/giovanni-s-room.html> by James Baldwin. Dell 
pocket edition. I had never heard of James Baldwin. I came back after every 
paycheck for another until I had read them all.

Vanessa: Being overwhelmed by all the books and being told I could only choose 
one. Still a problem.

If you weren’t running/working at a bookstore what would you be doing?

Tân: I’ve been in a bookstore for most of almost two decades. I have no idea.

Layla: Finding other ways to frustrate businessmen.

What’s the future of bookselling?

Peter Maravelis, Events Coordinator: Booksellers will more fully occupy their 
role as guardian of the long narrative and extended attention span. As texting 
and tweeting fragment language into a patois of bourgeois jingoism, the 
booksellers shall arise to their rightful place as protectors of critical 
thinking, humanism, and democracy. They will encourage the citizenry to go 
against the grain. Book Clubs will emerge where members memorize entire novels 
in one sitting (shades ofRay Bradbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ray-bradbury>). Giordano Bruno will dance 
happily inside his tomb.

The Staff Shelf

What are City Lights booksellers reading?


 * Glory Goes and Gets Some 
<http://coffeehousepress.org/shop/glory-goes-and-gets-some-2/> by Emily Carter 
(2001). Tân recommends: “I was at a party and Emily Carter was there and she 
told a great story. I got home at 3AM and found all my clothes on inside-out. I 
went to bed. And then, about to fall asleep, I bolted upright and realized it 
was Emily Carter who’d turned me inside-out.” 
 * Women in Clothes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/12/women-in-clothes-review-why-you-wear-fashion-sheila-heti-heidi-julavits-leanne-shapton>
 by Sheila Heti, Heidi Julavits, and Leanne Shapton (2014). Vanessa recommends: 
“Through original interviews, conversations, surveys, projects, diagrams and 
drawings from over 600 contributors, Women in Clothes explores the wide range 
of motives that inform how women present themselves through clothes, and what 
style really means.” 
 * Ongoingness: The End of a Diary <http://www.sarahmanguso.com/ongoingness/> 
bySarah Manguso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/04/sarah-manguso-ongoingness-the-end-of-a-diary>
(2015). Vanessa recommends: “A strange thing happened when I finished this 
book: I realized I could not really remember what words had been said, but 
instead the deep sensations I felt while reading. This is a hypnotic 
exploration of time and memory that evokes much but prescribes little (and 
that’s a good thing).” 
 * Astragal <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/astragal.html> by Albertine 
Sarrazin (2013). Layla recommends: “Sarrazin was referred to in the French 
press as the ‘female Genet.’ This is a romantic outlaw adventure written in 
vivid, darkly ironic prose, capturing both the sordid boredom and the seductive 
danger of the criminal underworld and life on the lam.” 
 * The Flamethrowers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/23/the-flamethrowers> by Rachel 
Kushner (2013). Layla recommends: “Kushner’s writing is authoritative and 
vivid, as exciting to read as the worlds she writes about. It’s was 
intoxicating reading about a young woman making her way in worlds in which 
women don’t usually get to exist, even in fiction. A cinematic, unstoppable, 
alienated and kick-fueled adventure.” 
Find more books from their staff shelf here 
<http://lithub.com/staff-recommendations-city-lights/>. 

City Lights <http://www.citylights.com/> is located at 261 Columbus Ave, San 
Francisco, CA 94133.
 