
Before LA’s the Last Bookstore <http://lastbookstorela.com/> opened its first 
brick-and-mortar store in December 2009, the staff sold used books online, out 
of owners Josh and Heidi Spencer’s home. In June 2011, the team moved to their 
current location in a former bank building. The goal was to create a bookstore 
that would contain a collection of what Josh would want to find in “the last 
bookstore on earth.”

Here, its booksellers talk to Literary Hub about the store’s past and present, 
and about great books.

What’s your favorite section in the store?

Katie: I give Kids and YA most of my attention and care, but I get caught up 
in the poetry section and English history as a browser.

Allan: Movie section.

Zach: The graphic novel section, “Dungeon Dungeon.”

If you had infinite space what would you add?

Katie: I’d love to devote more space to small presses and local authors. We’re 
also expanding our art section and collectible/rare books into their own annex, 
so it feels like we’ve got infinite space with this new addition.

Allan: Gifts, knick knacks, games, movies.

Darrell: More room for classic literature, modern fiction, esoteric 
literature, and local authors. I’d also like more installations.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Katie: Create an experience in visiting, I hope. We’ve got all the art 
installations and the neighboring art galleries, as well as having tons of 
books. I think we also do a good job of curating the mix of new and used, but 
it’s always a bit like playing catch-up with whatever title no one wants to 
bring in to sell back but everyone wants to buy.

Lindsay: We have way more fun, and we’re better at knowing our inventory, 
since we don’t have a database.

Greg: Help people find a good book.

Allan: Our prices are better.
 ‘One of my standouts is a customer who likes to come in and read aloud books 
in languages she doesn’t speak.’ Photograph: James F. Martinez/Courtesy of The 
Last Bookstore 
Who’s your weirdest regular?

Katie: We’re in downtown LA, so that’s a tough contest. One of my standouts is 
a customer who likes to come in and read aloud books in languages she doesn’t 
speak. I’ll be shelving or looking for a book for a customer and hear Italian 
or Spanish coming from her as she sits and reads to the other customers, 
unbidden.

Allan: There’s a regular who comes in who is always hunting for CDs. I think 
he’s about the hunt, I don’t think he actually enjoys them.

What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

Katie: I had a man with very clear mental health issues come in and tell me 
all about the extremely valuable book he had in his briefcase. He threatened to 
punch me “through the chest” if I didn’t offer him at least $200 for a 
water-damaged golfer’s memoir from the mid 90s. Our security guards got him 
out. I’ve also had more than one older male customer refuse to listen to me or 
talk to me because I’m a woman.

Greg: We had a customer who had just come off an overnight shift at work, and 
fainted in our record section due to an insulin dip. He was diabetic, and we 
had to call an ambulance to come and take care of him. He was fine, after the 
paramedics gave him insulin, and continued to shop with his friend.

Teddy: There was a guy who ran into an ex while they were both in the store. 
She had a restraining order against him, and he had to wait in the store for 
the police to come and file a complaint against him for violating the 
restraining order.

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Katie: Is it ok if I go off book and talk about the library? My hometown 
library has a creek running through the lower level, and you have to use 
stepping stones or a little bridge to get to the children’s section. It was the 
most magical place in the world to me, and I wanted nothing more than to go to 
the library with my mom and look at books. It was the beginning of my lifelong 
obsession with books and reading. The first book I ever read on my own came 
from that library. I also loved Sundance Books, the independent in my hometown. 
I tried to collect every color of bookmark they had when I was a kid.

Teddy: I remember going to Children’s Book World with my mom as a kid, and my 
dad reading Tintin comics to me that we got from there.

If you weren’t running/working at a bookstore what would you be doing?

Katie: I don’t even know. I’d love to be writing for a living, but when I 
think about other “day jobs” I can’t think of anything I’d be as excited and 
passionate about as working with books. I could make more money, probably, 
doing something else, but I don’t think I’d care about answering phones or 
writing technical documents quite as much as I care about recommending a 
perfect book to someone.

Lindsay: Trying to get a job at this bookstore.

Darrell: Going to medical school.

What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

Katie: When we first opened our little used-only bookstore, I thought I’d have 
time to read while at work. Ha! Having a small staff and plenty of used 
book-buying, shelving, and sales to make shut down that idea quickly. As we’ve 
grown, my downtime has shrunk proportionally.

The Staff Shelf

What are The Last Bookstore booksellers reading?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-last-bookstore-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9f7e527830359c1f464766184250ef6caf99ce2%2F0_6_703_1074%2F703.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Last%20Bookstore%20in%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-last-bookstore-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Last%20Bookstore%20in%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-last-bookstore-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9f7e527830359c1f464766184250ef6caf99ce2%2F0_6_703_1074%2F703.jpg>
 * Stoner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/stoner-john-williams-julian-barnes>
 by John Williams (1965). Matt recommends: “Stoner is one of the hidden 
classics of modern American literature. It follows the hard, lonely life of a 
simple farmer’s son turned scholar and his struggle to find love and meaning 
while keeping his honesty. Williams’ rendering of Stoner as an existential hero 
is exquisite and his misadventures within the anarchic politics of intellectual 
life are intriguing. It is a dark but fulfilling ride.” 
 * History of Rock ‘n Roll in Ten Songs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/19/history-rock-roll-ten-songs-greil-marcus-review>
 by Greil Marcus(2014). Kim recommends: “Definitely one of my favorite books to 
read this year, or maybe perhaps EVER! This books takes you through a weird 
rock n’ roll dream filled with appearances by Buddy Holly, Beyonce, Etta James, 
Ian Curtis, The Beatles, Phil Spector, Amy Winehouse and so many more. These 
stories were so much more personal than what you might read on the internet or 
in a magazine. Greil Marcus delivers a not-so-typical history of music that you 
weren’t expecting, but so thankful to have read.”  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-last-bookstore-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6158c4f240a57f7cdbfd314162199e5d4d25dec%2F0_0_646_1024%2F646.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Last%20Bookstore%20in%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-last-bookstore-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Last%20Bookstore%20in%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-last-bookstore-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6158c4f240a57f7cdbfd314162199e5d4d25dec%2F0_0_646_1024%2F646.jpg>
 * Zen in the Art of Archery 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/zen-in-the-art-of-archery.html> by Eugen 
Herrigel(1953). Tavis recommends: “Brisk and enlightening, this treatise on the 
‘artless art’ examines the author’s five year quest to achieve the ‘everyday 
mind’ through mastery of the bow and arrow.” 
 * The Clock without a Face 
<https://store.mcsweeneys.net/products/the-clock-without-a-face> by Eli 
Horowitz, Mac Barnett and Scott Teplin (2010). Ingrid recommends: “Detective 
Roy Dodge and his “confidential assistant” Gus Twintig are on a hunt for twelve 
emerald-encrusted clock-face numbers that have been stolen from each story of a 
thirteen-floor apartment tower, and buried in twelve spots across the country. 
So where are they and whodunnit? The left-hand page tells each tenant’s story 
while the right-hand page illustrates it (the floor). If you pick this up, have 
fun! And caution: do not resist the flow of Pun but do not drown in its eternal 
recurrence either…”  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-last-bookstore-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cd853f90e561d311f56173c3c19e901e287f0a9%2F0_0_974_1024%2F974.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Last%20Bookstore%20in%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-last-bookstore-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20The%20Last%20Bookstore%20in%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fapr%2F11%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-the-last-bookstore-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0cd853f90e561d311f56173c3c19e901e287f0a9%2F0_0_974_1024%2F974.jpg>
 * Edgar Gets Ready for Bed 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/328657/> by Jennifer 
Adams (2014). Lacy recommends: “Inspired by Poe’s masterwork The Raven, Edgar 
Gets Ready For Bed is a clever picture book telling the story of a mother 
guiding her disobedient son through his nightly ritual. It’s simple text and 
high-contrast black and white illustrations will appeal to little lovers of 
literature everywhere!”  