
Farley’s Bookshop <http://www.farleysbookshop.com/home> was founded in 1967 by 
Jim Farley in New Hope, PA which is about halfway between Philadelphia and New 
York City. Jim bought out a small bookshop that existed in town with a little 
help from James Michener and Fred Rogers (of Mr Rogers fame). He and his wife 
Nancy built the shop into what it is today, a good-sized, eclectic, nooks and 
crannies bookshop for readers who love books. Jim and Nancy were both 
passionate readers who felt strongly about the power of a book. That tradition 
is continued today, and Farley’s will be celebrating 50 years of independent 
bookselling in July 2017.

What’s your favourite section of the store?

Charlie (bookseller): The science section. I like the mix of hard science with 
our large Dover collection, as well as the pop science. There’s stuff for 
people at every level. I love books about ideas.

Caitlyn (bookseller): Every section. It’s too hard to pick, and we have great 
stock in all the time!
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
If you had infinite space what would you add?

Julian (manager): More books.

Michael (returns manager): It’d be great to have a dedicated event space so we 
could host larger groups.

What do you do better than any other bookstore?

Kristina (bookseller): We know our customers. Building relationships over 
years, sometimes decades, is what we do best. We know what they want to read 
almost before they do.

William (bookseller): A favorite thing about this place is that we are good 
about playing soul music and making sure people have a good time, that there is 
always a recommendation ready to go with that.

Interview with a Bookstore: Blackwell's in Oxford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/21/interview-with-a-bookstore-blackwells-in-oxford>
Who’s your favourite regular?

Charlie: Steve Rabinowitz is a regular who reads math books voraciously. You 
see him around town and say, ‘Hi, how are you’. He’s in every week, and his 
love for math is incredible.

Kristina: Paul and Lelia Matthews have been customers at the store for decades 
now. They’re both incredibly interesting people. He’s a painter; she’s an 
actress. When they find a book that they like they’ll purchase 20 copies and 
distribute them to their closest friends and family. Their enthusiasm for books 
is catching.

Michael: One of my favorite regulars is Sonja Irwin, who’s been a customer for 
years. She not only has great taste herself, but she’s always gifting books to 
others. It’s so rewarding to help her with specific recommendations because 
she’s so genuinely happy and grateful afterward. She’s usually got so many 
books that I walk them out to her car for her.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-farleys-bookshop-in-pennsylvania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25a107b086f9eedd77983102728fecba191c1133%2F0_0_650_430%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Farley's%20Bookshop%20in%20Pennsylvania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-farleys-bookshop-in-pennsylvania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Farley%27s%20Bookshop%20in%20Pennsylvania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-farleys-bookshop-in-pennsylvania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25a107b086f9eedd77983102728fecba191c1133%2F0_0_650_430%2F650.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s the craziest situation you’ve ever had to deal with in the store?

William: We’re a tourist town, so we’ve really seen it all. Every walk of 
life, every situation… the craziest thing will always be the parent who, when 
their child stops at our front window and says, “Books,” yanks them away and 
says, “We’re going to the candy store. What do you need a book for?”

Julian: Apparently back in the 70s, a few years before I started, Hunter S 
Thompson came in and started throwing $5 bills behind the counter.

What’s your earliest/best memory about visiting a bookstore as a child?

Caitlyn: As a group, we realized that all but one of us grew up coming to 
Farley’s. This place has shaped all of us as readers, as people. There were 
always just stacks and stacks of books everywhere, and someone around to help 
you get something from the top shelf. It’s really special to work here after 
coming here for years.

If you weren’t running or working at a bookstore, what would you be doing?

Michael: I have no idea. All my attempts to do anything else have ended in 
abject failure. This is where I belong.

Caitlyn: Saving animals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-farleys-bookshop-in-pennsylvania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F189a48b6467ff7dc37f95d5ec8db61fed7863e86%2F0_0_650_427%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Farley's%20Bookshop%20in%20Pennsylvania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-farleys-bookshop-in-pennsylvania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Farley%27s%20Bookshop%20in%20Pennsylvania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-farleys-bookshop-in-pennsylvania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F189a48b6467ff7dc37f95d5ec8db61fed7863e86%2F0_0_650_427%2F650.jpg>
 Photograph: Literary Hub 
What’s been the biggest surprise about running a bookstore?

William: That there are others out there like you, as obsessed with books as 
you are, as crazy.

Caitlyn: Way too many people care about our cat than they do about reading. We 
love Butter, but the books are pretty good too.

Michael: I’m constantly surprised at what gets published. I guess there must 
be something out there for everyone, but some stuff is just… wow.

Kristina: It’s surprising to me how certain reviewers will constantly feature 
the same four publishers over and over again. There are tons of great 
publishers out there, lots of small presses, and they’re publishing fantastic 
authors and receiving very little attention over it. So we’re doing our best to 
bring in those small presses, feature those authors, and get the word out that 
there’s more to the publishing world than the select few big names.

The staff shelf

What are the booksellers at Farley’s reading?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-farleys-bookshop-in-pennsylvania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca5ff62c47a2aec40b6fd114726992c5510e1474%2F0_0_1400_2100%2F1400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Farley's%20Bookshop%20in%20Pennsylvania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-farleys-bookshop-in-pennsylvania%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20a%20Bookstore%3A%20Farley%27s%20Bookshop%20in%20Pennsylvania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Finterview-with-a-bookstore-farleys-bookshop-in-pennsylvania%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca5ff62c47a2aec40b6fd114726992c5510e1474%2F0_0_1400_2100%2F1400.jpg>
 * A Manual for Cleaning Women by  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/manual-for-cleaning-women-474280.html>Lucia 
Berlin <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/manual-for-cleaning-women-474280.html> 
(2015). Kristina recommends: “This is one of the most remarkable short story 
collections. It’s incredible to me that a writer of Berlin’s caliber managed to 
slip through the cracks (this was published eleven years after her death in 
2004). Her stories are gorgeous and artfully simple: the comparisons to Raymond 
Carver and Richard Yates are apt but don’t even give her enough credit, for 
she’s doing something all her own here. She constructs beautiful glimpses into 
the lives of the ordinary, the disenfranchised, and the struggling.” 
 * All The Pretty Horses by Cormac McCarthy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/all-the-pretty-horses.html> (1992). Julian 
recommends: “It is a beautifully written tale of adventure, set in the border 
country of 1940s Texas and Mexico. It follows the trials of John Grady Cole and 
his friend Lacey Rawlins as they try to find their place in a rapidly changing 
and violent world. It has one of the greatest last sentences in American 
literature.” 
 * Welcome to Oakland by Eric Miles Williamson (2009). Charlie recommends: 
“This book is like reading the backside of a lightning bolt: equal parts Henry 
Miller, Jack London, Steinbeck, Celine, Kerouac and Bukowski. It is a howl from 
the forgotten places of America, places that Williamson grew up in. At times 
offensive, brash, lyrical as the best jazz, confrontational, tender,Welcome to 
Oakland pulls no punches. It will challenge your vision of America, it will 
challenge your vision of yourself.”  