
Attempts to eradicate invasive species have ranged from genetic modification 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/topics/science/nature/article/2016/02/24/new-genetic-strategy-proposed-stopping-cane-toads>
 to unleashing asquadron of goats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/29/no-kiddin-oregon-goats-on-mission-to-deplete-invasive-species-go-rogue>
 upon them. This growing problem now has another potential solution: fine 
dining.


A restaurant has opened in Miami Beach that encourages diners to tuck into 
invasive species – the plants and animals that have been introduced to a new 
area, typically causing problems for the environment and native species.

The venue, called Prey <https://1hotels.com/south-beach/taste>, offers up a 
range of delicacies including roast feral pig, lion fish and wild Texas 
antelope sushi. Fish ribs, made from invasive Asian carp, are seasoned in baked 
ginger guava. If you fancy something a little lighter, how about crickets 
covered in brie?

Chef Bun Lai, who conceived the pop-up eatery, catches some of the species 
himself, having long been concerned by the impact of invasive species.

“I’ve caught lizards and pythons and so on,” he said. “We did two years of 
research intoFlorida <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida> because this 
is the ground zero of invasive species in America. I spent months living out in 
the Everglades. We wanted a cuisine that celebrates nature – people are 
surrounded by walls normally, their food is so processed and shrink-wrapped.”

Lai, who made his name at another restaurant <http://www.miyassushi.com/> in 
his home state of Connecticut, said there were lines for several blocks when 
Prey opened in February. Convincing people to regularly tuck into antelope and 
crickets is another matter, however.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Finvasive-species-dinner-restaurant-prey-food-recipe-florida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14e240dc58b323b8b1907cce3ea9537cb7cafc43%2F0_207_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Invasive%20species%20for%20dinner%3F%20Restaurant%20serves%20up%20Florida's%20most%20reviled%20breeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Finvasive-species-dinner-restaurant-prey-food-recipe-florida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Invasive%20species%20for%20dinner%3F%20Restaurant%20serves%20up%20Florida%27s%20most%20reviled%20breeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Finvasive-species-dinner-restaurant-prey-food-recipe-florida%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14e240dc58b323b8b1907cce3ea9537cb7cafc43%2F0_207_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Sushi at Prey restaurant in Miami. Photograph: Prey 
“You can’t make everyone happy, really,” he said. “Sometimes people have to 
try something seven times before they like it. If people come back they will 
get to like it a bit more each time. A wild lion fish tastes good – much better 
than a farmed fish.”

As even a casual observer of The Simpsons 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mpzj1IvEhTA> will know, invasive species can 
cause havoc. Indeed,research 
<http://rsbl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/12/2/20150623> released by the 
Royal Society last month showed that “alien species” have been the second most 
common threat to species that have become extinct since 1500.

Whether they are introduced after hitching a ride on ships or planes, or are 
simply released into the wild by bored or indifferent pet owners, dozens of 
exotic species have taken hold in the US and aren’t like to be removed any time 
soon. Climate change is also opening new pathways for species, which is a 
concern when it comes to theexpanded range of mosquitos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/11/climate-change-zika-virus-south-central-america-mosquitos>
.

These newcomers can severely disrupt the balance of ecosystems and crowd out 
existing species. The emerald ash borer has marched across the midwest, ruining 
millions of ash trees. Critical riverbank habitat in Louisiana has been ripped 
apart by the South American Nutria, known locally as swamp rats. Lion fish have 
munched their way through US marine life after being displaced from their 
Pacific Ocean environment.

Florida is perhaps on the front line 
<http://myfwc.com/wildlifehabitats/nonnatives/invasive-species/>. The state has 
an exotic array of invaders, such as black spiny tail iguanas and the Cuban 
tree frog. Burmese pythons are perhaps the most destructive, wreaking havoc 
upon deer, bobcat and raccoon populations after infiltrating the Everglades. 
Symbolicsnake catching expeditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/27/snake-hunters-capture-106-burmese-pythons-florida-everglades>
 aim to highlight, if not solve, the problems.

“Wood storks have been found in the guts of those snakes, too,” said Craig 
Martin, chief of the Fish and Wildlife branch of aquatic invasive species. 
“Florida certainly has the climatic conditions for the establishment for a 
number of invasives. But this is a growing problem across the US and it’s 
driven by the fact we live in a more inter-connected world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Finvasive-species-dinner-restaurant-prey-food-recipe-florida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddd929d47d269ffdac55f5750cf4a093266dfbba%2F0_6_816_490%2F816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Invasive%20species%20for%20dinner%3F%20Restaurant%20serves%20up%20Florida's%20most%20reviled%20breeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Finvasive-species-dinner-restaurant-prey-food-recipe-florida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Invasive%20species%20for%20dinner%3F%20Restaurant%20serves%20up%20Florida%27s%20most%20reviled%20breeds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Finvasive-species-dinner-restaurant-prey-food-recipe-florida%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddd929d47d269ffdac55f5750cf4a093266dfbba%2F0_6_816_490%2F816.jpg>
 Bun Lai, chef at Prey. Photograph: Alan S Orling 
“The impacts are economic, environmental and to human health. There are 
economic assessments that have shown the costs are in the tens of billions of 
dollars. The first goal is prevention, prevention, prevention. But once they 
are here we need to have a management response.”

Of particular concern to wildlife officials is the spread of Asian carp, which 
are moving up the Mississippi River system, multiplying in huge numbers and 
hogging all of the plankton that other fish require. A key goal is to prevent 
them entering the Great Lakes – an electric barrier has been set up to achieve 
this goal. So far it has proved successful but Asian carp, like many invasive 
species, have a tenacity that can be hard to combat.

So could eating invasive species be part of the answer? Public appetite can 
certainly help influence species populations – thestaggering decline of tuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/04/warning-over-pacific-bluefin-tuna-stocks-as-japan-meeting-ends-in-stalemate>
 is a notable example – but a sizable shift in dining attitudes would need to 
occur before swamp rat replaces rump steak on menus.

There are other potential problems too. If an invasive species does become a 
popular restaurant staple, it could provide an incentive to farm them, which 
could lead to more of them getting into the wild.

“There is some evidence that you can reduce populations in localized areas by 
eating them” said Martin. “With Asian carp, we’d certainly recommend an 
enhanced recreational and commercial harvest of them. It’s a delicacy in Asia. 
I’ve eaten it and it’s bony. But it’s good.”
 