
My beloved British friends! It has been 25 years since I threw that goodbye 
party in Brixton, complete with saffron-laden rice dishes, to bid you farewell 
before I returned to Iran. You were the cast of my life from the day I arrived 
as a homesick 12-year-old. From schoolgirl, to undergraduate, to Londoner, you 
were at my side.

Yet, in a quarter-century, none of you has accepted my offer of coming to 
visit me here. The image of Iran is so calcified by its politics that not even 
one of your own could persuade you to come and explore for yourself. This is my 
last-ditch invitation: maybe you’ll get over that psychological hurdle and 
catch the six-hour flight to Tehran.

You will need to organise a visa and travel through a tour operator though, 
since Britons can’t get a visa at the door, unlike many other nationalities. 
But that is easily done, so many Britons and Americans are visiting these days 
– and from MondayBritish Airways has daily flights to Tehran 
<http://www.britishairways.com/en-gb/destinations/tehran/flights-to-tehran> 
from London.
Iran holiday guide map. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/travel_iran_web/giv-14066to6i6c8mJaU/>
 Map for Haleh’s journey (andYasmin Khan’s foodie tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/oct/29/iran-food-tour-yasmin-khan-stews-kebabs-desserts>
). 
We can’t possibly see everything Iran has to offer in one visit, but let me 
take you south to the cities of central Iran, veering off the tourist map here 
and there. By the way, in answer to that one girlfriend who keeps saying she 
doesn’t want to wear “the black thing,” you don’t have to wear achador; not 
everyone does. But women visitors will need a mid-length coat, and a light 
cotton scarf to hang loosely over their hair. And since there won’t be any 
booze, you can use the time to detox; there’s plenty of superb food, especially 
fruit and nuts, to compensate for the lack of calories from alcohol.

Tehran
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4af6161d5c27030457a98edc6fc7b20407a1ee3%2F0_236_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4af6161d5c27030457a98edc6fc7b20407a1ee3%2F0_236_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 A mural outside the former US embassy in Tehran. Photograph: Alamy 
The capital. This is where you’ll get a chance to see, first-hand, the Iran 
you know from news bulletins. The wall murals often seen in stock media images 
are a great way to step into the recent history of the place. They lionise 
revolutionary leaders and, more poignantly, memorialise martyrs of the 
eight-year war with Iraq. Almost every street is named after someone lost in 
that war. The murals provide an insight into the country’s priorities: from the 
zeal of early revolution and war to the contemporary penchant for the 
decorative. The walls of the US embassy, now officially referred to as “the 
nest of spies”, will provide selfie backdrops to shake your Instagram feed.

Having explored the political veneer of the city, we’ll head to Golestan Palace
 <http://www.golestanpalace.ir/en/history.html> in the heart of old Tehran. 
Here, Nassereddin Shah, the 19th-century Qajar king, introduced photography to 
Iran and practised his hobby taking pictures of the moustachioed women of his 
harem. The palace has an impressive archive of Iranian photography, thanks to 
him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc301ba266ee6ca1eddcba12ee8e66661b679b1bd%2F0_0_4533_2721%2F4533.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc301ba266ee6ca1eddcba12ee8e66661b679b1bd%2F0_0_4533_2721%2F4533.jpg>
 Golestan Palace, Tehran. Photograph: Alamy 
By now you’ll be hungry, so we’ll take a short walk to the entrance of the 
Grand Bazaar, the bustling hub of commercial activity. You can find almost 
anything here, but we are stopping for the famous lunch atMoslem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/nov/22/moslem-restaurant-tehran-iran-tah-chin>
 restaurant. We’ll queue to get into this congested delight, but it’s worth it: 
it serves the besttah-chin in town. Portions of saffron and yogurt rice, served 
with chicken and barberries, easily feed two Iranians – and we know how to eat!

Moving on, we will go find Tehran’s buzzing art scene, where the young and the 
hip spend Friday afternoons gallery-hopping. New galleries around town are 
helping regenerate the old centre of Tehran: these includeAaran Gallery 
<http://www.aarangallery.com/> (12 Dey Street) which showcases work by young 
Iranian artists. As we head north, we’ll pop intoAg Gallery 
<http://artgalleries.ir/en/ag-gallery/> (3 Peysan Street) for photography, via 
Dastan’s Basement <http://www.dastangallery.com/> (6 Bidar Street) a bijou 
gallery where the art is still affordable.

Perhaps we’ll grab a Persian herbal infusion in one of the many new coffee 
shops, as the après art scene requires – you won’t see a Starbucks or 
McDonald’s while you’re here. Now, there’s an incentive.

Kashan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27df2ad5820afae893cfdefc56705ace25094e25%2F0_171_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27df2ad5820afae893cfdefc56705ace25094e25%2F0_171_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Manouchehri House, a boutique hotel in Kashan 
Many Iranians like to go north to take in the Caspian Sea’s lush vegetation 
and humid climate. But most foreign visitors go south to see the historic 
cities of Isfahan, Shiraz and Yazd. We’ll start in Kashan, the gateway city to 
the central desert region and will stay atManouchehri House 
<http://www.manouchehrihouse.com/en/hotel> (doubles from £70), a 19th-century 
property, now a boutique hotel, renovated even as the country was experiencing 
the worst of the sanctions.

When many people were thinking of leaving, the owner raised this house from a 
heap of dust and rubble. We all thought she was crazy but, these days, booking 
in advance is necessary to enjoy a night in what is now an admired example of 
architectural renovation. Tehranis, tired of the crowds and the villas that 
have mushroomed in the Caspian region, now run to the desert to buy and rebuild 
abandoned homes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa91069f253ed1c711c0963834d8d1b6ea7758d0d%2F0_35_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa91069f253ed1c711c0963834d8d1b6ea7758d0d%2F0_35_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Fin Garden. Photograph: Alamy 
In Kashan we’ll also visit the Agha Bozorgi seminary, the only mosque in Iran 
with a sunken garden. Before we turn away from the city, we’ll visit Fin Garden 
too, which had the dubious honour of housing Amir Kabir, one of Iran’s 
modernising prime ministers in exile. He was killed in the bath house. To 
lighten the mood, we’ll grab a kebab, sitting on beds alfresco, at Gholam’s 
Kebab House before hitting the motorway towards Yazd.

On the way to Yazd
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9661b9f7300171139db3c086d33976493e8b35ab%2F0_613_2431_1459%2F2431.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9661b9f7300171139db3c086d33976493e8b35ab%2F0_613_2431_1459%2F2431.jpg>
 Aghda old town. Photograph: Haleh Anvari 
We’ll stop at Aghda, famous for its pomegranates, where the old town has been 
abandoned in favour of modern housing

There can be stops at any town that takes your fancy as we travel along the 
edge of Dasht-e Kavir, one of Iran’s two central deserts. There are significant 
historical sites in Natanz, Naeen and Ardestan, the latter home to a mosque 
built on the remains of a Zoroastrian fire temple dating from 1158. There’s 
also theMoon Qanat 
<http://www.thecivilengineer.org/online-historical-database-of-civil-infrastructure/item/446-qanat-of-mun-moon-qanat>
, an ancient double-tier aqueduct. The underground irrigation system associated 
with it dates from 1,000BC, and is an early technological wonder that brought 
water to Persia’s many arid cities, employing a system of underground wells and 
canals.

It’s a long journey, so we’ll stop for the night at Aghda, famous for its 
pomegranates, where the old town has been abandoned in favour of modern 
housing. The mainly uninhabited neighbourhood makes for an evocative stroll. 
One of the larger houses has been restored as the cosyKhaloo Mirza hotel 
<http://www.khaloomirzahotel.com/Uk/> (doubles from £25). Here, we’ll sleep on 
floor mats in shared rooms, traditional Iranian style. Food is provided by the 
hotelier’s aunt from a large kitchen, and it will no doubt include Aghda’s 
superb pomegranate paste.

Camping in Dashte E Kavir
 Kavir-e Lut desert. Photograph: Brian A Vikander/Getty Images 
Before getting to Yazd, we’ll make a detour to join an off-road group to camp 
amid the desert dunes, where the landscape is spectacular and the unexpected 
flora otherworldly. This vast landscape is not a place to go on your own, so 
we’ll join Hamid Boreiri, who has been leading groups on desert excursions for 
19 years (zistnc.com <http://zistnc.com/>).

Everyone brings their own 4WD vehicle (spare seats are shared around). We’ll 
help dig the car out of soft sand as we traverse the dunes, and pitch camp 
ourselves – it’s tents and sleeping bags here. Travellers report that they feel 
a surge of energy under the desert skies. Walking barefoot in the sand 
exfoliates your feet but it also cleanses the soul. You certainly come out of 
the desert feeling lighter. Maybe it’s to do with the salt in the sand; these 
deserts were once seas. Maybe the feminine curves of the dunes suggest a softer 
place. That said, all that screaming as vehicles crest the dunes is cathartic!

Yazd
 Amir Chakhmagh. Photograph: Getty Images 
To Yazd, the city of wind towers, which suck the hot desert air down on to a 
shallow pool of water and cool the house. One of these has been recreated in a 
wonderland mall in Dubai but here, inDowlatabad Garden 
<http://www.iranreview.org/content/Documents/Dowlatabad_Garden.htm>, we can see 
the tallest functioning wind tower in the world. No other city in Iran has been 
preserved so meticulously by its residents, who have resisted the lure of 
building the classical pastiche high-rises so beloved of the nouveau riche in 
Tehran.

Follow me to the Khalifa pastry shop and order its famed Yazdi delicacies of 
baghlava and sweetmeats to take back home

The city has strong associations with Iran’s pre-Islamic religion. 
Zoroastrians gather annually at Chak Chak, a mountainside temple closed to 
Muslims. But we can visit a functioning fire temple in town and make the hike 
to the Towers of Silence where, until 70 years ago, bodies of dead Zoroastrians 
were left to be consumed by carrion birds. Follow me to the Khalifa pastry shop 
and order its famed Yazdi delicacies of baghlava and sweetmeats to take back 
home.

Amir Chakhmagh, a three-storey structure known as a hosseinieh – for 
commemoration ceremonies – will bring us back to Iran’s present Shia rituals. 
This is a place where the martyrdom ofImam Hossein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2014/nov/05/iran-high-cost-business-mourning>
 is marked each year. The large woodennakhl, representing a palm that carried 
his body, is dressed in black decorative cloth and used as the centrepiece for 
the mourning processions of Ashura every year.

Rest will come at Khan restaurant, once a typical Iranian hammam, before we go 
to sample broad bean and dill rice with lamb at Talar Yazd restaurant. We’ll 
stay inMoshirolmamalek hotel <http://hotelgardenmoshir.com/> (doubles from £115 
B&B) with its own Persian garden on the edge of the city.

Shiraz
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F882f4c7d7985fd57ba116adde1f99144bf04d038%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F882f4c7d7985fd57ba116adde1f99144bf04d038%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A boy runs between pillars at the Vakil mosque in Shiraz. Photograph: Pascal 
Mannaerts/Barcroft Images 
How can we not visit Shiraz, the garden of Iran and the heart of its poetic 
soul? Venerated poetsSa’di <https://www.britannica.com/biography/Sadi> and Hafez
 <https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/hafez> are 
buried here. Iranians use Hafez’s mystic poetry for divinations, and visit his 
grave as if on a secular pilgrimage. Although we will have to dash to see all 
that is on offer here, dashing is not the Shirazi way. Whereas Isfahanis are 
famous for their quick wit and love of money, Shirazis are known for their 
appreciation of a gentler lifestyle centred on the city’s many private and 
public gardens. The city has a fine selection of accessible Persian gardens, 
includingEram <http://www.atlasobscura.com/places/eram-garden>, Jahan-nama 
<http://www.gardenvisit.com/gardens/jahan_nama_garden>, and Delgosha 
<http://www.gardenvisit.com/gardens/bagh-e_delgosha>, and the newly reopened 
Shapouri Pavilion Garden <https://www.facebook.com/ShapouriPavilionAndGarden> 
includes a new restaurant where we can take the weight off our feet.
 Vakil bazaar. Photograph: Emad Aljumah/Getty Images 
The city’s sublime air, laced with the scent of orange blossom wafting from 
the many citrus orchards, is legendary. The Shirazi aromatic lime is 
indispensable to our cooking, and is served liberally withfaloodeh, the local 
frozen noodle dessert. The Vakil bazaar is one of the most colourful in the 
country. The proximity of Shiraz to the homelands of nomadic tribes means the 
place is full of the bright, glittery fabrics favoured for traditional clothes.

Not far from the bazaar is the Shahcheragh mausoleum 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shah_Cheragh>, a Shia shrine with mirror-work 
decorations that have inspired contemporary artists includingMonir 
Farmanfarmaian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2014/dec/27/-sp-monir-shahroudy-farmanfarmaian-iran-infinite-possibility>
. Here, you do have to wear a chador – they are provided at the door and are 
not black. After a long day, perhaps we’ll stay at the newShiraz Grand Hotel 
<http://www.chamranhotel.org/en/content/quran-gate> (doubles from £130 B&B) by 
Qur’an Gate, an example of the new modern architecture that is popping up 
around Shiraz.

Persepolis
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a69753478d88ef547ffb03007da53c711e0e806%2F0_52_5150_3089%2F5150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a69753478d88ef547ffb03007da53c711e0e806%2F0_52_5150_3089%2F5150.jpg>
 Xerxes’ Gateway, also known as the Gate of All Nations, at Persepolis. 
Photograph: Alamy 
An hour’s drive north-east of Shiraz is our portal to the ancient past. 
Persepolis, the ceremonial palace built by the Achaemenid king Darius in 518BC, 
was a significant site in the Persian empire. Our ancient history is sometimes 
lost in the noise of contemporary politics, but images and words from this era 
abound in our daily life, serving as the glue that binds the nation. The 
Achaemenids were expansionists and ruled more than 40% of the then known world, 
but the fact that the palace was built by hired hands and not slaves marks the 
Achaemenids as progressive for their time.

Our ancient history is often lost in the noise of contemporary politics but 
images from this era abound in daily life

As we will see, the surprisingly well-preserved bas-reliefs show guests from 
the many nations of the empire arriving at the palace bearing gifts. Among 
imposing statues of mythical animals are the well-known winged bulls, guardians 
of the palace. Sadly they didn’t deter Alexander the Macedonian (who does not 
go by the title of “Great” in this country) from burning the place down.

Next morning, on our way to Isfahan, we’ll stop at Pasargad, the Tomb of Cyrus 
the Great <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2006/nov/22/iran.worlddispatch>, 
the founder of the Persian empire and the first king of Iranians. His 
sarcophagus stands without pomp on a windswept plain. In 1971, Mohammad Reza 
Shah held a huge ceremony to mark 2,500 years of monarchy in Iran. His famous 
words – “Cyrus sleep easy for we are awake” – became the words of the last 
Iranian king to its first. The revolution followed eight years later.

Isfahan
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3793d2325bc268bea4caab80c32eeeac9c1dea8%2F0_113_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3793d2325bc268bea4caab80c32eeeac9c1dea8%2F0_113_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Mosque in Imam Square, Isfahan Iran. Photograph: Alamy 
Isfahan should always be the last city on any travel itinerary in Iran. OK, 
I’m biased (it is my home town) but this truly is the jewel in the crown. Most 
of what we’ll see was built by Shah Abbas in the 17th century, when his capital 
was established here. The magnificentNaghshe Jahan Square 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/115>, with its turquoise domes, and palace of 
Alighapou, positioned around an old polo field, are wondrous and you’ll want to 
see them again and again.

This is a living and working neighbourhood: Isfahanis still come to procure 
spices and jewellery in the old Gheisariyeh bazaar, and the surrounding 
passageways bustle with artisans making handicrafts. My favourite is the 
coppersmiths’ passage, where the cacophony of beating hammers is a 
centuries-old sound. Another joy is the ceiling of theLotfollah mosque 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sheikh_Lotfollah_Mosque>. Here, the design of 
the tiles creates the same sensation as watching a starry night, drawing you 
upwards as if falling into the sky. Not far away is the Jameh mosque, one of 
the oldest in the country, rebuilt in the 11th century. No colourful tiles 
here: the wonder is in the patterns and craftsmanship of the brickworks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23385dc00bd4b32b7c3ba2a54a60dfab83f2d315%2F261_0_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%20holiday%20guide%3A%20from%20Tehran%20to%20Isfahan%20and%20beyond&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Firan-holiday-guide-tehran-isfahan-persepolis-yazd%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23385dc00bd4b32b7c3ba2a54a60dfab83f2d315%2F261_0_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Fine dining … the restaurant at the Abbasi hotel. Photograph: Abassi Hotel 
Finally, a major feature of Isfahan is the river, along the banks of which 
Isfahanis go to take the air. There are a number of old bridges here, from the 
plain-brick Si-o-se pol with its 33 arches, to the Khaju bridge with its 
decorative motifs and tiles, where the king would sit to enjoy the sound of 
water falling over specially designed steps. Nowadays, the river runs dry most 
of the year, but that hasn’t stopped Isfahanis continuing to use its banks in 
their leisure time.

Staying in the Abbasi hotel <http://abbasihotel.ir/> (doubles from £130 B&B) 
is a must. The oldcaravanserai has been converted into possibly the most 
beautiful hotel Iran has to offer. The quince-laden trees and the dome of the 
Chaharbagh seminary visible in the garden make this a magical end to your stay.

But only if you come!

Sound advice

Showing musical instruments being played is still banned on Iranian television 
but concerts are held regularly in Tehran. VisitIran Music 
<http://musiceiranian.ir/> for details and catch a live gig.

State of the art

Housed in two renovated old houses in Tehran are Gallery O 
<http://ogallery.net/> and Ab-anabar <http://ab-anbar.com/>, both of which 
showcase cutting-edge art in what were once Tehran’s modern houses.
 