
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> should be drawing up 
contingency plans for the EU unravelling after Brexit and a possible French 
departure, an economic adviser to successive Irish governments has said.

Dr Sean Barrett urged Enda Kenny’s administration in Dublin to strongly back 
any French attempt to gain more concessions from Brussels toprevent a possible 
“Frexit” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/20/well-done-britain-brexit-vote-boosts-french-far-right-front-national-election-machine>
.


The economic expert claimed the republic had been too distracted by an 
election earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/28/irish-election-enda-kenny-plans-to-form-government-despite-losing-voters>
 to do more to persuade fellow EU states to grant David Cameron abetter deal 
from Brussels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/19/camerons-eu-deal-what-he-wanted-and-what-he-got>
 to prevent Brexit.


The Trinity College Dublin academic, one of a core of advisers who persuaded 
the then taoiseach Charles J Haughey to create a more open economy, leading to 
theCeltic Tiger economic boom years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/jan/03/ireland-economy-financial-recession>
, said the EU’s collapse was a possibility, especially if the Eurosceptic Front 
National leader, Marine Le Pen,becomes president of France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/marine-le-pen-says-trumps-victory-marks-great-movement-across-world>
 next year.

“If France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> exits the EU, Ireland 
would lose a major ally in debates over the common agricultural policy (CAP). 
Irish agriculture would have to adjust to competition with New Zealand and 
South America,” Barrett said.


“Ireland’s strategy while the EU survives should emphasise trade and market 
access, and also to develop trade with the rest of the world, as an insurance 
against an EU breakup. We should have at least a scenario to develop trade with 
non-EU countries in case of that breakup.”


He said the Fine Gael/Independents minority coalition must do more than the 
government did for Britain in arguing for a better deal for France, to prevent 
a possible EU meltdown.


“If Ireland wants the French to stay in the EU, presumably to retain an ally 
to support CAP, we had better form an ‘entente cordiale’ now. The government 
has to ask: ‘What do French voters see as the EU’s defects? And how can we 
help?’ This we failed to do in the UK’s case,” Barrett said.


“The Brexit referendum took many people in Ireland by surprise, as it did in 
the UK. Ireland has most to lose from a hard Brexit, with tariffs and border 
posts reinstated with its main trading partner.


Marine Le Pen, Beppe Grillo, Geert Wilders, Frauke Petry: has their big moment 
arrived?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/12/elections-eu-donald-trump-brexit-italy-referendum>
“Ireland should have sought more concessions for the UK in order to give Mr 
Cameron more to put before voters in the referendum. The Irish general election 
campaign and the indecisive result occupied the government in the republic for 
the first half of 2016. These factors, combined with complacency that remain 
would win, meant that Ireland did not get the UK referendum result it wanted.”


He said Ireland should have sided with Britain in “curtailing the superstate 
and regulating migration” during negotiations with Brussels.


Dublin needs to become one of France’s strongest EU allies as the union comes 
under more strain, Barrett said.


Frexit, Nexit or Oexit? Who will be next to leave the EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/frexit-nexit-or-oexit-who-will-be-next-to-leave-the-eu>
Barrett, a former member of the Seanad, Ireland’s second parliamentary 
chamber, predicted that the US corporation tax rate would fall under Donald 
Trump. This would prove massively challenging for Ireland, he said, given its 
much criticised 12.5% corporation tax rate, which has encouraged US 
multinationals including Dell, Apple and Google to establish their European 
bases in the Irish Republic.

A longtime critic of the euro, Barrett predicted more turbulence ahead for the 
single currency.

Angela Merkel and Marine Le Pen: one of them will shape Europe’s future | 
Natalie Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/angela-merkel-marine-le-pen-europe-destiny>
“Ireland sleepwalked into the euro currency and paid the price in the banking 
collapse and bailout. The humiliation of Ireland by theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> and Mr Claude 
Trichet in particular has dampened down any remaining Irish enthusiasm for a 
federal Europe,” he said.

“The banking and economic collapses were inevitable. It was flawed policies 
and a flawed currency that brought a country down.”

The government and main opposition parties insist that Ireland, traditionally 
one of the most pro-European countries, remains committed to the EU project.


However, since the Brexit vote, there have been a few Irish voices questioning 
the wisdom of Ireland staying in the EU while its largest trading partner, the 
UK, is planning to leave.


Last month, the broadcaster and television presenter Gay Byrne said the 
republic should consider leaving the EUon the same day as Britain 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/brexit/we-should-leave-eu-on-same-day-as-british-gay-byrne-backs-irish-eu-exit-if-brexit-happens-35139500.html>
.


“Since our main trading partner in Ireland is the UK and our second main 
trading partner is America, it might be worth considering if they continue with 
Brexit that we could come out ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> on the same day that Britain is 
coming out,” he said on his Lyric FM show.


The presenter for 37 years of RTÉ’s The Late Late Show added: “I have no idea 
whether anybody agrees with me or not. We now know that large numbers of 
people, at least half the population in the UK, are unhappy with Europe, are 
unhappy with Brussels, are unhappy with what is going on at the moment. There 
is no reason to believe that the same proportion doesn’t apply in Ireland.


“A large number of people are unhappy with Brussels and are unhappy with the 
way Europe is going, and maybe they might consider some other possibility.”

 