
Ireland’s central bank has reported a substantial increase in the number of 
inquiries from UK-based financial services companies to operate from Dublin in 
the wake of the Brexit referendum.

Applications for an Irish base can take up to a year and deputy governor Cyril 
Roux said on Thursday that several overtures had moved from preliminary 
inquiries to the pre-application or application phase.

“Since the UK referendum, there has been a material increase in the number of 
authorisation queries from UK-authorised entities,” he said.

Dublin is vying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/dublin-exploits-brexit-uncertainty-to-lure-firms-from-london>
 with otherEuropean cities, including Frankfurt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/frankfurt-in-front-the-city-poised-to-become-londons-gateway-to-europe>
 andParis, to lure banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/france-helps-banks-consider-moving-to-paris-after-brexit-vote>
 and other London-based service companies concerned about the potential loss of 
financial passporting – the ability to operate across the continent – when the 
UK withdraws from Europe.

“We’re seeing applications throughout the whole spectrum. We have applications 
for new business, the licensing of firms who are not present here, but we also 
see very significant indications from regulated firms that are small today but 
want to be big tomorrow,” said Roux.

“We see the whole gamut of firms inquiring for establishing or growing in 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, it is Mifid (markets in 
financial instruments directive) firms, insurance companies, CSDs (central 
securities depositories), payments institutions.”

However he reiterated previous warnings by the central bank that financial 
services must have a substantive presence in Ireland and those seeking brass 
plate operations, without transferring substantial numbers of employees or 
operations, would not be licensed.

Financial regulation was tightened up in Ireland following the bailout by the 
International Monetary Fund in 2010 and the central bank will be obliged under 
EU law to regulate those licensed in the country.

“Outsourcing and insourcing are acceptable – up to a point. One may outsource 
activities, but one may not outsource responsibility. A firm may not outsource 
to the extent that it is effectively hollowing out its regulated activity,” 
said Roux.

While Dublin is positioning itself as the only other English-speaking country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/dublin-exploits-brexit-uncertainty-to-lure-firms-from-london>
 in the EU with a similar legal system to the UK, virtually all the big US 
banks who would lose passporting rights post-Brexit, including JP Morgan and 
Citi, are already licensed to operate in Ireland. Earlier this year Citi, which 
has 9,000 employees in the UK, said it could make a decision on relocation in 
the first quarter of 2017.

Dublin is already one of the world’s largest centres for operating investment 
funds and has a growing financial technology and insurance presence.

Ireland’s financial services minister told Reuters last week that some firms 
making applications would be waiting to see if there was any further clarity on 
the terms of Brexit before making any final decision to move.
 