
The danger in having a moon village as your vision for the future is that 
people get the wrong impression. The mind leaps ahead and lands on a movie set: 
a giant dome shelters a huddle of homes, a bank of generators, and a 
modestly-stocked shop that doubles as the post office. A lost spacefarer with a 
PhD in botany clings to life by growing spuds in human faeces.

The idea is so easily misconstrued that Jan Woerner, the director general of 
theEuropean Space Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/european-space-agency> (ESA), makes clear 
from the start what the moon village is not. “Let me tell you what it won’t 
mean,” he says. “Single houses, a school, a church, a swimming pool, a bakery, 
an undertaker. This is not what I’m thinking about.”


What he does have in mind is the future of human space exploration. In a 
decade or so, the InternationalSpace <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space>
 Station will be done with. The $150bn outpost will plunge back to Earth in a 
fireball above the Pacific Ocean leaving astronauts with nowhere to go. If 
humans want to maintain a presence in space, they need a new plan, and soon.


While Nasa remains fixated on sending people to Mars - a challenge of daunting 
technical difficulty - ESA under Woerner sees the moon as the obvious next 
venture for a long time to come. The “village” he has in mind is a diverse 
community of public and private organisations that work on the moon together. A 
band of nations might build a telescope on the far side of the moon, where 
observations are shielded from Earth’s electromagnetic din. A single agency 
could test whether robots can make radiation-proof habitats from lunar 
regolith. A tech firm could extract water from polar ice and turn some into 
hydrogen, oxygen and rocket fuel. Another might break into lunar tourism.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fis-a-moon-village-the-next-step-for-space-exploration-esas-chief-thinks-so%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1949b78b753beb5a65e683d1e2a0e579dcba0ad%2F96_0_2343_1406%2F2343.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20a%20moon%20village%20the%20next%20step%20for%20space%20exploration%3F%20ESA's%20chief%20thinks%20so&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fis-a-moon-village-the-next-step-for-space-exploration-esas-chief-thinks-so%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20a%20moon%20village%20the%20next%20step%20for%20space%20exploration%3F%20ESA%27s%20chief%20thinks%20so&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fis-a-moon-village-the-next-step-for-space-exploration-esas-chief-thinks-so%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1949b78b753beb5a65e683d1e2a0e579dcba0ad%2F96_0_2343_1406%2F2343.jpg>
 ESA’s Jan Woerner is quick to point out that his moon village vision is not 
‘single houses, a school, a church, a swimming pool, a bakery, an undertakers. 
This is not what I’m thinking about.’ Photograph: ESA/Foster + Partners 
Unlike a single, all-consuming and costly mission, the moon village is 
intended to grow incrementally as an open, international effort. In time, 
Woerner says, it would build up the vital infrastructure and practical know-how 
that humans will need to head more safely into the farther reaches of the solar 
system.


Woerner has kicked the idea around for a while, but will raise it formally 
with ESA’s ministerial council for the first time later this year. “It’s an 
inspiring concept, and if others have a better idea, I am ready to change my 
mind. But so far I can tell you that the moon village is my favourite solution 
for the future,” he told the Guardian. “The moon is the next logical stepping 
stone.”


He has plenty of support. “The question is what to do after the space 
station,’ says Ian Crawford, professor of planetary science at Birkbeck, 
University of London. “Either nothing follows and you shut down human space 
exploration, or you build another space station – and it’s hard to see the 
point of that – or you go somewhere else, and I strongly believe the moon is 
the next place to go.”


It is more a necessity than a desire, Crawford says. Before we head to Mars – 
or any other faraway body – humans must learn how to thrive in dusty, high 
radiation environments. “To send people to Mars you have to be very confident 
in all aspects of the technology,” he says. “Going to the moon is risky too, 
but the advantage of learning and trialling all this stuff on the moon is that 
if something goes wrong, you can bring people back.The moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/moon> is only three days away. Abort 
options exist.”


The moon itself is a laboratory. An archive of solar system history, the 
signatures of meteorites, comets and the solar wind are written in the dust. A 
moon village would give scientists the means to explore the body, a lump of the 
ancient Earth, much as Antarctic bases have opened up the southern continent.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fis-a-moon-village-the-next-step-for-space-exploration-esas-chief-thinks-so%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45e045e3974fee56dd06e8aab6ce75fd684c004c%2F37_0_2790_1674%2F2790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20a%20moon%20village%20the%20next%20step%20for%20space%20exploration%3F%20ESA's%20chief%20thinks%20so&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fis-a-moon-village-the-next-step-for-space-exploration-esas-chief-thinks-so%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20a%20moon%20village%20the%20next%20step%20for%20space%20exploration%3F%20ESA%27s%20chief%20thinks%20so&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fis-a-moon-village-the-next-step-for-space-exploration-esas-chief-thinks-so%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F45e045e3974fee56dd06e8aab6ce75fd684c004c%2F37_0_2790_1674%2F2790.jpg>
 The moon village has plenty of parallels with polar outposts. Photograph: 
ESA/Foster + Partners 
The moon village has plenty of parallels with polar outposts. The US McMurdo 
research centre on the tip of Ross Island began as a handful of buildings in 
the 1950s. It has now grown to more than 100 structures and a population of 
1000 in the summer months. The settlement has an airport, a water distillation 
plant, sewers and a waste management centre, all needed to support the 
dormitories, clubs and research facilities. Scientists at the base make space 
weather observations, study microbes that thrive under glaciers, drill ice 
cores to obtain 100,000 year records of Earth’s atmospheric greenhouse gas 
levels, and send out robotic submarines to map the underneath of sea ice.

Next year, the US company Moon Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/03/us-startup-moon-express-2017-lunar-mission>
 hopes to land the first commercial spacecraft on the moon. The polar regions 
are thought to harbour vast reserves of ice that can be melted into water, 
split into hydrogen and oxygen, and turned into rocket fuel. Bob Richards, a 
co-founder of the company, has called the moon a “gas station in the sky”. 
Naveen Jain, the chairman, told the Guardian it is time entrepreneurs had the 
chance to show what they can do there. “If ESA wants to enable private 
enterprises to do what they do best, then I absolutely support it,” he said.


The prospect of turning the moon into a mine may not please everyone, and 
Crawford says that international legislation around the resources should be 
strengthened. But he sees no moral objection to mining. “The reason we have 
qualms about it on Earth is we are damaging the habitats of other living things 
we share the planet with. The moon is essentially a dead rock, and it must be 
preferable to exploit bodies that don’t have any indigenous life on them.”


Under George W. Bush, Nasa planned to return to the moon and build a permanent 
polar base. But the plan was shelved by Barack Obama, who explained his 
decision with a blunt “we’ve been there before.” Even after the Apollo 
missions, the idea that Nasa has been there and done the moon is nothing but 
“the most superficial geopolitical soundbite,” says Crawford.


Jeff Hoffman, a former Nasa astronaut, believes humans need to go back to the 
moon as soon as possible. “It has been nearly 50 years since we explored a 
planetary surface and we need to get some experience. The problem with a ‘moon 
village’ would be if the infrastructure is so costly to build and maintain that 
resources for Mars get sucked up,” he says. “Plans for lunar exploration need 
to be done in a way to enhance our ability to get to Mars, not handicap it.”


Katherine Joy, a lunar scientist at Manchester University, says that while an 
international consensus is supposed to exist in the form of theGlobal 
Exploration Roadmap 
<http://www.nasa.gov/content/just-released-updates-to-the-global-exploration-roadmap>
, a clear plan is still needed. “A pathway needs to be decided soon,” she says. 
“That is the strength of the moon village concept. It provides an ambitious 
vision that can bring people together.”


“A lunar base isn’t a distraction from our desire to visit and explore Mars,” 
she adds. “What we learned from Apollo is that touch-and-go-style missions are 
exciting, and scientifically rewarding, but they don’t lead to a sustained 
human presence on a different world.”


Exploration and learning how to survive on an alien world is only part of the 
space game. For decades, missions in Earth orbit and out into the solar system 
have bound countries together. The International Space Station operates only 
because Americans, Russians, Europeans and others work side-by-side and trust 
each other. As Britain prepares to leave the EU, the moon village might do for 
Europe what politicians could not, Woerner believes. “Space has the power to 
join forces in Europe - and even beyond Europe,” he says. “We should use it for 
the sake of humankind.”

 