
This week a cycle helmet made of paper won a £30,000 design award. How can 
something made of paper protect your head?

The Ecohelmet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/17/folding-bike-helmet-wins-james-dyson-design-award>
, the brainchild of US designer Isis Shiffer, works like one of those Christmas 
decorations that folds down almost flat, but expands into a circle of 
honeycombed paper. The idea is that the honeycomb of stiff card – tested by 
Shiffer using crash-simulation apparatus – will be strong enough to absorb an 
impact.

Why do we need this?

It is intended for use in conjunction with city bike-hire schemes. Such 
schemes do not usually supply helmets, so these fold-up ones could be sold 
through a vending machine at an estimated price of around £4. They can also be 
folded and carried in your pocket.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fis-a-paper-cycle-helmet-really-a-good-idea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ac6254834097a5545af4fc1314271843ca7d267%2F0_204_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20a%20paper%20cycle%20helmet%20really%20a%20good%20idea%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fis-a-paper-cycle-helmet-really-a-good-idea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20a%20paper%20cycle%20helmet%20really%20a%20good%20idea%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fis-a-paper-cycle-helmet-really-a-good-idea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ac6254834097a5545af4fc1314271843ca7d267%2F0_204_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 The Ecohelmet folded and unfolded. Photograph: Kimberly Mufferi/Dyson/PA 
Won’t it simply turn to pulp in a rain shower? 

Part of the next phase of the project is to cover it with some kind of 
recyclable or biodegradable waterproof film. There will also be some kind of 
indicator to show when it has reached the end of its useful life.

What are cycle helmets usually made of?

Many modern helmets have an outer plastic skin that protects them from 
scratches and day-to-day wear, and an inner shell of crushable foam, usually 
expanded polystyrene, designed to absorb impact. That shell will not re-expand 
after being crushed, which is why you should always replace a helmet after it 
has undergone an impact: even if the impact does not cause drastic damage to 
the helmet, it could affect its capacity to absorb future impacts.

What do they cost? 

Anything from below £30 to more than £200, depending on aerodynamics, 
ventilation, shell thickness and fancy stuff such as visors. The heavier and 
less ventilated the helmet, the higher the price, although it will do the 
same job.

What safety standards do helmets have to meet?

There are reputable standards that potential purchasers should look for, most 
combining “anvil” tests (to assess impact on different kinds of surfaces) with 
tests on the retention system (to ensure the helmet stays in place in a crash). 
You can look for helmets that meet the European standard EN1078 – though 
parents should note that current guidance says young children need a stronger 
helmet. In the US, the standards to look for are CPSC, ASTM F1447 and Snell 
B-90.The Department of Transport says 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20121107103953/http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafety/research/rsrr/theme1/bicyclehelmetsreviewofeffect4726?page=6>
: “There is little, if any, research evidence that helmets complying with one 
standard as opposed to another perform better in protecting the wearer in the 
event of a crash.” In other words, your helmet should meet one of the standards 
they list, but it doesn’t matter which.

Do they actually work?

Helmets do three things: they manage an impact, by slowing down the 
deceleration when the head hits a solid object or surface; they spread the area 
of impact, and they protect the scalp from contact with that solid surface or 
object. They are not going to save your life in every incident – many cycling 
fatalities stem from collisions with motor vehicles, in which no helmet could 
make a difference – but the medical advice for the past 30 years or so has been 
that they will “downgrade trauma”; ie, you will eliminate a large degree of 
risk by wearing one.

The Guardian view on cycle helmets: head cases make bad law | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/26/cycle-helmets-bad-law-uk-australia-guardian-view>
Isn’t there some evidence that suggests wearing a helmet makes you more likely 
to crash?

A psychological study by researchers at the University of Bath linked helmet 
wearing with “increased risk-taking and sensation-seeking”, butthe Bicycle 
Helmet Safety Institute <http://www.helmets.org/index.htm> did not feel it had 
great merit. A 2013 study suggesting that cars passed closer to cyclists 
wearing helmets has since been discredited.

Most cyclists in the UK seem to wear a helmet – is this the same everywhere?

Stand near a cycle lane in Holland – or better still, hire a bike and get 
riding as well – and you will notice that very few people commuting on cycles 
put on a helmet, compared to London, where they are ubiquitous. One study put 
helmet wearers at 0.5% of Dutch cycle users. The difference is that the 
Netherlands has spent 40 years and hundreds of millions of euros investing in 
infrastructure that effectively separates cyclists and pedestrians from motor 
vehicles. Hence, the risk of falling off one’s bike or being hit by a car is 
much reduced. If other governments had been as far-sighted as the Dutch, this 
invention might be irrelevant.
 