
One of the great puzzles of British life makes its annual appearance tonight 
at the Albert Hall: who are these people who wave flags, the union flag mainly, 
at theLast Night of the Proms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/13/prom-76-bbcso-alsop-kaufmann-grosvenor-alberga>
? With what sentiment – passion or irony? – do they sing along to Rule 
Britannia and Land of Hope and Glory? Would I like any of them if I met them? 
Why do I go on watching them year after year, from the time Malcolm Sargent was 
at the rostrum? Could it be that these sights and sounds strike a fond chord 
among people who would normally consider themselves immune to, and deeply 
distrustful of, the charms of bulldog patriotism?

God save The Last Night of the Proms post-Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/last-night-of-the-proms-nicholas-kenyon-brexit>
What I hope is honest self-examination leads me to answer yes to the last 
question. The Last Night of the Proms has a similar spirit to1066 and All That 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1066_and_All_That> – something is being gently 
mocked: not real British history, with all its achievement, conquest and 
villainy, but a Victorian music hall version that includes barefoot seamen, 
plump contraltos, and no mention of slaves other than those that Britons shall 
never, never, never be.

The late John Drummond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/sep/08/radio.bbc>, who ran the Proms 
for the BBC for 10 seasons in the 1980s and 90s, wrote that his experience of 
the evening “moved from tolerant enjoyment to almost physical revulsion”; but 
to the casual viewer it seems harmless. Many European countries, including 
Germany, broadcast the show live. The sight of a young Asian music student 
waving the Japanese flag to Elgar’s imperial triumphalism might be baffling, 
but the confusion defuses the charge that what’s on display is a noisy 
celebration of British, particularly English, nationalism.

Tonight that perception may change. After the vote for Brexit, the singing and 
the flag-waving could be seen as a symptom of a wider public mood rather than 
as a musical ritual sui generis.

The former Proms director Nicholas Kenyon wrote in the Guardian this week of “
a sense of foreboding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/last-night-of-the-proms-nicholas-kenyon-brexit>
 that this most British of occasions might be hijacked to celebrate the triumph 
of Little England”, arguing that that would be to “radically misread” its 
history as an internationalist event, and ignore British music’s immense debt 
to Europe. To prevent this misreading – which I think means how viewers here 
and the rest of the world see it – an anonymouslyorganised online campaign 
<http://www.crowdfunder.co.uk/flags-for-the-last-night-of-the-proms> has raised 
enough money to buy 5,000 blue EU flags, which volunteerswill hand out to the 
audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/pro-eu-protest-planned-for-last-night-of-the-proms>
as they queue to get in. Evidence, when waved later, that we aren’t all 
anti-European jingoists.

Europhobe MPs such as Peter Bone and Bill Cash are scandalised. They fear an 
opposite hijacking. Cash urged the BBC toprevent the Last Night 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/07/anti-brexit-campaigners-to-hijack-last-night-of-the-proms-with-e/>
 being “hijacked by an attempted rejection [sic] of the will of the British 
people”. Bone called it “aninspiring, uplifting British event 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/last-night-of-the-proms-brexit-protest-eu-flags-bbc-albert-hall-crowdfunded-a7231546.html>
, not an EU event”, which shouldn’t be hijacked by “cheap politics”. It sounds 
ridiculous to say so, but there is a danger of flag-clash here: some no doubt 
politer version of the kind of behaviour that led to flags being banned from 
Rangers v Celtic games. The truth is that this event has for decades had the 
potential to embarrass or divide the United Kingdom, and that only the 
combination of its participants’ innocent high spirits and the BBC’s skilful 
management has spared it from the axe.

The patriotism that lies at the heart of the concert’s second, “traditional” 
half is relatively new in a musical festival that began in 1895.Sir Henry Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/from-the-archive-blog/2015/nov/24/sir-henry-wood-proms-interview-1938>
, the Proms’ co-founder and first conductor, laid down the core with his medley
Fantasia on British Sea Songs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YUXBrek5N9g>, 
which was composed for the battle of Trafalgar’s centenary in 1905, and 
included Rule Britannia. The piece became a fixture of the final evening, and 
the promenaders began the habit of stamping their feet in time to a rhythmic 
section of it, the sailor’s hornpipe, which may have been the start of the 
audience participation that marks the evening as a whole.

Elgar’s Pomp and Circumstance March No 1 (“Land of Hope and Glory”) and 
Parry’s Jerusalem featured occasionally, but it wasn’t until 1953, the 
coronation year, that the sea songs, Elgar and Parry became the programme’s 
three fixed elements. BBC TV began broadcasting the concert in 1947, the same 
year that Sargent became the Proms’ conductor. Rousing popular music, a lively 
audience, a charismatic conductor: the concert was ideal material for 
television. Did it matter that the music had a boastful Edwardian thrust – that 
what it celebrated was going, or gone?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Flast-night-of-the-proms-jingoistic-ironic-brexit-royal-albert-hall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50be96b9029c3b8270acda3e13722e4c8f0946e%2F0_186_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Last%20Night%20of%20the%20Proms%20jingoistic%20or%20ironic%3F%20Tonight%20we%E2%80%99ll%20finally%20find%20out%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Flast-night-of-the-proms-jingoistic-ironic-brexit-royal-albert-hall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Last%20Night%20of%20the%20Proms%20jingoistic%20or%20ironic%3F%20Tonight%20we%E2%80%99ll%20finally%20find%20out%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Flast-night-of-the-proms-jingoistic-ironic-brexit-royal-albert-hall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50be96b9029c3b8270acda3e13722e4c8f0946e%2F0_186_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 ‘The sight of a young Asian music student waving the Japanese flag to Elgar’s 
imperial triumphalism might be baffling, but the confusion defuses the charge 
that what’s on display is a noisy celebration of British, particularly English, 
nationalism.’ Photograph: Nicky J Sims/Redferns via Getty Images 
The modern promenading style was born in that time, when the empire had begun 
to be embarrassing, even risible, to a generation familiar only with its 
retreat. As the historian David Cannadine has written, a paradox of the Last 
Night is that it was created as a “British tradition” between 1947 and 
Sargent’s death in 1967 when “the leitmotif … wasnot so much ‘hope and glory’ 
as ‘decline and fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/12/last-night-proms-glasgow-britannia-union>
’”. In school history classes, or at least those I attended in the 1950s and 
60s, the empire was a curious absence. Perhaps nobody knew how to teach it – 
what to say. Our parents’ generation knew about Clive of India whereas we 
learned the causes of the Franco-Prussian war – and in the evening, first on 
radio and later on television, heard the mockery of what might be called the 
imperial manner, the drawl and the stiff upper lip, inThe Goon Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/may/27/goon-show-60th-birthday> 
andThat Was The Week That Was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/nov/26/that-was-the-week-that-was-review-1962>
. It seems to me now that the singing of Land of Hope of Glory without meaning 
it, or without knowing what it meant, arose out of the same uncertain mood, 
somewhere between nostalgia and satire, that later in the 1960s made the union 
flag a part of pop culture, a fashionable design.

Pro-EU protest planned for Last Night of the Proms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/pro-eu-protest-planned-for-last-night-of-the-proms>
The Last Night has spawned many imitations at the Albert Hall and elsewhere, 
concerts where plastic flags are included in the ticket price and audiences hum 
along to the Dambusters March. These are unquestionably English occasions. The 
original, meanwhile, has been sustained by a different impulse.

In 1996, two years before government devolution, the then Proms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms> director, Nicholas Kenyon, decided, 
in his words, “to stop the Last Night being accused of being too ‘little 
England’” by creating separate open-air concerts in Scotland, Wales and 
Northern Ireland. Wood’s sea-song fantasia was then adapted to include The Skye 
Boat Song, Ar Hyd y Nos (All Through the Night) and The Londonderry Air; 
tonight’s television coverage will show the audiences in Scotland, Wales and 
Northern Ireland when the song appropriate to each nation comes to be played.

The concert in Wales sometimes includes Rule Britannia, with a verse in Welsh, 
but so far as I can tell neither Jerusalem nor Land of Hope and Glory has ever 
been included in any Proms concert outside England – the littler England that 
Tory MPs such as Bone and Cash still somehow persist in mistaking for Great 
Britain.

I shall watch tonight and monitor my own reactions. Will the Brexit 
promenaders sing differently, or will that just be my imagination? Will there 
be a ruck between leavers and stayers? Whatever happens, I’ll see ghosts in the 
crowd – young men in polo necks and duffel coats, young women in ponytails. My 
own generation, repeating catchphrases from The Goon Show or lines from Beyond 
the Fringe; pleased to be at the Albert Hall, thinking ourselves funny, 
learning to show off – and none of us knowing who did what to whom at the 
battle of Rorke’s Drift.
 