
In a recent debate with Hillary Clinton, Donald Trump pressed his claim that 
the chair of the USFederal Reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve>, Janet Yellen, was 
politically motivated.

The Fed, Trump claimed, was applying overdoses of monetary stimulus to 
hypnotise voters into believingeconomic recovery was under way.

It’s not a completely crazy idea, but I just don’t see it. If Yellen is so 
determined to keep interest rates in a deep freeze, why has she been trying in 
recent months to talk up longer-term rates by insisting that the Fed is likely 
to hike rates faster than the market currently believes?

Central bankers have, of course, been known to help incumbents before 
elections, by allowing inflation to drift up and keep employment booming. 
During President Nixon’s 1972 re-election campaign, he lectured Fed chair 
Arthur Burns on the need for pump-priming the economy to help him defeat his 
Democratic challenger, George McGovern. Nixon won resoundingly, but Burns’ 
policies helped trigger the worldwide inflation of the 1970s and brought 
forward the breakup of the post-war system of fixed exchange rates. The 
long-term effects were catastrophic.

Will Yellen launch a rerun of the bad old 1970s, when US inflation hit double 
digits? I doubt it. Although it is not hard to imagine that she privately holds 
Trump in the same low regard he holds her, most observers see no signs that 
inflation is imminent.

Some people still insist that if the Fed does not urgently raise interest 
rates and rein in the money supply, the US economy will gothe way of Zimbabwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/14/no-cash-no-cure-zimbabwes-hospitals-buckle-amid-economic-crisis>
, where inflation far exceeded 25,000% in late 2008. But the argument that Fed 
balance-sheet expansion will translate into high inflation has been wrong for 
the past six years. Inflation in the US has been consistently below target and, 
even now, bond yields reflect deep scepticism about whether the Fed has the 
will or the capacity to sustain price growth at the official 2% target on a 
consistent basis.

Indeed, the central banks that have raised interest rates prematurely, 
including the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swedish National Bank, have 
been forced to reverse course, and the Fed wants to avoid that fate.

The US economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> is performing 
far better these days, and the moment for raising rates is probably near. But 
to infer that an immediate increase is inevitable is ludicrous. In fact, there 
is still a worldwide downward draft on interest rates, with the ECB and the 
Bank of Japan in easing mode, as are many smaller central banks. The Fed has 
allowed some tightening simply by not playing along, and letting the US dollar 
appreciate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffederal-reserve-playing-politics-janet-yellen-central-banks-us-government%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F226d30bf8a0d03f2a2643c5f117602ab9b240ecc%2F0_0_2059_3000%2F2059.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20the%20Federal%20Reserve%20playing%20politics%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffederal-reserve-playing-politics-janet-yellen-central-banks-us-government%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20the%20Federal%20Reserve%20playing%20politics%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Ffederal-reserve-playing-politics-janet-yellen-central-banks-us-government%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F226d30bf8a0d03f2a2643c5f117602ab9b240ecc%2F0_0_2059_3000%2F2059.jpg>
 Gold bullion bars for sale in New York. Some believe a return to the gold 
standard era of the late 1800s would leave little scope for political 
interference. Photograph: Mario Tama/Getty 
Central banks are not immune to manipulation, and fighting off political 
pressures is an endless battle. During the financial crisis, the monetary 
authorities were called on to assume temporary emergency powers, including 
massive purchases of government and private sector bonds. For most, including 
the Fed, there is no clean exit in sight, and this has made the problem of 
political insulation more difficult, with or without an election.

Some believe the only salvation is a return to the gold standard era of the 
late 1800s, when governments fixed the price of their currency in gold, leaving 
little scope for political interference. Unfortunately, gold bugs seem 
surprisingly – or perhaps wilfully – ignorant of the chronic financial crises 
and deep recessions of that era. Ultimately, the gold standard collapsed, after 
governments were forced to abandon it during the first world war and thereafter 
were never able fully to re-establish public trust.

More forward-looking thinkers point to private cryptocurrencies such as 
bitcoin as the future of money, arguing that they take politics out of the 
equation entirely. But this, too, is naive. Governments can already block 
cryptocurrencies from circulating in the legal economy by restricting bank 
access, imposing tax laws, and by also impeding retail stores’ ability to 
accept it. And, as I explain in my new bookThe Curse of Cash 
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10798.html>, bitcoin can hardly be 
considered a long-term substitute for large-denomination bills.

While blockchain technology 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/how-blockchain-can-rescue-globalization-by-hernando-de-soto-2016-09>
 is exciting and will probably have many applications in banking, finance, and 
across the economy, it is no guarantee against political influence on 
inflation. In the long history of currency, from coinage to the advent of paper 
money, the private sector may innovate, but ultimately the public sector 
appropriates. The government will always be able to control the rules.

Ironically, the best way to insulate central banks from political pressure 
would be to expand their toolkit to allow for effective negative interest rate 
policy, though this will take time. In the meantime, the Fed and other central 
banks will have to keep walking a tightrope that leaves them especially 
vulnerable to outside pressure. Fortunately, the Fed has a chair right now who 
is able and willing to stand up to it.

 * Kenneth Rogoff is professor of economics and public policy at Harvard 
University and recipient of the 2011 Deutsche Bank Prize in Financial Economics

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>, 2016
 