
Israel has responded furiously to a UN security council resolution condemning 
Israeli settlements in the occupied territories, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
 recalling two of its ambassadors to countries that voted for the motion and 
threatening to cut aid.

The security council adopted the landmark resolution demanding Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> halt all settlement building and 
expansion in the occupied territories after Barack Obama’s administration 
refused to veto the resolution on Friday.

A White House official said Obama had taken the decision to abstain in the 
absence of any meaningful peace process. The resolution, which passed by a 14-0 
vote, was met with loud applause in the packed chamber after the US ambassador, 
Samantha Power, abstained.

The move was immediately condemned as “shameful” by the office of the Israeli 
prime minister,Benjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu>. A spokesman pointedly 
referred to Israel’s expectation of working more closely with the US 
president-elect, Donald Trump.

On Saturday Netanyahu said Israel would reassess its ties with the UN and had 
ordered a review of the funding of UN institutions and the presence of UN 
representatives in Israel.

“I have already instructed to stop about 30m shekels (£6.3m) in funding to 
five UN bodies that are especially hostile to Israel ... and there is more to 
come,” he said, without giving any further details.

The security council last adopted a resolution critical of settlements in 
1979, with the US abstaining then too. The US vetoed a similar resolution in 
2011, which was the sole veto cast by the Obama administration at the security 
council.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fus-abstains-un-vote-end-israeli-settlement-building-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20abstains%20from%20UN%20vote%20to%20end%20Israeli%20settlement%20building%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fus-abstains-un-vote-end-israeli-settlement-building-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20abstains%20from%20UN%20vote%20to%20end%20Israeli%20settlement%20building%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fus-abstains-un-vote-end-israeli-settlement-building-video&media=>
US abstains from UN vote to end Israeli settlement building 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/23/us-abstains-un-vote-end-israeli-settlement-building-video>
Amid emerging criticism of the handling of the vote by Netanyahu, whose 
manoeuvres were seen as anattempt to sideline Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/23/trump-intervenes-to-sideline-obama-over-israeli-settlements>
 and his administration, Israel ordered action against a number of countries.

The response included the recall of the Israeli ambassadors to New Zealand and 
Senegal, who voted for the resolution, the cancellation of a planned visit by 
the Senegalese foreign minister to Israel in three weeks’ time, and the 
cancellation of all aid programmes to Senegal.

New Zealand’s foreign minister, Murray McCully, said his country’s vote should 
have been no surprise to Israel. “We have been very open about our view that 
the [security council] should be doing more to support the Middle East peace 
process and the position we adopted today is totally in line with our 
long-established policy on the Palestinian question,” he said.

The UK, France, Russia and China also voted in favour of the resolution, which 
described Israeli settlement building as a “flagrant violation” of 
international law.

The vote has sharply underlined the extent of Israel’s international isolation 
under Netanyahu, and in particular the hollowness of Netanyahu’s boast at the 
UN general assembly in the autumn over Israel’s purported diplomatic advances 
at the UN, not least among African members.

While Israel may expect a much easier ride after the inauguration of Donald 
Trump, support for the motion from countries such as the UK and France 
demonstrates the deep frustration in Europe with the policies of Netanyahu’s 
rightwing coalition over settlements and the moribund peace process.

For its part, the Obama administration made clear 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/white-house-netanyahus-choices-led-to-anti-settlement-un-resolution/>
 that the US decision to abstain was in direct response to choices made by 
Netanyahu on settlements.

The resolution also serves as a warning to the incoming Trump administration 
over its policies after the selection by Trump of afar-right pro-settler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-israel-ambassador-david-friedman>
, David Friedman, to be ambassador to Israel.

While the US and EU have worked closely together in coordinating foreign 
policy on the Israel-Palestine question, there has been growing support among 
European governments for tougher steps against Israel, which has already 
resulted in a directive on the labelling of settlement products.

The strength of the language in the resolution reiterating the illegality of 
Jewish settlements built on land intended for a Palestinian state, occupied by 
Israel in 1967, is likely to have an impact on multinational companies 
operating in the occupied territories or working with Israeli enterprises with 
links to the occupied territories.

Although the resolution is not binding in legal terms, it will have other 
practical effects, not least in the impact it may have on the Palestinian 
complaint to the international criminal court, which includes Israeli 
settlements.

The resolution also includes language calling for differential treatment of 
Israel within the pre-1967 borders, calling on states to “distinguish, in their 
relevant dealings, between the territory of the State of Israel and the 
territories occupied since 1967”, which could potentially pave the way for 
future sanctions.

Israeli supporters in the US – both senators and lobby groups – were aghast. 
Morton Klein, the president of the rightwing Zionist Organization of America, 
railed in unequivocal terms: “Obama has made it clear that he’s a Jew-hating 
antisemite.”

Leading pro-Israel Republicans also weighed in, including the House speaker, 
Paul Ryan, who denounced the US abstention as “absolutely shameful” and 
promised that “our unified Republican government will work to reverse the 
damage done by this administration, and rebuild our alliance with Israel”.

In Israel, however, questions were being asked about Netanyahu’s handling of 
the vote.Writing in Haaretz 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.761042>, the columnist Chemi 
Shalev was particularly scathing about Netanyahu’s diplomatic failure.

“Resolution 2334 shatters the [Israeli] government-induced illusion that the 
settlement project has been normalised, that it passed the point of no return, 
that it is now a fait accompli that will remain unchallenged,” he wrote.

“In recent years, after President Obama desisted from efforts to advance the 
peace process, Netanyahu, his ministers and settler leaders had behaved as if 
the battle was over: Israel built and built, the White House objected and 
condemned, the facts on the ground were cemented in stone.

“You can have your cake and eat it too, the government implied: thumb your 
nose at Washington and the international community, build in the West Bank as 
if there’s no tomorrow and still get $38bn in unprecedented [US] military aid.”
 