
An Israeli official has accused Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> of colluding in a “shameful 
move against Israel at the UN” over a planned security council vote on Israeli 
illegal settlements.

In striking language underlining the long-running depth of hostility between 
the government ofBenjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu> and the Obama 
administration, the unnamed official accused Obama and his secretary of state, 
John Kerry, of “secretly cooking up with Palestinians an extreme anti-Israeli 
resolution”.

The comments emerged in the midst of 24 hours of extraordinary diplomacy that 
saw the US president-elect, Donald Trump – who has yet to be sworn into office 
– undermine the foreign policy of a sitting president andintervene to see a 
vote on the resolution on Thursday evening postponed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/23/trump-intervenes-to-sideline-obama-over-israeli-settlements>
.

That appears to have been only a temporary respite as it emerged that other 
members of the security council were pushing ahead with a vote 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/1.760936> on the same text later on Friday.

UN abruptly postpones vote to halt Israeli settlements 'indefinitely'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/donald-trump-binyamin-netanyahu-un-resolution-settlements-occupied-territories-palestine>
At the heart of the issue has been an Egypt-drafted resolution that calls for 
the immediate halt of illegal Israeli settlement building, which it appeared 
the Obama administration was prepared not to veto in a breach of the US’s long 
record of vetoing resolutions criticisingIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel>.


This prompted Netanyahu to ask for help from Trump and his transition team and 
also saw Israel put pressure on the Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, 
behind the scenes to postpone a vote.

Explaining the Israeli moves, the unidentified Israeli official said: 
“President Obama and secretary Kerry are behind this shameful move against 
Israel at the UN. The US administration secretly cooked up with the 
Palestinians an extreme anti-Israeli resolution behind Israel’s back which 
would be a tailwind for terror and boycotts and effectively make theWestern Wall
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/prayer-rights-protest-at-jerusalems-western-wall-erupts-into-clashes>
 occupied Palestinian territory.”

He continued by calling it “an abandonment of Israel which breaks decades of 
US policy of protecting Israel at the UN”, adding: “President Obama could 
declare his willingness to veto this resolution in an instant but instead is 
pushing it. This is an abandonment of Israel which breaks decades of US policy 
of protecting Israel at the UN.”

Reacting to news the resolution might be go to a vote on Friday, Israel’s 
ambassador to the UN, Danny Danon, said: “We call on the United States to stand 
by us and we expect our greatest ally to continue with its long-standing policy 
and to veto this resolution.”

Responding to the Israeli accusations, the Obama administration strongly 
denied it had been involved in any of the discussions around the draft.

The furious Israeli comments emerged after the disclosure of the details of 
the contacts betweenNetanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu>, the Trump transition 
team and Cairo on Thursday seeking to have the vote cancelled or delayed.


The timing of some of the contacts – between Netanyahu and Trump’s transition 
team, and between Trump’s team and Egypt – remains unclear, but it appears 
Trump called Sisi after the cancellation of the vote.


Donald Trump's Israel ambassador is hardline pro-settler lawyer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-israel-ambassador-david-friedman>
Unlike Trump’s other recent interventions in US foreign policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-foreign-policy>, which have largely 
flagged up his often contradictory intentions, on this occasion he appears to 
have deliberately interposed himself in an issue of current US and 
international diplomacy.


Sisi’s spokesman, Alaa Yousef, said on Friday that the two had agreed to give 
Trump’s incoming administration a chance to tackle the issue.

“During the call, they discussed regional affairs and developments in the 
Middle East and, in that context, the draft resolution in front of the security 
council on Israeli settlement,” Yousef said.

In an unintended slip referring to Trump’s status, he added: “The presidents 
agreed on the importance of affording the new US administration the full chance 
to deal with all dimensions of the Palestinian case with a view of achieving a 
full and final settlement.”

In more evidence of the growing crisis around the resolution, the hawkish US 
senator Lindsey Graham warned that any country receiving US aid that voted for 
the resolution would see moves against it in Congress to have that aid 
suspended or significantly reduced.

Speculation that the US might not deploy its veto had been fuelled by the 
Obama administration’s frustration over recent political moves by Netanyahu’s 
rightwing coalition, not least over proposed measures to retroactivelylegalise 
100 outposts built on private Palestinian land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/israel-votes-to-authorise-illegal-settler-homes-in-palestine>
.


Israeli settlements have long been seen as a stumbling block in peace efforts 
as they are built on land the Palestinians see as part of their future state. 
The UN maintains that settlements are illegal but its officials have reported a 
surge in construction over the past months.
 