
Hadassah Spitz is sitting on a swing outside her house in the illegal Jewish 
West Bank outpost of Amona, her six-year-old daughter, Miriam, in her lap. With 
the rest of her family, she is waiting.

Within the next fortnight – by 25 December at the latest if things go to 
schedule – Amona will be evacuated and demolished under an order issued by the 
Israeli high court two years ago. The settlement was built illegally on private 
Palestinian land, without the state’s direct support, and the court is 
insisting that it and its 300 residents have to go.

Hadassah watches as a steady stream of supporters, most of them teenagers, 
pour into the settlement with sleeping bags and rucksacks, many heading for a 
series of plastic tunnel greenhouses set up by residents for them to sleep in. 
They have come following media reports of a police training exercise, before 
the operation to remove Amona, at the Tze’elim army base in the Negev desert.
Amona was built illegally on land belonging to the Palestinians. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/west_bank-zip/giv-3902V5d7KWEL0WI7>
 Amona was built illegally on land belonging to the Palestinians. 
The first to arrive have already been busy. There are tyres stacked ready to 
be set alight on the road into the outpost. Temporary toilet blocks are being 
built for the thousands expected to come.

Already a cause celebre for the settlement movement, Amona has come to exert 
an outsized influence on Israeli politics and society, dominating the political 
agenda. The reason is simple. Beyond its solitary hilltop, Amona’s fate has 
become inextricably bound up with new and controversial legislation currently 
before the Israeli parliament. The so-called legalisation bill seeks to 
retroactively legalise some 4,000 outpost homes such as that belonging to the 
Spitz family.

Except – by a bitter irony – the new law, drafted in the first place by 
Amona’s supporters in the Israeli parliament, will not apply to the Spitz 
family or their neighbours. The reality is that this cluster of dwellings has 
been transformed in recent weeks into a key fracture line in Israel’s 
increasingly febrile rightwing politics. Critics say the issue has the 
potential to threaten the Middle East peace process and the prospects for a 
two-state solution.

This is because, while jubilant at the election of Donald Trump as US president
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/israel-donald-trump-netanyahu-jerusalem>
, Israel’s pro-settler far right are now asking themselves whether the 
sacrifice of Amona to political contingency can be turned into the last ever 
such “evacuation”; whether the end of Amona may paradoxically represent a new 
beginning for the settlement movement, as its leaders in the Knesset call for a 
new policy of ever greater annexation of Palestinian land and the imposition of 
full Israeli sovereignty in the occupied territories.

For Hadassah Spitz, however, on Friday there were more urgent questions. Not 
least, what she will do with her children when the bulldozers come. “I have 
lived here for 18 years,” says the 38-year-old. “My husband has been here 
longer. He was here on the first day.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fisrael-amona-benjamin-netanyahu-palestine-west-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88377a3096945b265c6bbffa99087c139f123d5d%2F0_201_3648_4560%2F3648.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Israeli%20settlers%20angry%20as%20government%20prepares%20to%20evict%20outpost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fisrael-amona-benjamin-netanyahu-palestine-west-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Israeli%20settlers%20angry%20as%20government%20prepares%20to%20evict%20outpost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fisrael-amona-benjamin-netanyahu-palestine-west-bank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88377a3096945b265c6bbffa99087c139f123d5d%2F0_201_3648_4560%2F3648.jpg>
 Hadassah Spitz, 38, pictured with her daughter Miriam, 6, outside the house in 
Amona where she has lived for 18 years. Photograph: Peter Beaumont for the 
Observer 
Amona was the scene of violent confrontations with Israeli police 10 years ago 
– the last time the Israeli authorities came to destroy houses in the outpost. 
Then, Hadassah recalls, the Spitz family cut their house into four pieces and 
moved it to its present location. This time, however, she does not seem so 
convinced Amona will survive.

“I think bad things will happen,” she says. “It was a trauma the last time. My 
oldest son just received his army call-up papers [for national service]. He is 
so angry. He doesn’t want to have anything to do with an army that could do 
this to us. We feel so let down by the politicians.”

That emotion is not new to Israel’s settlers. The truth is that Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> has been here before, in 2005, when 
the Gaza settlements were evacuated by Ariel Sharon, and in the events around 
Amona a year later. This explains in large part why the question of Amona has 
become so loaded. The violent images from that period 10 years ago – of Israeli 
security forces expelling Jews from their houses – remain indelibly inscribed 
in the settler community’s consciousness, and are viewed like kryptonite by 
Israel’s most rightwing government ever.

And more alarmed than anyone at the prospect of a repetition has been Israel’s 
prime minister,Benjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu>, who took votes from the 
pro-settler Jewish Home party to win the last elections in 2015 and who is 
afraid of losing that constituency as his coalition has increasingly stumbled.

For if there is an irony, it is that if Amona is destroyed and its residents 
relocated in the coming weeks, it will happen despite the efforts of key 
figures in the Israeli government, who have gone through the most elaborate 
acrobatics to bypass the court ruling demanding its demolition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fisrael-amona-benjamin-netanyahu-palestine-west-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F037ed7d95718a82b8b3b8ed9dcf8dd0d3320ee99%2F0_146_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Israeli%20settlers%20angry%20as%20government%20prepares%20to%20evict%20outpost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fisrael-amona-benjamin-netanyahu-palestine-west-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Israeli%20settlers%20angry%20as%20government%20prepares%20to%20evict%20outpost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fisrael-amona-benjamin-netanyahu-palestine-west-bank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F037ed7d95718a82b8b3b8ed9dcf8dd0d3320ee99%2F0_146_4096_2459%2F4096.jpg>
 Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has been criticised for his 
government’s handling of Amona. Photograph: Atef Safadi/EPA 
Driven by the courts’ 25 December deadline, Netanyahu and his rivals have 
competed to give the impression of trying to find a solution for Amona, even as 
the issue has exacerbated the bitter power struggles within his own coalition. 
The direct result has been the legalisation bill,condemned by US, EU and UN 
officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/08/un-criticises-israel-settlement-law-west-bank>
, and seen by many commentators as a sop to settlers if – and when – Amona is 
knocked down.

Netanyahu strongly opposed the bill initially, but was forced to fall into 
step after threats that Naftali Bennett, leader of the Home party, might 
collapse his coalition. The prime minister did warn his coalition partners that 
the legislation could lead Israeli politicians – himself included – into the 
dock of the International Criminal Court. None of these gyrations have been 
lost on Israeli commentators. “Naftali Bennett has scared him more than the US 
administration and more than the European Union,” Amnon Abramovitz, political 
analyst for Israeli TV’s Channel Two, told Reuters last week. “Even though 
Netanyahu has been prime minister for 11 years, he remains more a politician 
than a leader.”

All of which has left Netanyahu facing a choice: between domestic survival on 
the one hand, and international condemnation on the other. And all week, as the 
legalisation bill has moved forward, the international clamour has grown. On 
Thursday the UN high commissioner for human rights, Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein, 
joined other governments and international organisations in warning that the 
new law would be in breach of international legislation, and urged Israeli 
lawmakers to “reconsider their support for this bill which, if enacted, would 
have far-reaching consequences and would seriously damage the reputation of 
Israel around the world”.

At the week’s end, as the prospect of evacuation came closer, that argument 
was falling on deaf ears among Amona’s supporters, including a group who 
demonstrated outside Israel’s high court demanding an end to “the court’s 
dictatorship”. Others have made appeals by email and social media for 
supporters to converge on the outpost. Among them is religious-Zionist youth 
movement Ariel, which said in a statement calling on members to act: “We cannot 
keep silent while the destruction of a settlement in the land of Israel takes 
place. It is our right and obligation to safeguard our country, our way and our 
faith. Everyone should choose the form of struggle that works for him. Of 
course one should not protest violently or break the law.”

And in Amona on Friday, it was not only the teenage members of groups like 
Ariel who were arriving. Lior Angleman, 40, had come for the day with his 
family from Kfar Saba, bringing sweets for Amona’s children: “I came to show my 
support as it looks as though things are going to happen soon. I cannot believe 
that they are planning to throw Jewish people out of their homes on their own 
land.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fisrael-amona-benjamin-netanyahu-palestine-west-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1269da4c28bbd30373c408aa1bff54c9d9807e5%2F687_0_3239_1944%2F3239.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Israeli%20settlers%20angry%20as%20government%20prepares%20to%20evict%20outpost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fisrael-amona-benjamin-netanyahu-palestine-west-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Israeli%20settlers%20angry%20as%20government%20prepares%20to%20evict%20outpost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fisrael-amona-benjamin-netanyahu-palestine-west-bank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1269da4c28bbd30373c408aa1bff54c9d9807e5%2F687_0_3239_1944%2F3239.jpg>
 Supporters of the Amona settlers have been bringing supplies ahead of the 
evacuation. Photograph: Jim Hollander/EPA 
Back on her porch, Hadassah is not sure that a confrontation can be avoided if 
push comes to shove. “We are not violent but when things happen, people react. 
Events like this concentrate the anger inside.”

As if to underline her point, a sudden noise comes from inside her house. It 
is her oldest son – the one called up by the army – shouting and crying.
 