
The American eagle swoops a little closer to the growling Russian bear. 
Tensions mount between Washington and Moscow.Russian diplomats are expelled by 
the US president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/29/barack-obama-sanctions-russia-election-hack>
.

Trump questions claims of Russian hacking: 'I know things others don't'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/donald-trump-unfair-blame-russia-election-hacking-interference>
Is this a second cold war? No: it is the first hotdesk war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/29/fbi-dhs-russian-hacking-report>
. Its soldiers can work anywhere, on laptops, in internet cafes, or in the 
heart of the Russian intelligence establishment. Their weapons are bytes, not 
bullets. Their mushroom cloud is digital chaos.

This is Theresa May’s first full-blooded geopolitical challenge (Brexit was 
part of her inheritance). To date, Barack Obama has responded to Russia’s 
cyber-attacks during the US presidential election with a range of sanctions;
Vladimir Putin has declined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
, for transparently tactical reasons, to retaliate; and Donald Trump has taken 
to Twitter to praise the Russian president’s decision as “very smart!” (Isn’t 
there something especially pleading about that exclamation mark?)

The prime minister must now decide how to position herself in this spaghetti 
western standoff between the Good, the Mad and the Fugly. She could do nothing, 
of course. But that would be a craven lapse into paralysis, given the manner in 
which she has handled Putin in recent months. In October sheaccused Russian 
forces of “sickening atrocities” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/may-european-leaders-stop-russian-atrocities-syria-brexi>
 in Aleppo, and undertook tosend 800 troops to Estonia 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/26/britain-boosts-estonia-troop-deployment-on-russias-border/>
, one of four Nato battalions dispatched to deter Russian aggression.

In November, the prime minister declared that the west needed to “keep up the 
pressure on Russia <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38018148>” over its 
conduct in Syria. Meanwhile, she authorised the transfer to Estonia of 
high-precision long-range missiles to be deployed alongside drones, tanks and 
RAF jets. I doubt that May ever believed Putin could be driven out of Syria. 
But the buildup of forces in the Baltics is an unambiguous warning to him not 
to push his luck.

She knows too that conventional warfare is but the half of it. As Andrew 
Parker, director-general of MI5,said in his Guardian interview last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/01/andrew-parker-mi5-director-general-there-will-be-terrorist-attacks-in-britain-exclusive>
, Russia “is using its whole range of state organs and powers to push its 
foreign policy abroad in increasingly aggressive ways – involving propaganda, 
espionage, subversion and cyber-attacks. Russia is at work across Europe and in 
the UK today.”

In this context, May can hardly now pick up the pom-poms and join Trump on the 
cheerleading mat. And just to remove any doubt, her allies are categorical that 
there will be no strategic shift in response to a single tweet by the 
president-elect. As a starter, she indicated over the weekend that Russian 
oligarchs with links to Putin would no longer be welcome at Tory fundraising 
events – hardly a dagger in Moscow’s flesh, but a clear enough indication that 
she has no intention of following Trump down the road of appeasement.

Still, he is going to be president in less than three weeks. It is central to 
the prime minister’s vision of Britain’s place in a post-Brexit world that the 
“special relationship” should survive and prosper, especially in the form of a 
new bilateral trade deal. Her allies were delighted that Trump raised the 
precedent of Ronald Reagan’s bond with Margaret Thatcher in his first phone 
call with May 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3925524/Theresa-Maggie-says-Trump-President-elect-phones-invokes-Reagan-era-upbeat-message-Britain.html>
.

To be fair, they are realistic: nobody knows how the 45th president will 
respond to the counsel and promptings of his foreign counterparts. But Team May 
is determined at least to try. Aside from the prime minister’s forthcoming 
visit to Washington, there are plans for senior No 10 staff to make a separate 
trip to meet their opposite numbers in the new White House.

The specific conundrum May faces is that the standoff between Russia and the 
US is (apparently) about to yield place to a love-in. The greater threat in the 
era of Trump and Putin is not conflict but convergence – and not a convergence 
of peace, but a new struggle on many fronts, within and between nations, in 
whichRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and the US are on the 
same side.

Already, one can see the lineaments of that struggle: internationalists versus 
nativists; autocracy versus liberalism; traditionalism versus pluralism. It is 
fast rendering obsolete the old matrix of left-right, and east versus west. 
Trump and Putin are very different politicians. One is a tycoon and television 
star; the other a pitiless product of the KGB. But in this newly ordered world 
they are potential allies – of the worst sort.

May’s priority must be to dash any hopes the president-elect may have that 
Britain will be a wholly compliant Airstrip One

How chilling are the resonances with Nineteen Eighty-Four – and particularly 
the passages from “The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism” read 
by Winston Smith. This text describes a world in which great geopolitical blocs 
are “not divided by any genuine ideological difference”, in which “the 
fighting, when there is any, takes place on the vague frontiers whose 
whereabouts the average man can only guess at”, and in which the “cultural 
integrity” of each bloc is its true priority. From this fictional warning, it 
is not such a great leap to Trump’s Oceania and Putin’s Eurasia.

To persist with the metaphor, May’s priority must be to dash any hopes the 
president-elect may have that Britain will be a wholly compliant Airstrip One. 
In this respect, she faces a more nuanced diplomatic challenge than confronted, 
say, Thatcher or Tony Blair. Reagan and his “dear friend, Margaret” agreed on 
practically everything. Blair and George W Bush were from different sides of 
the political divide, but discovered common ground after 9/11.

It is self-evident that Trump and the prime minister do not enjoy any such 
identity of conviction. Yes, they are conservatives who share a core belief in 
the primacy of the nation-state. But on Nato, protectionism, climate change, 
Islam and much else, they differ fundamentally. May’s mission is to find common 
ground without selling out. It is a task of spectacular complexity.

On Russia, however, she cannot budge an inch. Her task as the only G8 leader in
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> not facing an election 
in the next 18 months is to confront Trump with the ineluctable facts about 
Putin: that he is an inveterate regional aggressor, a globally active enemy of 
democracy, and a mostly unchecked threat to the stability of the west. That his 
campaign of cyberwarfare alone mandates those nations he has targeted to enact 
further sanctions – and not only the symbolic kind.

Somebody needs to tell the president-elect that his political crush on Putin, 
as well as dividing his own party and country, and splitting the west, will 
send the worst possible signal to an autocrat just waiting for the green light. 
As theIron Lady once said <http://www.margaretthatcher.org/archive/us-bush.asp>
: this is no time to go wobbly.
 