
The world is getting smaller. That is the unbidden meme of our generation, 
thanks to the juggernaut of growth unleashed by an outpouring of global bodies, 
free trade agreements, technology and international capital. Every business and 
person now has a global reach and audience.

 Today’s paradigm is globalisation and free trade is its evangelical mantra. 

 But this narrative has become worn and no longer fits the facts. In recent 
months, there has been a backlash, accompanied by emotive talk about the 
reversal of globalisation and the battle for society’s future.The Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development used its latest health check on the 
global economy to warn of the costs of protectionism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/protectionism-trade-wars-world-growth-oecd-donald-trump>
.

The hand-wringing is half a decade too late, because globalisation is already 
dead and we are already some miles into the journey back.

Donald Trump and Theresa May are not flagbearers in the distance, they are 
catapults battering at the walls.Trump’s stated intent to pull the US out of 
the TPP on his first day in office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-100-days-plans-video-trans-pacific-partnership-withdraw>
underlines the new reality we inhabit, as does the European Union’s recent 
troubles closing a trade agreement with Canada thanks toWallonia’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/wallonia-ceta-ttip-eu-trade-belgium>
 obstinance.

 Today, we have a new meme – deglobalisation – as people turn their backs on 
an interconnected world economy and societies turn iconoclastic.

 It is not for the first time. 

Globalisation <https://www.theguardian.com/world/globalisation> may be defined 
as when trade across nations is growing faster than GDP. People interact more, 
transact more and create more wealth. Deglobalisation is the alternate state 
where trade grows less than GDP. Countries focus inwards, trade declines as a 
proportion of GDP and growth shrinks. A clear cycle of the two emerges over 
history.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Feconomics-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftoo-late-for-hand-wringing-globalisation-dead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58be07d8828f8006146a0a7d8aed03377900a575%2F0_0_942_578%2F942.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20too%20late%20for%20hand-wringing%20%E2%80%93%20globalisation%20is%20already%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Feconomics-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftoo-late-for-hand-wringing-globalisation-dead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20too%20late%20for%20hand-wringing%20%E2%80%93%20globalisation%20is%20already%20dead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Feconomics-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ftoo-late-for-hand-wringing-globalisation-dead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58be07d8828f8006146a0a7d8aed03377900a575%2F0_0_942_578%2F942.jpg>
 Phases of globalisation and deglobalisation over the last two centuries. 
Illustration: Maddison, World Bank, Max Roser, CPB Netherlands, Camdor Global 
 * Proto-globalisation (1820-1870): Rapid global trade growth, thanks to the 
Industrial Revolution and the spread of European colonial rule 
 * Globalisation 1.0 (1870-1913): Empire building became the norm. Rapid 
advancements in transport and communications grew trade. But rapid change also 
meant volatile bouts of economic obsolescence and crisis 
 * Deglobalisation 1.0 (1913-1950): Limited growth, unequal outcomes and a 
huge debt overhang from previous decades stoked economic nationalism and 
protectionism. Trade fell and a collective failure to tackle deeper structural 
issues led to the 1930s 
 * Globalisation 2.0 (1950-2010): Since then, we have been on a tearaway 
expansion with unparalleled growth of both global trade and GDP 
 * Deglobalisation 2.0 (2010-?): The last financial crisis focused policymaker 
attention inwards and crystallised the growing sense of social 
disenfranchisement. A toxic mix of suppressed wages, rocketing debt and 
political myopia have largely destroyed the allure of globalisation. 
 This is more than a sense of ennui. Global trade today is not slowing down 
but has plateaued 
<https://www.cpb.nl/en/figure/cpb-world-trade-monitor-august-2016> – hardly a 
barometer of rude global health. After their peak in January 2015, global 
exports fell -1.6% by the end of August 2016. The blame lies not with commodity 
price falls, but shifts in trade policy.Protectionism is en vogue 
<http://www.globaltradealert.org/gta-analysis/fdi-recovers>. Restrictive trade 
measures have outstripped liberalising measures three to one this year and 
increased by almost five times since 2009, as policymakers try to circumvent 
the WTO. Meanwhile, thedeleveraging of banking balance sheets 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2014/speech777.pdf>
 over recent years has hit global lending, as banks retreat from peripheral to 
core domestic activities, cutting vital credit flows through key arteries.

 All of this preceded the populist deluge of 2016 and, indeed, contributed as 
policymakers myopically prioritised stability over social cohesion, ignoring 
the lessons of the past.

 But globally, politicians are now fast realigning to shifting public moods. A 
year ago, to imagine a world where the major western leaders included Trump, 
the Brexit brigade and Marine Le Pen was the province of satire. Today, we are 
two-thirds there. Their ascendancy has shifted the political debate towards 
nativism in a hauntingly familiar nationalist narrative, as others follow suit.

 Our new politics are not leftwing or rightwing, merely whether you are in 
this world or out of it. Even defenders of globalisation are falling into the 
same trap. By demonising those that voted against and not providing alternative 
options, they cling tighter to those that confirm and affirm their beliefs. 
That is still nativism of a different sort and still the politics of division, 
not unity.

 This is Deglobalisation 2.0. 

 Monetary policies such as quantitative easing and its newborn sibling, fiscal 
easing, cannot change this dynamic. Absent structural change, their cumulative 
corrosive impact on savings and fillip to global debt ensure a limited runway 
and only inflame the rhetoric of disenfranchisement. Meanwhile, divorces are 
turning ugly as emotions override reason, viz the talk of Brexit fees and 
anti-dumping levies, the metaphorical Kristallnacht of populist victors like 
May and Trump as they struggle for coherence, and emerging divisions between 
central banks and politicians, to name but a few.

 Democracy is fast turning to kakistocracy – government by the least qualified 
leaders. Globalisation is transmuting to nationalism. The effects are well 
documented in history – autarky, economic naivety, protectionism and a rush to 
grab what remains of the pie, only to trample it underfoot.

 Me first always ends in me last. The world is still getting smaller, but just 
in our minds and horizons now, and thoughtless we risk becoming all the poorer 
for it.

Bob Swarup is the author of Money Mania 
<http://www.bloomsbury.com/uk/money-mania-9781608198412/>

 