
I have always considered “tolerance” a highly problematic concept: it is today 
considered to describe a positive attribute, when in fact it refers to a rather 
negative one. This ambivalence was succinctly put byGoethe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/26/10-objects-made-modern-germany>, 
who, in one of his Maxims and Reflections, stated: “Tolerance should really 
only be a passing attitude: it should lead to appreciation. To tolerate is to 
offend.”

Why does music give us chills? You asked Google – here’s the answer | David 
Shariatmadari
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/02/why-does-music-give-us-chills-google>
Merely tolerating someone is ultimately an act of condescension, whereas 
actual appreciation results in seeing the other as one’s equal. “Diversity”, in 
turn, is an extension of the principle of appreciation in that it signifies the 
achievement of equality of opportunity for social, cultural, ethnic, religious 
or other groups that would otherwise be subject to discrimination.

Both concepts could not be more topical in our globalised world, in which 
states and societies are faced with increasing permeability and fluidity, and 
the resulting challenges lead to a host of debates and conflicts. It is in this 
constantly shifting climate of insecurity that states and societies have to 
deal with the enormous challenge of unprecedented levels of global migration.

Precise terminology is important here. Take the usage of the terms “global” 
and “universal”: while they can often have the same meaning, “universal” has a 
distinctive additional meaning that is time- and place-independent and 
categorical: there is a reason we call it theUniversal Declaration of Human 
Rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/oct/03/what-is-european-convention-on-human-rights-echr>
 and not the Global Declaration of Human Rights.

It is specifically in the context of immigration that we must reassess and 
reaffirm our notions of “tolerance” and “diversity”. The philosopherMartin Buber
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/mar/01/religion> explored the 
principle of dialogue as a basis of human relations in his seminal work, I and 
Thou. According to Buber, human beings form their identities chiefly in 
relation to what surrounds them – other humans and the physical world. Thus, 
any social construct – be it in a society or between nation states – 
necessitates dialogue and exchange. Understanding the other – or in Buber’s 
words, for every “I” to seek reciprocal understanding of the “You” – is 
therefore the very foundation of humanity.

We need to see the other as our equal and fully accept him or her despite 
perceived weaknesses or differences. This is the real intellectual basis of 
improving relationships between human beings. It is on this basis too that we 
can embrace our responsibility of protecting each other’s human rights.

With every right we enjoy, there is, however, a set of responsibilities linked 
to it. TheGerman government has taken on an admirable leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/refugees-welcome-uk-germany-compare-migration>
 role in dealing with what has widely been called the “refugee crisis”, yet it 
is clear this is a universal issue. As is the seemingly unsolvable 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which is not a conflict between two nations but 
between two peoples who have opposite narrations.

Without ever claiming that we can bring about real peace or equality in the 
world and the Middle East in particular, theWest-Eastern Divan Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/18/west-eastern-divan-orchestra-barenboim-argerich-review-prom-43-royal-albert-hall>
 (named after acollection of Goethe’s poetry 
<https://sites.google.com/site/germanliterature/18th-century/goethe/goethe-poetry/west-oestlicher-divan>
) and I have nonetheless striven tirelessly to lead by example. Today’sconcert 
in Geneva to mark Human Rights Day 
<http://danielbarenboim.com/barenboim-west-eastern-divan-orchestra-mark-human-rights-day-with-concert-at-united-nations-in-geneva/>
 is no exception. In our orchestra, diversity is lived on a daily basis and no 
single musician can exist without a fundamental understanding and appreciation 
of the other, however different he or she may be.

The sovereign independent republic of the West-Eastern Divan, as I like to 
call it, began as an unpredictable experiment in 1999. Over the years, it has 
grown into an example of how society could function under the best of 
circumstances. Our musicians have gone through the painful process of learning 
to express themselves while simultaneously listening to the narrative of their 
counterparts. I cannot imagine a better way of implementing thefirst and most 
fundamental article 
<http://ccnmtl.columbia.edu/projects/mmt/udhr/article_1.html> of the UN 
Declaration of Human Rights: that all human beings are born free and equal in 
dignity and rights, that they are endowed with reason and conscience and should 
act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

From the outset, our approach in the orchestra’s workshops and seminars has 
been to focus on understanding what it means to listen to each other – both as 
musicians and as human beings. Learning to listen in that way sensitises us 
both for ourselves and the world around us.

Music, of course, makes this possible because it allows us to think, feel and 
express different thoughts and emotions simultaneously. Music never only cries 
or smiles but makes both possible at once. It is a constant, simultaneous 
conversation between apparent opposites that can peacefully exist side by side. 
This should be the spirit we carry forward.

• Daniel Barenboim and the West-Eastern Divan Orchestra give a concert 
<http://danielbarenboim.com/calendar/> dedicated to human rights today, 10 
December, in Geneva
 