
The Italian government has agreed to a bailout of Monte dei Paschi di Siena 
(MPS) after the world’s oldest bank admitted thatit had failed to raise €5bn 
(£4.25bn) from private investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/22/italy-bail-out-monte-dei-paschi-di-siena-rescue-matteo-renzi>
 as part of a last-ditch plan to rescue the bank.

Paolo Gentiloni, Italy’s new prime minister, announced in the early hours of 
Friday that his cabinet had agreed to the rescue andwould be dipping into a 
€20bn fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/italys-20bn-bailout-fund-to-rescue-monte-dei-paschi-di-siena>
 that had already been approved by the parliament earlier this week in the 
event that MPS needed to be saved.

The government announced that its first step would be to strengthen the bank’s 
ability to procure liquidity. If necessary, the bank can move ahead with a sale 
of state-backed bonds.

Pier Carlo Padoan, the finance minister, did not specify how much the rescue 
would cost the Italian state, but he said funds would be sufficient to cover 
the bank’s capital requirements.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fitaly-bail-out-monte-dei-paschi-di-siena-rescue-matteo-renzi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F532ae38d4d307809db3876d56aefa8bec77cc8e1%2F0_0_4602_2761%2F4602.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italian%20cabinet%20gives%20green%20light%20to%20Monte%20dei%20Paschi%20di%20Siena%20bailout&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fitaly-bail-out-monte-dei-paschi-di-siena-rescue-matteo-renzi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italian%20cabinet%20gives%20green%20light%20to%20Monte%20dei%20Paschi%20di%20Siena%20bailout&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fitaly-bail-out-monte-dei-paschi-di-siena-rescue-matteo-renzi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F532ae38d4d307809db3876d56aefa8bec77cc8e1%2F0_0_4602_2761%2F4602.jpg>
 Italy’s new prime minister, Paolo Gentiloni, made the announcement in the 
early hours of Friday. Photograph: Andreas Solaro/AFP/Getty Images 
“This will secure MPS’s capital needs and allow the bank to continue its 
industrial plan. Italy’s third largest bank will finally return with force to 
operate in support of the Italian economy and in a contest of full tranquillity 
for its savers and its employees,” Padoan said.

Italy's Monte dei Paschi shares hit record low as bailout looms – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/22/italys-monte-dei-paschi-bailout-rescue-bid-business-live>
The government said junior bondholders – who under new EU rules must take a 
hit before any state intervention – would be able to convert their bonds into 
shares, which will then be converted into senior debt.


The announcement brought to an end months of uncertainty about MPS’s fate 
after the bank embarked on an attempt to first raise billions of euros on the 
private market. In a statement on Thursday night, MPS said that the attempt 
“has not ended with success”.

“In particular, there were no manifestations of interest on the part of an 
anchor investor who could have put a significant investment in the bank and 
this negatively affected decisions of institutional investors,” MPS said.

MPS’s board met on Thursday night after it failed to secure an anchor 
investor, thought to be the Qatar sovereign wealth fund.

Within hours of that announcement, Gentiloni convened his cabinet and formally 
approved the state rescue plan.

The bank also announced that the two investment banks that tried 
unsuccessfully to arrange the private investment – JP Morgan and Mediobanca – 
would not receive any fees for their work.

Shares in the bank were volatile during the day, lifting off record lows but 
then falling back in the confusion surrounding the next steps. The shares – 
down 85% this year – slumped by 7.5%. MPS is under instruction from the 
European Central Bank to bolster its finances after it was found to be the
weakest of 51 European banks subjected to stress tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rescue-package-in-place-as-europes-oldest-bank-fails-stress-tests>
.

Italy to bail out Monte dei Paschi di Siena bank with €20bn rescue fund
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/italys-20bn-bailout-fund-to-rescue-monte-dei-paschi-di-siena>
The failure to convince Qatar to inject up to €1bn means that Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> will have to impose losses on 
bondholders before it can stump up cash because of new EU rules intended to 
prevent taxpayers from picking up the bill for bank losses. However, about €2bn 
of the bonds are held by private investors, and the government suggested that 
arrangements were in place to protect those junior bondholders.

The bailout is not just a financial issue. It is also expected to have 
political consequences for Italy’s controlling Democratic party and Matteo 
Renzi, the former prime minister whostepped down from office earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/italy-paolo-gentiloni-to-succeed-matteo-renzi-as-prime-minister>
 after he was roundly defeated in the referendum on 4 December. While Gentiloni 
has taken over as interim prime minister, Renzi is expected to run for election 
again as early as next year.

Wolfango Piccoli, an analyst with Teneo Intelligence, said a government rescue 
might not be immediately damaging politically, in large part because public 
attention will be diverted from the issue during the Christmas period. But the 
issue could become “politically toxic” later, once it becomes clear how many of 
the bank’s junior bondholders are eventually compensated for their losses, and 
how long it takes for them to be paid.

“In terms of the junior bondholders, let’s see what happens. it will 
eventually be decided by Brussels,” Piccoli said. Once MPS is saved, a number 
of other banks could also require government support.

“This will drag on for some time. If we have elections in May or June, it will 
be used then [against Renzi’s Democratic party], and there is no way to deflect 
that,” he added.

Monte dei Paschi di Siena: a brief guide to the world's oldest bank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/22/monte-dei-paschi-the-history-of-the-worlds-oldest-bank>
The bail-in of bondholders should help reduce the amount of funds the Italian 
government must contribute to MPS.

Analysts at Barclays said any state intervention for MPS may not be enough to 
solve the problem facing the banking system, which has amassed bad lending at a 
time when the economy has been stagnating. They said the six largest banks 
could need €30bn to clean up their balance sheets and even if the €20bn “were 
to represent sufficient firepower to plug the hole, we doubt the decision to 
deal with MPS through a public sector solution will represent a template to be 
unrolled across the system quickly”.

The €5bn fundraising from private investors was complex, involving a cash call 
on shareholders, asking bondholders to swap their investments for equity, and 
also parcelling off bad debts. The €4.25bn Atlante fund – set up by Renzi and 
backed by larger banks to prop up banks – had been expected to hoover up the 
problem loans.



 