
Plans by leading Italian banks to raise billions of euros from investors to 
boost their financial strength have been damaged by the outcome of Sunday’s 
referendum, a leading ratings agency said on Tuesday as it downgraded its 
outlook for the sector.

Fitch – which said it had a negative outlook on the Italian banking industry 
for 2017 – said profitability in the sector was already frail before the 
referendum result that sparked political chaos andforced the resignation of the 
prime minister, Matteo Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/matteo-renzis-future-in-the-balance-amid-high-turnout-in-italy-referendum>
.

“The referendum result could also damage the recapitalisation plans of some 
Italian banks, most notably Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena (MPS) and 
UniCredit, and have negative implications for the broader banking sector, whose 
attractiveness with investors has already reduced significantly during 2016. 
The sector’s ability to access the institutional markets for funding and 
capital, which has become more difficult and expensive this year, could 
deteriorate further,”Fitch <https://www.theguardian.com/business/fitch> said.

Could Matteo Renzi's exit lead to an Italian bank rescue?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/dec/05/mario-renzi-bank-eurozone>
The ratings agency delivered its verdict on the sector, which is weighed down 
with €360bn (£304bn) of bad debts amid attempts to find investors to inject up 
to €5bn into MPS, the world’s oldest bank. Senior officials from MPS,which was 
the weakest of the 51 subjected to stress tests by regulators earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rescue-package-in-place-as-europes-oldest-bank-fails-stress-tests>
, were in Frankfurt to meet executives from the European Central Bank ahead of 
an end-of-year deadline to boost its financial health.

But expectations that the government will step in boosted sentiment, with the 
index of Italian banking stocks jumping 9% and pushing bank shares acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> higher. Shares in MPS were 
briefly suspended after falling 5% before ending up 1%. Shares in Unicredit, 
which has been expected to launch a €12bn cash call next week, rose 13%.

Renzi’s resignation has been temporarily frozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/matteo-renzis-resignation-frozen-by-italys-president>
 by the president, Sergio Mattarella, until the senate passes a budget, perhaps 
on Wednesday, when a new prime minister from his Democratic party is expected to
take over until elections are held 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/06/matteo-renzi-plotting-return-power-italian-reports>
.

The referendum, which rejected constitutional reforms favoured by Renzi, was 
held at a crucial time for the fresh injection of funds into MPS, where the US 
bank JP Morgan is helping to broker a plan to attract investors to buy its 
shares.

Tomas Kinmonth, fixed income strategist at ABN Amro, said a €1bn complex debt 
structuring completed on Tuesday “will assist in the capitalisation of the 
struggling Italian bank”. “This is a crucial step, and perhaps enough to tempt 
the equity consortium to help rescue the bank,” said Kinmonth.

The Qatar Investment Authority – the gulf state’s sovereign wealth fund – is 
among the investors that MPS has hoped to convince to participate in the cash 
call.

But the political uncertainty may deter such a private sector rescue and Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> is said to be preparing a package of 
measures under a “precautionary bailout”.

Some €2bn of debt is held by private investors who would be required to take 
losses under new EU rules. According to reports, however, a plan is being 
devised under which the first €100,000 of their investment could be protected, 
as would be case if they were depositors with the bank.
 