
Monte dei Paschi di Siena’s attempt to float itself off the rocks with private 
capital appears doomed and a state-sponsoredbailout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/monte-dei-paschi-bailout-worlds-oldest-bank-eu>
 looks inevitable. The Italian government on Wednesday granted itself the funds 
for a rescue package. The deed will probably be done by Christmas, with losses 
imposed on junior bondholders.

It is tempting to think this outcome was inevitable. The crisis at Italy’s 
third-largest lender has bubbled away for most of 2016 and the bank has a long 
and grim record of disappointing its backers. Over the past five years, it has 
raised €8bn in capital but churned out losses of €15bn.

But, turn the clock back just a few months, and there were realistic hopes 
that recapitalisation by the private sector would succeed. The Siena-based 
lender was bottom of the class in theeurozone’s regulatory stress tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/30/eu-bank-stress-tests-vulnerability-of-barclays-and-rbs-under-scrutiny>
 in the summer but a few Greek banks have proved it is possible to find brave 
investors willing to take a punt on recovery.

Italy's €20bn bailout fund to rescue Monte dei Paschi di Siena
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/italys-20bn-bailout-fund-to-rescue-monte-dei-paschi-di-siena>
MPS also seemed to have acquired two ingredients it had previously lacked – a 
credible chief executive and a serious cost-cutting plan. Marco Morelli, a 
former Bank of America executive, arrived in September and outlined his 
ambition to cut 2,500 jobs and a quarter of the branches. If recapitalisation 
could be achieved, said Morelli, MPS would emerge at the end of 2019 with one 
of the healthiest capital ratios amongEuropean banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/europeanbanks>.

And why not? Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> is not Greece. 
Half the country is rich. It ought to be possible for a bank founded in 1472 to 
shuffle off its bad loans, even at depressed prices, overcome its foolish 
acquisitions from the boom years and regain a profitable niche. The critical 
sum at stake in the recapitalisation plan – €5bn – was not off the scale and JP 
Morgan, the Wall Street powerhouse advising MPS, was on hand to round up a few 
so-called anchor investors.

It has not worked. The immediate reason is that the anchor investors, 
supposedly from Qatar and China, have got cold feet. Meanwhile, junior 
bondholders have squealed at being asked to turn their IOUs into equity. In 
other words, confidence drained away, not helped by MPS’s warning that its 
levels of liquidity were falling fast.

But the other trigger was the landslide defeat for prime minister Matteo Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/matteo-renzi-to-resubmit-resignation-as-italys-prime-minister>
 in the referendum on constitutional reform. That reopened the debate about 
Italy’s long-term future in the eurozone. Until the elections are held and the 
political picture clears, investors seem to have decided that Italy is not a 
place to take a high-risk bet.

January’s planned €13bn recapitalisation of Unicredit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/italian-banking-crisis-unicredit-to-raise-13bn-euros>
 should still be safe. Unicredit is bigger, its bad debts are less severe and 
underwriters are already in place. But Italy’s political class should be 
alarmed by MPS’s failure to find private-sector friends. Bigger challenges have 
been overcome during the eurozone’s many crises. This state bailout looks like 
investors’ vote of little confidence in Italy.

Lily-livered Deloitte’s ridiculous apology

The sins of Serco and G4S, circa 2013, were grave. The companies had been 
billing the government for placing electronic tags on offenders who were dead 
or in prison. They were told to engage in “corporate renewal” – in other words, 
get their houses in order – and they would be banned from bidding for public 
sector work in the meantime.

Deloitte apologises for Brexit memo in effort to make peace with No 10
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/deloitte-apologises-for-brexit-memo-in-effort-to-make-peace-with-no-10>
The response was reasonable and appeared to have the desired effect. The 
companies reformed their boards and audit committees to try to ensure that such 
a scandal could never happen again. Six months later, the bans were lifted, 
which also seemed roughly right. Outsourcing is designed to save money for the 
public purse and Serco and G4S, love them or loathe then, are two of the 
biggest operators in the country. So best to have the duo, in scrubbed-up form 
one hopes, in the market to keep the bidding competitive.

Now Deloitte has similarly been banned from bidding for central government 
contracts for six months. Or, rather,the consultant has volunteered for 
punishment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/deloitte-apologises-for-brexit-memo-in-effort-to-make-peace-with-no-10>
. Has it also ripped off taxpayers for millions through deceit or incompetence?

Not at all. All that has happened is that one of its consultants wrote a 
two-page internal memo suggesting the government had no plan for Brexit, which 
is hardly a controversial opinion, and that civil servants are struggling to 
cope with the extra workload. But Deloitte thinks it needs to apologise for the 
“unintended disruption ... caused to government” by a leak to the Times. It 
wants “to put this matter behind us”.

This affair is ridiculous. The partners of Deloitte come across as 
lily-livered. And Theresa May, in apparently endorsing the six-month ban, 
appears terrified of criticism. Outsiders will draw a simple conclusion from 
the colossal over-reaction:the memo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/whitehall-struggling-to-cope-with-scale-of-work-arising-from-brexit-vote>
 was on the money.
 