
Liverpool have made their best start to a Premier League season, their total 
of 43 points after beatingManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> is their highest at the 
halfway stage, yet they still find themselves six points behind Chelsea.

Jürgen Klopp chose to look on the bright side after Georginio Wijnaldum’s goal 
was enough to beat third-placed City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/liverpool-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 1-0. “Chelsea are unbelievably strong, but can you imagine how annoying it 
must be to win 13 games in a row and find there is still a team only six points 
behind?” the Liverpool manager said. “Maybe we will have to win 14 games in a 
row. No one really thinks we can do it, but for me to beat City was the perfect 
way to end the year. We knew we had to win, because we knew the earlier results.
I only had to look at the guys’ faces to know Chelsea had won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/chelsea-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
, but now we have won four in a row and we have to keep it going. We are in the 
region of the table where we want to be, we have to keep winning our games and 
see where that takes us.”

Georginio Wijnaldum gives Liverpool deserved win against Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/liverpool-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
Neither side created many chances and the Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager would have liked to 
see more control from his side. “We were not quite as good in possession as we 
should have been,” he said. “We defended really well but we were not as 
confident with the ball. I think we deserved the win, though. City are a really 
good side and we had to stay compact.”

Willian double sinks brave Stoke and extends Chelsea run to 13 straight wins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/chelsea-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
Pep Guardiola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola> looked 
slightly deflated, unable to put much of a positive spin on a defeat his 
players accepted too meekly. “We started the game well, we know our record at 
Anfield and we wanted to play with courage,” the City manager said. “Then the 
first chance Liverpool have they score, so it was always difficult. It was a 
good cross and a good header, we had a lot of people there but I am not a guy 
to personalise and say we lost for that reason. We had a long time to react to 
going behind and we were not able to create many opportunities.”

Guardiola was reluctant to admit the gap to Chelsea is now too large at 10 
points, though he did start to turn his attention to some of the other prizes 
on offer. “The second leg of the season starts tomorrow and there are still 
many things left to fight for,” he said. “We are still in the Champions League 
and we have the FA Cup to come. You must expect a gap to exist when one team 
wins 13 matches in a row. Maybe a team that can do that does not have too many 
weaknesses, but when you are behind all you can do is focus on your own games, 
beginning with the next game. We have to wake up because after this we have a 
game against Burnley. We have to forget about talking about big things, the 
second half of the league is starting and we have to think about that.”
 