
Jürgen Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> admitted he 
was at a loss to explain how Liverpool had under- performed so dramatically in 
the first leg of the EFL Cup semi-final at Southampton and the only consolation 
for him was that his team are still alive in the tie.

Southampton had a clutch of excellent chances but they will take only a 1-0 
lead to Anfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/southampton-liverpool-efl-cup-match-report>
for the second leg on 25 January, which came courtesy of Nathan Redmond’s 
20th-minute goal. Redmond went close on three further occasions while Cédric 
Soares also chose the wrong option on a two-on-one counterattack.

Nathan Redmond gives Southampton narrow edge against Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/southampton-liverpool-efl-cup-match-report>
“I’ve tried [to explain the performance] in three or four interviews but I 
cannot,” the Liverpool manager, said. “The start was good. If we would have 
done this for 90 minutes, then it would have been very difficult forSouthampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton>. But after we conceded, the 
game changed.

“I’m actually not used to a reaction like this from my boys but they have to 
accept that tonight was not good. We did not have a lot of chances – if we had 
some [at all]. The performance, of course, doesn’t feel too good. But for the 
final, I would think it’s still open. You have two disappointed managers after 
the game. One, because he lost and the performance wasn’t good, and the other 
because he only won 1-0 and has to go to Anfield afterwards.”

Claude Puel, the Southampton manager, was not about to disagree. “There is a 
bit of frustration at the end of the game, to [only] be 1-0 up,” he said. “With 
a little bit more efficiency, we could do a bit better. But I’m also happy to 
see the level of the team and all of the players.

“It was a great performance against a team that, since the beginning of the 
season, does not waste many chances.Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> had just one chance tonight – 
at the beginning of the game [through Roberto Firmino]. We had good 
organisation and we kept the clean sheet.”

Redmond admitted that he might have scored four times. “On another day, they 
might go in but we’ve got the win and we take it on to the second leg now,” he 
said. “Probably, the first miss was the most frustrating. I didn’t realise how 
much time I had. I will learn from those mistakes.”

Klopp offered praise to his goalkeeper, Loris Karius, who saved twice from 
Redmond and was helped out by his crossbar on the winger’s third and final 
chance towards the end.

“How did Karius play? Good,” Klopp added. “He saved us. If you lose three or 
four nil, then it could be much more difficult for the second game. So, yeah, 
he kept us in the game, that’s how it is. It’s his job. I’m not too surprised, 
honestly. If a goalkeeper has to make saves like this, something else is wrong 
in the game and that was our problem tonight.”

Claude Puel’s Southampton neutralise Liverpool to put Wembley in sight | Ben 
Fisher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/11/claude-puel-southampton-efl-cup-liverpool>
It was put to Klopp that he might take comfort from the scoreline being only 
1-0.

“That’s the only comfort, actually,” he replied. “But it’s good. It’s the 
third best result you can get. If you don’t win and you don’t draw, losing 1-0 
is the third best result.

“I don’t like it too much but it’s still possible [to reach the final] and 
this team always shows a reaction. We have to show a reaction against 
Southampton but it will be cool if we could also show a reaction at the weekend 
against Manchester United, because we probably need a better performance to get 
something at Old Trafford.”

Klopp promised that things would be different when the two sides meet in the 
second leg at Anfield. “We will strike back,” he said. “We will be a different 
team. It will be different. Everything will be different at Anfield. So, for 
us, it’s still possible to go to Wembley and that’s the target.”
 