
Football changed in April 2013. Jürgen Klopp’s Borussia Dortmund beat José 
Mourinho’s Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/24/borussia-dortmund-real-madrid-champions-league>
 andJupp Heynckes’s Bayern Munich beat Tito Vilanova’s Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/apr/23/bayern-munich-barcelona-champions-league>
 in the semi-finals of the Champions League and the hegemony of a Spanish model 
of football, based on possession or its opposite, was shattered by a series of 
rampaging German counterattacks.

The lessons of that fortnight remain highly relevant to Sunday’s meeting at 
Old Trafford betweenManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> and Liverpool, 
Mourinho and Klopp. Or at least that is the convenient theory. Nothing is ever 
as neat and simple as that, and by the following season Carlo Ancelotti’s Real 
were devastating Pep Guardiola’s Bayern by breaking with rapid efficiency.

Jürgen Klopp: Don’t make Manchester United v Liverpool bigger than it is
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league>
But those four games in April 2013 did change the perception. It had seemed 
football could be played in only one of two ways. Either you sought to achieve 
possession statistics of 75%, dominating the game through keeping the ball as 
Guardiola’s Barça had done, or you sought to defy that approach by radical 
non-possession, retaining the shape and waiting for a mistake, as Mourinho had 
done with Internazionale against Barça in 2010 and, in a less exaggerated way, 
with Real in certain key games.

Theorising about football had come to focus on that one metric: possession. It 
did not necessarily express how well you had played, but it did express how you 
played. But football is not a simple dichotomy and the rise of Klopp and the 
German school, and others who share similar ideas, such as Chelsea’s Antonio 
Conte, have shaken the simplicity of that analysis.

That is not to say Guardiola’s style – call it tiki-taka if you like – is 
finished, outmoded, but that top clubs have found another way of playing.

And there are clear crossovers between the two philosophies – as is seen 
clearly in somebody such as Tottenham’s Mauricio Pochettino, understandably 
given his tutelage under Marcelo Bielsa. The Guardiola style may be a little 
more focused on possession, although that is evolving almost by the week, and 
the Klopp-Conte style more on rapid transitions, but both require acute 
positional sense and both tactical approaches are based on a belief in the 
value of attacking.

In that sense, Mourinho still remains aloof among the managers of the Premier 
League’s top six clubs in that he does not believe only in playing on the front 
foot, something that creates a certain tension at clubs such as Real and United 
whose self-identity is of cavalier flair. That is another of the strands that 
makes their meeting at Old Trafford so intriguing.

When United went to Anfield in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
, they were stuttering badly and had won one of their previous four league 
games. Mourinho shut the game down, adding to an impression that Klopp’s side 
can be frustrated by dogged teams who sit deep – as they were in losing to 
Southampton in theEFL Cup semi‑final first leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-claude-puel-southampton-efl-cup>
 on Wednesday.

But United go into Sunday’s game on the back of nine straight wins in all 
competitions. Perhaps they have not been quite as fluent as they would have 
liked, perhaps they have enjoyed some of the luck that had shunned them earlier 
in the season and perhaps it has not been the most testing run of fixtures but 
nine wins are nine wins.

Manchester United still making up for Louis van Gaal’s expensive lost time | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/12/manchester-united-morgan-schneiderlin-jose-mourinho>
Mourinho is smiling again, making jokes in interviews. He has solidified the 
defence and his substitutions are working. He’s back in control. But what does 
Mourinho do here? It’s one thing to grind out a point away from home amid a bad 
run, quite another to set out to do so at Old Trafford on a good run.

What may be tactically correct may not be emotionally or politically correct – 
was his assertion this week that a United v Liverpool game wasn’t like going to 
the theatre a warning to expect a battle? And because the only top-six side 
United have beaten on their good runwas Tottenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/manchester-united-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
, who at the time were in a miserable patch of their own, there is a sense that 
this game is the real test of whether United are capable of challenging the 
very best.

But there’s a broader narrative beyond even that. Louis van Gaal won four 
games out of four againstLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> but there was a wider belief 
that the Dutchman’s stewardship of the club was a time of flux and that the 
pendulum of supremacy may be shifting back towards Merseyside.

The past four years have brought four different champions: the last time that 
happened was 1990-93 and was followed by United’s domination; the previous such 
sequence was seven from 1967-73 and was followed by Liverpool’s domination. 
With United seemingly obsessed with celebrity signings and playing staid 
football, it was possible to discern Liverpool resurgent with their bright 
young coach and his focus on developing talent. The game at Anfield in October 
did not really change that perception.

Mourinho has beaten Klopp once in six meetings and there were plenty of 
questions asked in the autumn about whether he too was a little passé, both 
tactically and in his relations with players. Results have quelled that tide of 
criticism but this feels like another test, another chapter in the history of 
entangled but competing theories that began in April 2013.
 