
Jürgen Klopp has said Liverpool have nothing to fear from Sunday’s visit to 
Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/manchester-united-liverpool-match-preview>
 as a meeting of the fierce north-west rivals provides a perfect opportunity to 
react to theEFL Cup defeat at Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/southampton-liverpool-efl-cup-match-report>
.

José Mourinho confident United can sustain winning form against Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league>
Liverpool are four places and five points above José Mourinho’s team, although 
recent form favours the hosts. United have won nine consecutive matches in all 
competitions while Chelsea’s closest challengers at the Premier League summit 
have not won in three, the brief sequence featuringa goalless draw at home to 
League Two Plymouth Argyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/liverpool-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-match-report>
 in the FA Cup and defeat in the first leg of the EFL Cup semi-final at St 
Mary’s Stadium in midweek.

However, Klopp insists there is no reason to head to Old Trafford in 
trepidation. TheLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> 
manager could start Philippe Coutinho for the first time since November and 
recall the captain, Jordan Henderson, from a heel injury.

“There is nothing to fear,” Klopp said. “What could I fear? At this moment, 
anything is possible. It could be that United are not at their best level on 
Sunday, just nobody knows about it yet.

“I don’t fear things like this. I’ve had enough time in the game to realise 
what happens. At this moment I’m 100% positive, absolutely looking forward to 
the game.

“I’ve had so many defeats in my life, especially as a player – as a manager, 
too – that I really know defeat is not the problem. Your reaction to it is the 
problem. We’ve now had four days to react from a really bad game on our side by 
playing in a very important game. I love it. That’s how football should be: you 
can react immediately. So let’s think about this and not what could happen if 
we can’t do it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjose-mourinho-and-jurgen-klopp-preview-manchester-united-v-liverpool-premier-league-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mourinho%20and%20Klopp%20preview%20Manchester%20United%20v%20Liverpool%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjose-mourinho-and-jurgen-klopp-preview-manchester-united-v-liverpool-premier-league-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mourinho%20and%20Klopp%20preview%20Manchester%20United%20v%20Liverpool%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F14%2Fjose-mourinho-and-jurgen-klopp-preview-manchester-united-v-liverpool-premier-league-video&media=>
Mourinho and Klopp preview Manchester United v Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/14/jose-mourinho-and-jurgen-klopp-preview-manchester-united-v-liverpool-premier-league-video>
Liverpool will open a comfortable eight-point lead over their old adversaries 
with victory at Old Trafford but Klopp denied that would also represent a 
decisive step in a genuine title challenge from his team.

“I don’t care, actually,” he claimed. “The last thing I think about is if 
United can come back and overhaul us. It would be a huge gap, of course, but 
they were already a few points behind a few teams at the top of the table.

“The season is too long, this game decides not a lot actually. At the moment 
everyone thinks Chelsea will win all their games and I don’t know what they 
think of Tottenham. The international games come again in February and then it 
is difficult again.

“The whole of December and January for us is outstandingly intense, which we 
knew already, but if these two months decide the whole season what were you 
doing the rest of the season? There is still a lot to be done and a lot of 
things to fix. So it is always better you win and all the rest draw but you 
cannot wish. You have to do the work.”

Manchester United v Liverpool: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/manchester-united-liverpool-match-preview>
Coutinho’s availability, and substitute’s display at Southampton, is a timely 
fillip for the Liverpool manager with Sadio Mané on Africa Cup of Nations’ duty 
with Senegal. Klopp has not been able to select Coutinho, Mané, Roberto Firmino 
and Adam Lallana in the same lineup since the6-1 rout of Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/liverpool-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 on 6 November but, with his team only five points behind Chelsea, he insists 
there is no reason to rush into the transfer market this month.

The Liverpool manager explained: “The right player for us, if he’s available 
and if the club he plays for wants to sell him, that’s pretty difficult at this 
moment because who wants to sell high-quality players? All the other players we 
don’t need, that’s how it is. You don’t buy a player for one or two games, that 
makes no sense.

“We have to go through this now. Of course it is not too cool that Sadio is 
not here. Of course it’s not cool that Phil was injured but is now on the way 
back. Whether he is at exactly the same level as before the injury is another 
question because they are all human beings.

“It’s not like they can just perform like this [clicks fingers]. Of course, 
Daniel [Sturridge] was injured and has come in and needs some rhythm. Joël 
Matip: in best shape, then he’s out. That’s not cool either.

“But as a squad and as a team you have to go through these situations. You 
have to take the benefit of being a strong group. You can imagine and believe, 
we always think about how we can strengthen the squad. There’s absolutely no 
issue from the owner side. They do not think: winter – too much money. We only 
think about the right players. Not any player.”
 