
Jürgen Klopp has demanded answers from Fifa on the Liverpool defender Joël 
Matip after he was forced to leave the player out for the1-1 draw with 
Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
.

The Cameroon centre-half retired from international football in 2015 but the 
national team coach Hugo Broos has attempted to call him up for theAfrica Cup 
of Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>.

Matip had made his position clear in the lead-up to the tournament and 
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> were relaxed about 
the situation, despite Cameroon officials continuing to make noises about him 
being selected.

However, although Cameroon finalised their squad for the competition more than 
a week ago,Liverpool were unable to gain clarity from Fifa about Matip’s 
situation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/liverpool-joel-matip-manchester-united-fifa>
.

“Our understanding is Joël is retired from international football and we, the 
club, did everything we had to do to make this clear but until now we could not 
get the response we need to be 100 per cent sure that he can play,” said Klopp.

José Mourinho: Jürgen Klopp thought I was trying to get Firmino sent off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/jose-mourinho-jurgen-klopp-thought-i-was-trying-to-get-firmino-sent-off>
“It’s pretty difficult and pretty frustrating, to be honest. He’s been in 
training for five days and would have been in the squad, 100 per cent, maybe on 
the pitch today, so I don’t think it’s fair.

“But we cannot do more and are still waiting on the decision. We could not 
take the risk.

“But we need to get an answer as quickly as possible because on Wednesday we 
have the next game [an FA Cup third-round replay at Plymouth] and then another 
game and another game. We cannot wait forever.

“It is public now, we have this problem and we are not the only team with this 
problem.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fklopp-happier-than-mourinho-after-manchester-united-and-liverpool-draw-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Klopp%20happier%20than%20Mourinho%20after%20Manchester%20United%20and%20Liverpool%20draw%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fklopp-happier-than-mourinho-after-manchester-united-and-liverpool-draw-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Klopp%20happier%20than%20Mourinho%20after%20Manchester%20United%20and%20Liverpool%20draw%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fklopp-happier-than-mourinho-after-manchester-united-and-liverpool-draw-video&media=>
Klopp happier than Mourinho after Manchester United and Liverpool draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/15/klopp-happier-than-mourinho-after-manchester-united-and-liverpool-draw-video>
West Brom have faced a similar situation with Allan Nyom, who has not played 
in their last two matches because they have not received any clarification from 
Fifa.

Klopp added: “I think Tony Pulis said a few things about it so I don’t think 
that it is fair for the fans, for the clubs, for the team-mates and for 
everything.

“Now we have to wait in this moment and think about the game – and then after 
the game we will try again to get answers.”
 