
Allianz Arena, April 2015, and at the end of their last competitive encounter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/28/bayern-munich-borussia-dortmund-german-cup>
 Jürgen Klopp sprinted past Pep Guardiola to join the celebrations rather than 
offer commiserations or a handshake. It was nothing personal, simply a release 
in a draining final season at Borussia Dortmund and one last shot across the 
bows of Bayern Munich. Klopp’s admiration for Guardiola is genuine, his 
anticipation for their reunion clear and heightened, but what matters most to 
the Liverpool manager is that his team meet Manchester City on New Year’s Eve 
on equal terms. This season’s Premier League has levelled their playing field.

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
Footage of Klopp’s wild, or just characteristic, reaction 
<https://vine.co/v/eWLX573jP9J> to Dortmund’s victory in the 2015 German Cup 
semi-final went viral and encouraged the contrasting image between the two 
coaching heavyweights of the Bundesliga – the besuited Guardiola, king of 
controlled possession, looking on bemused as the counterpressing Klopp rushed 
by in a blur of yellow baseball cap and grey hoodie.

It followed a farcical penalty shootout between their former clubs, featuring 
Philipp Lahm and Xabi Alonso slipping and missing Bayern’s first two penalties 
and Manuel Neuer smacking their last against the crossbar as Dortmund prevailed 
2-0 (they wouldlose the final to Wolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/30/jurgen-klopp-borussia-dortmund-wolfsburg-german-cup-final>
), and there was an acknowledgement of sorts between the coaches when, long 
after the chaos, Klopp patted Guardiola on the back. The shootout brought them 
level on four wins apiece in meetings in Germany.

Their rivalry was intense and started with Klopp’s belief that Mario Götze 
defected to Bayern in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/may/18/mario-gotze-borussia-dortmund-bayern-munich>
 because of the former Barcelona coach. “Götze has gone because he is 
Guardiola’s personal chosen signing and he wants to play with Guardiola, in his 
style,” he remarked. “If it’s anyone’s fault, it’s mine. I can’t make myself 
15cm shorter or start speaking Spanish.” But any animosity was directed at 
Bayern and the financial imbalance that took Götze, followed a year later by 
Robert Lewandowski, to Bavaria, prompting that famous Klopp line about Bayern 
being the Chinese of the business world: “They look at what others are doing 
and copy it, just with more money.” It was not about beating Guardiola then or 
now, insists Klopp. It was, and is, about competing and winning.

Pep Guardiola says he learned from Jürgen Klopp and praises attacking style
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/pep-guardiola-learned-from-jurgen-klopp-praise-attacking>
“We never thought in these categories,” the Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> manager said this week when 
asked about the financial disparities between Bayern and Dortmund. “It was how 
it was and we were used to it. It’s not that we feel that we are now on one 
level because I’m not interested in it. What I am interested in is that this 
team is in a good way and we like how our football is, and we have to prove it 
every few days. That is what we try to do for Saturday.

“It’s really interesting. I know people are excited when they think about it. 
There is nothing to do apart from prepare the party for afterwards while 
everyone watches the television. The good news is that we are involved. It’s 
not City v someone else, it’sLiverpool v Man City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/28/liverpool-v-manchester-city-new-years-eve-lallana-firmino>
. We are some kind of a challenger. We don’t care about being favourite or 
whatever, it feels like we are always challenging in each game and have to 
prove it, and now we have to make the people happy again. It’s possible. That’s 
how it is.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-pep-guardiola-manchester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98836de609f1a5dc03662cef7f78c1da1af777cf%2F20_48_2631_1579%2F2631.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%20finally%20gets%20a%20chance%20to%20face%20Pep%20Guardiola%20on%20level%20playing%20field%20%7C%20Andy%20Hunter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-pep-guardiola-manchester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=J%C3%BCrgen%20Klopp%20finally%20gets%20a%20chance%20to%20face%20Pep%20Guardiola%20on%20level%20playing%20field%20%7C%20Andy%20Hunter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjurgen-klopp-liverpool-pep-guardiola-manchester-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F98836de609f1a5dc03662cef7f78c1da1af777cf%2F20_48_2631_1579%2F2631.jpg>
 Klopp races past Guardiola to celebrate with his players at the end of the 
2015 German Cup semi-final. Photograph: Action Press/REX/Shutterstock 
Finances – one of Klopp’s least favourite subjects and something he regards as 
an unhealthy obsession in the Premier League – remain tilted in Guardiola’s 
favour, with City’s starting lineup in theirlast outing at Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/hull-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 costing more than £100m higher than Liverpool’sagainst Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/liverpool-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
. However, as Klopp is fond of saying, it is what happens on the pitch that 
matters above all else and in that regard he is at an advantage before 
Saturday’s match between second and third in the Premier League. Liverpool are 
nine months further along the line with their manager’s work than City and 
Klopp has overseen 46 games more in English football than his counterpart at 
the Etihad Stadium.

“I don’t know in general if that is an advantage but for the game there is no 
big advantage,” Klopp says. “Chelsea are six points ahead butin their game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 City should have scored a second with [Kevin] De Bruyne. It is possible then 
that the game is closed.

“The next situation is Costa’s equaliser. For most of this game they were much 
the better team. They could have won but they didn’t. They are already really, 
really good but I am more interested in our thing. We are in a very intensive 
moment, in a good moment and we need to keep on going but we have to adapt to 
the different qualities of our opponents, such as Stoke. A few parts may be 
similar, we will see, but in general it is a different game. A lot of things we 
have to do better from the Stoke game and I don’t mean the start. A little bit 
between the lines – Joe Allen turns and goes and made wonderful game the other 
day. De Bruyne can do that and it makes not too much sense for that to happen. 
We already know where we have to improve.”

Manchester City rely on Sergio Agüero to end his jinx at Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/manchester-city-sergio-aguero-jink-liverpool-anfield-pep-guardiola>
Sadio Mané will play his penultimate game for Liverpool before departing for 
the Africa Cup of Nations in Gabon and will be hoping to replicate the impact 
he made on his last appearance against a Guardiola team. The Senegal 
international starred in a 3-0 friendly win for Red Bull Salzburg over Bayern 
in January 2014, scoring one, winning a penalty for the second and creating the 
third – all before half-time – in a performance that first alerted Liverpool to 
the forward’s potential. A repeat at Anfield would be a fine parting gift.

“I remember it was a very good test for us,” Mané says. “We won 3-0 and for us 
to play against a big team like Bayern was a big moment. I was very happy that 
day to help make this kind of game and help my team. Pep was the Bayern coach, 
so maybe he will remember but now it is a different type of game, in a 
different league and it will be tough.

“It will be a very good game because it is two open teams. Maybe we have the 
best strikers, I can’t say, but in our mind it is not about being the best, it 
is about trying to score as many as we can. The most important thing is the 
three points. Of course it would help us make a big step if we won but it is 
not just City, we have to try to do that in every game. I just have to try to 
give my best and make the fans and my team-mates proud.”
 