
Jürgen Klopp has billed Liverpool’s Premier League trip to face arch-rivals 
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> on 
Sunday as a “special” fixture – but insists it does not take on any extra 
significance just because both teams are back battling at the top end of the 
table. A United victory would take José Mourinho’s side within two points of 
Liverpool in fourth but Klopp believes the intensity will be no higher than 
usual in a fixture which always draws the spotlight.

“You could be 10th and they could be first, or they are 15th and we are first 
– it makes no difference to the game,” he said. “It is very important, we know 
about this. It is a special game and we are aware of that: the players know 
more about this fixture, most are experienced enough.“If we can win there it 
would be nice, but there are a lot of games to play and a lot of points which 
you should get, and these are only three of them. Both teams, especially in the 
long term, are in a good shape. We can lose against each team and we can win 
against each team.”

José Mourinho confident United can sustain winning form against Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league>
Klopp will go head to head with José Mourinho, looking to get one up on his 
counterpart after the Portuguese ‘won’ their first meeting, having completely 
nullified the threat of a free-scoring Liverpool side with agoalless draw at 
Anfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/17/liverpool-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 in October.

Now United are on an upward curve the task will be even harder, and Mourinho 
will be no less determined to beat his rival. He was always [the most 
competitive] but I don’t think there are a lot of managers who don’t want to 
win,” Klopp added.

“It is not new and we should not be surprised about this. We have this kind of 
angriness in us also. We go there for a result, no other reason. Last year [in 
the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/mar/17/manchester-united-v-liverpool-europa-league-live>
)] was the first time I’d had the experience to play there and it was a good, 
intensive game.

“I don’t think José or myself, no matter how much we want to win, can make the 
difference. The players have to perform, that’s how it always is. We were ready 
for it [in March] and we will be ready again. In each game you need to have 
this little bit of luck in decisive situations, but that is for both of us.”

José Mourinho says Paul Pogba could be future Manchester United captain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/jose-mourinho-jurgen-klopp-manchester-united-liverpool>
It is in attack where Liverpool have struggled in their last two matches, 
failing to score against League Two sidePlymouth in the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/08/liverpool-v-plymouth-argyle-fa-cup-third-round-live>
 and drawing a blank againstSouthampton in the first leg of their EFL Cup 
semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/southampton-liverpool-efl-cup-match-report>
 in midweek.

Despite that, Klopp stressed that did not mean it was time to look to change 
what had worked so well so far in the season or for players to become concerned.

“It was only one game where we didn’t create a lot of chances - the last one - 
but that is how it is in life,” he said.

“If something doesn’t work you have to think about it. But there is no time 
for looking for excuses when you miss a pass, you have to be ready for the next 
situation.”
 