
Former Essendon AFL coach James Hird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/james-hird> has reportedly been taken to 
hospital after suffering a “major” health scare.


The Herald Sun reported 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/james-hird-taken-to-hospital-with-major-health-scare/news-story/d3510ef3cd113de4b1928e08aaaee9b4>
 Hird was taken by ambulance to Cabrini hospital in Malvern, south of 
Melbourne, but left the hospital on Thursday and continued to receive care 
elsewhere.


A spokeswoman for Cabrini Hospital said she was unable to confirm the report 
or provide any further comment due to patient confidentiality issues.

Hird was one of Essendon’s biggest stars playing 253 games between 1992 and 
2007 and was part of premiership winning teams in 1993 and 2000. He also 
captained the club from 1998 to 2000 and was named coach at the end of 2010.

Hird accepts 'a level' of responsibility for Essendon supplements scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/17/hird-accepts-a-level-of-responsibility-for-essendon-supplements-scandal>
His glittering career took a hit, though, when caught up in the 2012 
supplements scandal that rocked theAFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl>, 
for which he served a 12-month suspension.

Hird has said he now accepts “a level” of responsibility for the supplements 
scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/17/hird-accepts-a-level-of-responsibility-for-essendon-supplements-scandal>
.

In early January, the court of arbitration for sport upheld the World 
Anti-Doping Agency’s appealagainst an AFL tribunal decision to clear 34 players 
of taking the banned substance thymosin-beta 4 while Hird was coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/18/james-hird-defends-34-banned-players-and-says-they-are-innocent-of-doping>
, handing 34 past and present players a 12-month ban.

Hird said he should have done more to prevent the situation that enveloped the 
club, cruelling its performance since 2102 and potentially ending careers.

“It is not just 2016 that it has wiped off [for the players] and potentially 
beyond but it has been 2013, 14 and 15 where they weren’t able to get the 
opportunity to play the football to their ability,” he said.

James Hird defends 34 banned players and says they are innocent of doping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/18/james-hird-defends-34-banned-players-and-says-they-are-innocent-of-doping>
“I have a level of responsibility in that. I should have known more. I should 
have done more when the opportunity came. I feel extremely guilty for that and 
bad for that. I can only apologise for that. I made decisions in real time that 
in hindsight, I think were wrong.”

But Hird said others at Essendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> 
made the situation worse and hinted the AFL had denied the club and the players 
a fair hearing.

“I don’t feel like a victim myself but those 34 players are victims of this 
situation, a situation that, at the first instance, is the responsibility of 
the Essendon football club,” he said.

“The football club and as a part that I had in it, has to put up its hand and 
say we made mistakes... Those mistakes were compounded by people in authority 
and outside the club. When I feel guilt, sadness, devastation for the players, 
I am also upset at the way the procedural fairness or process was enacted to 
deny our players procedural fairness and the football club fairness.”

• AAP contributed to this report
 