
Bestselling thriller writer James Patterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/james-patterson> has cancelled publication 
of his novel The Murder of Stephen King, belatedly deciding that he did not 
want to cause King and his family “any discomfort”.

King has dreamed up his fair share of deranged fans, from Misery’s 
axe-wielding Annie Wilkes who keeps her favourite author writing by chopping 
off his foot, to Morris Bellamy, the villain in his recent thriller Finders 
Keepers, who shoots his idol in the head. Patterson’s novel, which was only 
announced last week for publication in November, promised to feature “all of 
Stephen King’s greatest villains, rolled into one”.

Why Stephen King's It still terrifies 30 years on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/23/why-stephen-kings-it-still-terrifies-30-years-on>
“Stephen King is facing a nightmare. A stalker is re-enacting the horrors from 
his novels. And he won’t stop until he kills the master of suspense himself – 
unless King puts him out of his Misery first,” ran its description, with 
Patterson stating that the novelist “did not participate in the making of this 
novel, nor is he affiliated with it in any way”.

“I hope he likes it,” added Patterson last week, describing himself as a fan 
of the horror novelist - an admiration that does not seem wholly returned. In 
2009, Kingdescribed Patterson as “a terrible writer” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/feb/05/stephenking-fiction>.

But on Thursday, less than two weeks after the novel was announced, Patterson 
announced its cancellation. He added that the decision was taken after the 
publicity that followed the announcement of The Murder of Stephen King, when he 
was alerted to the fact that “fans ofStephen King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking> have disrupted the King 
household in the past”.

“My book is a positive portrayal of a fictional character, and – spoiler alert 
– the main character is not actually murdered,” he said in a statement from his 
publisher. “Nevertheless, I do not want to cause Stephen King or his family any 
discomfort. Out of respect for them, I have decided not to publish The Murder 
of Stephen King.”

The novel, part of Patterson’s BookShots series of short reads and co-authored 
withDerek Nikitas <http://dereknikitas.com/>, will be replaced with Taking the 
Titanic, a story in which two thieves posing as newlyweds board the doomed ship 
to “rob its well-heeled passengers”. “I’m disappointed, yes, but what’s much 
more important to me is we do right by Stephen King,” wrote Nikitas on Twitter.

According to Associated Press 
<http://hosted.ap.org/dynamic/stories/U/US_BOOKS_PATTERSON_KING?SITE=AP>, which 
saw an early edition of The Murder of Stephen King, the novel features a 
detective named Jamie Peterson attempting to save King from the man who is 
trying to murder him.

Patterson told AP last week that King’s remarks dismissing him as a terrible 
writer were “hyperbole”. “I know I’m not a terrible writer. That’s a little 
over the top,” said Patterson, adding that if King wrote a novel called The 
Murder of James Patterson he “would definitely want to read it”.
 