
This would have been a big year for British tennis had just one Murray topped 
the tennis world rankings. Back in January, the odds of both becoming the best 
players in their category on the planet would have been even more laughably 
long.Jamie Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jamie-murray> was the 
brother from Dunblane who had never quite made it; who only three years earlier 
had come close to quitting. Now he ends 2016 as the world’s doubles No 1, on an 
equal footing with his singles champion brother.

We meet at the Lawn Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> 
Association training centre in south-west London. I am braced for the typical 
sport star entourage of officious agents and publicists, so when a tall, 
unexpectedly slight man appears in the lobby all by himself, for a moment I 
don’t even recognise him. The 30-year-old does not look at all like most 
professional sportsmen. There is none of the usual high-definition grooming or 
caramel-glow complexion, and his manner is gently warm and relaxed. If staff 
members didn’t keep stopping at our table to offer their congratulations, you 
would never guess he was a celebrity. Murray chats to each one with respectful 
affection, and a humility that appears to be entirely authentic.

In fact, for a man at the peak of his career, Murray feels not so much 
jubilant as lowkey, even almost flat. He is known as the sunnier-natured of the 
two brothers, and is certainly laid-back and light-hearted, but there is no 
beaming smile, no obvious delight in his world No 1 status, so I am curious to 
know how much actual pleasure he gets from tennis. Would he ever play for the 
sheer fun of it?

“No, I wouldn’t really do it, no. My mindset wouldn’t really allow me to do 
that.” Then what does he enjoy about being a tennis player? He considers the 
question thoughtfully. “I guess, for me, it’s seeing all the preparation and 
everything that’s gone into getting yourself on to the match court and 
competing and winning, and knowing that all that’s paid off.” Being ranked 
first in the world does feel good, he smiles. “But I guess it’s still more just 
the fact that I started playing tennis when I was four years old, and 26 years 
later I got to the top of my discipline. It was worth all the effort, the 
sacrifices, the highs, the lows, you know, all the perseverance. It was all 
worth it, because I got to the top of my sport, and I can say when I’m finished 
playing, ‘I got to No 1 in the world.’”

Even now, though, the satisfaction of winning still cannot equal the pain of 
losing. “The losses, they really hurt, whereas winning is just what you’re 
supposed to do. That’s what’s expected of you. When I’ve lost matches I felt 
worse, far worse, than I have felt the pleasure of winning certain tournaments. 
Which is weird, I guess. I mean, this year I won two grand slams, which was 
amazing and of course I was really happy that both times we won. But I wasn’t 
like jumping for joy.”

I could be playing with you this week, and next week I’m with another guy 
playing against you. That can make it awkward
Jamie Murray Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandy-jamie-murray-davis-cup-tennis-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448963684814%2FKP_629830_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Murray%20brothers%20on%20Davis%20Cup%20victory%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandy-jamie-murray-davis-cup-tennis-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Murray%20brothers%20on%20Davis%20Cup%20victory%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fandy-jamie-murray-davis-cup-tennis-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448963684814%2FKP_629830_crop_640x360.jpg>
Murray brothers on Davis Cup victory – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2015/dec/01/andy-jamie-murray-davis-cup-tennis-video>
Murray’s early promise on the court meant that by 11 he was already training 
full time and “treating it like a job”. His mother,Judy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/judy-murray>, had been a junior champion, 
and devoted herself to driving her two sons south every weekend to compete 
against English players. “When I was growing up I wanted to play against the 
best players in the world in the biggest tournaments on the biggest courts.” By 
15, however, Murray had been overtaken by his younger brother, Andy. “I wasn’t 
really enjoying playing tennis. I wasn’t doing particularly well, and at that 
stage in my life I would have said it’s a very long way away from getting to 
the top of the world. My ranking was awful. Then I started to play doubles, and 
suddenly I was having more success. It wasn’t really a decision; singles wasn’t 
an option, and doubles was going to give me a chance to be able to make a 
career from tennis.”

Murray won the Wimbledon mixed doubles title in 2007, but struggled to 
establish himself as a consistent contender, and was eclipsed in the public 
mind by his brother’s success. By 2013, he was demoralised, having worked 
through 14 different partners the previous season for no reward to speak of, 
and seriously considered giving up. But then he formed a successful partnership 
with the Australian John Peers, which went on to reach two grand slam finals. 
Ranked second in the world last year, he then found a new partner in the 
Brazilian Bruno Soares, and was duly rewarded with the No 1 ranking.

I have always been fascinated by the personal dynamics of a doubles 
partnership. “Well, it’s pretty intense, because you’re literally with the 
person all the time. I would say that it is like a marriage. From the moment 
you wake up, you’re with that person, so if you don’t get on then when you get 
on the court and you’re in stressful situations, you’re not able to communicate 
well with your partner, and it’s not going to bode well for winning the match.”

He is carefully vague about why his partnership with Peers ended last year, 
but reportedly blamed him for some defeats. “I kind of decided myself that I 
wanted to find someone else. Well, we weren’t getting on that well and it was 
just, kind of, like, I think we both fancied something a bit fresh, just new 
energies, that sort of stuff.” How did they reach an agreement to split? “I 
just emailed him, basically.” He literally sent him a Dear John? “Um, yes. Some 
people like to do it face-to-face, but nowadays people can text, send a 
WhatsApp message. ‘It’s not me it’s you’, that sort of thing. There’s so many 
ways to cop out of it now, aren’t there?”

Doubles tennis is starting to sound like Tinder. “Absolutely, yes, and it’s a 
small dating pool as well.” All the players on the circuit are constantly 
eyeing each other up as potential future partners, “and of course it’s not like 
if we were together and we split up in a normal relationship, we would just go 
our separate ways. But I could be playing with you this week, and next week I’m 
playing with another guy and we’re playing against you. There’s no getting away 
from it, so that can kind of make it awkward.”

I think that people now admire Andy's perseverance, his commitment and the 
effort that he’s made to get to where he is
Jamie Murray  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjamie-murray-ill-say-it-andy-is-not-the-easist-person-to-instantly-warm-to%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec9d300e2399f025d65f8c9797895ad79d6a02d2%2F0_0_5792_8131%2F5792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jamie%20Murray%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ll%20say%20it%20%E2%80%93%20Andy%20is%20not%20the%20easiest%20guy%20to%20instantly%20warm%20to%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjamie-murray-ill-say-it-andy-is-not-the-easist-person-to-instantly-warm-to%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jamie%20Murray%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ll%20say%20it%20%E2%80%93%20Andy%20is%20not%20the%20easiest%20guy%20to%20instantly%20warm%20to%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fjamie-murray-ill-say-it-andy-is-not-the-easist-person-to-instantly-warm-to%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec9d300e2399f025d65f8c9797895ad79d6a02d2%2F0_0_5792_8131%2F5792.jpg>
 New balls: Jamie Murray, now world doubles No 1. Photograph: David Levene for 
the Guardian 
I can’t help thinking Murray is more temperamentally suited to doubles than 
his famously volatile, short-tempered brother. Murray radiates easygoing good 
nature, but even so I feel awkward to ask about the brother whose success has 
always overshadowed his career. I assume he must be fed up with questions about 
Andy, but in fact the only faintly defensive flash concerns his mother, and 
comes when I ask what it was like to grow up in a family completely obsessed 
with one sport. “My mum never pushed us to play tennis, so if we didn’t want to 
play tennis, we didn’t have to play tennis,” he says quickly. On the subject of 
his brother, he is perfectly forthcoming.

“A lot of people, they only see him on the tennis courts, so they see him on 
TV and, you know he’s … I’ll say it as well, he’s not necessarily the easiest 
guy to instantly warm to and support, because you see him shouting and 
screaming all the time. He never looks happy or anything like that, so I 
understand that, and I get that, but I think that people now admire his 
perseverance, his commitment and the effort that he’s made to get to where he 
is.”

Does Murray put the public antipathy towards his brother down to tensions 
between England and Scotland? “I think that whole ‘England-losing-at-football’ 
comment certainly put him on the back foot straight away with the country 
really, because so many people were upset.” (In 2006, a reporter asked which 
team he would be supporting in the World Cup and Murray joked: “Anyone but 
England, ha ha!”) “It was a joke, and the guy who wrote about it was an idiot. 
Andy got stitched up from a really young age, and the backlash from that was 
ridiculous, and it basically took him to, you know, cry after the final at 
Wimbledon for people to kind of like forgive him. Not that he needed forgiving 
for what he said, because it was a joke. But it took that moment nearly 10 
years later for people to just come around to him.” Murray confirms his support 
for Scottish independence with such obvious caution that I think he must be 
worried about attracting the same sort of hostility.

If there is any jealousy between the brothers, I detect no hint of it. 
Murray’s career winnings total less than $3m (£2.4m), compared to his brother’s 
$56m (£45m), and he can’t compete for the same lucrative sponsorship deals. He 
thinks that would change if doubles tennis were better promoted on TV, but 
seems quite philosophical about it. I wonder whether their contrasting success 
is in part down to personality differences; would he have been a better singles 
player if driven by the same sort of demons we see tormenting his brother on 
court? “It’s difficult to say. I think everyone’s different. I mean, someone 
like Federer, for example, he is unbelievably driven. He loves tennis. He loves 
what he does and you feel like he has a happy, balanced life, but he’s still 
incredibly successful. I think it’s just everyone’s different and everyone 
functions differently.”

This sort of cautious diplomacy seems to come so easily to Murray that it’s a 
surprise when a question about drug testing elicits a more forthright response. 
Earlier this year,Maria Sharapova  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/04/maria-sharapova-doping-ban-reduced-french-open-return>
was banned for using a substance she claimed not to have known was prohibited, 
so doesn’t he worry that he could inadvertently contravene the rules? “No, I 
don’t. It’s never worried me, no. I think at the end of the day it’s your 
responsibility. I mean, like, the Sharapova stuff, it was a bit of a mess. If 
you’re taking medication and stuff then you’ve got to be aware of what’s 
allowed and what’s not. I mean there’s a website you just type in the thing and 
it tells you if it’s prohibited or not, so it’s a fairly basic process.” It 
isn’t easy to make a genuine mistake? “No, I don’t think it is. You’d have to 
do something stupid, I think, to do that.”

The common mistake sport fans like me often make is to imagine that playing 
the game we love for a living must be the best job in the world. In fact, if 
anything, a sporting talent looks more like a curse than a gift. Even being No 
1 in the world can’t deliver unadulterated joy – but to walk away from the 
court isn’t easy either.

“All the ex-players I’ve spoken to always say: ‘Play as long as you can 
because nothing will compare to it.’ Most players, when they retire, they 
think: ‘I could’ve done things differently. I could’ve worked a bit harder. I 
could have put more time in on my fitness or I could have worked harder to get 
my serve better. Did I really get everything out of my career?’ I don’t think 
many people can probably say that they did.”

Can he? He laughs and shakes his head. “Not yet. If I was to stop now, if I 
couldn’t play again, I’d be like: ‘No, I didn’t get the most out of it.’”
 