
Japan’s defence ministry has requested a record budget to counter growing 
Chinese military activity around a group of disputed islands in the EastChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea.


The ministry is seeking 5.17 trillion yen (£38bn) for the year beginning in 
April 2017. That marks an increase of 2.3% from last year, and is the fifth 
annual increase since Japan’s prime minister,Shinzo Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe>, came to power in late 2012 
vowing to bolster the military to address a surge in Chinese naval activity and
North Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea>’s nuclear weapons 
programme.

The latest budget request marks a continuation in the shift in focus away from 
Japan’s northernmaritime border with Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/09/russia-build-southern-kuril-islands-seized-moscow-tokyo-abe>
 – where cold war Soviet forces once posed a threat – to an 870-mile chain of 
southernoutlying islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/18/japan-steps-up-military-presence-east-china-sea>
 stretching from the Japanese mainland towards Taiwan.

Much of the hardware on the defence ministry’s shopping list is designed to 
counter potential threats to Japanese territory in the East China Sea, 
including the disputedSenkaku islands <http://senkaku%20islands/>, which are 
also claimed by Beijing.

At the heart of the strategy is the development of a mobile amphibious force – 
modelled on the US marine corps – that would be able to respond quickly to an 
attempt to invade the Senkakus, which China refers to as Diaoyu.

In the single biggest outlay, the ministry wants more than 100bn yen to 
upgrade Japan’s Patriot Advanced Capability (PAC-3) missiles, seen as the last 
line of defence against anuclear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/a-grave-threat-why-north-koreas-claimed-nuclear-test-is-a-cause-for-concern>
 or conventional attack by North Korea.

The sense of urgency in Tokyo over missile defence is growing amid evidence 
that North Korea ismaking progress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/03/north-korea-launches-ballistic-missile-says-south>
 in its attempts to build reliable ballistic missiles capable of reaching 
Japan, including thoselaunched from submarines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/north-korea-tests-submarine-launched-ballistic-missile>
.

The improvements will dramatically enhance the PAC-3’s range and its ability 
to target incoming missiles.

The Senkakus are surrounded by rich fishing grounds and potentially huge oil 
and gas deposits. The uninhabited islets are administered byJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, but Chinese vessels have stepped up 
incursions into waters near the territories in recent months.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fjapan-defence-ministry-record-budget-counter-chinese-north-korea-nuclear-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94f00abcb853d89834b78a8bc7448022dbc2955e%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Japan%20defence%20ministry%20seeks%20record%20budget%20to%20counter%20Chinese%20threat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fjapan-defence-ministry-record-budget-counter-chinese-north-korea-nuclear-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Japan%20defence%20ministry%20seeks%20record%20budget%20to%20counter%20Chinese%20threat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fjapan-defence-ministry-record-budget-counter-chinese-north-korea-nuclear-threat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94f00abcb853d89834b78a8bc7448022dbc2955e%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Japanese ground self-defence troops during live-fire training. Photograph: 
Aflo/Barcroft 
To improve Japan’s ability to patrol the islands, ministry officials want to 
spend 95bn yen on six Lockheed Martin F-35 stealth fighters, as well as more 
than 90bn yen on four Bell-Boeing V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft and six 
Boeing Chinook twin-rotor helicopters.

Incursions by Chinese planes into Japanese airspace near the Senkakus were met 
with a record number of scrambles by Japanese fighter planes between April and 
June, while Tokyo continued to resist Beijing’s requests for talks on the 
dispute.

This month, the Japanese foreign minister, Fumio Kishida, summoned China’s 
ambassador in Tokyo, Cheng Yonghua, to protest against Chinese maritime 
activity in the area, saying it had contributed to a “marked deterioration” in 
Sino-Japanese ties.

Last week, however, Kishida and his Chinese counterpart, Wang Yi, agreed it 
was important to establish lines of communication to avoid accidents near the 
Senkakus that could quickly escalate into a conflict.

“We reached a common recognition that we have to control friction at sea 
firmly through the efforts of both countries,” Wang told reporters during a 
trilateral summit in Tokyo that also included South Korea’s foreign minister.

As a prominent member of a group of conservative politicians who believe the 
postwar constraints imposed on Japan’s military are unfair and out of date, Abe 
wants the country’s self-defence forces to play a bigger international role 
that includes possible involvement in overseas conflicts.

Last summer, his governing coalition pushed through controversial security 
legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/17/japan-to-pass-security-bills-despite-protests>
 thatreinterpreted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/30/japan-pm-overturn-pacifist-defence-policy-shinzo-abe>
 Japan’s war-renouncing constitution to allow the armed forces to exercise its 
right to collective self-defence – or coming to the aid of an ally – for the 
first time since the end of the second world war.

Despite the broader scope afforded Japanese troops by the new laws, 
speculation is mounting that Abe, whosecoalition dominates both houses of 
parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/11/japan-could-change-pacifist-constitution-after-shinzo-abe-victory>
, will attempt to ditch article 9 of the US-authored constitution, which 
restricts Japan’s military to a purely defensive role.
 