
Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has warned China that ties are 
“deteriorating markedly” over disputed East China Sea islets, as China’s envoy 
in Tokyo reiterated Beijing’s stance that the specks of land were its territory 
and called for talks to resolve the row.

Tensions between Asia’s two largest economies have risen since Japan saw an 
increasing number of Chinese coastguard and other government ships sailing near 
the disputed islets – called Senkaku in Japan and Diaoyu inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> – over the past few days.

 Fumio Kishida, Japan’s foreign minister, called in the Chinese ambassador, 
Cheng Yonghua, for the second time since Friday and told him that China was 
trying to change the status quo unilaterally, a Japanese foreign ministry 
statement said. It also said Kishida told Cheng that the environment 
surrounding Sino-Japanese ties was deteriorating markedly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fjapan-warns-china-of-deteriorating-relations-over-senkaku-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef9f6774b0481594b921750fb50a43704d1a97b0%2F0_3_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Japan%20warns%20China%20of%20deteriorating%20relations%20over%20Senkaku%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fjapan-warns-china-of-deteriorating-relations-over-senkaku-islands%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Japan%20warns%20China%20of%20deteriorating%20relations%20over%20Senkaku%20Islands&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fjapan-warns-china-of-deteriorating-relations-over-senkaku-islands%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef9f6774b0481594b921750fb50a43704d1a97b0%2F0_3_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A file photo from 2011 shows a Japanese surveillance plane flying by the 
islands. Photograph: AP 
Japan signs off biggest ever defence budget as Senkaku tensions rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/24/japan-approves-defence-budget-china-senkaku>
Cheng said after the meeting that he told Kishida the islands were an integral 
part of China’s territory and that the dispute should be resolved through 
diplomacy and dialogue.

“I told him that … it is natural that Chinese ships conduct activity in the 
waters in question,” he told reporters. “I also told him both countries need to 
work on dialogue through diplomatic channels so as not to make things more 
complicated and escalated.”

Dozens of Chinese vessels were spotted near the islands at the weekend. The 
flurry of Chinese incursions into the waters follows a period of sustained 
pressure on China about its activities in the South China Sea. The US, its 
south-east Asian allies and Japan have questioned Chinese land reclamation on 
contested islands in the South China Sea, particularly since an international 
court rejected China’s historic claims to most of that sea last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/jul/12/south-china-sea-dispute-what-you-need-to-know-about-the-hague-court-ruling>
.

 China has refused to recognise the court ruling on a case brought by the 
Philippines. Japan called on China to adhere to it, saying it was binding but 
Beijing warned Japan not to interfere.

Ties between China and Japan, the world’s second and third largest economies, 
have been plagued by the territorial row, the legacy of Japan’s wartime 
occupation of parts of China and regional rivalry.
 