
Victoria’s youth affairs minister, Jenny Mikakos, has denied she has lost 
control of the youth justice system, saying ongoing riots by detainees are not 
unique to the state and are due to an increasingly violent cohort of offenders.

Her comments were supported by the director of secure services, Ian Lanyon, 
who said the drug ice was contributing significantly to an increase in youth 
violence.

Police were called to the Malmsbury youth justice centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/12/police-called-to-quell-alleged-riot-at-victorian-youth-detention-centre>
, 100km north of Melbourne, on Thursday afternoon after six detainees refused 
to comply with corrections staff orders to move into another unit and instead 
began rioting.

It was the second clash in the space of a few days, with riot police called in 
on Sunday to controlunrest at the Parkville youth justice facility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/08/police-quell-riot-at-melbourne-youth-detention-centre>
, about 6km north of Melbourne.

Police called to quell alleged riot at Victorian youth detention centre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/12/police-called-to-quell-alleged-riot-at-victorian-youth-detention-centre>
It follows ongoing riots every few weeks at the facilities, causing extensive 
damage and prompting the state government to transfer some detainees to a unit 
within the Barwon adult prison that has been reclassified as a youth facility.

Mikakos told reporters on Friday morning that violent riots in youth detention 
were not confined toVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria>.

“If you look to what happened in Perth three years ago, an entire youth 
justice facility was trashed,” she said. “The clients were moved to an adult 
prison in response, a decision upheld by the supreme court.

“In recent weeks, including on the weekend, we had an incident in Sydney. 
We’ve had incidents right around the country because the type of offenders 
we’ve seen has been changing in recent years.

“We’ve got far more violent offending going on. We’re seeing it in the 
community and we’re seeing it in our youth justice facilities as well.”

An increased investment in police recruitment meant more young violent 
offenders were being charged and detained, and shortages in youth justice beds 
was exacerbating the issue.

Lanyon told reporters that in part the rioting was also occurring owing to 
ongoing media coverage. But the bigger issue was the changing nature of 
offending, he said.

“I’m talking to my colleagues around the country to understand what’s really 
driving some of this behaviour,” he said. “The dynamics have changed within 
this offending cohort.

“We’re seeing much more violent offending playing out. The drug ice has 
certainly had a significant impact in terms of some of the behaviours that we 
are seeing, and these are quite extraordinary behaviours.”

Those involved in Thurday’s riot armed themsleves with parts of the unit they 
had destroyed, Lanyon said. They had a history of abusing drugs and alcohol but 
he said he did not know if drugs were a factor in their behaviour.


‘Orchestrated violence’: workers fed up with riots at youth justice centres
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/24/orchestrated-violence-workers-fed-up-with-riots-at-youth-justice-centres>
He also emphasised that there were no drugs in the centre. “What we are seeing 
is this drug ice is really insidious, it stays within young people’s systems 
for some time,” he said. “It also has an ongoing and enduring effect on motor 
function.”

Mikakos rejected calls from the state opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/victorian-minister-refuses-to-quit-over-riots-in-youth-detention-centres>
 for her to resign over the issue, saying she was “not interested in the 
Liberal party has to say”. “They are yet to suggest a single idea about how 
these challenges can be addressed,” she said.

The riots and youth facilities were being reviewed, she said, and behaviour 
management training was also taking place. Fortification works to the Parkville 
youth justice facility were under way, including steel being placed into the 
ceilings to prevent detainees from entering them.

Drawing up a business case for a new youth justice facility had also been 
expedited, Mikakos said.

She added that it was usually those on remand involved in the rioting and she 
was in discussions with the children’s court about how its processes could be 
sped up.

“The youth justice framework in this state has not been updated for 16 years,” 
Mikakos said. “So we are looking at a whole raft of measures. Everything is 
being looked at … We are looking at the entire system – every part of it.”
 