
Tristram Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt>, the former 
shadow education secretary, has called on Jeremy Corbyn to pull out of a 
Christmas fundraising event organised by the “disreputable” Stop the War 
coalition.

Hunt called on the Labour leader  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/04/sun-shines-on-jeremy-corbyn-once-more-after-byelection-victory>
not to attend the event in light of its decision to picket the party’s 
headquarters last week and the “ugly comments” it has made about the shadow 
foreign secretary, Hilary Benn.

Hunt told the Andrew Marr Show on BBC1 on Sunday: “I don’t think that he 
should go there. Stop the War coalition picketed the Labour party headquarters 
when we were trying to run a phone-bank for the Oldham byelection, so they were 
preventing the election of aLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>
 member of parliament.

“We have also seen some pretty ugly comments from them about Hilary Benn and 
the fact that Hilary Benn should be sacked. And also their comments about 
Islamic State and about how the French almost had it coming to them. They are a 
really disreputable organisation. I would hope Jeremy would step back and not 
go to their fundraiser.”

Corbyn faced questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/05/labour-corbyn-critics-fear-shadow-cabinet-revenge-reshuffle>
 at a recent meeting of the parliamentary Labour party over his plans to attend 
the Christmas fundraiser for the group he chaired until he was elected Labour 
leader.

Steve Doughty, a shadow foreign office minister, questioned whether it was 
appropriate for Corbyn to attend a fundraising event for an organisation that 
responded to theParis attacks <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks> 
by saying that France was reaping the whirlwind of a decade of wars.

Corbyn said that a blogpost under the headline had been withdrawn by the 
group. But there was anger last week when the Stop the War coalition organised 
a demonstration ahead of the Oldham West and Royton byelection and forced the 
party to postpone a phone-bank campaign.







 