
David Moyes <https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-moyes> has branded 
Jeremain Lens “disgracefully disrespectful” after the Sunderland winger, on a 
season’s loan at Fenerbahce, was quoted as saying he hoped his parent club 
would get relegated.

The Holland international, previously with PSV Eindhoven and Dynamo Kyiv, was 
quoted in the Turkish media suggesting thatSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> dropping into the 
Championship might help facilitate his ambition of a permanent move to the 
Istanbul club.

Sunderland v Stoke City: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/sunderland-stoke-city-match-preview>
Moyes, who sanctioned Lens’s loan in August, was not impressed. “It’s 
disgracefully disrespectful to the club which holds his registration,” the 
Sunderland manager said. “You hate to think of anyone connected to this club 
saying that.

“A lot of team-mates here who he played with are fighting every week with a 
small squad to try to keep us in the Premier League. It’s a disgrace to say 
that about your parent club.”

Lens was signed for Sunderland by Dick Advocaat – now his coach at Fenerbahce 
– in July 2015 for a fee reported as around £8m but which was more than £13m. 
After falling out with Sam Allardyce, Advocaat’s successor, he found himself 
reduced to a bit-part role but has shone in Turkey.

Not that Moyes, who sought Allardyce’s counsel, was ever exactly dazzled by 
Lens. “Maybe when he left people thought: ‘What are you doing getting rid of 
him?’” said the manager,whose side are at home against Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/sunderland-stoke-city-match-preview>
 on Saturday. “But I don’t know if anyone would want him back at the club now. 
I think it would be very hard for that to happen.

“We’d paid around £13m for him, I knew his reputation as a player, we were 
short of bodies and we hadn’t got a lot of quality so I did think was it right 
to move him on. But there were just some things I saw with him that I wasn’t 
sure about.

“I wanted to give him an opportunity but I didn’t feel as if I saw enough from 
him – and he wanted to go and work with Dick again and Fenerbahce were offering 
to pay all of his wages.

“I only had a few weeks with him in the summer so I was going mostly on what 
I’d been told by other people. I took advice from our coaches and from Sam 
[Allardyce] as well. They told me he didn’t play much last season.”

Wherever Lens ends up Sunderland accept that they will not recoup a figure 
anywhere near £13m and this, all too typical, transfer market failing has been 
highlighted by a Uefa analysis which shows Sunderland recorded the 11th biggest 
net debt in Europe during the past financial year.

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/13/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
Uefa calculated the club were £181m in debt – a figure topped by only two 
other English clubs: Manchester United and Queens Park Rangers. The statistics 
reveal that of the past 46 players signed by Sunderland, only three – Darren 
Bent, Simon Mignolet and James McClean – were sold for a profit.

It has left Moyes, who has rejected a £7m bid from Crystal Palace for his 
left‑back Patrick van Aanholt and is an advocate of condensing the January 
transfer window into a 10-day period, with limited room for manoeuvre this 
month.

“I wasn’t aware how poor Sunderland’s financial position was when I took the 
job,” he said.

“You don’t want a club that has got that much debt because it means it’s going 
to make it very difficult. It’s important that Sunderland don’t spend badly now 
– there has probably been too much of that in the past.”
 