
Jill Stein <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jill-stein>, the Green party’s 
presidential candidate, is preparing to request recounts of the election result 
in several key battleground states.


Stein launched an online fundraising page 
<https://jillstein.nationbuilder.com/recount> seeking donations toward a 
multimillion-dollar fund she said was needed to request reviews of the results 
in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin.

The drive has already raised more than $4.5m, which the campaign said would 
enable it tofile for recounts in Wisconsin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/jill-stein-election-recount-clinton-trump-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin>
 on Friday and Pennsylvania on Monday.


Jill Stein to formally file for Wisconsin recount as fundraising effort nears 
$5m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/jill-stein-election-recount-clinton-trump-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin>
The fundraising page said it expected to need around $6m-7m to challenge the 
results in all three states.

Stein said she was acting due to “compelling evidence of voting anomalies” and 
that data analysis had indicated “significant discrepancies in vote totals” 
that were released by state authorities.


“These concerns need to be investigated before the 2016 presidential election 
is certified,” she said in a statement. “We deserve elections we can trust.”

Stein’s move came amid growing calls for recounts or audits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/hillary-clinton-election-vote-recount-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin>
 of the election results by groups of academics and activists concerned that 
foreign hackers may have interfered with election systems. The concerned groups 
have been urging Hillary Clinton, the defeated Democratic nominee, to join 
their cause.


Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> won unexpected 
and narrow victories against Clinton in Pennsylvania and Wisconsin earlier this 
month and may yet win Michigan, where a final result has not yet been declared.

Vote margins in Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-25T12:35:47/embed.html>
Stein and her campaign made clear they were acting because they wanted to 
ensure the election results were authentic, rather than because they thought 
she had actually won any of the contests. Several states allow any candidate 
who was on the ballot to request a recount.


Friday is the deadline for requesting a recount in Wisconsin, where Trump’s 
winning margin stands at 0.7%. InPennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania>, where his margin is 1.2%, 
the deadline falls on Monday. In Michigan, where the Trump lead is currently 
just 0.3%, the deadline is Wednesday 30 November.

The Guardian previously disclosed that a loose coalition of academics and 
activists concerned about the election’s security is preparing to deliver a 
report detailing its concerns to congressional committee chairs and federal 
authorities early next week, according to two people involved.

“I’m interested in verifying the vote,” said Dr Barbara Simons, an adviser to 
the US election assistance commission and expert on electronic voting. “We need 
to have post-election ballot audits.” Simons is understood to have contributed 
analysis to the effort but declined to characterise the precise nature of her 
involvement.

A second group of analysts, led by the National Voting Rights Institute 
founder John Bonifaz and Professor Alex Halderman, the director of the 
University of Michigan’s center for computer security and society, is also 
taking part in the push for a review.


In a blogpost 
<https://medium.com/@jhalderm/want-to-know-if-the-election-was-hacked-look-at-the-ballots-c61a6113b0ba#.r70sjdi3x>
 on Wednesday, Halderman said paper ballots and voting equipment should be 
examined in Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania. “Unfortunately, nobody is 
ever going to examine that evidence unless candidates in those states act now, 
in the next several days, to petition for recounts,” he said.

Clinton’s defeat to Donald Trump followed the release by US intelligence 
agencies of public assessments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
 that Russian hackers were behind intrusions into regional electoral computer 
systems and the theft of emails from Democratic officials before the election.

Curiosity about Wisconsin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/wisconsin> has 
centred on apparently disproportionate wins that were racked up by Trump in 
counties using electronic voting compared with those that used only paper 
ballots.

Use of the voting machines that are in operation in some Wisconsin counties 
has been banned in other states, including California, after security analysts 
repeatedly showed how easily they could be hacked into.

However, Nate Silver, the polling expert and founder of FiveThirtyEight, cast 
doubt <https://twitter.com/NateSilver538/status/801221907609579520> over the 
theory, stating that the difference disappeared after race and education 
levels, which most closely tracked voting shifts nationwide, were controlled 
for.

Silver and several other election analysts have dismissed suggestions that the 
swing-state vote counts give cause for concern about the integrity of the 
results.

Still, dozens of professors specialising in cybersecurity, defense and 
elections have in the past two days signed an open letter to congressional 
leaders 
<https://docs.google.com/a/guardian.co.uk/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdwQa-5YTdMJP4U1mqRLihr1wG4Kz8Nw58lTGFabrcZprUkYw/viewform?c=0&w=1>
 stating that they are “deeply troubled” by previous reports of foreign 
interference, and requesting swift action by lawmakers.

“Our country needs a thorough, public congressional investigation into the 
role that foreign powers played in the months leading up to November,” the 
academics said in their letter, while noting they did not mean to “question the 
outcome” of the election itself.

Senior legislators including Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and 
Congressman Elijah Cummings of Maryland have already called for deeper 
inquiries into the full extent of Russia’s interference with the election 
campaign.

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
Wednesday’s announcement by Stein, who had previously been hesitant to get 
involved, also shields Democratic operatives and people who worked on Clinton’s 
bid for the White House from needing to overtly challenge the election.

Some senior Democrats are known to be reluctant to suggest there were 
irregularities in the result because Clinton and her team criticised Trump so 
sharply during the campaign for claiming that the election would be “rigged” 
against him.

But others have spoken publicly, including the sister of Huma Abedin, 
Clinton’s closest aide. “A shift of just 55,000 Trump votes to Hillary in PA, 
MI & WI is all that is needed to win,” Heba Abedinsaid on Facebook 
<https://twitter.com/yashar/status/801177640291823616>, urging people to call 
the US justice department to request an audit.

Alexandra Chalupa, a former Democratic National Committee consultant who 
during the campaign investigatedlinks between Moscow and Trump’s then campaign 
manager Paul Manafort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/16/donald-trump-campaign-paul-manafort-ukraine-yanukovich>
, is also participating in the attempt to secure recounts or audits.

“The person who received the most votes free from interference or tampering 
needs to be in the White House,” said Chalupa. “It may well beDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, but further due diligence is 
required to ensure that American democracy is not threatened.”

In a joint statement issued last month 
<https://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/press-releases/215-press-releases-2016/1423-joint-dhs-odni-election-security-statement>
, the office of the director of national intelligence and the Department for 
Homeland Security said they were “confident” that the theft of emails from the 
DNC and from Clinton’s campaign chair, John Podesta,which were published by 
WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/wikileaks-emails-hillary-clinton-campaign-john-podesta>
, was directed by the Russian government.

“Some states have also recently seen scanning and probing of their 
election-related systems, which in most cases originated from servers operated 
by a Russian company,” the statement went on. “However, we are not now in a 
position to attribute this activity to the Russian government.”
 