
Most people I know think that I’m crazy – but anybody who actually knew Billy 
Thorpe didn’t think that.

When I was a young kid growing up in Adelaide he was a big pop star – a 
well-dressed, nice young guy seen on television every week. Mums liked him. He 
was one of the biggest stars in the country and he moved to Australia from 
Britain just like I did. Sitting there watching him sing on the telly, I 
wondered what it would feel like to be that lucky. But back then it seemed luck 
was never on my side. I was just dreaming.

The next time I saw him he had changed. In just a couple of years he had 
thrown away the nice suits, grown his hair and turned into the loudest and 
hardest rocking singer in the country. This time I knew it had nothing to do 
with luck; he had taken life by the throat and was squeezing everything he 
could out of it. This was what I wanted to do. Fuck luck, I was going to shape 
my own destiny just like Billy.

'A rare privilege': artist Ben Quilty's heartfelt ode to Cold Chisel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/06/a-rare-privilege-artist-ben-quiltys-heartfelt-ode-to-cold-chisel>
I used to sneak into the Octagon, the local dance hall in Elizabeth, and watch 
Billy tear the paint off the walls. Girls would be screaming and fainting every 
time he moved his leg. Every bloke in the place almost put their necks out as 
they tried to copy the way he moved when he played guitar. Billy was The King.

In 1972, I climbed out of my bedroom window and ran away from home with my 
older sister and her friends, to go to the infamous Sunbury rock festival. I 
lay for eight hours in the back of a station wagon on top of their camping 
gear, breathing in the smoke that billowed from each of them as they passed 
around joint after joint. They talked about Billy Thorpe and how great it was 
going to be to see him live at a fucking rock festival. I was high on life. 
They were just high.

To cut a long story short, I got to the festival, was given a handful of pills 
and ended up in a hospital tent for two days. Eventually I woke up and walked 
back to the place where I had left my sister. She hadn’t even noticed I was 
gone. I sat down and drew a deep breath just as Billy walked on stage and 
screamed out the opening line to Be-Bop-A-Lula. At that point, it was the best 
day of my life.

When he finished we jumped in the car and drove all the way back to Adelaide. 
It was like a dream. But dreams must end and I had go back home. Back to my 
life as a garden variety juvenile delinquent. Billy was the ultimate delinquent 
and I had a lot to do if I was going to be like him.

I tried to see every show that Billy did when he came through Adelaide. As a 
16-year-old I even managed to get into a couple of his gigs at the wildest pub 
in Australia, the Largs Pier Hotel. There was a bouncer on the door they called 
“The Beast”, who could tell I was a music fan, and he let me in. He was too 
busy throwing big ugly tattooed blokes through plate glass windows to bother 
about some kid. I would go right to the front of the stage and watch Billy’s 
every move. Watching and learning.

I noticed at one of these gigs that there seemed to be too many amplifiers for 
the room. If they were all working there would have been no back wall left on 
the pub, so I asked one of Billy’s roadies about it. He told me that there were 
one or two amps that Billy needed and the rest were just there for show. It was 
smoke and mirrors to keep the punters guessing.

Cold Chisel: writing Australia's unofficial national anthems since 1973
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/06/cold-chisel-writing-australias-unofficial-national-anthems-since-1973>
I’ve seen it a million times since but Billy was the first. He was a 
trailblazer. He kicked the door down so kids like me could charge on through 
and make the music we liked.

This was a man who got arrested for swearing at a gig and responded by writing 
a song called You Can’t Go Around Saying Fuck On Stage Anymore. Of course he 
then sang it at every gig and got himself arrested in righteous towns all over 
the country. Kids loved him and parents feared him.

One night my mates and I ended up in a hotel with the Billy and the Aztecs 
after a show. We sat as Billy held court, telling and told the room full of 
young musos from the support band about how to make real music, “not pop shit”. 
At the same time he was rolling the biggest joints I had ever seen. Eventually 
the guys from Cold Chisel and I floated down the stairs and rethought how we 
would take on the world.

In the late 70s Billy moved to the States and, I presume, busted a few 
American eardrums and upset the local law enforcement community. In his 
absence, bands like Cold Chisel and the Oils and AC/DC came through the ranks, 
playing the now world famous pub rock scene he had helped to create.

Eventually Billy moved back to Australia, started a studio and wrote a few 
top-selling books. I remember him sitting in my house around the time I started 
trying to write my book. He sat and scribbled on my papers, and ripped pieces 
out and told me how he thought I should be writing. I listened intently. By 
this time, no one told me what to do. Except Billy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fjimmy-barnes-i-wouldnt-be-where-i-am-if-it-werent-for-billy-thorpe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88b29bb70bf90adf20845515c02606111cc29d94%2F0_0_640_424%2F640.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jimmy%20Barnes%3A%20I%20wouldn't%20be%20where%20I%20am%20if%20it%20weren't%20for%20Billy%20Thorpe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fjimmy-barnes-i-wouldnt-be-where-i-am-if-it-werent-for-billy-thorpe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jimmy%20Barnes%3A%20I%20wouldn%27t%20be%20where%20I%20am%20if%20it%20weren%27t%20for%20Billy%20Thorpe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fjimmy-barnes-i-wouldnt-be-where-i-am-if-it-werent-for-billy-thorpe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88b29bb70bf90adf20845515c02606111cc29d94%2F0_0_640_424%2F640.png>
 Billy Thorpe, Jimmy Barnes and Bryan Brown at an Australia Day barbecue at 
Brown’s house. Photograph: Lynn Thorpe 
On Australia Day <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australia-day> 
1998, Bryan Brown invited us to his place for a barbecue. What could be more 
Australian than that? I arrived and before I could get in the door Bryan 
grabbed me and said, “I’d love you to sing a song to celebrate this great day – 
Australia bloody day”.

“Of course,” I said. What could be more Australian than singing at Bryan’s 
barbecue on Australia day?


Then he told me he wanted me to sing Waltzing Matilda. I thought “perfect” but 
I wasn’t sure I knew all the words.


Jimmy Barnes denounces anti-Islamic protesters who used his songs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/22/jimmy-barnes-denounces-anti-islamic-protesters-who-used-his-songs>
“I’ve written the fuckin’ things out for you,” he said, and he stuffed a 
couple of bits of paper into my hand. Then he says, “I want you to sing it with 
fuckin’ Thorpie.”

I walked in the door and there was Billy grinning from ear to ear, sitting 
ready with Bryan’s acoustic guitar. He said, “Come on Jimmy. We can’t wait all 
fuckin’ day, we’ve got sausages to burn.”


It was the most Australian day of my life.


In February 2007, I was taken to hospital for heart surgery. Later that week, 
around the same time that I was being discharged, Billy was admitted to the 
same hospital. I must have passed him in the hallway. Billy died of a heart 
attack that night. My heart recovered from the operation but it was torn apart 
from the loss of my hero, Billy Thorpe. Most people I know think that I’m crazy 
but I was only trying to be as wild as Billy.


• Working Class Boy by Jimmy Barnes is out now from HarperCollins. His live 
show,Working Class Boy: An Evening of Stories & Songs 
<http://www.jimmybarnes.com>, tours nationally in November and December
 