
This just was not Jo Konta’s day. As Angelique Kerber, the Australian Open 
champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/serena-williams-angelque-kerber-australian-open-final-tennis>
, Wimbledon finalist and No2 seed here, was hitting an irresistible rhythm on a 
playing area big enough to land a helicopter on, the British No1 fell to earth 
in two one-sided sets, one win short of contestinga medal at her first Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/andy-murray-fabio-fognini-olympics-rio-tennis-third-round>
. The German kept her shape as wind whistled around the cavernous Centre Court 
arena – where in the previous match, Andy Murray had to battle for two hours to 
subdue Fabio Fognini – and was well worth the 6-1, 6-2 winning margin. Konta 
did not surrender, by any means, but her normally solid ground strokes and 
reliable serve went missing as she struggled to put a clean racket on Kerber’s 
consistently deep replies. Mistakes were inevitable on both sides of the net in 
such demanding conditions but three double faults and 43 unforced errors in 
just over an hour’s tennis made Konta’s task impossible. It wasn’t as if she 
was not trying. Yet she hit 18 clean winners to her opponent’s seven, but was 
taking way more chances.

Kerber, meanwhile, played a tighter, safer game. She landed 84% of her first 
serves on a day when serving was a liability, hitting a relatively modest high 
of 156kph, and she consolidated her reputation as a fierce last-ball 
competitor, hunting down every chance.

In the semi-finals, Kerber plays the seventh seed Madison Keys, who spent a 
mere 53 minutes disposing of the Russian Daria Kasatkina 6-3, 6-1. Keys served 
big (six aces and three double faults) and hit big off the ground, with 30 
clean winners. She will be tough – although she did struggle over three tight 
sets against France’s Kristina Mladen ovic, then was much improved in three 
sets against ninth seed Carla Suárez Navarro.
 