
Vice-president Joe Biden <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/joebiden> will 
make a cameo Wednesday on Law & Order: Special Victim’s Unit, the well-known 
police procedural, highlighting a very real partnership between the politician 
and the show’s leading actor, Mariska Hargitay.

Hargitay leads the show’s upcoming season, the 18th, playing detective Olivia 
Benson. Biden will appear in the second episode of the season on 28 September 
to commend the fictional detectives on their work to end the rape kit backlog, 
shorthand for thousands of uncounted and untested sexual assault kits that 
police collected but never processed.

“There’s a growing awareness of the problem at all levels, from citizens to 
elected officials,” said Ilse Knecht, a senior policy adviser for the 
not-for-profit Joyful Heart Foundation, founded by Hargitay with the express 
purpose of ending the backlog.

“It definitely is something that people are becoming more aware of, and more 
angered by honestly, and inspired to action – but there’s still a long way to 
go.”

The episode specifically addresses efforts to end the backlog in Detroit, 
where more than 11,000 kits were discovered. Now, nearly 10,000 have been 
tested, identifying 762 suspected serial rapists impacting 40 states and 50 
convictions.

“Rape kit” is the term used to describe forensic evidence collected by nurses 
following a sexual assault.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> who submit to such exams often 
undergo invasive, sometimes hours-long examinations of their bodies to collect 
evidence immediately following the trauma of sexual assault.

Evidence from rape kits has helped identify serial rapists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/24/untested-rape-kits-backlog-us-legislators>
, hasexonerated the innocent 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2014/07/25/texas-man-exonerated-through-dna-testing-he-didnt-know-was-going-to-happen/?utm_term=.9543ca8c5344>
, and helps build a strong court case. Many advocates also believe that regular 
testing of rape kits could encourage more women to report sexual assault. TheUS 
Department of Justice <https://www.rainn.org/statistics/criminal-justice-system>
 estimates that roughly one in three women report an assault.

Rape kit backlogs have been found in states across the country, including 
backlogs of thousands in major cities such as Los Angeles, New York City, 
Houston, Cleveland and Memphis, Tennessee. Hargitay’s foundation estimates that
175,000 backlogged kits 
<http://www.joyfulheartfoundation.org/events/talk-san-francisco-untested-rape-kits>
 were found nationwide as of 2014.

For Biden, the episode may hold special meaning. One of Biden’s signature 
accomplishments as a senator was passage of theViolence Against Women Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/09/stanford-sexual-assault-joe-biden-victim-letter-brock-turner>
. Biden was also a lead sponsor of theDebbie Smith Act 
<https://www.rainn.org/news/biden-talks-about-rape-kit-initiative>, the first 
to directly address and attempt to end the rape kit backlog.

“If there’s a rape kit left sitting on a shelf, there’s a victim without 
justice,” then senator Biden said during thebill’s reauthorization in 2008 
<http://votesmart.org/public-statement/381667/senate-passes-bidens-debbie-smith-reauthorization-act#.V-rrf5MYhAY>
. “It is unconscionable that we have the ability to solve these crimes and hold 
the perpetrators responsible, but because of red tape and lack of funding, the 
criminals are free and their victims continue to live in fear.”

The show marks one of many collaborations between Hargitay and Biden, 
including on NBC. In 2014, Biden was featured in a public service announcement 
alongside Hargitay, whichaddressed campus sexual violence 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0jer1IlrOdQ>.

My heart is full of joy and gratitude for @thejhf's invaluable ally, my 
friend, and my hero in this work, @VP Biden, whom we honored at the 2016 
#JoyfulRevolution Gala last night. <https://www.instagram.com/p/BFR7KM7kK60/>

A photo posted by Mariska Hargitay (@therealmariskahargitay) on May 11, 2016 
at 1:17pm PDT

Just this year, Hargitay narrated Biden’s introductory video at the Democratic 
national convention 
<http://deadline.com/2016/07/joe-biden-speech-democratic-convention-hillary-clintin-1201793944/>
. In May, Biden was honored for his legislative work to combat violence against 
women by Hargitay’s not-for-profit group dedicated to ending the backlog, the 
Joyful Heart Foundation.

And in June, Hargitay spoke at the United State of Women Summit at the White 
House.

In 2014, Hargitay and the county prosecutor covering Detroit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/12/new-york-35m-untested-rape-kits>
 were together when $35m in funding to test backlogged rape kits was announced. 
In September of last year, Biden and Hargitay helped announce$79m in funding to 
process rape kits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/10/initiative-end-rape-kit-backlog-joe-biden-loretta-lynch>
, and$35m the year before that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/12/new-york-35m-untested-rape-kits>
.
 