
Joe Gomez will make a long-awaited return for Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> on Sunday, with Jürgen Klopp 
admitting he resisted buying defensive cover to keep the first-team path clear 
for the England Under-21 player.

The 19-year-old has not played a senior game for Klopp having ruptured a 
cruciate ligament on England duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/14/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-joe-gomez-cruciate-injury>
 at the start of the manager’s tenure and suffered an achilles injury in 
pre-season. Following a carefully staged rehabilitation period and six games 
for the under-23s, however, he is in line to start Sunday’s FA Cup third-round 
tie against League Two side Plymouth Argyle at Anfield, where the visitors will 
be backed by more than 8,500 fans.

FA Cup third round: match previews
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/fa-cup-third-round-match-previews>
Liverpool have rejected several loan inquiries for Gomez, with Klopp confident 
the teenager, signed for £3.5m from Charlton Athletic in 2015, can have an 
influence at Anfield this season. And he admits Gomez’s potential was a reason 
for not signing more defenders during the teenager’s absence, with Liverpool 
offloading Martin Skrtel, Kolo Touré and Brad Smith during the summer and 
signing two central defenders in Joël Matip and Ragnar Klavan.

The Liverpool manager explained: “It depends on the quality of the player. If 
you bring a talent in too early you don’t help him. Joe, for sure, is one where 
it is worth keeping a space in the squad for him. He was really unlucky. I can 
still remember the situation when he had the injury. I saw it in an under-21 
game on television and thought: ‘Oh my God’. It was really unlucky.

“Sometimes life should be nice, that the train is not running away without 
you, and that’s what we always thought about. Everybody was and is sure about 
his quality. He’s still a very, very young boy and we took him for a reason. 
OK, it was before I was here but it was a good reason. We try to create some 
space where he can develop and perform when possible.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-gomez-liverpool-playmouth-fa-cup-jurgen-klopp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2012bd1b065b977c2cceb11b83e7adfe0af3ae53%2F0_7_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Gomez%20returns%20for%20Liverpool%20against%20Plymouth%20in%20FA%20Cup%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-gomez-liverpool-playmouth-fa-cup-jurgen-klopp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Gomez%20returns%20for%20Liverpool%20against%20Plymouth%20in%20FA%20Cup%20third%20round&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fjoe-gomez-liverpool-playmouth-fa-cup-jurgen-klopp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2012bd1b065b977c2cceb11b83e7adfe0af3ae53%2F0_7_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 Gomez receives treatment after the cruciate ligament injury he suffered while 
playing for England’s Under-21 team against Kazakhstan in October 2015 
Photograph: Joe Toth/BPI/REX Shutterstock 
Klopp visited Gomez as soon as scan results confirmed the extent of the knee 
injury sustained against Kazakhstan 15 months ago. The Catford-born defender 
has admitted the manager’s encouragement and working alongside Danny Ings, who 
ruptured his cruciate in the same week, were important factors in his recovery. 
“The first time the manager spoke to me was the thing that stuck with me the 
most,’ Gomez said. “I had just come back from the scan and he was positive and 
told me to stay positive. He just told me not to stress about it. It was nice 
of him to take that time as I had just found out and it was an important moment.

Liverpool recall dropped goalkeeper Loris Karius for Plymouth FA Cup tie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/liverpool-goalkeeper-loris-karius-plymouth-fa-cup>
“It wasn’t easy. The timing of it was frustrating, having a new manager come 
in and not being involved while watching the team doing so well, but I have had 
a lot of good people around me. Ingsy was with me most of the time and the 
medical team, Matt Konopinski, Jordan Andreas, everyone helped me. It wasn’t 
easy at the time but I got through it.”

The defender made seven appearances for Liverpool for Brendan Rodgers before 
injury struck and admits the extended spell on the sidelines, coupled with 
another serious knee injury for the unfortunate Ings, has brought a fresh 
perspective to his Anfield career.

“When you have experienced something like that you don’t take things for 
granted any more,” added Gomez, who impressed at left-back for Rodgers but 
prefers playing in central defence. “Just being able to play, and being here at 
this club, is a blessing in a way. You can get caught up in a lot of things 
playing for Liverpool but the main thing is to stay grounded. That’s something 
I won’t forget. I know it can get taken away from you in an instant with an 
injury like that.

“The key is to stay level-headed: don’t get too high with the highs and at the 
same time stay strong when things aren’t going your way. Just being healthy and 
having the opportunity to play isn’t something that everyone has all the time. 
I am lucky to be able to do something I enjoy doing. I still have a long way to 
go. I’m back but I’m not properly back yet. I am not in the team yet. There’s 
still a lot of hard work to be done but having been out for so long I am just 
really grateful to have this opportunity.”
 