
The announcement that Joey Barton is to be re-signed by Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/joey-barton-makes-return-burnley-january-transfer-window>
 in January heralds the beginning of a new chapter in the colourful life of a 
footballer whose most significant contributions since leaving the club for 
Rangers last summer have come in literary, rather than football form.

Towards the end of No Nonsense: The Autobiography 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/no-nonsense.html>, his interesting 
collaboration with the journalist Michael Calvin, Barton announced his 
intention to win the Scottish Premiership with Rangers, a bold but commendable 
claim that has been rendered ludicrous by hisfractious and protracted departure 
from Ibrox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/rangers-terminate-joey-barton-contract-immediate-effect>
.

Joey Barton to make return to Burnley when January window opens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/joey-barton-makes-return-burnley-january-transfer-window>
Having passed up the offer of a two-year contract with Burnley in favour of a 
new challenge in Scotland, Barton arrived in Glasgow to great fanfare, much of 
it generated by himself as he announced his intention to become the best player 
in Scottish football. Following eight largely underwhelming appearances for the 
club (the last of them a5-1 shellacking at the hands of Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/celtic-rangers-scottish-premiership-match-report>
 in his first Old Firm game),one training-ground bust-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/joey-barton-rangers-fallout-after-celtic-defeat>
 and a spot of bother involving himbetting on various football matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/joey-barton-sfa-charged-placing-44-bets-football-matches>
 in which he was not involved, he parted company with the club.

Of course big decisions do not always work out and it was no great shock to 
see such an outspoken, high-maintenance player fall out with the club 
hierarchy, but the alarming frequency with which Barton’s decisions tend not to 
work out had been well documented long before he sat down with Calvin to give 
his own version of his myriad misadventures on and off the field.

Aged 34, with the slate once again wiped clean, he now sits on a stool in the 
last-chance saloon.

In a career spanning six clubs in three countries across 15 years, Barton’s 
move toRangers <https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> was the only one 
that can be considered an unmitigated disaster and it seems appropriate that he 
will be given the opportunity to rehabilitate his reputation as a footballer at 
the club where perhaps he made arguably his greatest contributions.

As part of a two-man midfield, Barton made 40 appearances for Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> as they won the Championship 
title in 2016, playing well enough to be voted on to a ferociously competitive 
division’s team of the season. He might not be as good a player as he thinks he 
is but neither is he anywhere near as bad as his many detractors would have us 
believe. Having failed to make any sort of impression in Scotland’s top flight, 
one wonders whether or not he can still hack it in the Premier League after an 
absence of one and a half seasons.

In Sean Dyche, at least, Barton appears to have found something of a 
likeminded soulmate, one whom he claims was the main reason he originallyjoined 
Burnley from QPR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/27/burnley-joey-barton-talks>. 
“He accepted me as the finished article, the older, wiser person I have always 
wanted to be in the dressing room,” says Barton in a book that was fiercely 
critical of some of his other former managers. “I responded to him as one of 
the few managers I felt was a friend.”

In the workplace, the pair’s relationship certainly seems to be one of mutual 
respect and neither Dyche nor his other players seem to have minded Barton 
regularly assuming the role of de facto manager in dressing-room team-talks.

It will be intriguing to see how Barton fares on his return to the English top 
flight. Despite having been training with Burnley since leaving Glasgow he has 
not played a competitive match since early September, even if some might feel 
such a description of Rangers’ defeat at the hands of Celtic extremely 
charitable.

Although the added steel he brings to midfield would be of benefit to any team 
in a relegation scrap, there will inevitably be concerns that a player in the 
twilight years of his career, chucked into the hurly-burly of the Premier 
League in mid-season after so long on the sidelines, may initially at least 
find that games are passing him by.

Barton, for all his well-documented shortcomings, has never been short of 
self-confidence and will certainly back himself to come back with a bang. 
During his first spell with Burnley he was given a month to work on his fitness 
after missing pre-season training and was rarely found wanting after being 
given his first start in October 2015.

In his book he claims to have told Burnley’s younger players that age is no 
more than a state of mind, a number. “My prime attributes, awareness, 
application and competitiveness, are more enduring,” he writes. “So many 
players are done when they lose even a fraction of their pace; I’m fortunate 
because I’ve never had any to lose.”

After the ill-advised self-promotion with which he trumpeted his arrival in 
Scotland, it is the kind of pragmatic approach which should serve Barton well 
on his return to Turf Moor.
 