
Joey Barton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/joey-barton> is to rejoin 
Burnley when the transfer window opens in January having agreed a deal that 
will tie him to Turf Moor until the end of the season.

The 34-year-old has been training with his former club since his contract with 
Rangers was terminated last month. In a statement,Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> confirmed they had agreed terms 
with the midfielder on a deal until the end of the season – subject to 
international clearance once the transfer window opens in January.

Joey Barton set to join Rangers after agreeing two-year deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/23/joey-barton-rangers-burnley> 
Barton enjoyed a successful year with Sean Dyche’s team last season, being 
named the club’s player of the year and in the Championship team of the year as 
he helped Burnley win promotion to the Premier League.

However, he opted against extending his one-year deal at Turf Moor in favour 
of a two-year contract at Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/23/joey-barton-rangers-burnley>, 
themselves promoted and convincing Barton into what he described as the 
“toughest decision of my professional life”. It proved an ill-fated decision 
with the midfielder’s time in Scotland beset by controversy and lasting less 
than six months.

Joey Barton suspended for three weeks by Rangers after talks with Warburton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/joey-barton-believes-remain-rangers-talks-mark-warburton>
Barton was suspended by Rangers for three weeks in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/joey-barton-believes-remain-rangers-talks-mark-warburton>
 over a training ground row with his team-mate Andy Halliday after a 5-1 rout 
by Celtic. The former Manchester City, Newcastle United, Queens Park Rangers 
and Marseille player described manager Mark Warburton’s handling of the dispute 
as “strange”. In an interview withthe Guardian’s Donald McRae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/19/joey-barton-interview-conflict-rangers>
, he admitted he probably would not have joined Rangers had he known what was 
in store.

The midfielder was then charged by the Scottish Football Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/joey-barton-sfa-charged-placing-44-bets-football-matches>
 for breaching their gambling rules and received a one-match suspension last 
month after admitting placing 44 bets between 1 July and 15 September. His 
Rangers contract, believed to be worth £20,000-a-week, had already been 
terminated by that point after playing only eight games.

Joey Barton charged by SFA with placing 44 bets on football matches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/joey-barton-sfa-charged-placing-44-bets-football-matches>
Dyche was keen to offer Barton the chance to prove his fitness for the Premier 
League and, having trained with his former team-mates for the past few weeks, 
will resume his career in the top flight of English football from next month. 
“It’s great to be back!” he tweeted on Tuesday.

Burnley are 16th in the Premier League and their preparations for the January 
window also include the sale of Lukas Jutkiewicz to Birmingham City for £1m. 
The striker moved to St Andrew’s on loan in August having failed to score in 35 
games following a £1.5m move from Middlesbrough in 2014. He has impressed at 
Birmingham, scoring six goals in 17 appearances, and will join the club 
permanently on 3 January having agreed a contract until 2020.

Jutkiewicz is the first signing approved by Gianfranco Zola since he 
surprisingly replaced Gary Rowett as the Birmingham manager last week. The 
club’s new owners, Trillion Trophy Asia, are expected to give Zola around £10m 
to spend next month in pursuit of promotion and have taken up an option on 
Jutkiewicz that was included as part of his loan deal.
 