
Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> reached the 
women’s final at the Sydney International on a brilliant night for British 
tennis that included Dan Evans securing his first win over a top-10 player at 
the quarter-final stage.

Konta has not dropped a set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/johanna-konta-juan-coto-part-of-everything-i-do>
 at the tournament and was at her aggressive best in a 6-2, 6-2 victory over 
Eugenie Bouchard in the last match of the evening session.

From 2-2 in the opening set, the world No10 won seven games in a row and will 
play the second seed, Agnieszka Radwanska, in the final. It will be Konta’s 
third WTA Tour final. She won her first title in Stanford last summer and then 
lost to Radwanska in Beijing in October.

Johanna Konta: Juan Coto is still very much a part of everything I do
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/johanna-konta-juan-coto-part-of-everything-i-do>
This week’s run is yet another demonstration that Konta deserves her top-10 
place and she will go into theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, where she reached the 
semi-finals 12 months ago, as a title contender.

Of facing Radwanska, the world No3, Konta said: “She’s been one of the best 
players for as long as I can remember. I played her twice before, lost twice, 
so hopefully I’ll do a better job. I’m looking forward to the challenge.“

Evans beat Dominic Thiem 3-6, 6-4, 6-1. The Briton was outhit in the first set 
but turned things around in the second and dominated the decider. Thiem, ranked 
No8 in the world, became frustrated by Evans’s impressive defence and made a 
slew of unforced errors in the third set.

“The first set was pretty much what I thought was going to happen,” Evans 
said. “I just had to hang in there. I knew I’d have to do a lot of running. I 
had to try to force my game on him, come forward and I did that in the end 
pretty well.”

The 26-year-old was pegged back from 3-0 to 3-3 in the second set but forged 
ahead again and took his fourth set point. Evans, ranked 67, made a flying 
start to the decider, winning the first four games, and this time a demoralised 
Thiem could find no way back.

Evans will play Russia’s Andrey Kuznetsov, who upset the fourth seed Pablo 
Carreño Busta in the quarter-finals.

Laura Robson’s Australian Open lasted 74 minutes after she lost in the first 
round of qualifying to France’s Amandine Hesse.

Robson was hoping to build on an encouraging performance at the US Open four 
months ago but the 22-year-old made a sluggish start against Hesse, the world 
No205, and never recovered. Her 6-2, 6-4 defeat at Melbourne Park means Robson 
has failed to win a match since September.

Hesse went through to meet either Spain’s Silvia Soler-Espinosa or the 
American doubles specialist Bethanie Mattek-Sands.
 