
Johanna Konta’s meteoric rise through the world rankings continues apace and 
yesterday she became the first British woman to break into the top 10 in 32 
years after defeating Madison Keys to reach the final of the China Open.

The last British woman to breach that exalted barrier was Jo Durie in 1984 and 
in the past 15 months the 25-year-old Konta has soared –via an Australian Open 
semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/johanna-kontas-fairytale-australian-open-run-ended-by-angelique-kerber>
 – from 150 to the top 10. Durie was quick to offer her best wishes, tweeting: 
“Congrats to JoKonta91 a fantastic year & thoroughly deserves the Top Ten 
ranking. More to come I’m sure.”
Jo Durie (@Jodurie) 
Congrats to @JoKonta91 <https://twitter.com/JoKonta91> a fantastic year & 
thoroughly deserves the Top Ten ranking. More to come I'm sure.
 <https://twitter.com/Jodurie/status/784686378940502016> October 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Jodurie/status/784686378940502016> 
There was further historical gloss on yesterday’s achievements after Andy 
Murray, the world No2,defeated David Ferrer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/andy-murray-david-ferrer-china-open-tennis>
 to reach the men’s final in Beijing. For the first time in ATP and WTA 
rankings history, Britain now has a man and woman in the world’s top 10 at the 
same time.

Konta, the 11th seed, overcame Keys 7-6, 4-6, 6-4 in an encounter that lasted 
more than two and a half hours. The Briton led 4-2 in the first set before 
losing three games in a row. She rallied to take the set on a tie-break before 
unravelling in the second to allow the American to take the tie into a third 
set. But in the decider Konta proved too strong.

By reaching the final, where she will face Poland’s Agnieszka Radwanska on 
Sunday morning, Konta will also move into the top eight of the Road to 
Singapore, the race to reach the WTA Finals later this month. She said in her 
on-court TV interview immediately after her win yesterday: “I’m definitely 
enjoying my time here, it’s my first time playing Beijing and I hope to play 
many more times.”

Besides Durie and Konta, the 1977 Wimbledon champion Virginia Wade and Sue 
Barker are the only other British women to break into the top 10 since rankings 
started in 1975. “It’s really special, I feel very blessed to be coming back 
for the final,” said Konta.

Johanna Konta: ‘You’re going to go through phases of hating the sport’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/21/johanna-konta-wimbledon-tennis-interview>
Andy Murray into China Open final after beating David Ferrer in straight sets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/andy-murray-david-ferrer-china-open-tennis> 