
Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> held off a 
spirited comeback from Daria Kasatkina to book her spot in the semi-finals of 
the Apia International in Sydney.

At a set and a break up the British No1, seeded sixth, appeared to be coasting 
towards a last-four place but her Russian opponent broke back immediately and 
then again to establish a 4-2 lead.

Bernard Tomic upbeat despite defeat in Kooyong opener
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/bernard-tomic-upbeat-despite-defeat-in-kooyong-opener>
But Konta, who made 31 winners and 30 unforced errors, dug deep to win five of 
the next six games for a 6-3, 7-5 victory in just under an hour and 
three-quarters as she set up a showdown with the Canadian wildcard Eugenie 
Bouchard.

Kasatkina, ranked 16 places below Konta at 26 in the world, claimed an upset 
win against the world No1 Angelique Kerber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/johanna-konta-sydney-angelique-kerber-tennis>
 on Tuesday but was left to rue making double the amount of unforced errors 
(30) as winners (15).

The 19-year-old made a sluggish start in searing temperatures by dropping her 
opening service game and, although she got back on serve, Konta claimed what 
would prove to be a decisive break in the fourth game.

Konta broke in the first game of the second set but then dropped serve twice 
before hitting back immediately to level matters at 4-4.

The Sydney-born 25-year-old continued her resurgence by breaking Kasatkina for 
the final time in the 11th game and then held serve to complete a hard-fought 
triumph.

Meanwhile, Dan Evans mounted an impressive comeback to upset eighth seed 
Marcel Granollers and reach the quarter-finals in the mensâ€™ tournament.

The British number three, ranked 67, struggled in the first set, but hit back 
impressively to win 1-6 6-3 6-3 in an hour and 43 minutes.

Evans was particularly dominant on his first serve, losing only seven points, 
and a single break in each of the last two sets was enough to topple the world 
number 37.

Evans will next play either top seed Dominic Thiem or Portuguese qualifier 
Gastao Elias as he continues his build-up to the Australian Open.

There was defeat, though, for British number eight Brydan Klein in the second 
round of the ASB Classic in Auckland.

Klein posted an excellent victory over Facundo Bagnis in round one, a player 
ranked 269 places higher, but Joao Sousa proved too strong, the Portuguese 
winning 6-3 6-4.
 