
Heather Watson spent years toiling in Laura Robson’s shadow, before assuming 
the role of British No1 when the Londoner faltered, but she was unable to 
deliver on the immense promise ofher memorable battle with Serena Williams at 
Wimbledon in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/03/heather-watson-serena-williams-wimbledon>
.

Johanna Konta has the look of slam winner going into the Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-australian-open-form-of-her-life>
Now, as she continues to work on a game big on athleticism and light on power 
– and Robson struggles on the outer edges of her sport after being cut down by 
injury – Watson finds herself in the pecking order behind Johanna Konta, who 
has risen again to No9 in the world afterwinning her second WTA title in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-agnieszka-radwanska-sydney>
 and is widely acclaimed for playing the best tennis of her own turbulent 
career.

It says much for Watson’s generosity of spirit that she could find time ahead 
of her own opening match here – against the unpredictable Australian Sam Stosur 
on Tuesday – to give one of the most popular players on the Tour the sort of 
uplifting assessment she deserves.

Konta, who beat Eugenie Bouchard and Agnieszka Radwanska in the two best 
consecutive performances of her career to win the Sydney Open in the city where 
she was born 25 years ago, has been handed a brutal draw. She starts against 
the talented Belgian Kirsten Flipkens, then faces the prospect of matches 
against Japan’s rising prospect Naomi Osaka, the former world No1 Caroline 
Wozniacki and one-time finalist here, Dominika Cibulkova, before what might be 
the match of the women’s draw, against Williams in the quarter-finals.

Watson, her friend and rival, thinks Konta is up to the challenge. “I watched 
a few of her matches on TV the last few days and she’s just playing so, so 
well. I’m just so impressed with her tennis and how tough mentally she’s on the 
court now,” said Watson. “She’s winning every single week. The only first-round 
match I can remember her losing is Roland Garros. Apart from that she’s 
consistent week in week out. She works really hard, is very professional and Jo 
is definitely a contender for slams.”

She did not see her awesome 6-4, 6-2 win over Radwanska in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-australian-open-form-of-her-life>
 in Sydney the night before, “because I was at a Fed Cup dinner – and she 
couldn’t come because she was winning.”

Watson added: “I feel there’s always a pattern with breakthroughs in tennis, 
like a plan. With [Angelique] Kerber [the defending champion and world No1], it 
was sort of the US Open and she just took off from there. With Jo, she made the 
fourth round of the US but I think she saidher breakthough was semis here in 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/johanna-konta-australian-open-semi-finals>
 [last year].

Johanna Konta: ‘You’re going to go through phases of hating the sport’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/21/johanna-konta-wimbledon-tennis-interview>
“It’s possible when you get that confidence and you run with it, you can play 
really well for a long time.”

It would be nice to think Watson could join Konta in the upper reaches of her 
sport but she has a little way to go from 75 in the world. Still, it is not 
beyond her to re-enter the top 50, at least, and perhaps push on higher than 
that.

Konta, meanwhile, has the watchful respect of her peers. It is a testimony to 
the level she is playing at that the third seed Radwanska – who plays Tsvetana 
Pironkova in her opening match and could meet the British No1 again in the 
semi-finals – says she could not have played much better herself in the Sydney 
final.

“I’m very confident,” she said after her arrival here on Saturday. “I really 
hope I can play the same tennis, even the tennis I played in the final.”

To reach the semi-finals, she probably has to beat former teenage prodigy 
Mirjana Lucic-Baroni, the 28th-seed Alizé Cornet, 14th-seed Elena Vesnina and 
fifth-seed Karolina Pliskova – a decidedly less treacherous path than that 
confronting Konta.

But, as Konta continually reminds us, she is determined to “stay in the now”. 
It is one of the sporting cliches that rings true, especially for a player who 
has suffered from anxiety in the past, worrying about other people’s 
expectations and not trusting her talent. The way she hit the ball in Sydney 
over the past few days, that self-doubt looks to have evaporated. If she does 
play Radwanska in the semi-finals, it is the Polish player who is more likely 
to bring her reservations to the court.

IN WITH A SHOUT? THREE TO WATCH

Johanna Konta, No9 seed

Konta’s stunning rise began with an amazing run in 2015, but peaked almost a 
year ago when shemade the Australian Open semi‑finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/27/johanna-konta-marches-into-australian-open-semi-final-by-beating-shuai-zhang>
, ranked 47 at the time. Her aim no doubt will be to at least equal such 
success, this time with the added pressure of top‑10 status. She finished 2016 
consistently, reaching the latter stages of tournaments, and her warm-up to the 
first major of the year has beenconfidence-instilling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-australian-open-form-of-her-life>
,winning in Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-agnieszka-radwanska-sydney>
. A British woman had not been ranked in the top 10 since 1984, let alone won a 
grand slam – Virginia Wade was the last, at Wimbledon in 1977. Konta, 25, is 
shaping up to be Britain’s best bet since.

Garbiñe Muguruza, No7 seed

The world No7 may have been heralded as the breakout performer of 2016 if not 
forAngelique Kerber bagging her first two majors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/angelique-kerber-karolina-pliskova-us-open-final>
.Muguruza’s win at the French Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/garbine-muguruza-beats-serena-williams-french-open-final-match-report>
 made waves. The rest of the season did not live up to that but the 23-year-old 
Spaniard has come back this year looking strong in her opening few matches in 
Brisbane, before having to retire because of a right thigh injury. If she 
recovers well she could be a real contender.

Dominika Cibulkova, No6 seed

Coming off the back of a sensational end to 2016, reaching the finals in Wuhan 
andwinning in Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/30/dominika-cibulkova-angelique-kerber-wta-finals-match-report>
, the Slovak will be intent on continuing her success into the new year. Her 
form at the end of last year was arguably the best it has ever been as she 
entered the top 10 for the first time. Her start to 2017 has been slower, 
losing fairly early in Brisbane and Sydney, but the 27-year-old will definitely 
have her eyes set on making it late into the second week at Melbourne Park.by 
Molly McElwee
 