
A year after threatening to gatecrash the party in Melbourne by reaching her 
first semi-final at a major, Johanna Konta returns for the 2017 edition of the
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> armed with 
a game even more impressive to unleash on a field in possibly more disarray.

The defending champion, Angelique Kerber, who went on to add a second major to 
her listat Flushing Meadows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/angelique-kerber-karolina-pliskova-us-open-final>
, has hit an untimely low patch, the great but ageing Serena Williams,newly 
engaged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/29/serena-williams-engaged-alexis-ohanian-reddit>
 and just as gnomic, is coming off a rare defeat in Auckland – and Konta is 
playing the best tennis of her life.

Johanna Konta has the look of slam winner going into the Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-australian-open-form-of-her-life>
She won the second WTA title of her career by demolishing the estimable 
Agnieszka Radwanska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/johanna-konta-agnieszka-radwanska-sydney>
 in two quick sets in the final of the Sydney International on Friday and 
arrives in Melbourne fully fit and bursting with confidence. In short, the best 
British player since Laura Robson’s game and health went into decline, is 
unlikely to have a better chance of winning a grand slam tournament.

However, pressed about her elevated status as a contender, she said: “I think 
that’s other people’s opinion and actually that’s quite flattering if people 
talk like that, or think that. But there’s a whole lot of work to be done 
between being a contender and the possibility [of being] the person who will 
actually be winning it in the end. There is a lot of matches to be played; a 
lot of different things will happen between now and then.

“All I can do is take one match at a time, however much of a broken record it 
sounds, one point at a time, and really just compete the best I can these next 
two weeks.”

Away from competition, Konta is way more relaxed – and was thrilled to be 
surrounded by close family in Sydney, where she grew up before her Hungarian 
parents decamped to the UK when she was 13. Her sister has an eight-week-old 
boy and there was that air of family contentment.

“I was really keen on playing Sydney [where she has competed twice before 
without breaking through], because I wanted to meet my nephew. To be quite 
honest, I am also learning about myself. This is the beginning of my second 
full year on tour, so I haven’t been playing the schedule for a very long time.

“I am learning about how I feel preparing for slams, and continuously learning 
about myself in these scenarios, these situations. I am very happy I was there, 
I got to share an amazing experience with my family. We will see how things 
develop.

“Ultimately, most players are able to perform at their best when they are 
happy and when they are comfortable. I guess when you feel at peace and are 
just enjoying competing, you can play your best. I was able to have that last 
week.

“The good feeling was created there, because my family was around. They gave 
me some balance and some external happiness outside the court. I was definitely 
very happy with that but I was also very happy that, with each match I played, 
I got that little bit match fitter. I was improving with every match.”

Kyle Edmund given lucky pre-Australian Open hint of Santiago Giraldo’s game
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/kyle-edmund-lucky-pre-australian-open-hint-santiago-giraldo>
Konta, whose life coach, Juan Coto, died last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/johanna-konta-juan-coto-part-of-everything-i-do>
, has done well to keep her tennis together and has a new on-court coach in Wim 
Fissette, a bigger serve, an improved forehand to go with the steady, nagging 
groundstrokes of her double-handed attack on the other wing, and the same 
winning smile that simultaneously invites warmth and puzzlement.

Konta gives very little away, a defence mechanism that allows her to control 
her emotions, even when there is no pressure to do so. It is almost as if she 
is permanently on court. In press conferences, both arranged and more informal, 
she is never less than charming, but invariably guarded. She has built a wall 
around herself that Donald Trump would be proud of.

In the city of her birth last week, Konta beat Eugenie Bouchard then Radwanska 
so impressively it was impossible not to put her in the frame alongside Kerber 
and Williams for the first slam title of the season. She would privately 
acknowledge that – and certainly Fissette, who has coached some of the best 
players in the game, would be telling her that – but Konta would only say: “I 
was able to just keep getting better with every match I played. I was 
definitely pleased.”

She characterises her improvement from a ranking of 153 in the world at the 
end of 2014 to No9 when the latest list is released on Monday as her “journey”. 
Others might describe it as amazing.

Even as little as a year ago, she was just inside the top 50. She had made the 
fourth round of the US Open then the semi-finals here. As her friend and 
compatriotHeather Watson observed on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/johanna-konta-australian-open-2017-womens-tennis-melbourne>
, since then, Konta has just kept winning, “week in, week out”. But she has a 
problem, a significant one: awaiting here in the first week are matches tougher 
than any of her rivals. She starts on Tuesday against her coach’s compatriot 
Kirsten Flipkens, with a dance card to follow that may look like this: the 
Japanese star Naomi Osaka, the former world No1 Caroline Wozniacki, the 2014 
Australian Open finalist Dominika Cibulkova, then Serena Williams in the 
quarter-finals, before another meeting with Radwanska in the semi-finals. The 
other side of the draw could throw up Garbiñe Muguruza or Kerber as the other 
finalist. Whoever it is, Konta will be ready.

Australian Open women’s form guide: the players to watch in Melbourne | Molly 
McElwee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/12/australia-open-womens-form-guide-players-to-watch>
Her natural caution kicks in when asked about her blistering form and 
prospects. “To have beaten a player like Aga, I’m definitely very pleased with 
the level I played but we all know it’s not a given. It doesn’t decide how you 
will do in the next event.”

She went to her favourite fish and chip shop when she got to Melbourne but was 
quick to point out she had the fish grilled “but no chips – and I probably 
won’t for a little while”.

There is a fair chance she will not have many down weeks in which to indulge 
her love of that sort of food. Her form dictates there is a lot of serious 
tennis to come.
 