
John McEnroe is adamant that Andy Murray has “his best shot ever” to win the 
French Open. Even allowing for the American’s penchant for theatricality, that 
is an encouraging endorsement on the eve of Murray’s semi-final against the 
defending champion,Stan Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka>, on Friday.

He will find that match tough enough, let alone the prospect of beating – 
possibly – Novak Djokovic in the final on Sunday. But McEnroe insists: “There’s 
a chance for Murray. Maybe his best chance to win the French ever could be this 
year. This year. I don’t know if he’s going to be able to keep this up, so to 
me he has got his best shot ever.

French Open 2016: Novak Djokovic makes short work of Tomas Berdych
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/02/french-open-2016-novak-djokovic-beats-tomas-berdych>
“You look at those other guys trying to figure how to get by these guys 
[Djokovic, as well as the wounded absentees Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer], 
like Milos [Raonic] and others. Stan was able to do it a couple of times 
[against Nadal in Melbourne and Djokovic in Paris].”

McEnroe added: “Andy’s had an incredibly consistent record in the slams – and 
they’re much tougher to beat in the slams, these guys. There is no question he 
has gotten a lot better. He has had to get better and he has probably made them 
better. He can take pride in that as somebody who is trying to have a great 
rivalry.

“It has been extremely difficult at times and frustrating. He has had better 
moments than almost anybody, obviously, but there is always something you could 
say he could do something about. You could say: ‘Maybe his second serve could 
be a little better’. But there have been times where it has been better and 
others where the reality is just nerves or something gets in the way a little 
bit. And then everybody says: ‘See – there’s the old Murray.’”

The old Murray has been evident here and there in this tournament, searching 
for the fine form that carried him to the finals in Madrid, where he lost to 
Djokovic, and then in Rome, where he beat him.

Murray knows he has yet to hit a convincing rhythm throughout a whole match, 
having struggled through 10 sets at the beginning to shift two players outside 
the top 100,Radek Stepanek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/24/andy-murray-fights-back-stepanek-french-open>
 andMathias Bourgue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/25/andy-murray-beats-mathias-bourgue-french-open-five-sets>
. It was probably at the start and end of hisfour-sets win over Richard Gasquet 
in the quarter-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/01/andy-murray-richard-gasquet-french-open-quarter-finals>
on Wednesday that the new Murray arrived. At times, he was majestic, especially 
in giving up just two games in the final hour of the match.

Nevertheless, he has had a few problems with his serve, and his drop-shotting 
of Gasquet – although it drained the Frenchman’s legs – was not as precise as 
he would have liked. On clay, it is a shot that can win a lot of points, if 
planted in the right place at the right pace.

The semi-final presents a different challenge entirely – even against another 
single-handed backhand artist in Wawrinka, who destroyed Djokovic with it a 
year ago. Murray has kept an eye on the Swiss’s progress here, of course, but 
pointed out: “The way that I play against Stan will be different to the way 
that Novak plays against him because, although our games are fairly similar, we 
have different strengths and hit shots slightly differently. A year has gone by 
since then and that match, in a couple of days, doesn’t mean much when we’re 
out there, really.

“I watched it and Stan played some great stuff, especially at the end of the 
match when he had to close it out. It seems like high-risk tennis but he’s 
making it look easy.”

McEnroe, who will give up some of his pre-Wimbledon time preparing for his 
stint with the BBC to advise Raonic on how he might make an impact there, 
thinks Djokovic is playing so well he could overhaul Federer’s 17 slams. “It’s 
good in a way that you have people talk about it, it’s kind of history in the 
making,” he said of the Serb’s dominance.

“It has happened so fast. Pete Sampras sat down after he got his 14th [slam 
title] at the US Open, stopped playing with this magnificent way to go out. And 
the next thing you know and not that long later, Roger is beating [his total] 
and Rafa catches him. It’s crazy.

“And now Novak, all of a sudden he’s at 11. It’s insane how tough they are to 
beat. It’s incredible. So, yeah, potentially that could happen. And Murray 
could add on a couple. And Stan looks like he is pretty dangerous right now. 
Stan has got the same amount of majors as Andy. I mean you wouldn’t put their 
overall career record on the same page but at the same time that’s a pretty 
good place to be.”
 