
I’m extremely anti-cucumber. I believe cucumbers are demonic, the black hole 
of the food world, infusing everything close by with their evil cucumber-ness. 
I didn’t actually try cucumber until 18 and I avoided them since. Which became 
more difficult after going vegetarian and even more difficult after going vegan.

My first memories are of being super-fussy with food. I couldn’t stand 
cabbage, onions, courgettes especially. Dad would be starving for Irish stew 
after laying pipes all day, so it was all about him getting his food. I’d often 
hide food on my plate and just try to get meals over with as quickly as 
possible. Memories of being confronted by lunches at Sacred Heart primary are 
traumatic for me.

All I really cared about was music, clothes, booze, cigarettes and drugs – 
until I was 25. The closest I came to food shopping was using a shopping 
trolley to carry a Vox AC30 amp. Whenthe Smiths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/smiths> went to No 1 we were still surviving 
off potatoes, crisps, chocolates and Coca-Cola.

Lonely Boy by Steve Jones; Set The Boy Free by Johnny Marr review – setting 
the record straight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/20/lonely-boy-steve-jones-set-the-boy-free-johnny-marr-review-sex-pistols-smiths>
The second time I ever flew was to New York. After a night at CBGB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/01/every-night-different-band-cbgb-punk-photographs-bettie-ringma-ramones-blondie>
 we’d roll out of bed and go straight to the local diner and there we 
discovered hash browns and eggs over easy and orange juice. It was probably the 
healthiest food I’d eaten until that point and probably got me off E numbers 
briefly.

From the minute we made Meat is Murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2011/oct/14/meat-murder-smiths> I 
never ate meat again. Of course not; I couldn’t be hypocritical. It wasn’t much 
of a sacrifice, to be honest, as nutrition still meant nothing to me. If you 
look at photos from that time I’m 22-23 and seven stone.

I still miss cheese, because I ate a lot before going vegan. To say it was to 
clean myself of drink or drugs is a bit reductive. I’m a different beast. I 
just like the idea of change. I’m a vegan who avoids desserts now, but if you 
see me in a year I might be eating vegan Victoria sponge cake.

Because I’m naturally a pot-smoking Mancunian guitar player, to find myself 
becoming a marathon runner was an unusual thing. But if Bob Marley could get up 
at the crack of dawn to go running, then I can. This morning I ran 15 miles. 
Some days I’ll just do 10, others 20. You just get up and do it. After a full 
marathon I’m craving the biggest, saltiest pizza ever invented.

My tour rider looks like the deli in Whole Foods. Salads, stuffed vine leaves, 
chilli or wasabi, rice, white tea, health bars, spinach, tofu and porridge.

Set the Boy Free by Johnny Marr (Century, £20). Click here to buy a copy for 
£16.40 from the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/set-the-boy-free.html>
 