
One state in which a Jewish government rules the entire territory from the 
Mediterranean to the Jordan and controls a Palestinian Arab population that 
equals the number of Jews is not the only option. There could be a single state 
of all its citizens, controlled by a democratically elected parliament and 
government in the interests of all its citizens (Kerry accuses Israel of 
undermining peace hopes, 29 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/kerry-defends-us-decision-to-not-veto-un-condemnation-of-israeli-settlements>
). This would not be a bizarre arrangement. In fact, all civilised nations 
apart from Israel are governed in this way.

Your Q&A section says that “This would effectively be the end of the Jewish 
homeland, and thus unacceptable to the vast majority of global Jews and many 
others.” First, the “Jewish homeland” was formed by taking the land of another 
people, the Palestinians. And most Jews today, as shown by their distribution 
around the world, have no need for a Jewish homeland.

There is also no evidence to show that a single democratic state covering 
Israel, the West Bank and Gaza would be unacceptable. There are many Jews in 
the US and the UK who recognise that an ethnically defined state is an 
anachronism in the modern world. They see that a state of and for all its 
citizens is the only just route to peace. Even in Israel itself, where the grip 
ofJudaism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/judaism> on the apparatus of state 
control is increasingly resented by many secular Jews, there is a growing 
one-state movement.

The time has come to face the facts. The rightwing racists who run Israel in 
the face of all principles of democracy that apply in the rest of the world 
have to be removed by democratic means so thatIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> and Palestine can be governed as one 
state in the way their citizens deserve.
Karl Sabbagh
Author, Palestine: A Personal History

Theresa May’s attack on John Kerry over Israel is extraordinary | Azriel 
Bermant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/theresa-may-israel-john-kerry-attack-extraordinary>
• The prime minister was absolutely right to criticise John Kerry’s speech on 
Israel and settlements (Report, 30 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
). First, it is legitimate to question why the US secretary of state found it 
so important to focus his final days in office on Israel’s settlement policy 
when so much of the world is in flames, so much of the Middle East is in ruins, 
and when much of that is a direct result of President Obama’s and Kerry’s 
failures in office. This selectivity in itself invites criticism on the grounds 
of a lack of even-handedness.

Second, while one may disagree with Israel’s settlement policy (as many in 
Israel do), to suggest that settlements are the obstacle to peace is plainly 
wrong. Israel had to fight three wars for survival (1948, 1956 and 1967), long 
before there was an occupation or settlements. In 1967, Israel’s offer to 
return the territories, in exchange for peace – an offer embedded into UN 
resolution 242 – was rejected by the Palestinians and Arabs. In 2000, Israel 
made generous offers to create a Palestinian state, but this too was rejected, 
and when Israel implemented a unilateral and complete withdrawal from Gaza 
(2005), all it got in return was a barrage of rockets.

The real impediment to peace and to the two-state solution is that the 
Palestinians (and many Arabs) refuse to concede Israel’s right to exist. They 
do not dream of a state alongside Israel, but one in place of Israel.

The issues are existential, not territorial. Had it been otherwise, the 
problem would long have been solved, just as it was when Egypt made peace with 
Israel in 1979.
Joshua Rowe
Manchester
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fjohn-kerrys-challenge-to-israel-on-a-two-state-solution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a3a39792c79ad467980056f85318ec2e5ba0119%2F1936_172_1842_2303%2F1842.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Kerry%E2%80%99s%20challenge%20to%20Israel%20on%20a%20two-state%20solution%20%7C%20Letters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fjohn-kerrys-challenge-to-israel-on-a-two-state-solution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Kerry%E2%80%99s%20challenge%20to%20Israel%20on%20a%20two-state%20solution%20%7C%20Letters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fjohn-kerrys-challenge-to-israel-on-a-two-state-solution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a3a39792c79ad467980056f85318ec2e5ba0119%2F1936_172_1842_2303%2F1842.jpg>
 Benjamin Netanyahu’s government is the ‘most rightwing coalition in Israeli 
history’, according to John Kerry. Photograph: Gali Tibbon/AFP/Getty Images 
• Reacting to John Kerry’s assessment that Benjamin Netanyahu’s government is 
the “most rightwing coalition in Israeli history”, Theresa May’s spokesman said 
she “thought it was not appropriate to focus … solely on the issue of Israeli 
settlements” and continued: “The government believes that negotiations will 
only succeed when they are conducted between the two parties, supported by the 
international community.”

The fly in that ointment is that the present creeping annexation of 
Palestinian territory, while never-ending “negotiations” continue, suits the 
Netanyahu government. Without external pressure, such as trade and cultural 
sanctions on Israel, there is nothing to prevent the latticework that is 
Palestine from being eaten away to the point where it is as no longer viable as 
a state.
Eddie Dougall
Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk

• In the international angst over Israel it is surely worth remembering those 
acts of generosity to beleaguered Jews shown by the international community: 
the Balfour Declaration of 1917, which “favoured the establishment in Palestine 
of a national home for the Jewish people”, followed by its implementation 
through the state of Israel in 1948. To this neutral observer things started to 
go wrong only when Israel decided in 1967 that it would no longer accept the 
borders provided for it 19 years earlier. That seems to have been the key 
action from which the whole tragedy has ensued. Somehow we need to find a way 
back to first principles on this matter.
Robin Wendt
Chester

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 