
“I’m one of the last Romantics”, composer John Luther Adams 
<http://johnlutheradams.net/> tells me through jetlag-protecting shades in a 
hotel in Heathrow, self-medicating on fruit and coffee, en route from New York 
to Scotland. “But my Romanticism is informed by quantum physics and the science 
of ecology.”

His claim to Romanticism might seem strange from a composer whose music sits 
within and between the worlds of Cageian experimentalism, environmental 
activism, American minimalism and teeming orchestral soundscapes. Romantic 
composers of the 19th and early 20th centuries –Wagner 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ibWxhwcZI_w>, Debussy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SgSNgzA37To>, Vaughan Williams 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lp4G5vtdSWc> – wrote tributes to the sea, 
using nature as a metaphor for human dramas and narratives. But in the hands of 
Adams and his Pulitzer prize-winningBecome Ocean 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dGva1NVWRXk> – a piece memorably described by 
Alex Ross as the “loveliest apocalypse in musical history 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/07/08/water-music-3>” – his music 
becomes more than a metaphor for natural forces: it is an elemental experience 
in its own right. Between Ocean is an epic 40-minute vision of the Pacific 
Ocean that crashed and swelled and lapped and tore at the beach in front of his 
Alaskan home (where he lived for nearly 40 years, sleeping every night with the 
windows open to maintain a sometimes frightening physical closeness with the 
sea), its musical power as ineluctable as a force of nature, so that when you 
listen to it, you feel overwhelmed and awed by the sheer flux and foment of the 
musical elements into which you are plunged.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdGva1NVWRXk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdGva1NVWRXk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdGva1NVWRXk&media=>
If you listen to it with open ears, that is. The 62-year-old Adams tells me 
that Become Ocean has also been dismissed as a mix between Wagner and Philip 
Glass. On the positive side, as well as Alex Ross’s description, his favourite 
epithet of all comes from a death metal website,steelforbrains.com 
<http://steelforbrains.com/>, which called Become Ocean “doom as all hell”. 

It’s the accolades rather than the criticisms that Adams has got used to in 
recent years, as his Alaskan-born works  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q07GEJ145CY>are becoming a part of the new 
music landscape worldwide. He smiles that “this sudden outbreak of 
respectability has just allowed me to continue doing what I’ve always done, 
which is what the music wants me to. Except that it’s a little easier to find 
people who want to make these things happen with me.”


The latest of Adams’s creative partners are the East Neuk festival 
<http://www.eastneukfestival.com/> and the Southbank Centre 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/festivals-series/david-byrnes-meltdown>
, who have commissioned a piece to be performed outdoors by a massed group of 
French horns.Across the Distance <http://www.eastneukfestival.com/programme/> 
needs a cornucopia of hornists in multiples of eight. There will be 32 in East 
Neuk, including the members of the Fife Horn Union in July, and 64 on the South 
Bank in London in August. It’s a piece about time and distance. The group 
begins by playing together in a circle, but the musicians progress through 21 
“stations”, further and further away from each other. “So we move outward – and 
we don’t come back. The music just goes out into the landscape.” There is no 
conductor: “The players will each create their own journey through the physical 
space, because the time of the piece is determined by their breath, by how long 
they hold their notes for. You will hear the horns go out, away from you, and 
by the end of the piece, you’ll be hearing things that you don’t see, as the 
players go into the distance.”

My music is a way of making us more present in the world.
John Luther Adams 
Like so much of Adams’s music <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zpj9tGjKVLY>, 
Across the Distance uses music to create a state of heightened attention, not 
just to the often sublime sounds, but to the environment in which they are 
happening. “The music is a means of exploring more broadly and more deeply 
wherever we are,” he says. “The shared experience of listening together at the 
end of a piece likeInuksuit <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fnoxu4ocQb0> 
[another outdoor work, for anything from nine to 99 percussionists] is 
extraordinary: as the music of the piece dissolves back into the music of the 
place, there’s this phenomenon of each of us in our own location listening 
together.” It’s this that connectsAdams’s environmentalism 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/arts/culturebox/2015/02/john_luther_adams_grammy_winner_for_become_ocean_discusses_politics_and.html>
 withhis music <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rUDjOyacZoU>. He doesn’t write 
pieces that preach to his listeners, urging protest on behalf of green issues 
(“although that’s a good idea”, he says). Rather, borrowing from the artist
Robert Irwin <http://www.pacegallery.com/artists/211/robert-irwin>, his music 
is a means of unlocking a sense of “your participation in the world, your 
embeddedness in this staggeringly beautiful and complex experience of being in 
the world. If we lived in a society where we felt empowered by that idea, and 
felt a responsibility to the world at that level, problems like climate change 
would be dealt with instantly, because they would just have to be. That’s how 
art, how music, can be of practical use. It can be a model for how we can be, 
individually and collectively, in the world.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fjohn-luther-adams-music-across-the-distance-southbank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435790258709%2Fdd897f25-565a-4e60-b73d-3525783ce34c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Luther%20Adams%3A%20a%20force%20of%20nature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fjohn-luther-adams-music-across-the-distance-southbank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Luther%20Adams%3A%20a%20force%20of%20nature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fjohn-luther-adams-music-across-the-distance-southbank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435790258709%2Fdd897f25-565a-4e60-b73d-3525783ce34c-1020x612.jpeg>
 A performance of John Luther Adams’ Inuksuit at East Neuk festival, July 2013. 
Photograph: Ros Gasson Photography Scotland 
During his decades in Alaska 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/leaving-alaska> (where he and 
his wife still have a house, although they now live between New York and the 
Sonoran desert in Mexico), Adams saw at first hand how climate change was 
affecting the landscape and natural rhythms of the place he loved. As the pace 
of that human-influenced change accelerates, does he feel a sense of anger or 
frustration about the apocalypse that we may well be visiting on the planet, 
and whether that motivates his music? “Do I have anger? No – maybe because I’m 
no longer an angry young man. But I have a great sense of sadness and loss. And 
longing. Longing for what, I’m not sure. Maybe it’s a yearning for an Alaska 
that never existed, except in my imagination. And I think it’s a profound 
existential longing that we all share now and that we have to confront. And if 
we don’t – well, to the extent that we don’t, it’s to our own collective peril.”

That’s where his music finds its place in the world. “It’s a way of making us 
more present in the world, a vision of how we might be together not only with 
each other, but with the larger community of life.”

Adams’s music <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1wmf0cScpGQ> is also his way of 
making sense of his own place in musical and human ecology. “I think I’ve been 
trying my whole life to compose home, to compose a space that I can inhabit. 
And then I invite you to have your own experience in that landscape.” He also 
has an earthier way of defining his aesthetic. He tells me a story aboutJackson 
Pollock <https://flavorwire.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/jp5.jpg>, who was asked 
why he didn’t work from nature. “Pollock snarled back: ‘Iam nature!’ Ard we 
are: we’re all nature.” Adams’s music makes us aware of that simple but 
profound fact as resonantly and elementally as any creative artist working 
today.

 * John Luther Adams’s Across the Distance premieres at the East Neuk festival 
<http://www.eastneukfestival.com/programme/> on 5 July. Then at the Southbank 
Centre, as part ofDavid Byrne’s Meltdown 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/festivals-series/david-byrnes-meltdown>
, on 23 August.
 