
In 1992, when the first submarine armed with Trident nuclear missiles arrived 
on the Clyde near Glasgow, John Ainslie was in a canoe. Along with a flotilla 
of other protesters, he was buzzing the huge dark boat as it cut through the 
cold water. He had just been appointed as the coordinator of the Scottish 
Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (SCND), and he was arrested by the Ministry of 
Defence police.

John, who has died of cancer aged 62, was the quiet, unassuming heart of the 
peace movement inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> for the 
last 25 years. As well as putting himself on the line, he became an 
authoritative and internationally respected nuclear researcher. He was the 
author of 20 reports on aspects of nuclear policy, starting in 1992 with 
Cracking Under Pressure, about defects in nuclear submarine reactors.
 Scottish CND’s giant puppets, CiNDy and Big Sandy. Photograph: John 
Ainslie/Scottish CND 
His most recent report, in July, written with Dan Plesch from the University 
of London, argued that successive UK governments had deceived the public by 
pretending that Trident was a British bomb when it is actually American. Other 
reports exposed Trident’s safety flaws, its targeting strategies, and its 
secret workings. In 2008, he discovered problems with a mysterious top-secret 
warhead ingredient known as fogbank.

He backed Scottish independence as a way of triggering UK nuclear disarmament. 
In the run-up to the referendum in 2014 he showed how Trident warheads could be 
removed from the Clyde within two years – and how they could not safely be 
based anywhere else in the UK.

John played a crucial role in breaking the story of the Trident submariner, 
William McNeilly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/17/trident-whistleblower-william-mcneilly-discharged-from-royal-navy>
, who went on the run in 2015 after alleging 30 safety and security flaws. John 
was a skilled user of freedom of information law, and helped to prise open the 
MoD’s secretive nuclear citadel and expose its inadequacies.

He was a son of the manse, born in Fraserburgh, Aberdeenshire, the sixth child 
of Emily (nee Peters) and the Rev Duncan Ainslie. After attending high schools 
in Kirkcaldy and Arbroath, in 1971 he joined the army.

He served with the Scottish infantry regiment, the Black Watch, studied 
international relations at the University of Keele in Staffordshire, and became 
a junior officer. According to his family and colleagues, he was involved with 
military intelligence in Northern Ireland, though he never spoke about it.

In 1980 he had a big falling-out with the army and resigned his commission, as 
a conscientious objector. Before he was allowed to leave, he had to argue his 
case before a tribunal, and to pay back some of his university fees. He then 
became a youth worker with the Church of Scotland, and studied divinity at the 
University of Glasgow. He worked for more than five years in the late 1980s as 
a community minister in Easterhouse, a deprived area of Glasgow. He was 
appointed coordinator of SCND in 1991.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fjohn-ainslie-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9ccb03f549045c89bcc234553766340e6a564a9%2F0_68_2048_1230%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Ainslie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fjohn-ainslie-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Ainslie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fjohn-ainslie-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9ccb03f549045c89bcc234553766340e6a564a9%2F0_68_2048_1230%2F2048.jpg>
 John Ainslie campaigning for SCND 
John was diagnosed with oesophageal cancer in 2012 and, despite treatments and 
operations, it spread to his brain. During his illness, he kept doing many of 
the things he loved – hill walking, cycling, sailing and rowing.

He also took SCND’s two giant puppets, Big Sandy and CiNDy, to festivals and 
protests, and followed nuclear bomb convoys around Glasgow in the early hours 
of the morning. In the weeks before he died, he was trying to finish a report 
on the impact of a convoy crash.

John married Alison Bush in 1986, and two years later they had a son, Duncan. 
Despite being apparently fit and healthy, Duncan died suddenly in 2009 from a 
suspected heart condition. John is survived by Alison, and by his siblings: 
Margaret, Andrew, Eric, Alan and Catherine.

• John Ainslie, anti-nuclear campaigner, born 3 May 1954; died 21 October 2016
 