
“You are safe and sound here,” the gift shop owner said, as he handed over 
some change. At breakfast, the waiter had been similarly reassuring. “I always 
tell my guests they are in a very safe place. There might be issues around the 
corner,” he said, pouring out tea. “But here you are perfectly safe.”

After a while these repeated soothing asides became rather disconcerting. I 
hadn’t expected to find Jordan anything other than peaceful, but since the 
bottom has fallen out of the tourism industry because of the conflict in 
neighbouring Syria, most people you meet have an urge to emphasise how 
risk-free a trip here is.
Jordan map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/travel-jordanmap/giv-15726MTEYgy0Lymtq/>
It’s easy to see why. Thanks to the widespread sense of unease about 
travelling to the region, Jordan, as well as being safe, is now extremely 
empty. Some of the country’s most extraordinary sites are virtually deserted; 
tourism has fallen 66% since 2011. As a tourist, you can’t help feeling worried 
for the people who work in the travel industry (which has historically 
contributed about 20% of GDP), but at the same time there is an uneasy pleasure 
in visiting places like Petra, one of the new seven wonders of the world, in 
near silence.

Nothing had prepared me for how spectacular Jordan is, and perhaps part of the 
intense experience of visiting now is tied up with the unusually solitary 
feeling you have as you walk through its ancient sites.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a9790a143d07abbb741d2bcd55cf554d5a9d77d%2F0_248_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a9790a143d07abbb741d2bcd55cf554d5a9d77d%2F0_248_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 The Siq that leads to Petra, Jordan. Photograph: Emad Aljumah/Getty Images 
After a late-night arrival in Amman with Rose, my 12-year-old daughter, we set 
off early and drove through desert to Petra, arriving late morning. When 
tourism here was at its peak, there were as many as 3,000 visitors every day. 
On the day we visited in late October, only 300 people went through the gates. 
This meant that walking in the Siq, the natural gorge that leads through red 
sandstone rocks to the the vast classical Treasury building, carved into the 
rockface in the first century BC, felt very peaceful. There were no crowds with 
selfie-sticks, no umbrella-waving tour guides. It was the most unfrazzling 
experience, which allowed us to look at the scenery and see it as it has been 
for centuries.

Highlights of Jordan: readers’ travel tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/nov/24/highlights-jordan-petra-wadi-rum-dead-sea-amman>
Conservationists’ concerns, referred to in my now out-of-date Lonely Planet 
Guide, about mass tourism in Petra – the pernicious effects of humidity and the 
damage wrought by thousands of feet trampling up the steps cut in to the rock – 
are no longer so acute.

We had only one day in Petra, but there was so much we wanted to see that we 
walked 12 miles, racing around in the heat to pack everything in, overwhelmed 
and stupefied by the quantity of beautiful tombs and facades. Guidebook 
photographs do no justice at all to the splendour of the site, the monumental 
architectural talent of the Nabateans (the nomadic people who built Petra) and 
the mesmerising way sunlight changes the colour of the rock as the day 
progresses, from orange to pink and, with dusk, to shadowy grey. This vast 
settlement is truly extraordinary. The canyon alone and the sudden, amazing 
reveal of the Treasury is enough in itself to justify a visit, but this is only 
the beginning.

We hurriedly climbed 700 steps up to the Monastery, a temple or tomb carved 
into the mountain summit, drinking hot, sugary mint tea at the top in a cafe 
offering a view over the whole site. The cafe owner appeared bemused by the 
reluctance of tourists to come. “It’s safe here; we have no Isil. But people 
have stopped coming,” he told us.

The Foreign Office travel advice notes that there is “a high threat from 
terrorism” in Jordan – but it makes the same warning about Egypt, and also 
Germany and France.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1daf2d4b2554f4a645ecdb70bb800e40ab7504b4%2F0_177_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1daf2d4b2554f4a645ecdb70bb800e40ab7504b4%2F0_177_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 Petra’s High Place of Sacrifice. Photograph: Paul Harris/Getty Images/AWL 
Images RM 
Jordan’s defensiveness has built up over the past 15 years, as its location, 
sandwiched between Syria, Iraq, Palestine, Israel and Egypt, has conspired to 
discourage visitors. First there was the Intifada of 2000, then 9/11, then the 
war in Iraq. Then, just as things were beginning to pick up, in 2008 there was 
the global recession and, later, the violent aftermath of the Arab Spring, 
culminating in the ongoing carnage in Syria. The key thing to remember is that 
the Foreign Office website does not advise against travel to anywhere except a 
two-mile strip along the Syrian border (which is far from tourist sites); it 
also notes that 60,820 British nationals visited Jordan in 2015 and that most 
visits are trouble-free. We had lunch at a restaurant under a canopy of trees 
at the centre of the site. Towards the end of the day, we walked around the 
back of the site, up another 670 steps, past tombs and Bedouin houses, to the 
High Place of Sacrifice – the exposed mountain plateau where the Nabateans 
performed religious rituals. A long twisting trail leads to the summit. We 
arrived at sunset having passed only four other tourists on the way up.

The cafe near the top was closed – last year’s price list faded and flapping 
in the breeze and only a goat inside. Dotted everywhere were groups of camels 
sitting on the ground, their legs tucked beneath them, with no customers.

There was some bitterness at the fickle nature of the global tourist market. 
“A bomb goes off in Turkey and people think ‘We shouldn’t visit Jordan,’ ” a 
jewellery seller said. A man selling bottles of sand with camel shapes formed 
from different coloured layers, said this was the worst year since 2002, 
mournfully displaying the blown sand vases that are no longer selling. His 
friend’s hotel had just closed and his business was very slow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84e6084c2c86f3df466005d76e19214644420070%2F0_301_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84e6084c2c86f3df466005d76e19214644420070%2F0_301_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
 Bottles filled with sand forming camel shapes. Photograph: Alamy 
We walked back down at dusk, hurrying to make sure we were on flat ground 
before the light disappeared completely. There was no one else in the courtyard 
in front of the Treasury, and we walked silently up the Siq in the half light, 
watching the shadows creep up the rock, until it was totally dark. We heard the 
sound of donkeys being led back to their stables, but barely saw them in the 
darkness. As we reached the end of the gorge, we saw the beginnings of 
preparations forPetra by Night 
<http://visitpetra.jo/DetailsPage/VisitPetra/EntertainmentsDetailsEn.aspx?PID=4>
, with candles being lit so tourists can walk along in the late evening.

We stayed at the lovely Petra Palace <http://www.petrapalace.com/index.aspx> 
(doubles/twins from £57 B&B) in Wadi Musa, just a few hundred metres from the 
entrance to the site, and ate in a cafe a few doors down, enjoying small plates 
of hummus,kibbeh (fried lamb meatballs), baba ganoush (chargrilled eggplants), 
tabouleh and stuffed vine leaves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b4d088f3948026fe4b660b80ff0f95a2986071c%2F0_333_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b4d088f3948026fe4b660b80ff0f95a2986071c%2F0_333_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
 Sunrise in Wadi Rum. Photograph: Rhombur/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
On our second day we drove for two hours down to Wadi Rum, the spectacular 
desert that T E Lawrence described as “vast, echoing and godlike”, with its 
rocks like melted wax emerging on the skyline, their colours shifting in the 
light and alien shapes forming from the cavities. We hired a guide,Abdullah 
<https://www.facebook.com/abdallah.difallah>, who drove us to sand dunes where 
we could climb the rocks for amazing views and later we set up camp at the foot 
of a sandstone cliff. Abdullah made a fire and cooked meat-and-vegetable stew 
and potatoes, which we ate by torchlight, and then rolled out carpets on the 
sand so we could bed down in sleeping bags in the open. We woke up before dawn 
to watch the sun rise over the rocks, and walked up one of the cliffs before a 
breakfast of sesame paste halva and tea.

Later in the week we travelled to the Dead Sea for a night, where there were 
just a handful of people floating in the salty water when we arrived at dusk, 
and then 30 miles north of Amman to see Jerash, a huge Graeco-Roman settlement, 
with theatres, colonnades, a hippodrome, triumphal arches, squares and mosaics 
depicting scenes of daily life – all well-preserved after an earthquake in 749 
buried the ruins in sand for centuries. It felt such a privilege to see this 
remarkable place so empty – so unlike the jostling experience of walking 
through the Forum in Rome. In a time when Peru has set a limit on the number of 
people walking the Inca Trail, and residents in Venice are protesting against 
tourist numbers, visiting Jordan feels like being transported back to another 
era, before charter flights and package holidays. When we arrived at 9.30am, 
there was one tour bus in the car park. It got busier towards lunchtime, but 
most of the time we were alone among the amphitheatres and plazas. We drank 
cardamom coffee in the Temple of Artemis, watching lizards dart out from 
between the Corinthium columns, while a stray kitten tried to climb into my 
handbag.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80551c3ccb8b695036bbb6214eb50e4abd125c0c%2F0_80_4743_2846%2F4743.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80551c3ccb8b695036bbb6214eb50e4abd125c0c%2F0_80_4743_2846%2F4743.jpg>
 Jerash. Photograph: Alamy 
Jordan clearly needs tourists to return. The big chain hotels are managing to 
weather the storm by shifting marketing to locals, but the smaller business are 
suffering. “Before 2011, 70% of our business came from Russia, Scandinavia, 
Germany and the UK. Now that has shifted to 70% of our business coming from 
Jordan, Lebanon, Palestine and expat Iraqis,” the manager ofDead Sea Kempinski 
<https://www.kempinski.com/en/dead-sea/hotel-ishtar/> told me. “The bigger 
hotels can shift to weddings and the local market, but those who are most 
affected are the people selling trinkets.”

The Jordanian Tourism Board is fighting back in imaginative ways. It recently 
brought a group of film producers and directors over from Los Angeles to show 
them the country’s superb film locations. It has encouraged Instagram stars to 
come and post picturesque scenes from the desert. They like to remind visitors 
of the number of films made in Jordan, from Lawrence of Arabia toTheeb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/13/theeb-review-bedouin-boy-in-the-fog-of-war>
, which won the Bafta for best foreign film last year, to The Martian and 
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade. The board is optimistic for 2017; UK 
visitors are already up 6% this year and the Russian market is up 1,200%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16eb492b46dd23c6d3fbb9a5b7d2c18d69011942%2F0_603_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jordan%20is%20spectacular%2C%20safe%20and%20friendly%20%E2%80%93%20so%20where%20are%20the%20tourists%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fjordan-petra-amman-holiday-jerash-dead-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16eb492b46dd23c6d3fbb9a5b7d2c18d69011942%2F0_603_2448_2448%2F2448.jpg>
 Amelia Gentleman and Rose in Jordan. Photograph: Amelia Gentleman for the 
Guardian 
Jordan is home to 635,000 refugees from Syria, 80,000 of them in the Zaatari 
refugee camp in the north of the country, and the World Bank has estimated that 
about a third of the country’s nine million population is made up of refugees – 
Palestinians and Iraqis as well as Syrians.

The country’s attitude towards the crisis is in marked contrast to that of 
some other nations. “We welcome refugees: they are our relatives,” said our 
guide in Jerash, Talal Omar. “We have a long history together and we speak the 
same language. You having a good holiday in Jordan is helping Jordan tackle 
that issue. The money that tourists bring in to our country helps pay the 
overheads we have from the refugees.”

I’m not sure that going on holiday in Jordan can be presented as directly 
aiding the refugee crisis, but certainly the reverse is true – that the absence 
of tourism is hugely problematic for the country.


Way to go

The trip to the Dead Sea and Jerash was organised by the Jordan Tourism Board 
<http://www.visitjordan.com/>. Flights were provided by Royal Jordanian 
<http://www.rj.com/en>, which flies Heathrow-Amman direct from around £350 
return. Tourists organising their trip independently are recommended to buy a
Jordan Pass <http://www.jordanpass.jo/>, which includes visa and entry to the 
main sites
 