
José Mourinho has said Paul Pogba is a potential Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> captain, with the 
manager in no doubt the midfielder has all the attributes required to lead the 
team one day.

José Mourinho confident United can sustain winning form against Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league>
Pogba was signed for £89m from Juventus in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-united-sign-paul-pogba-93-million-juventus>
 and after a slow start is becoming a dominant performer and showing why the 
club paid a world-record fee.

Wayne Rooney is the captain, although he is no longer first-choice and may be 
on the bench again on Sunday forthe visit of Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/manchester-united-liverpool-match-preview>
, who are second in the table, five points ahead of United.

Asked if Pogba could lead the club, Mourinho said: “I think he has the 
potential. I think he has the charisma. The ambition. The mentality. He is a 
good professional. Being so young and with so many ingredients, I think he can.”

Despite Pogba becoming a key member of his side, Mourinho was careful not to 
put any added pressure on the player to perform againstLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>. “It is not fair to say a 
player has to be dominant,” he said.

“He is playing amazingly well, no doubts about it, but the team is also 
playing well. I am not expecting the team to play really bad and for one player 
to have all the weight on his shoulders, not Paul, not anyone. I expect the 
team to play well and Paul to be at the level he is playing now regularly.”

Jürgen Klopp: Liverpool have nothing to fear from visit to Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-nothing-to-fear-visit-manchester-united>
The player praised Mourinho’s man-management of him since his return to Old 
Trafford from Italy. “He told me not to listen to anybody, just be focused on 
the pitch and enjoy yourself. That is all I am doing,” the 23-year-old told the 
BBC’s Football Focus. “He talked to me. He made me very comfortable and 
confident.

“He said: ‘You know how to play, do what you want.’ He let me free on the 
pitch. He told me just to enjoy myself. That is it. That is all I need to hear 
from the manager.”

Paddy Crerand, who won the league title and European Cup in the same United 
side as Sir Bobby Charlton in the 1960s, praised Pogba by comparing him to the 
club’s joint-top scorer.

“Paul Pogba is just a special player,” Crerand said. “He is one of those that 
demands the ball all the time. Sometimes, if things don’t go right, one or two 
might hide for a little spell but he wants it constantly.

“You know who was the same? Bobby Charlton. If he made a mistake, he still 
wanted it. Others might go into their shell for a bit but he never would. 
Paul’s the same and I think he’s fantastic.”

United start the weekend 10 points behind the leaders Chelsea but Pogba is 
confident they can catch up and win the title. “You have to believe. We are not 
far off,” he said.

Manchester United’s Memphis Depay is Lyon’s No 1 target, says coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/memphis-depay-manchester-united-lyon>
“I know Chelsea are at the top but this is the Premier League, you never know 
what is going to happen. You have to keep fighting and believing. Inside I feel 
we can still win the league. The team is getting better and better. We all know 
each other now so we feel much better than we did at the start of the season.”

Regarding whether the match with their north-west rivals, whose 18 titles puts 
them second to United’s 20, is still English football’s biggest game, Mourinho 
said: “I don’t know. I know Manchester United is the biggest club in this 
country. I know, you know, everybody knows. I am sorry. It is easy to know.

“I can feel the rivalry is big and for sure, it is a big match. Around the 
world, people will look to this match with special eyes, that’s for sure.”
 