
José Mourinho has come out in favour of a 48-team World Cup finals  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/fifa-world-cup-expansion-48-teams-gianni-infantino>
as the prospect of that substantially expanded tournament heads closer to 
reality.

Gianni Infantino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/gianni-infantino> made 
a commitment to increase the number of competing nations by 50% as part of his 
platform in the Fifa presidential election and Mourinho believes it will 
improve the competition. The decision has proven controversial elsewhere, 
however, with the German FA this week coming out against the proposals. The 
Football Association, meanwhile, is understood to accept the expansion as an 
inevitability; the Fifa council will vote on the plans in Zurich on Tuesday.

Fifa’s Gianni Infantino says federations are in favour of expanding World Cup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/fifa-world-cup-expansion-48-teams-gianni-infantino>
“I’m totally in favour,” Mourinho said to Fifa’s website 
<http://www.fifa.com/the-best-fifa-football-awards/news/y=2017/m=1/news=11-questions-for-jose-mourinho-2862355.html>
. “As a club manager, if the expansion meant more games, less holidays and less 
pre-season for players, I would say no. But it’s important for critics to 
analyse and understand that expansion doesn’t mean more matches.”

One of the proposals for the restructuring of the World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> would involve 16 
groups of three teams, with only two matches per group before a knockout round 
of 32. The Manchester United manager believes this is the right structure for 
developing smaller nations and heightening excitement.

“This way, the two group matches are crucial, then the knockout stage is next 
which brings even more emotion,” Mourinho said. “Teams with less potential and 
experience will probably play two matches and go home. But they would do so 
having improved and gained experience on the pitch.”

The expansion plan is expected to be approved at Tuesday’s meeting of the 
37-member Fifa council, which includes Infantino and also David Gill, the 
former Manchester United chief executive now aFifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> vice-president. The English FA is 
understood to have been happy with the current 32-team tournament but sees an 
expansion as afait accompli. Instead of opposing the plans, it seems set to use 
any influence to try to negotiate the terms of the tournament. Specifics, for 
example the number of places allocated to European teams, will not be decided 
at Tuesday’s meeting.
 