
José Mourinho is adamant Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> will attack Liverpool 
on Sunday in the same fast, incisive style that Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur 
found so difficult to handle at Old Trafford this season.

His side take on their fiercest rivals for the second time this season with 
the mood transformed from when they met at Anfield in October. Then, United 
were under pressure, having already lost two league games and desperate to 
avoid a third defeat. They defended for most of the gameand came away with a 
point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/17/liverpool-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-jurgen-klopp>
.

José Mourinho says Paul Pogba could be future Manchester United captain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/jose-mourinho-jurgen-klopp-manchester-united-liverpool>
Now they are on a high, after nine consecutive wins, and hope to deal a severe 
blow to a Liverpool side yet to win in 2017. And, as Mourinho is keen to point 
out, teams are finding it increasingly difficult to deal with United, 
especially at Old Trafford. In mid-November Arsenal were overrun throughout the 
contest before grabbing a point withan 89th-minute Olivier Giroud header 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/manchester-united-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
. Three weeks laterSpurs were beaten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/manchester-united-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 with another display of powerful play, having no reply to Henrikh Mkhitaryan’s 
first-half strike.

Gone seem the days of draws against, Burnley, Stoke City, West Ham United and 
Everton (as well as Arsenal). Now it is all about winning. And if Europa League 
defeats are disregarded, they are unbeaten against English opposition since the 
defeat at Chelsea on 24 October, a run of 16 outings.

And so, three months after the drab goalless draw at Anfield, Mourinho is in 
no doubt that Liverpool will face a United onslaught this time. He said: “We 
try. We did it against Arsenal and Tottenham. We are going to try to do it 
against Liverpool. Arsenal could not be in control of that match. Tottenham 
could not be in control of that match. Let’s see ifLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> can, against big opponents, 
big players. Everything is more difficult but we are going to try.”

He then outlined why the side is firing so well now. “Because the results are 
better than before, this changes a lot of things. At that time [the Anfield 
match] I had less time working together with my players. Now we know each other 
better, we have a certain way to think and play football. We don’t just have 
good performances, we have good results, we play at home not away [on Sunday]. 
Little details that change a bit. But it’s a big match – let’s enjoy the match.”

Mourinho did not concede the draw between the sides was insipid. “Some people 
say 0-0 is not a good game because no goals,” the 53-year-old said. “I accept 
that way of analysing it but it doesn’t mean I always agree with that. Nil-nil 
can be a good game. If Liverpool are better than us, have more shots, are close 
to winning, then a point is good. If we are the best team and dominate and have 
more chances then a point is a bad result.”

The prize for beating Liverpool is not only bragging rights and a spring in 
the step for their fans. Victory will close the gap to Jürgen Klopp’s side, who 
began the weekend in second, to two points.

“I am not worried about that,” Mourinho said. “I just want to win the next 
match. And no matter what happens against Liverpool, I will want to win against 
Stoke [next Saturday].

“We don’t choose competitions or opponents. No competition is more important 
than another. We just try to win matches while we are improving the team. The 
team has to be improving all the time. Next season has to be better than this 
season. This is our way. We don’t look for nine victories or 10, or six or 
seven, unbeaten in 15 or 16. It is just the next match. Now it is Liverpool and 
we are going to try to win.

José Mourinho and his Chelsea coaches received £8.3m in severance pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/jose-mourinho-chelsea-rui-faria-8m-severance-pay>
“We are in the race to win the next match. After Liverpool, if you ask me I 
will say we want to, and we can, win against Stoke. That is our approach. 
Mathematically the numbers are huge: 18 matches to play, 54 points to play for. 
The last three or four matches with nine, 12 points available; that is the 
moment to say what can we do for up and down. Now is too early.”

Following the 2-0 win against Hull City in the EFL Cup semi-final first leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/manchester-united-hull-city-efl-cup-match-report>
 at Old Trafford on Tuesday night, Mourinho implored the supporters to be more 
raucous for Liverpool’s visit. Now, he said: “What I want I have from them 
since day one, especially because they give us [support] in a difficult moment 
with bad results, and to have the fans with me and the players is the best and 
most important feeling. Now it is just a question of having a little bit extra 
in a match which for them means a little bit more. It’s for them that the match 
means something more.

“They have to make us feel that feeling we felt at Anfield – we felt clearly 
for the Liverpool fans it was more than a match. Now we play at home we have a 
huge percentage of our fans compared with Liverpool fans.

“In modern football there is no more intimidation. These guys are used to 
strong atmospheres. It cannot affect the Liverpool players. A strong atmosphere 
from our fans cannot intimidate the Liverpool players. What it can do is give 
something more to ours. I don’t think it can influence. Anfield was no 
influence on us, not at all; it gave something more to them. That is what Old 
Trafford can do to our boys. That little extra. You are tired but you have a 
little more to give. You are confident, so you are going to be ultra confident. 
But this will not interfere with Liverpool. They come here with stability to do 
their game and follow Jürgen’s game‑plan, what he thinks can be their game. I 
think they will play their game. Our boys, with a special support, they can 
have a special performance.”

There have already been some impressive performances in United’s winning 
streak. If a 10th comes on Sunday by beating Klopp’s resurgent side, then it 
could be argued that Mourinho may be, in his first season, starting to create 
the kind of teak-tough winning machine similar to his previous champion sides 
at Chelsea, Internazionale and Real Madrid.
 