
Donald Trump’s astonishing victory in the US presidential election has made 
one thing abundantly clear: too many Americans – particularly white male 
Americans – feel left behind. It is not just a feeling, it can be seen in the 
data no less clearly than in their anger. And, as I have argued repeatedly, an 
economic system that doesn’t deliver for large parts of the population is a 
failed economic system. So what should President-elect Trump do about it?

Over the past third of a century, the rules of America’s economic system have 
been rewritten in ways that serve a few at the top, while harming the economy 
as a whole, and especially the bottom 80%. The irony of Trump’s victory is that 
it was the Republican party he now leads that pushed for extreme globalisation 
and against the policy frameworks that would have mitigated the trauma 
associated with it. But history matters: China and India are now integrated 
into the global economy. Besides, technology has been advancing so fast that 
the number of jobs globally in manufacturing is declining.

Trumpism could be a solution to the crisis of neoliberalism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/trumpism-solution-crisis-neoliberalism-robert-skidelsky>
The implication is that there is no way Trump can bring a significant number 
of well-paying manufacturing jobs back to the US. He can bring manufacturing 
back, through advanced manufacturing, but there will be few jobs. And he can 
bring jobs back, but they will be low-wage jobs, not the high-paying ones of 
the 1950s.

If Trump is serious about tackling inequality, he must rewrite the rules yet 
again, in a way that serves all of society, not just people like him.

The first order of business is to bolster investment, thereby restoring robust 
long-term growth. Specifically, Trump should emphasise spending on 
infrastructure and research. Shockingly for a country whose economic success is 
based on technological innovation, the GDP share of investment in basic 
research is lower today than it was a half-century ago.

Improved infrastructure would enhance the returns from private investment, 
which has been lagging as well. Ensuring greater financial access for small and 
medium-size enterprises, including those headed by women, would also stimulate 
private investment. A carbon tax would provide a welfare trifecta: higher 
growth as firms retrofit to reflect the increased costs of carbon dioxide 
emissions; a cleaner environment; and revenue that could be used to finance 
infrastructure and direct efforts to narrow America’s economic divide.But, 
given Trump’s position as a climate change denier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/13/the-guardian-view-on-climate-change-trump-spells-disaster>
, he is unlikely to take advantage of this (which could also induce the world 
to start imposing tariffs against US products made in ways that violate global 
climate-change rules).

A comprehensive approach is also needed to improve America’s income 
distribution, which is one of the worst among advanced economies. While Trump 
has promised to raise the minimum wage, he is unlikely to undertake other 
critical changes, such as strengthening workers’ collective bargaining rights 
and negotiating power, and restraining CEO compensation and financialisation.

Regulatory reform must move beyond limiting the damage that the financial 
sector can do and ensure that the sector genuinely serves society.

In April, President Barack Obama’s council of economic advisers released a 
brief showing increasing market concentration in many sectors 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/page/files/20160414_cea_competition_issue_brief.pdf>
 (pdf). That means less competition and higher prices – as sure a way to lower 
real incomes as lowering wages directly. The US needs to tackle these 
concentrations of market power, including the newest manifestations in the 
so-called sharing economy.

America’s regressive tax system – which fuels inequality by helping the rich 
(but no one else) get richer – must also be reformed. An obvious target should 
be to eliminate the special treatment of capital gains and dividends. Another 
is to ensure that companies pay taxes – perhaps by lowering the corporate-tax 
rate for companies that invest and create jobs in America, and raising it for 
those that do not. As a major beneficiary of this system, however, Trump’s 
pledges to pursue policies that benefit ordinary Americans are not credible; as 
usual with Republicans, tax changes will largely benefit the rich.

Trump will probably also fall short on enhancing equality of opportunity. 
Ensuring preschool education for all and investing more in public schools is 
essential if the US is to avoid becoming a neo-feudal country where advantages 
and disadvantages are passed on from one generation to the next. But Trump has 
been virtually silent on this topic.

Restoring shared prosperity would require policies that expand access to 
affordable housing and medical care, secure retirement with a modicum of 
dignity, and allow every American, regardless of family wealth, to afford a 
post-secondary education commensurate with his or her abilities and interests. 
But while I could see Trump, a real-estate magnate, supporting a massive 
housing programme (with most of the benefits going to developers like himself), 
his promised repeal of the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) would leave millions 
without health insurance.(Soon after the election, he suggested he may move 
cautiously in this area.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-appears-to-soften-stance-on-range-of-pledges>

The problems posed by the disaffected Americans – resulting from decades of 
neglect – will not be solved quickly or by conventional tools. An effective 
strategy will need to consider more unconventional solutions, which Republican 
corporate interests are unlikely to favour. For example, individuals could be 
allowed to increase their retirement security by putting more money into their 
social security accounts, with commensurate increases in pension benefits. And 
comprehensive family and sick leave policies would help Americans achieve a 
less stressful work-life balance.

The Oval Office will tame President Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/oval-office-will-tame-us-president-donald-trump>
Likewise, a public option for housing finance could entitle anyone who has 
paid taxes regularly to a 20% down-payment mortgage, commensurate with their 
ability to service the debt, at an interest rate slightly higher than that at 
which the government can borrow and service its own debt. Payments would be 
channeled through the income-tax system.

Much has changed since President Ronald Reagan began hollowing out the 
middle-class and skewing the benefits of growth to those at the top, and US 
policies and institutions have not kept pace. From the role of women in the 
workforce to the rise of the internet to increasing cultural diversity, 
21st-century America is fundamentally different from the America of the 1980s.

If Trump actually wants to help those who have been left behind, he must go 
beyond the ideological battles of the past. The agenda I have just sketched is 
not only about the economy, it is about nurturing a dynamic, open, and just 
society that fulfils the promise of Americans’ most cherished values. But while 
it is, in some ways, somewhat consistent with Trump’s campaign promises, in 
many other ways, it is the antithesis of them.


My very cloudy crystal ball shows a rewriting of the rules, but not to correct 
the grave mistakes of the Reagan revolution, a milestone on the sordid journey 
that left so many behind. Rather, the new rules will make the situation worse, 
excluding even more people from the American dream.

• Joseph Stiglitz is a nobel prizewinner in economics, university professor at 
Columbia University, a former senior vice-president and chief economist of the 
World Bank and chair of the US president’s council of economic advisers under 
Bill Clinton.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>
 