
The chief executive of JP Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/jpmorgan> has warned that the biggest US 
bank could cut as many as 4,000 UK jobs if Britain votes to leave the EU.

Speaking to employees in Bournemouth, Jamie Dimon said Brexit would be a 
terrible deal for the UK economy and jobs, and warned that Britain could find 
itself in a trade war with the EU.

With the chancellor, George Osborne, at his side Dimon said JP Morgan would 
have to act quickly after a vote to leave because it would not be able to 
service its clients around Europe from the UK as it does now.

“I don’t know if it means 1,000 jobs, 2,000 jobs – it could be as many as 
4,000. They will be jobs all round the UK … I don’t want you to worry about it 
but when you vote you should be thinking about something like that,” Dimon told 
employees.
Bloomberg (@business) 
BREAKING: JPMorgan may cut "as many as 4,000 jobs" if #Brexit 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Brexit?src=hash> happens, CEO Jamie Dimon says 
https://t.co/g0F966Xt98 <https://t.co/g0F966Xt98> https://t.co/wzxHxw3Ksi 
<https://t.co/wzxHxw3Ksi>
 <https://twitter.com/business/status/738674465211441152> June 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/business/status/738674465211441152> 
JP Morgan employs about 19,000 people in the UK, with its main offices in 
Canary Wharf, Bournemouth and Glasgow. Dimonhas hinted before that JP Morgan 
could quit or severely reduce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/21/jpmorgan-backs-campaign-to-keep-britain-in-the-eu>
 its activities in the UK if there was a vote to leave the EU but he has not 
put a figure on potential job losses before.

The bank’s Bournemouth operation employs 4,000 people and provides 
technological and operations support for the bank in more than 40 countries.

Dimon said Brexit would harm the UK and EU economies and cause years of 
uncertainty and could lead to a breakup of the EU.


“In a bad scenario, and this is not the worst-case scenario, trade retaliation 
against Britain by countries in the European Union is possible, even though 
this would not be in their own self-interest. Retaliation would make things 
even worse for the British and European economies. And it is hard to determine 
if the long-run impact would strengthen theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> or cause it to break apart.”
 