
JP Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/jpmorgan> Chase agreed to pay 
$264m on Wednesday to settle charges that it employed well-connected Chinese 
“princelings” in order to win business in the Asia-Pacific region.

The settlement with US regulators comes after a three-year investigation into 
a vast foreign bribery scheme that violated the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
(FCPA). It could be the first of several such deals with Wall Street banks.

“JP Morgan engaged in a systematic bribery scheme by hiring children of 
government officials and other favoured referrals who were typically 
unqualified for the positions on their own merit,” said Andrew Ceresney, 
director of the Securities and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) enforcement division.

“JP Morgan employees knew the firm was potentially violating the FCPA yet 
persisted with the improper hiring program because the business rewards and new 
deals were deemed too lucrative.”

The Department of Justice called the scheme “bribery by any other name” and 
said it had recently created three dedicated international corruption squads 
“to combat this type of quid pro quo, and we’ll use all resources at our 
disposal to uncover and put an end to these crimes”.

Starting in 2006 senior Hong Kong-based JP Morgan bankers set up and used a 
“client referral programme”, also referred to as the “sons and daughters 
programme”, to hire candidates referred by clients and government officials.


The bank admitted that some candidates hired under the scheme did little more 
than proof reading but were paid the same amount as entry-level investment 
bankers. In one case bankers in New York told their Hong Kong peers that one 
Chinese hire was unqualified to be an investment banker. But a senior Chinese 
official had said that his hiring would help JP Morgan secure a lucrative role 
in an upcoming initial public offering (IPO) of a state-owned company. A 
position was created for the candidate in New York, and JP Morgan thereafter 
obtained a leading role in the IPO.


JP Morgan Chase to pay $307m for steering investors toward own products
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/18/jp-morgan-chase-307-million-investors-conflict-of-interest>
The DoJ calculates the scheme increased profits at JP Morgan by at least $35m.


“US businesses cannot lawfully seek to gain a business advantage by corruptly 
influencing foreign government officials,” said US attorney Robert Capers of 
the eastern district of New York.

“The common refrain that this is simply how business is done overseas is no 
defence. In this case, JP Morgan employees designed a programme to hire 
otherwise unqualified candidates for prestigious investment banking jobs solely 
because these candidates were referred to the bank by officials in positions to 
award business to the bank. In certain instances, referred candidates were 
hired with the understanding that the hiring was linked to the award of 
specific business. This is no longer business as usual; it is corruption.”


Kara Brockmeyer, chief of the SEC enforcement division’s FCPA unit, said: “The 
misconduct was so blatant that JP Morgan investment bankers created ‘referral 
hires vs revenue’ spreadsheets to track the money flow from clients whose 
referrals were rewarded with jobs. The firm’s internal controls were so weak 
that not a single referral hire request was denied.”


A JPMorgan spokesman said in an email: “The conduct was unacceptable.” The 
hiring program was halted in 2013 and the bank took actions against those 
responsible, the spokesman said.
 