
Argentina have won the Davis Cup for the first time after Juan Martín del Potro
 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/juan-martin-del-potro>, playing with a 
broken finger in his left hand, inspired a stirring comeback against the hosts, 
Croatia, in the final.

Heading into the final day in Zagreb 2-1 ahead, Croatia were on the verge of 
victory whenMarin Cilic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/marin-cilic> surged 
into a two-set lead against Del Potro but the 2009 US Open champion battled 
back to level the match at 2-2 with a 6-7, 2-6, 7-5, 6-4, 6-3 win. That set the 
stage for a deciding rubber and Federico Delbonis swept past Ivo Karlovic 6-3, 
6-4, 6-2 to seal victory for Argentina, who had lost their four previous 
finals. It is the seventh time in Davis Cup history that a country has come 
from 2-1 down in the final to become champions. Out of the game for nearly two 
years and forced to undergo three wrist operations Del Potro’s comeback has 
been the feelgood story for tennis in 2016.

Having won a silver medal for Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina> at the Rio Olympics, his upset 
five-set victory over Britain’s Andy Murray went a long way to sending his 
country into the Davis Cup final, where he won both singles rubbers, having 
overcome Karlovic 6-4, 6-7, 6-3 7-5 on Friday.

He revealed his broken finger after his singles victory. “It happened when I 
tried to catch a ball in the fifth set,” the right-handed Del Potro said. “This 
was an emotionally exhausting match and one of the biggest wins of my career. 
Thanks to all those who prevented me from retiring, I was very close to never 
playing again and, well, here I am.”

Cilic had earlier beaten Delbonis 6-3 ,7-5, 3-6, 1-6 ,6-2. Victory in 
Saturday’s doubles had putCroatia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/croatia> 
within one victory of a second title, having landed their first honour in 2005.

The Argentine fans, including Diego Maradona in the VIP box, treated their 
team to a standing ovation at the end of the tie. The Argentina coach, Daniel 
Orsanic, who has Croatian roots, singled out Del Potro’s heroics.

“What Del Potro did was amazing. He represents his country with so much pride 
and he also showed how good a player he is,” he said. “His achievement today 
borders on the impossible while Federico played a perfect match and was on top 
of every ball throughout the contest.”
 