
A jury in Pennsylvania <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania> has 
awarded more than $7m in damages to a former Penn State University assistant 
football coach who said the school retaliated by firing him after he implicated 
Jerry Sandusky as a molester of young boys.


 The $7.3m in compensatory and punitive damages for Michael McQueary was 
confirmed Kendra Miknis, chief administrator of the centre county court of 
common pleas in Bellefonte, Pennsylvania, Reuters reported.

 McQueary, claiming a loss of reputation and a $140,000-a-year coaching job in 
2012 for his role as a whistleblower inthe scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/penn-state-sexual-abuse-scandal>, had 
sought more than $8 million in damages.

 McQueary, who coached wide receivers for legendary Penn State head coach Joe 
Paterno for eight seasons, told state investigators in 2011 that he had seen 
Sandusky, a retired but still-revered coach, in the shower having sex with a 
young boy 10 years earlier while McQueary was still a graduate student.

 He also implicated Timothy Curley, the university athletic director, and Gary 
Schultz, a Penn State vice president who oversaw the campus police department, 
in a cover-up. Sandusky, now 72, was not arrested for 10 more years.

 Sandusky was tried and convicted in 2012  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/09/jerry-sandusky-sentenced-child-abuse>
of molesting 10 boys and was sentenced to 30 to 60 years in prison.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjury-hands-7m-damages-to-penn-state-whistleblower-in-sandusky-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8be2dcd475e9450491db11ec435ecb441fefb8d5%2F0_132_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jury%20hands%20%247m%20damages%20to%20Penn%20State%20whistleblower%20in%20Sandusky%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjury-hands-7m-damages-to-penn-state-whistleblower-in-sandusky-scandal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jury%20hands%20%247m%20damages%20to%20Penn%20State%20whistleblower%20in%20Sandusky%20scandal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjury-hands-7m-damages-to-penn-state-whistleblower-in-sandusky-scandal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8be2dcd475e9450491db11ec435ecb441fefb8d5%2F0_132_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
 Jerry Sandusky arrives for an appeal court hearing in Bellefonte in May 2016. 
Photograph: ddp USA/REX/Shutterstock 
 Paterno was fired for his role in the Sandusky scandal and died months later. 
McQueary never worked anywhere of note after his dismissal, he said, because 
other schools viewed him as damaged goods. He had ostensibly lost his job 
because the new head coach, Bill O’Brien, did not want him.

 McQueary also claimed in his lawsuit that former Penn State president Graham 
Spanier defamed him in a public statement in 2011 that publicly defended Curley 
and Schultz.

Joe Paterno once again takes spotlight from Jerry Sandusky's victims | Heather 
Long
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/feb/11/joe-paterno-spotlight-sandusky-victims>
 Elliot Strokoff, a lawyer for McQueary, told Reuters earlier Thursday that he 
would not be able to comment on the verdict because Judge Thomas Gavin has a 
gag order in place. Penn State attorney Nancy Conrad told media much the same. 
A university spokesman also declined to comment.

 In an unusual arrangement, the jury ruled on defamation and misrepresentation 
claims made by McQueary against Penn State, but Gavin himself will rule within 
30 days on the whistleblower part of the lawsuit.

 McQueary “should not have been a scapegoat”, Strokoff said during closing 
arguments Thursday morning. “They said that he is the villain and that he is 
only in court because of his own failures.“

 Conrad told jurors in closing that McQueary was not defamed by Spanier in 
2011 and argued that his failure to find a job since 2012 was his own fault, 
not Penn State’s.

 “He was not damaged by any actions of the university,” Conrad said. “If he 
was harmed, it was by national media and public opinion. He failed to find a 
position because of his own shortcomings.”
 