
Ordinary people around the world have been failed by globalisation, Justin 
Trudeau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau> has told the 
Guardian, as he sought to explain a turbulent year marked by the election of 
Donald Trump, the Brexit vote and the rise of anti-establishment, nation-first 
parties around the world.

“What we’re facing right now – in terms of the rise of populism and divisive 
and fearful narratives around the world – it’s based around the fact that 
globalisation doesn’t seem to be working for the middle class, for ordinary 
people,” the Canadian prime minister said in an interview at his oak-panelled 
office in the country’s parliament. “And this is something that we identified 
years ago and built an entire platform and agenda for governing on.”

Last year, at a time when Trump was being described as a long shot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/datablog/2015/dec/09/donald-trump-polls-past-elections-republican-nomination>
 for president and the threat of Brexit seemed a distant possibility, Trudeau, 
44,swept to a majority government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/20/justin-trudeau-set-to-become-pm-as-liberals-sweep-board-in-canada-election>
 on anambitious platform <https://www.liberal.ca/realchange/> that included 
addressing growing inequality and creating real change for the country’s middle 
class.

If we can show you can have growth that works for everyone … that diffuses a 
lot of the uncertainty, the anger
Justin Trudeau 
One year on, what has emerged is a government that seems to go against the 
political tide around the world;open to trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/eu-canada-sign-ceta-free-trade-deal-trudeau-juncker>
,immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/canada-immigration-quota-2017> 
anddiversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/canada-cabinet-gender-diversity-justin-trudeau>
 and led by a social media star whose views onfeminism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/17/justin-trudeau-feminist-twitter-explodes>
,Syrian refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/dec/11/canadian-pm-justin-trudeau-syria-refugees-toronto-video>
 and LGBT rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/04/syrian-refugee-marches-beside-justin-trudeau-canada-pride-parade>
 have provoked delight among progressives.

But as he enters his second year in power, Trudeau – a former high school 
teacher and snowboarding instructor – is under pressure to show the world that 
his government has found an alternative means of tackling the concerns of those 
who feel they’ve been left behind.


He cited the signing of Ceta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/22/eu-and-canada-in-emergency-talks-over-trade-deal-martin-schulz-wallonia>
 – the free trade deal between the EU and Canada – and a hotly contested
decision to approve two pipelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/canada-approves-kinder-morgan-oil-pipeline-justin-trudeau>
 as examples of this approach.

“We were able to sign free trade agreement with Europe at a time when people 
tend to be closing off,” he said. “We’re actually able to approve pipelines at 
a time when everyone wants protection of the environment. We’re being able to 
show that we get people’s fears and there are constructive ways of allaying 
them – and not just ways to lash out and give a big kick to the system.”

Tru love: Canada's year of Justin Trudeau has been a honeymoon, but will it 
last?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/justin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge>
Canada has not remained immune to such pressures, he said – despite what the 
freshwave of interest in migrating to the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/canadas-immigration-website-crashes-as-donald-trumps-us-election-lead-grows>
 in the wake of Trump’s victory and the Brexit vote would suggest. “I think 
there’s a lot of people saying ‘oh well, Canada is a special place,’ and we 
are,” said Trudeau. “But we are subject to the same kinds of tensions and 
forces that so much of the world is facing right now.”

Trudeau said he is keenly aware that the world is watching. “I think it’s 
always been understood thatCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> is 
not a country that’s going to stand up and beat its chest on the world stage, 
but we can be very helpful in modelling solutions that work,” he said. “Quite 
frankly if we can show – as we are working very hard to demonstrate – that you 
can have engaged global perspectives and growth that works for everyone … then 
that diffuses a lot of the uncertainty, the anger, the populism that is 
surfacing in different pockets of the world.”

In January, Trudeau’s government will face off against its greatest challenge 
to date: a Trump presidency. When it comes to US relations,few countries have 
as much at stake as Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/canada-donald-trump-nafta-economy-nato>
 – last year saw nearly three-quarters of Canada’s exports head to the US while 
some 400,000 people a day cross the shared border.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjustin-trudeau-interview-globalisation-climate-change-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F235bde1916462baacc17227ab09bb9d87976c3da%2F0_80_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Justin%20Trudeau%3A%20'Globalisation%20isn't%20working%20for%20ordinary%20people'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjustin-trudeau-interview-globalisation-climate-change-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Justin%20Trudeau%3A%20%27Globalisation%20isn%27t%20working%20for%20ordinary%20people%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjustin-trudeau-interview-globalisation-climate-change-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F235bde1916462baacc17227ab09bb9d87976c3da%2F0_80_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Justin Trudeau: ‘We are subject to the same kinds of tensions and forces that 
so much of the world is facing right now.’ Photograph: Chris Wattie/Reuters 
Trudeau’s father, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister during the 
late 1960s, 70s and 80s,once likened living next to the US 
<http://www.cbc.ca/player/play/1797537698> to sleeping with an elephant. “No 
matter how friendly and even-tempered is the beast, if I can call it that, one 
is affected by every twitch and grunt,” he told the Washington Press Club in 
1969.

'I'm moving to Canada': the cops, pop stars and athletes who made good on the 
threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/dec/14/im-moving-to-canada-the-cops-pop-stars-and-athletes-who-made-good-on-the-threat>
Nearly five decades on, his son is poised to weather what will probably be one 
of the toughest tests of this sentiment. The prime minister and the 
president-elect seem to have little in common; Trudeau is a self-described 
feminist who appointed his country’sfirst gender-balanced cabinet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/canada-cabinet-gender-diversity-justin-trudeau>
, while Trump’s campaign sawmore than a dozen women come forward with 
allegations of sexual misconduct. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/20/donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-tenth-woman-accuser>
 Trudeau has sought to champion trade deals such as Ceta, while Trump has 
threatened to rip up Nafta and bury TPP.

The contrast was captured last December after Trump and Trudeau catapulted 
into global headlines within days of each other over their response to the 
Syrian refugee crisis; Trump, who had called for atemporary ban on Muslims 
entering the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
, suggested thatfamilies fleeing war could be Isis infiltrators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/19/syrian-refugee-families-texas-mexico-border-laredo>
; Trudeau, in contrast was at the Toronto airport to greet the first wave of the
tens of thousands of Syrian refugees airlifted to Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/11/plane-carrying-syrian-refugees-arrives-toronto-canada>
 in the past year.

Trudeau skirted past these differences, instead highlighting the links that 
bridge both administrations. On Syrian refugees, for example, Trudeau pointed 
to underlying concerns around security. “Certainly in a world where terrorism 
is a daily reality in the news, it’s easy for people to be afraid,” he said. 
“But the fact is that we laid out very clearly – and Canadians get – that it’s 
actually not a choice between either immigration or security, that of course 
they go together.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcanadian-pm-justin-trudeau-syria-refugees-toronto-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Canadian%20PM%20Justin%20Trudeau%20greets%20Syrian%20refugees%20in%20Toronto%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcanadian-pm-justin-trudeau-syria-refugees-toronto-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Canadian%20PM%20Justin%20Trudeau%20greets%20Syrian%20refugees%20in%20Toronto%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fcanadian-pm-justin-trudeau-syria-refugees-toronto-video&media=>
Canadian PM Justin Trudeau greets Syrian refugees in Toronto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/dec/11/canadian-pm-justin-trudeau-syria-refugees-toronto-video>
The two governments are also keen to create policies that address those who 
feel that globalisation and trade have failed to benefit the middle class and 
those working to join it, said Trudeau. “There are differences in the policies, 
the solutions for it, but I know that when we talk about making sure there are 
good jobs for the middle class, that is a place where we are going to be able 
to find agreement and alignment on.”

A silver lining for Trudeau may lie in Trump’s pledge to resurrect plans for 
TransCanada’s Keystone XL pipeline. 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/business/trump-says-keystone-xl-news-coming-soon-blasts-f-35-costs-and-the-cia-1.3891799>
 When the Obama administration rejected the plan last year, Trudeau said in a 
statement he was “disappointed” in the decision. When Trudeau called Trump to 
congratulate him after the election, the two briefly spoke about Keystone, said 
Trudeau, adding that it remains to be see how the US will move forward with 
plans for the pipeline.

When people finally realise it’s a tremendous opportunity to lead on climate 
change, Canada will have a head start
Justin Trudeau 
Any reluctance to move forward on climate change south of the border could be 
a boon for Canadian companies across various sectors, said Trudeau. “I know 
Canada is well positioned to pick up some of the slack and when people finally 
realise that it’s a tremendous business opportunity to lead on climate change, 
Canada will already have a head start.”

But he also cast doubt on Trump’s ability to completely derail US efforts 
towards combatting climate change. “You know quite frankly at the subnational 
level in the United States, states, municipalities are already showing that 
they understand that climate change is real so that the potential for the 
federal government to ease off on actions is not total,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjustin-trudeau-interview-globalisation-climate-change-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc42f9d2f724d34459072a0afb03dcd58134729c3%2F0_14_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Justin%20Trudeau%3A%20'Globalisation%20isn't%20working%20for%20ordinary%20people'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjustin-trudeau-interview-globalisation-climate-change-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Justin%20Trudeau%3A%20%27Globalisation%20isn%27t%20working%20for%20ordinary%20people%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjustin-trudeau-interview-globalisation-climate-change-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc42f9d2f724d34459072a0afb03dcd58134729c3%2F0_14_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Trudeau has previously said he was ‘disappointed’ in Obama’s decision to 
reject the plans for TransCanada’s Keystone XL pipeline. Photograph: LM Otero/AP
Last week’s announcement of a national carbon price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/canada-sets-first-national-carbon-price-of-c10-a-tonne>
 is a key part of Trudeau’s environmental policy – one that has been derided by 
environmentalists for enabling the expansion of fossil fuels, compensated by 
initiatives that include investments in clean tech and promises to phase out 
federal subsidies for oil and gas companies. The policy saw Trudeau recently
approve a liquefied natural gas project in British Columbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/28/canada-pacific-northwest-lng-natural-gas-pipeline-british-columbia>
 as well as two pipelines that will offer Alberta’s oil sands nearly a million 
barrels a day in increased capacity.

The approvals have sparked broad opposition among environmentalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/canada-kinder-morgan-pipeline-expansion-protest>
, some First Nations and several of the communities affected by the planned 
infrastructure projects. “There is a number of people out there who’ve always 
[believed] if you stop pipeline, you stop the oil sands,” said Trudeau. “Well, 
actually as we’ve seen, it doesn’t work that way and what we end up with is 
much more oil by rail.”

Trudeau to be questioned by ethics watchdog over reports of cash for access
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/justin-trudeau-to-be-questioned-political-fundraisers-ethics>
The discontent has chipped away at Trudeau’s unprecedented political honeymoon,
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/justin-trudeau-canada-first-year-prime-minister-global-stage-challenge>
along with revelations of fundraisers thatoffered access to Trudeau and his 
ministers for a price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/justin-trudeau-under-pressure-amid-cash-for-access-fundraising-claims>
, a government decision to push forward with a C$15bn ($11bn) deal tosell 
weaponised military vehicles to Saudi Arabia 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/politics/the-saudi-arms-deal-what-weve-learned-so-far/article28180299/>
 amid outcry by human rights organisations as well as speculation that his 
government is moving away froma promise to reform the country’s voting system. 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/wherry-trudeau-electoral-reform-1.3811862> 
Still,recent polls suggest that 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/grenier-quarterly-polls-nov2016-1.3883456> 
were Canada to hold an election today, Trudeau’s team would earn an even 
greater proportion of votes than they did last year.

The government’s environmental policy takes a long view on the transition to a 
carbon-free economy, said Trudeau. “It’s not going to happen in a day, or in a 
week, but it will happen over years and perhaps a decade or two,” he said. “I 
know there are people out there extremely passionate about the environment, who 
don’t think I made the right decision on approving a couple of pipelines. But I 
think that everyone can see at least what it is we’re trying to do and that 
we’re consistent with what I’ve always said which is, you protect the 
environment and you build a strong economy at the same time.”

The double-barrelled approach, said Trudeau, echoes his government’s broader 
effort to address the tensions currently wreaking havoc on the political status 
quo around the world. “People get that we need jobs, we need a protected 
environment,” he said. “On the other hand, if people have no jobs, if they have 
no opportunity, they’re not going to worry about protection of the air and 
water if they can’t feed their kids.”


 