
Katie Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/katie-mitchell> provokes 
strong reactions. Some think of her as a vandal, ripping apart classic texts 
and distorting them to her own dubious purpose. Others consider her to be the 
most important British director of theatre and opera at work today – indeed, 
among the greatest in the world. Her critics characterise her as high-minded 
and humourless, a kind of hatchet-faced governess intent on feeding her 
audiences with the improving and bleak. Others, though, talk about her 
gentleness, empathy and swiftness to burst into a joyous and slightly dirty 
laugh. One theatre professional told me that some agents only reluctantly put 
forward actors for Mitchell’s productions because of her fearsome reputation; 
and yet there are actors who have worked with her for 30 years.

But if Mitchell is indeed Britain’s greatest living theatre director, 
audiences in this country have not had many chances in recent years to see her 
most ambitious work. In 2015, she did not open a single production in the UK. 
Instead, Mitchell has been largely directing in Germany and France, 
crisscrossing the continent by train, always working on five or six projects at 
once: theHandel opera Alcina 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/15/arts/music/handel-alcina-mozart-aix-festival.html?_r=0>
, a version of Stanisław Lem’s novel Solaris, a production of Donizetti’s opera 
Lucia di Lammermoor, another of Debussy’s Pelléas et Mélisande, a theatre 
version of two novels by the Romanian Nobel laureate Herta Müller, a new opera 
based on Neil Gaiman’s story Coraline, an adaptation of a French novel (she was 
agonising over whether to choose Duras, Yourcenar or de Beauvoir) and a 
feminist rewriting of Hamlet seen from the point of view of Ophelia’s bedroom. 
(Somewhat outrageously for a British director, Mitchell has only ever directed 
one Shakespeare play and has no intention of ever doing so again.)

Katie Mitchell, British theatre’s queen in exile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/feb/01/katie-mitchell-british-theatres-queen-in-exile>
When occasionally she comes to a pause in London, Mitchell works in a 
featureless room up a narrow, low-ceilinged staircase in a row of old 
warehouses near Elephant and Castle. Her friend and fellow director, Richard 
Jones, once described her to me as “Edwardian” – and there is something 
starched and straight-spined in her bearing, an impression that is amplified by 
the precision and care with which she speaks, and her severity of dress. When I 
visited her at the studio on a balmy day in the spring of 2015, she was wearing 
plain black lace-ups, black culottes and a black T-shirt, and the only colour 
about her was her blue eyes. She projects a sense of zeal and focus that can 
make one’s own ways feel casual and slipshod. But there is no froideur about 
her, nor indeed any braggadocio.

Mitchell arouses criticism in Britain chiefly through the manner in which she 
takes complete artistic control of every aspect of the work, including the 
script – assuming the mantle of an auteur. Her speciality,the Telegraph’s 
critic once wrote 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/theatre/drama/3669609/Women-of-Troy-Euripides-all-roughed-up.html>
, “is smashing up the classics”. Michael Billington, the Guardian’s critic, 
once accused her of “director’s theatre at its most indulgent”. (The phrase 
comes from the GermanRegietheater – and “director’s theatre” is considered an 
especially Germanic affliction.) He told me that while he admires Mitchell’s 
seriousness of purpose, her “delightful” manner and some of her work, he 
strongly resists her “placing herself above the text”. The problem with 
director-dominated productions, he argued, was that the experience of seeing 
them became all about “what Katie did next” rather than about the expression of 
the ideas of the writer. He added: “I believe that the director is there to 
realise the author’s intentions with the best performers available.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5335c8f2e227d2db744ce34d717630b8ac791e8%2F0_201_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Katie%20Mitchell%2C%20British%20theatre%E2%80%99s%20queen%20in%20exile%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Katie%20Mitchell%2C%20British%20theatre%E2%80%99s%20queen%20in%20exile%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5335c8f2e227d2db744ce34d717630b8ac791e8%2F0_201_3504_2103%2F3504.jpg>
 Hattie Morahan and Ben Whishaw in Katie Mitchell’s 2006 production of The 
Seagull at the National Theatre, for which the director was labelled a 
‘vandal’. Photograph: Alastair Muir/Rex 
Benedict ­Cumberbatch called her a real ­European master craftswoman

When Mitchell talked about the reaction, in 2006, to her production for the 
National Theatre of The Seagull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/jun/28/theatre1>, the one that got her 
labelled a “vandal” – some felt that the text had been changed so much that it 
could no longer be thought of as Chekhov at all – she seemed a little wistful 
and self-searching. There was a feeling of having been misunderstood. “To make 
a text written however many hundred years ago live now in a way that to a 
director is satisfactory – sometimes cutting can be a way of doing that, or 
making certain dramaturgical choices. It’s not so culturally normal to do that 
in Britain, but it’s culturally normal in Holland or Germany,” she said. “A lot 
of very careful thought went into understanding the material Chekhov had 
written; there were hours of labour, very seriously intended. It is very 
difficult when there is a feeling that a travesty has been created when you 
have handled it so carefully. That wasn’t what one was aiming to do. But I 
wonder if that says more about those who said it than it does me?”

What enrages some British critics is precisely what many others admire about 
Mitchell: the fact that she stamps such a strong authorial mark on her work, 
that her style is as recognisable as Van Gogh’s or Picasso’s. “Katie dares to 
bring a text on stage in a very personal way. You could put me in a theatre and 
ask me, ‘Who has done this?’, and I would immediately say, ‘Katie Mitchell’,” 
saidIvo van Hove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/01/ivo-van-hove-antigone-edinburgh-festival>
, the revered artistic director of the Dutch theatre company Toneelgroep 
Amsterdam. “There is a personality behind the work. It is not 
middle-of-the-road theatre, well done.” Benedict Cumberbatch, who acted in her 
production ofMartin Crimp’s The City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/apr/30/theatre2> at the Royal Court in 
2008, told me Mitchell was “a real European master craftswoman: an auteur who 
takes risks and continually creates beautiful work”.

“She is a zealot,” Richard Jones said. “She doesn’t do generically imagined 
productions – and there are a lot of generic directors about. The British in 
particular want sentiment, and so do a lot of actors. She just doesn’t do that. 
She doesn’t render pulsating masterpieces into Downton Abbey. She’s much more 
important than anyone else, and I don’t think people get that.”

* * *

What, precisely, does a theatre director do? It is hard for audiences to know: 
after all, she departs the scene at just the point that the public are invited 
into the room. The director’s job, seen at its broadest, is to create an 
intellectual and imaginative framework for the action of the play. The text, 
the design, the lighting, the sound, the music – and the acting – all play 
their roles in creating this world. David Lan, the artistic director of the 
Young Vic theatre in London, once told me: “The art of directing is to make 
actors do exactly what you want – while making them think that they came up 
with it themselves.” But there are as many ways of being a director as there 
are directors. Mitchell has herself written a book about the job. In its 
foreword, Sir Nicholas Hytner, then the artistic director of the NationalTheatre
 <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, observed: “In the British 
theatre, most directors become directors by saying, ‘I am a director!’ and 
hoping that someone will believe them.”

When Dante was writing the Inferno it was said his pages were charred. Katie’s 
scripts should be singed
David Lan 
There are many ways of being a director, but there is no doubting when one is 
in the presence of a work by Katie Mitchell. “When Dante was writing the 
Inferno, it was said that his pages were charred,” Lan said. “I don’t know 
whether Katie’s scripts are singed, but they should be.” Dark material is a 
hallmark of Mitchell’s productions, as if she wants to lead us to the ghastly 
depths of human behaviour and force us to understand it: the idea of her 
directing a comedy is as unthinkable as her directing a Broadway show.

Her actors convey a sense of minutely observed, psychologically accurate 
naturalism. In her shows, actors do not declaim: if they are anxious or 
frightened, they stumble anxiously or fearfully over their words, to the 
detriment, sometimes, of audibility. That fear or anxiety, too, is strongly 
embodied: physical language does much of the work. Mitchell’s actors never look 
out beyond the stage to address the audience directly, for that would be to 
suggest that the theatrical illusion is not complete. The lighting is also 
naturalistic, to the detriment, sometimes, of visibility. She takes pleasure in 
a certain kind of set: a slightly dilapidated 19th-century interior, often 
designed byVicki Mortimer <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/vicki-mortimer>, with 
whom she has worked for three decades. She tends to choose plays that happen in 
one place, over a fixed period, and so scene changes are the exception rather 
than the rule. Watching, it is as if one is spying on real life as it unfolds 
in real time.

Over the past decade, Mitchell has also developed an entirely new way of 
working. In parallel with her naturalistic productions, she has collaborated 
with the film-maker Leo Warner to create works in which performers manipulate 
cameras and props so that images (often extreme close-ups) are projected on to 
a screen. Describing her multimedia production of Strindberg’s Miss Julie for 
the Schaubühne in Berlin, the critic Andrew Haydon – who has also written about 
Mitchell for academic publications – said that it was “like watching a Merchant 
Ivory film being made in front of your eyes”.

Such characteristics might help one spot a Mitchell production, but hardly 
convey what it is like to see one. Live theatre is the most fleeting of art 
forms. It is made and remade for its audience. Afterwards, it exists only in 
the memory. Eleven years ago, I saw Mitchell’s production of Iphigenia in 
Aulis, Euripides’ play set on the brink of the Trojan war. The set was a 
characteristic shabby-grandiose interior. Men with clipboards hurried about 
grimly, full of warlike self-importance. Into this world arrived, with a kind 
of magnificent inappropriateness, a flock of society women expecting a wedding. 
(Agamemnon, the Greek commander, had summoned his wife, Clytemnestra, and 
daughter, Iphigenia, on the pretext of a marriage for the girl; in reality he 
intended to sacrifice her to the gods to secure a fair wind.) Suitcase after 
suitcase arrived with this feminine retinue. There was a collision of frippery 
and horror that produced a sense of enormous anxiety.

From time to time, the chorus broke into fragments of dance that recalled the 
choreography of the German dance-theatre artist Pina Bausch, an important and 
lasting influence on Mitchell. As Iphigenia (quivering, terrified) was killed, 
a tremendous blast of wind rushed through the set, hurling the men’s officious 
paperwork into the air. There were more women than men on the stage – which is 
still rare in theatre – and the work had quite clearly been directed by a 
woman, focusing its attention on the confusion, fear and strength of the female 
characters. I remember feeling discombobulated, even irritated, by the 
production at the time. But to this day I find sharp shards of it lodged in my 
memory: it kept working on me.

To achieve the particular psychological exactitude she requires, Mitchell 
looks outside the British theatre tradition, using techniques that derive from 
the theories of the late 19th-century Russian director Konstantin Stanislavsky 
(which also later shaped the principles behind “method” acting). The playwright 
Simon Stephens recalled his surprise and bewilderment when Mitchell, directing 
the debut of his play Wastwater at the Royal Court in 2011, sent him 225 
questions about the script before rehearsals had even begun.

Wastwater has three scenes, each centring on a dialogue between a different 
man and a woman, each played out in a different location on the margins of 
Heathrow airport. “Say the first scene was between Charlotte and Simon having 
coffee,” Stephens recalled. “The kind of questions would be, ‘How many cups of 
coffee has Simon already had this morning? How long was the walk that Charlotte 
took to get here? How late was she? How anxious was she about being late? What 
was the temperature of the changing room that Simon was in at the swimming 
pool?’ I was thinking, ‘This is all bollocks.’” He filled out the questionnaire 
with increasing impatience, sometimes with joke answers.

On the first day of rehearsal, Stephens expected to begin with a read-through 
of the play – an almost universal convention, and in the case of a new work, a 
nice boost to the writer’s ego. But no. “Katie and her assistant director had 
compiled a 50-page document based on my answers, detailing the buildup to these 
three scenes,” Stephens said. “So we sat and read these 50 pages – which of 
course included my joke answers – the equivalent of ‘Simon’s had 24 cups of 
coffee.’”

The actor Angus Wright, who was in that production, admitted that for some 
actors, Mitchell’s way of working “can seem quite arid and precise” – there is 
a lot of sitting down with a pencil and paper before an actor gets to try 
something out. But she wants the actor to step out into a world that is 
complete – “in which you know where you have just come from, the car you 
travelled in, how you walked into the room from the front door.” Cumberbatch 
said that working with her was like attending an “acting gym” – an 
“all-consuming process” that involved everything “from analysing the script and 
breaking it down, to defining character through research and improvisation”. It 
is not a process for everyone: “It’s a schooling in acting, so you have to want 
to go along with that”. But, he said, “I adored the experience.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83d4ea71d611f749db4c4c813c1700f45a83420a%2F0_271_4141_2484%2F4141.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Katie%20Mitchell%2C%20British%20theatre%E2%80%99s%20queen%20in%20exile%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Katie%20Mitchell%2C%20British%20theatre%E2%80%99s%20queen%20in%20exile%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83d4ea71d611f749db4c4c813c1700f45a83420a%2F0_271_4141_2484%2F4141.jpg>
 Julia Wieninger (centre) in a 2014 production of Samuel Beckett’s Footfalls 
directed by Katie Mitchell. Photograph: Christian Jungeblodt 
The German actor Julia Wieninger, another of Mitchell’s regular collaborators, 
recalled that the cast of Martin Crimp’s The Rest Will Be Familiar to You from 
Cinema, a free adaptation of Euripides’ Phoenician Women, were asked to conduct 
extensive research into bronze age Thebes. “How was it built? Where were its 
seven gates? How far away was the invading army?” Having gathered such 
information, she and fellow actors improvised together to build character 
biographies and shared backstories. Saying the actual lines was a final touch 
applied to an already elaborately constructed edifice.

The eventual production, however, bore no signs of Thebes’s seven gates or the 
bronze age. It was set in another rundown 19th-century interior; all the 
characters were dressed in modern, black clothes. The chorus of young women 
were absolutely in control of the protagonists (a reversal of the usual power 
dynamic in Greek drama). The women appeared to be forcing the terrified main 
characters to say their lines, to repeat and relive actions that had been 
played out before. Sometimes the chorus would “rewind” – perform a series of 
actions in reverse, sometimes almost a whole scene, which was both dazzling to 
watch and deeply strange. Seeing the work in Hamburg one drizzly December 
night, I was mesmerised and excited. The friend I was with was enraged, finding 
it obfuscatory and bewildering.

* * *

Mitchell has a problem with Shakespeare: an “aversion”, she said. We had met 
on a chilly winter evening in London, after she had finished a day rehearsing 
Beckett’s Happy Days, a production destined for Hamburg. Had it not been for 
the regular explosion of Mitchell’s laughter – Stephens calls it her “Sid James 
laugh”, after the lascivious cackle of the Carry On actor – she would have 
seemed as unwaveringly serious as an abbess.

Shakespeare's plays are too long, she says. Then there's the difficult 
language and the weight of performance history

She loves reading Shakespeare’s plays – “they are fantastic poems with lovely 
moments of naturalistic live action”. But directing them? For a start, they are 
too long. Then there’s the difficult language, alien to modern ears. Then 
there’s the weight of each play’s performance history: the very British sense 
that there is a finite set of respectable ways for classic works to be 
directed. “The texts themselves and the history of their productions have got 
muddled,” she said. “So if you try to scrape the barnacles off, say, a Chekhov 
and give it a bit of a zing that it might have had when it was first radically 
produced, they get very, very, upset.”

It is perhaps odd, then, that Mitchell began her career at the Royal 
Shakespeare Company. She was 23; Adrian Noble had recently taken over as 
artistic director. She began by assisting directors such as Deborah Warner and 
later directed Ibsen, Strindberg, Euripides and Beckett.

The one Shakespeare she tackled was Henry VI Part 3. It was 1994; she was 29. 
The play was well-received, but afterwards, she recalled, John Barton, the 
great Shakespearean director, took her aside and said, “‘You know, it’s not bad 
work, but every single character is miscast, the narrative is not clear and 
every single line of verse is mauled. Oh, and you didn’t really do the battles. 
But other than that...’.” Looking back on her RSC years, she became melancholy. 
“Maybe I just started off in the wrong field,” she said. “Maybe entering the 
world of mainstream British theatre at all was a wrong turning.”

She told me this one afternoon in June, in Aix-en-Provence, where she was 
directing Handel’s Alcina. It was the end of the day’s rehearsals and she had 
returned to her rented flat, in the hills above the town. After swimming 
lengths in her landlord’s pool, she put on a blue sundress – the only time I 
saw her out of “uniform”.

Mitchell, who is 51, grew up in Hermitage, a village in Berkshire. Her mother 
was a cook and her father a dentist with artistic yearnings – “someone who was 
always searching for something”. (He later became a handpress printer, and 
experimented with the self-sufficiency movement.) The family watched Bergman 
and Antonioni films on BBC2. She started directing at boarding school at 16: 
among her first productions was Harold Pinter’s 1981 radio play, Family Voices. 
At 17, she founded her own company and took Tom Stoppard’s absurdist play After 
Magritte to Edinburgh. When I suggested this conveyed unusual drive, she 
bridled slightly. “I just liked doing it. I liked the organisation of it.”

After graduating from Oxford, she wrote to Peter Brook, the director of 
Bouffes du Nord in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/dec/24/peter-brook-bouffes-nord-theatre>
, and the presiding deity of British theatrical avant-gardeists. (His radical 
1970 production of A Midsummer Night’s Dream, set in a white box and eschewing 
period dress, remains a key moment in theatre history.) “He was the god. He was 
the big British director out there in Europe,” she said. He sent back a 
handwritten letter, and she headed to Paris. “I remember the nerves of it. I 
remember his blue eyes. I wanted to be his assistant – not a chance, of 
course.” (Things have come full circle: she will make her debut at the Bouffes 
in 2018.)

That evening, she went to the Châtelet theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ch-telet-theatre> to see one of Pina 
Bausch’s most famous dance-theatre works, Nelken (Carnations). Bausch, who died 
in 2009, was one of the most influential theatre-makers of the 20th century. 
With her company Tanztheater Wuppertal, she conjured a dark, magical, intense 
world, rooted in the language of dance but with its own singular idiom. Nelken 
took place on a stage strewn with thousands of pink flowers, and patrolled by 
Alsatian dogs.

“I just sat and cried: first because it was so beautiful, and second because 
it was made by a woman, and I hadn’t seen much work made by a woman,” Mitchell 
recalled. “The metaphors, the selection of images, the interaction between men 
and women, the fragments of narrative: the gender politics were very certain, 
very strong, very definite. There was no male gaze in the work. And it was very 
violent, you know – and very poetic.” Years later, invited to dine with Bausch, 
Mitchell surreptitiously fished one of her lipstick-stained cigarette ends out 
of the ashtray – she still has it.

While at the RSC, Mitchell did all she could to learn from eastern Europe. In 
1989, as the Soviet empire collapsed, she travelled around Poland, Georgia and 
Lithuania, learning from the artists she sought out. In St Petersburg, she 
observed Lev Dodin, the head of the Maly theatre, as he trained directors. 
“What he put them through! The first-year students had been to the zoo to look 
at animals, and they were doing a physical re-enactment of them. This guy was 
standing on one leg being the flamingo he’d seen. He was being annihilated. 
Dodin would say: ‘Is your bird hungry? Is it conscious or not conscious? Is it 
cold or hot?’ It was so rigorous, so thorough. He was watching everything. He 
was like a hawk.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f05ca5431816813fa4c0761fd3c587ba8217d73%2F0_58_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Katie%20Mitchell%2C%20British%20theatre%E2%80%99s%20queen%20in%20exile%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Katie%20Mitchell%2C%20British%20theatre%E2%80%99s%20queen%20in%20exile%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f05ca5431816813fa4c0761fd3c587ba8217d73%2F0_58_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Paul Ready, Kate Duchene and Liz Kettle in Katie Mitchell’s production of 
Waves at the National Theatre (2006). Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
After a stint as an associate director at the Royal Court in the 1990s, 
Nicholas Hytner, then the new artistic director of the National Theatre, 
invited her to join him. During her first years as an associate director, she 
found him extremely supportive, she said – especially in stiffening her resolve 
to make her firstforay into multimedia in 2006 with Waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/nov/11/theatre.stage>, a version of 
Woolf’s novel.

But over time, their relationship become “dysfunctional”, she said. In 2011 
she made the last of her 13 productions there. “It took several years for it to 
become clear,” she said of the period before her resignation, “but in 
retrospect I think there was a dislike [from Hytner] of the work I was making 
and a desire to rechannel my creative energies into safer territory for his 
repertoire, like children’s shows, until suddenly it seemed that was all that I 
was doing.”

In 2005, Mitchell had a little girl, Edie. “My career wasn’t in very good 
shape during the early period of Edie’s childhood, and it was very hard.” 
(Mitchell and Edie’s father did not remain together.) “The childcare comes in 
at over £30,000 a year, and my earnings would never be at £30,000 a year. I had 
to try to double my earnings. One of the hardest things Nick Hytner said to me 
was, ‘You’re only making work for money.’ I looked at him and thought: just 
even begin to understand what territory you’re heading into to with a woman in 
this situation. It was a startling moment.”

Hytner told me that the early productions she made at the theatre – including 
Chekhov’s Three Sisters, Waves and Iphigenia at Aulis – were “among the best 
and most beautiful I’ve ever seen”. But, he said, “I regret very much that with 
some of Katie’s work, we disagreed about certain basic principles – audibility 
and visibility of the action, for instance – and our professional relationship 
suffered.”

It was as things were becoming difficult at the National, however, that an 
unexpected invitation came from Europe – from the then artistic director of the 
Schauspiel theatre in Cologne, Karin Beier. At first, Mitchell demurred. “I 
said, ‘Karin, it’s too difficult: I can’t read anything, I don’t know anything 
about the language or the country, how on earth can I direct actors?” And she 
said, ‘Oh come on, Katie, it’s a favour, we’re old friends.’”

The play was Wunschkonzert (Request Programme), a 1970s one-woman play by 
Franz Xaver Kroetz about the last five hours in a woman’s life: the character 
listens to a request show on the radio, and, at length, commits suicide. 
Mitchell directed with the help of a literal translation. In the show, 
black-clad men surrounded the solitary single female figure, filming her total 
despair. The radio music was produced by a string quartet, placed in a glass 
box. Mitchell felt liberated: she was being asked to go further than she dared, 
not rein herself in. Wunschkonzert won the ultimate theatrical accolade in the 
German-speaking world: a slot at the Theatertreffen, the Berlin drama festival, 
where the best productions of the year are celebrated. More invitations flooded 
in. It is in Germany, now, that she feels she can make – is pushed to make – 
her most radical, her most feminist, work.

What makes Germany different from Britain in its relationship to the theatre, 
she said, was history, particularly the history of the 20th century. “You have 
to go back to Auschwitz,” she said. “It is not a matter of aesthetics.” In 
other words, an impulse to question and deconstruct on the German stage has 
arisen from the great jagged scar of the second world war. Any sense of 
theatrical heroism, or of authority, including the authority of a text, is 
ideologically questionable. It is a cultural difference between two closely 
intertwined nations that goes deep. As Neil MacGregor, the former director of 
the British Museum, remarked in a recent BBC documentary on Germany: “The 
British tend to use their history to comfort themselves … the Germans use it as 
a challenge to behave better in the future.”

* * * 

In June, I spent two days watching Mitchell work on Alcina, which she was 
preparing for the annual opera festival at the Grand Théâtre of 
Aix-en-Provence. (She was commuting to France, as always, by train: she eschews 
flying for environmental reasons, and has an encyclopedic knowledge of European 
rail connections.) The story – involving disguises, potions, magic rings, 
enchantments, knights and witches – is based on the romantic epic Orlando 
Furioso, by the 16th-century Italian poet Ludovico Ariosto. The bones of it are 
that Alcina and her sister Morgana are enchantresses who preside over a magical 
island, where they transform passing male visitors into rocks, animals, plants 
or waves.

In the studio, the performers were working in a rough approximation of Chloe 
Lamford’s two-storey set, yet another lived-in 19th-century interior. Mitchell 
sat erect, facing the performers as they repeated fragments of the action. She 
was flanked by the assistant director, Dan Ayling, and choreographer Joseph 
Alford; beyond them radiated, in a long row, the stage manager, designer, 
lighting designer, costume designer, music staff and their various assistants – 
plus a piano and harpsichord standing in for the orchestra. In the dimness, a 
dozen laptop screens glowed.

There was a curious contrast between the ordinariness of much of the work and 
the otherworldly power of the principals

Watching Mitchell and her team at work I felt as if I had been transported to 
a factory floor in which something was being made with immense precision, but 
through often opaque and arcane processes. There was a curious contrast between 
the ordinariness of much of the work (solving small logical problems, requiring 
many repetitions of fragments of action) and the otherworldly power of the 
principals – soprano Patricia Petibon and countertenor Philippe Jaroussky – in 
full voice. Mitchell hardly ever got up from her seat; nor did she ever raise 
her voice. When she issued an instruction she would tell Ayling, who, like an 
NCO would repeat the instruction at greater volume, and spring up, clutching 
his vocal score, which bristled with sticky notes.

Mitchell did not herself follow a score, as if the printed page would impede 
her scrutiny of the performers. She would often hoot with laughter – “Oh my 
days!” – or speak terrible franglais – “Now, put onles gants!” (The cast was a 
mix of French, German, Polish, British and Serbian nationals.) She was always 
scrupulously gentle and polite: one of her instructions to the actors playing 
Alcina’s staff began, “Now, lovely servants...” She never said that anything 
was “good” or “bad”, but rather, “clear” or “unclear”. Anna Prokohova, who sang 
Morgana, said: “She beats the operatic pathos out of you. She wants you walk 
through a door like you would really walk through a door; pick up a pencil like 
you would pick up a pencil.” Naturalism and opera are uneasy bedfellows. 
Mitchell was aware that requesting “that someone put on makeup while they are 
singing a difficult coloratura sequence is a really big ask”.

The production was unswervingly feminist. Alcina and Morgana ruled a realm 
designed to further their sexual pleasure. Their desire was portrayed without 
judgment. Male visitors to the island were put through a magical device (a 
contrivance resembling the baggage-security machine at Eurostar terminals) that 
turned them into stuffed animals. “People tend to duck the magic factor of the 
opera and play it out as a romantic comedy,” Mitchell said, “or play the 
romantic side of things and not look at the feminist side of things, which is 
that two women run something that is very efficient, that pleasures them.” As 
Le Monde’s critic gleefully pointed out, there was “un cunnilingus dès la 
deuxième scène” – cunnilingus right from the second scene.

Over the past 30 years, Mitchell told me, she has attended innumerable 
meetings to discuss why there are “a lot of women at the beginning of their 
careers [in theatre] and none, really, or only a very few, at the top”. Slowly, 
slowly, there have been signs of change: more women running theatres. “But 
there is something much more subtle,” she said, “and that is what we see on our 
stages: how women are represented, how relationships between men and women are 
represented. In opera, you feel that sometimes people can go and watch 
representations of women that are frankly antediluvian and that is seen as 
acceptable because it is tucked into this thing called opera. But for me it 
isn’t acceptable.” The same goes for theatre. Her production of Strindberg’s 
Miss Julie, for the Berlin Schaubühne, was seen entirely through the eyes of 
its apparently least important character, the put-upon servant Kristin. “She 
wrestled a misogynist text to the floor and put bullets in the back of its 
head,” said Haydon.

She wrestled a misogynist text [Miss Julie] to the floor and put bullets in 
the back of its head
Andrew Haydon 
At lunchtime, Mitchell, Ayling, Alford and Lamford went to a local bistro for 
lunch. The calm spell of the rehearsal room was lifted. Mitchell put on 
sunglasses and greedily soaked up the sun. It turned out that there were 
numerous tensions – most of which had been invisible to me – that required 
careful handling. One singer had complained that his costume was too hot (“I 
will die if I wear a jacket to the end of act three”, he had announced) – 
meaning a possible redesign, with budgetary consequences. Another was refusing 
to sing if the air conditioning was switched on. Another, who had a virtuosic 
aria to sing during a complicatedly choreographed sex scene, had been 
despondent, almost tearful, after a run-through. All these troubling matters 
were addressed away from the rehearsal room – the job of which was to provide 
an atmosphere that was “light and efficient and precise”, Mitchell said. “As a 
director you have a role that is very simple: to say whether it’s clear or not. 
That is the job: to watch in detail and make sure it is precise for the 
audience, second by second.”

* * *

A great deal of Mitchell’s worldview is set out in her book, The Director’s 
Craft: A Handbook for the Theatre, which describes, step by step, her way of 
working. It can seem at times almost amusingly plodding (“ask your stage 
management to buy tea, coffee and biscuits for the first days of rehearsals”). 
It is characteristically clear and patient in its tone, even if some readers 
regard its lengthy instructions for the making of a production as impossibly 
demanding. She frequently teaches, and a generation of young theatre directors 
– including Lyndsey Turner, Lucy Kerbel and Carrie Cracknell – have assisted 
her and learned at her side.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F576a5d68fbde7ee93fbf5a67aa79ea2a41099398%2F0_245_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Katie%20Mitchell%2C%20British%20theatre%E2%80%99s%20queen%20in%20exile%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Katie%20Mitchell%2C%20British%20theatre%E2%80%99s%20queen%20in%20exile%20%7C%20Charlotte%20Higgins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fbritish-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F576a5d68fbde7ee93fbf5a67aa79ea2a41099398%2F0_245_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Hattie Morahan and Benedict Cumberbatch in Katie Mitchell’s 2008 production of 
The City at the Royal Court. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
According to Turner (who recently directed Cumberbatch as Hamlet at the 
Barbican in London) Mitchell’s methodology is deeply liberating because it 
demystifies directing by showing “that there are steps you can take to narrow 
the gap between the play as it exists in your imagination and the work you’ll 
eventually see on stage”. This aspect of Mitchell’s project is quietly 
political: directing is shown to involve a set of skills that can be acquired 
and polished – rather than, as Turner put it, “having been to a certain kind of 
university, the ability to talk about plays in a certain way, or the possession 
of bucketloads of charisma.”

Turner said that it is a habit of hers to go round to Mitchell’s place in 
south London after her shows “for a bottle of wine and a debrief, when she will 
slowly tease out every choice made, every punch pulled, every challenge ducked… 
she understands your blind spots, your weaknesses, your affinities. She reveals 
patterns in your work, and gives you the courage to break bad habits.”

At the close of 2015, Mitchell was gearing up for another big artistic move: 
film. She and writer Duncan Macmillan are making a short – a thriller with a 
central female role, for Warp Films and Film4. They are hungry to work on a 
full-length feature. It is a logical consequence of Mitchell’s multimedia work: 
she will be able to make a perfected object that can exist in the way she 
intended, for ever, without the mess of live performance. In 2014 she was 
obliged, because of a cold, to watch previews of her production of The Cherry 
Orchard at the Young Vic on a monitor outside the auditorium: Simon Stephens 
cheekily told me he thought this was her “happy place”. He also observed that 
the only pop reference he had ever heard her invoke was Joy Division – whose 
lead singer, Ian Curtis, performed as if the audience did not exist.

If 2015 was a barren year for Mitchell in Britain, 2016 will be different. She 
will return to the National Theatre, under its new artistic director Rufus 
Norris, to direct Cleansed, by Sarah Kane. Her production of The Forbidden Zone 
– a multimedia work about war, which she created with Duncan Macmillan and the 
filmmaker Leo Warner for the Salzburg festival – will travel to the Barbican. A 
new “functioning, fruitful” relationship with the Royal Court under its 
artistic director Vicky Featherstone will be cemented with the British premiere 
of Ophelias Zimmer, her feminist version of Hamlet (with writer Alice Birch and 
designer Chloe Lamford). Her production of Lucia di Lammermoor will reach the 
stage of the Royal Opera; in October, she will become a visiting professor of 
opera at Oxford.

If Mitchell is, as Haydon calls her, “the king in exile”, then the king is 
coming home. But then, some trace of her has always been here. Mitchell once 
told me about sitting on the tube with Sam Mendes – her exact contemporary and 
almost polar opposite in both career and approach. “I said, ‘Just imagine, Sam, 
imagine what it is like as a woman reading Hamlet – when you consider where the 
women are placed in the play, what happens to them, what women readers might 
feel about that, about their absence.’ Then I said, ‘I look across at you and 
imagine what it might be like to be a man reading Hamlet, with so many male 
characters and male experiences being expressed, scene after scene after 
scene.’ He smiled wryly at me. He was always very patient with me.” Among their 
generation of directors, it is Mendes who has become the global superstar. But 
Mitchell has arguably achieved something more difficult. “She is,” Turner said, 
“reshaping the culture.”

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 