
Police are questioning Kim Kardashian West’s Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> chauffeur after a series of arrests 
connected to a robbery in October in which the US reality TV star lost jewels 
and other property worth €9m.

Seventeen suspects were detained in early morning raids across France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/09/kim-kardashian-robbery-at-least-15-people-arrested>
 on Monday.

Police told Agence France-Presse that the chauffeur, who on the day of the 
heist had dropped off Kardashian West at the apartment where she was staying 
during Paris fashion week, was among those helping their inquiries.

They were questioning the chauffeur to establish whether he had tipped off the 
gang that Kardashian West was alone in the flat in the exclusive 8th 
arrondissement after her bodyguard left to accompany her sister, Kourtney 
Kardashian, to a nightclub.

A police source told L’Express magazine 
<http://www.lexpress.fr/actualite/societe/braquage-de-kim-kardashian-des-papys-gangsters-au-coeur-de-l-action_1867374.html>
: “They are divided into three categories: those who are suspected of taking 
part in the robbery, those thought to have received the jewels and those 
suspected to have acted as intermediaries, mainly in acting as go-betweens.”


L’Express said a 72-year-old arrested in Grasse on the French Riviera and a 
60-year-old from the Paris region were suspected to have been among the five 
masked men who allegedly entered Kardashian West’s apartment and tied her up at 
gunpoint. Other, younger suspects were thought to have played a secondary role, 
police said.

Video surveillance footage of the street outside the apartment show thegang 
leaving calmly on foot and on bicycles with their haul in a plastic bag. They 
allegedly left fingerprints and DNA on plastic handcuffs and tape used to 
restrain Kardashian West and on a platinum and diamond cross necklace that was 
dropped in the street.

Having identified three suspects, French police put them under surveillance in 
order to track down their associates.

Le Figaro reported 
<http://www.lefigaro.fr/actualite-france/2017/01/10/01016-20170110ARTFIG00136-braquage-de-kim-kardashian-environ-300-000-euros-retrouves-lors-des-perquisitions.php>
 that police found €300,000 in cash during the raids, but no trace of 
Kardashian West’s jewels,which included a €4m diamond engagement ring given to 
her by husband, Kanye West.
 