
French police investigating the armed robbery of Kim Kardashian West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/kim-kardashian> in Paris last year 
have released a driver used by the star along with two other people, a legal 
source has told Agence France-Presse.

Fourteen people remain in custody, including a 72-year-old man who is 
suspected of being among the armed gang who took part inthe break-in at a 
luxury apartment in central Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/kim-kardashian-west-gunpoint-robbery-manhunt-paris>
, making off with jewellery worth about €9m (£8m).

Two other people who were arrested earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/kim-kardashian-wests-chauffeur-among-17-held-over-paris-robbery>
 have been released, the source said.

Police have been investigating whether the gang had been tipped off that 
Kardashian West’s bodyguard was providing security for her sister, Kourtney, at 
a nightclub in the city on the night of the robbery.

Investigators suspect they have detained five men who took part in the theft. 
Police tracked down the suspects after finding DNA at the crime scene, which 
led to a surveillance operation.

Armed and masked men wearing police uniforms burst into Kardashian West’s 
residence in the chic Madeleine area of the capital, where she and her 
entourage were staying duringParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> 
fashion week in October.

Kardashian, 36, was tied up and locked in the bathroom. The haul included a 
ring worth about €4m.

The robbery generated more unwanted publicity for Paris, which has had its 
image damaged by terror attacks in 2015 and last year. Luxury hotel bookings and
foreign tourist arrivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/louvre-blames-2-million-fall-in-visitor-numbers-on-terrorism-fears>
 in France are both down.

The biggest French jewellery heist occurred in July 2013, when robbers 
attacked an exhibition of Extraordinary Diamonds at the Carlton hotel in Cannes 
and made off with an estimated €103m in jewels.
 