
The nickname King Bibi for Israel’s prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.685468> has long been in 
circulation. It refers to his reputed imperial tendencies, his political gifts 
and his taste for fine living.

Now the conceit has been given a new currency via the sudden – if brief – 
appearance of a large golden statue of Netanyahu in Tel Aviv’s most famous 
square, satirising the prime minister’s years in office and the allegations of 
scandal that have surrounded the management of his household.

Appearing unexpectedly overnight in Rabin Square, the statue, on a white 
plinth, attracted the attention of scores of residents who waited to take 
selfies. But Netanyahu’s ministers, rushing to denounce the guerrilla art 
installation, made clear they were not amused.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fking-bibi-netanyahu-statue-attacked-by-israeli-culture-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc483369d85792a03cb86e553e0d8026a1a1f61dd%2F0_264_3537_4421%2F3537.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=King%20Bibi%20for%20a%20day%3A%20golden%20Netanyahu%20statue%20is%20toppled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fking-bibi-netanyahu-statue-attacked-by-israeli-culture-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=King%20Bibi%20for%20a%20day%3A%20golden%20Netanyahu%20statue%20is%20toppled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fking-bibi-netanyahu-statue-attacked-by-israeli-culture-minister%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc483369d85792a03cb86e553e0d8026a1a1f61dd%2F0_264_3537_4421%2F3537.jpg>
 Sculptor Itay Zalait said he had put up the statue to test the limits of 
freedom of expression in Israel. Photograph: Jack Guez/AFP/Getty 
Leading the charge against the work’s creator, sculptor Itay Zalait 
<http://www.itayzalait.com/>, was the culture minister, Miri Regev, a leading 
figure in the right’s culture war against Israeli artists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/01/israel-loyalty-in-culture-bill-debate-fascism-miri-regev-art-free-speech>
 deemed leftwing or too elite. She denounced the statue as an “expression of 
hatred towards Netanyahu”.

For their part, Tel Aviv municipal officials ordered Zalait to remove the 
statue and said they would haul it away and fine him if he refused.

The artist, who had said the installation depicted “the situation we find 
ourselves in”, complied, inviting Israelis to help “topple Netanyahu” from his 
plinth. It was a task which they dutifully carried out, with pictures later 
showing the statue on its side.

Zalait describes his approach on his website as using “humour and sarcasm to 
point out automatic, absurd and unaware aspects dealing with the freedom of 
choice”. A painter as well as sculptor, he had told Israeli media organisations 
that he planned “a subversive artistic political act which would garner much 
media attention”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fking-bibi-netanyahu-statue-attacked-by-israeli-culture-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a1a49e7e2b71dbf068c33d118b3cf2ff134bc4f%2F0_45_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=King%20Bibi%20for%20a%20day%3A%20golden%20Netanyahu%20statue%20is%20toppled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fking-bibi-netanyahu-statue-attacked-by-israeli-culture-minister%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=King%20Bibi%20for%20a%20day%3A%20golden%20Netanyahu%20statue%20is%20toppled&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fking-bibi-netanyahu-statue-attacked-by-israeli-culture-minister%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a1a49e7e2b71dbf068c33d118b3cf2ff134bc4f%2F0_45_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Taking a selfie with the statue earlier on Tuesday. Photograph: Baz 
Ratner/Reuters 
Speaking on Army Radio about his installation, Zalait said: “In the social 
media, there have been tens of thousands of comments about ‘King Bibi’. I 
simply made it a reality and put it in its deserved place, the Kings ofIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> Square.” The reference was to the 
plaza’s name before it was changed to honour Yitzhak Rabin, the Israeli prime 
minister assassinated by an ultra-nationalist during a peace rally there in 
1995.

Morning commuters snapping selfies with the statue were divided over whether 
it should be seen as mockery of Netanyahu, now in his fourth term, or a tribute 
to him. One woman bowed down in jest in front of the statue, which Zaliet said 
took him three months to sculpt.

Yael Dayan, a former city councillor, told Haaretz the installation was a “big 
middle finger in all our faces. <http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/1.757213> 
He is the king of Tel Aviv. It shows Israelis that Tel Aviv too is under 
Netanyahu’s regime.”

“The golden calf – that was my initial association,” another Tel Aviv resident 
told the paper. Another passerby, Nina Lobel, said the portrayal of Netanyahu 
was “horrendous” in that the artist had wanted “to show him as a dictator”.
 