
Here are our bold predictions for 2017. Please note the bold (or should that be
bold?) in bold predictions – these are to be taken with a pinch of salt. 
Especially the Tebow one.

Kobe Bryant will return from retirement

Few athletes are as prepared for a life after basketball than Kobe, a man of 
diverse interests and immense worldwide fame. Few athletes also are as 
ill-suited for retirement than Kobe, who burns to be on the court. These last 
few months away have to be killing him. He will mount a comeback, though 
probably not with the Lakers, who are building around a gifted young core of 
players. He’s always wanted to play for the Knicks. Would Phil Jackson dare 
drop him on the same floor as Carmelo Anthony?LC

Tiger Woods will win again

The notion that Woods could challenge for, let alone win, major championships 
was flawed even before his last and lengthy absence through injury. The depth 
of talent at golf’s summit means Woods will always be overawed and outplayed in 
such environments now.

Tiger Woods admits to ‘some pretty dire times’ during his long injury absence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/04/tiger-woods-hero-world-challenge-golf>
Still, he can and will win lower grade PGA Tour events. Woods has a propensity 
to prevail on the same courses, as shown by his record. He retains more 
competitive ability than some of those who win once or twice on Tour in any 
given year. If fitness troubles really are behind Woods, he will return to the 
podium. Then? Cue more major discussion.EM

An American not named Serena will win a grand slam title

Serena Williams did win Wimbledon six months ago, so let’s not put her in the 
ground just yet. But she’s now closer to 40 than 30 and there’s no question her 
stranglehold on the women’s tour was weakened during a year that saw the 
late-blooming Angelique Kerber win a pair of major titles to inherit the world 
No1 rankingon merit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/angelique-kerber-world-no1-karolina-pliskova-us-open-womens-final-serena-williams>
. The door has never been more open for the sport’s 90s babies.Garbiñe Muguruza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/garbine-muguruza-serena-williams-heir-apparent-french-open-final-tennis>
 andKarolina Pliskova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/09/serena-williams-out-of-us-open-with-shock-loss-to-karolina-pliskova>
 took advantage in 2016; Madison Keys will follow this year. The 21-year-old 
from Illinois, who has played into the second week at the last six majors, has 
all the shots, and power on both wings. Look for her to put it all together and 
become the first American woman not named Williams to capture a major singles 
title since Jennifer Capriati in 2002.BAG

A wildcard team will win Super Bowl LI

The NFL playoffs do not favor wildcard teams. To win the Super Bowl as a 
wildcard you have to win on the road three straight weeks and beat three of the 
league’s top teams. That said, it has happened six times before. Three of the 
last 11Super Bowl <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/super-bowl> champions came 
into the postseason as wildcards and 2017’s will as well. With no great, 
dominant team, the path is wide open. The Lions stumbled late in the season but 
still have a potent offense and the Patriots would rather forget their Super 
Bowls against the Giants and Eli Manning.LC

Villanova will finish the regular season undefeated
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbold-sports-predictions-for-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40e4125df9c0af3c69d59098e05d100396e52e14%2F0_45_2209_1326%2F2209.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kobe%20returns%20and%20Tebow%20thrives%3A%20our%20bold%20sports%20predictions%20for%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbold-sports-predictions-for-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kobe%20returns%20and%20Tebow%20thrives%3A%20our%20bold%20sports%20predictions%20for%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbold-sports-predictions-for-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40e4125df9c0af3c69d59098e05d100396e52e14%2F0_45_2209_1326%2F2209.jpg>
 Villanova are looking hot again this season. Photograph: Steven Branscombe/USA 
Today Sports 
The Wildcats have moved to No1 in the polls, but virtually no analysts 
predicted a repeat for a Villanova team that returned most of its title-winning 
2016 team. Aside from a shaky performance against DePaul late in 2016, the 
Wildcats have been stellar this season. Josh Hart has been the best player in 
the country, Jalen Brunson generates offense at will when he has the ball and 
Villanova are hitting their threes – something they didn’t do until the 
tournament last season. Ken Pomeroy’s stats say the Wildcats have less than a 
2% chance to go undefeated in the regular season, but with this team I like 
those odds.DM

Sebastian Giovinco will return to Europe

MLS is far from perfect but Italy are missing a trick with Sebastian Giovinco
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/08/sebastian-giovinco-italy-giampiero-ventura-mls-selection>
Arguably the best player in the history of Major League Soccer, Sebastian 
Giovinco has made himself a superstar at Toronto FC. But his success has come 
at a cost. Italy manager Giampiero Ventura, just like Antonio Conte before him,
says the playmaker has no international future as long as he is a MLS player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/07/sebastian-giovinco-italy-giampiero-ventura-mls>
. And so Giovinco could be tempted back to Europe, especially with the 2018 
World Cup coming into view.GR

Tim Tebow will thrive as a baseball player

At first glance, it seems that New York Mets farmhand Tim Tebow, super-athlete 
and light of all of our lives, sufficiently failed during his stint in the 
Arizona Fall League, and that’s probably because of his measly slash line of 
.194/.296/.242 over 70 plate appearances. Tebow did not hit a single home run, 
but he did“help save” a fan having a seizure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/tim-tebow-seizure-arizona-fall-league>
, staying with him until the paramedics arrived, and so it’s probably safe to 
say that the outfielder is more Moonlight Graham than Babe Ruth, right? Not so 
fast: Tebow was competing against some of thebest prospects baseball has to 
offer 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/news/tim-tebows-arizona-fall-league-season-is-over-and-heres-how-he-did/>
, and picked up steam as he went, finishing with an 11-game stretch where he 
hit .281 and posted an OBP of.425. In 2017, the Mets defy all logic and 
expectations by their May promotion of a surging Tebow to help with their 
sagging mid-week attendance. The Wilpons sell a package they call Tebow 
Tuesdays, which promises at least one pinch-hit appearance per-game and private 
autograph sessions for the first 50 to sign up. Tebow not only survives, but 
prospers, becoming a cornerstone in the Mets lineup as they win their first 
title since 1986.DL

Tom Brady will finally show signs of age
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbold-sports-predictions-for-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a5471f5c63fe8829bb9f73bdea8aee9932712d4%2F0_144_3199_1921%2F3199.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kobe%20returns%20and%20Tebow%20thrives%3A%20our%20bold%20sports%20predictions%20for%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbold-sports-predictions-for-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kobe%20returns%20and%20Tebow%20thrives%3A%20our%20bold%20sports%20predictions%20for%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbold-sports-predictions-for-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a5471f5c63fe8829bb9f73bdea8aee9932712d4%2F0_144_3199_1921%2F3199.jpg>
 Tom Brady stays ahead of the youngsters ... for now. Photograph: Reinhold 
Matay/USA Today Sports 
Tom Brady will turn 40 before the 2017 season. Saying a 40-year old athlete in 
a contact sport will look his age doesn’t seem especially bold, but in Brady’s 
case, it is. In his age 39 season this year, he’s the favorite for league MVP 
and is having one of the best seasons of his career. But Peyton Manning’s 
performance fell of a cliff from his age 38 to 39 seasons and Brett Favre’s did 
the same in the only season he opened as a 40 year-old. Maybe Brady stretches 
his youth a year or two beyond that pair, but the end is coming. Soon. Time, 
unlike the 2007 New England Patriots, is undefeated.DG

Floyd Mayweather makes a face turn

No one believes he’s really retired, even if more than 15 months have passed 
sincehe last climbed through the ropes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/13/floyd-mayweather-finishes-up-unbeaten-after-one-sided-victory-over-andre-berto>
. Not when one more fight could lift him to the singular mark of 50-0, one 
better than Rocky Marciano’s recognized paragon of fistic perfection. Not when 
he can effectively name his own price as a free agent, having fulfilled his 
six-fight contract with CBS and Showtime.

A Mayweather v McGregor fight would be an abomination – but a lucrative one | 
Les Carpenter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/09/floyd-mayweather-conor-mcgregor-fight-boxing-ufc>
Many insiders believe a rematch with Manny Pacquiao looms, which, despite the 
tart aftertaste of their first installment, would still be the second-richest 
fight in history. But it says here Mayweather will instead opt to fight Adrien 
Broner, an opponent who hardly deserves the opportunity but one who would allow 
Floyd to take on the unfamiliar role of good guy in the promotion.

Eight-figure paydays weren’t the norm for Mayweather until he turned heel, 
trading in his polite and humble Pretty Boy Floyd persona for a pantomime 
villain whom more fans pay to watch lose than watch win. But just because he 
made the business decision to break bad doesn’t mean he doesn’t care about 
people liking him. By going against the one fighter in the world more disliked 
than himself, Mayweather will exit the game as the cowboy in the white hat.BAG

Los Angeles will be awarded the 2024 Olympics

Maybe this doesn’t qualify as a bold prediction, after all most of the other 
competitors have dropped out. But Los Angeles was once eliminated as a 
contender after the USOC chose Boston as the American city to push. It has 
never seemed like LA was a favorite of anyone to host the games for a third 
time. The other competitors – Paris and Budapest – are more appealing choices. 
And yet LA might be the perfect Olympic city. The facilities are already in 
place. It could probably host the Games next year. For this reason Los Angeles 
will be the safe choice. Probably the only choice.LC

Ronda Rousey doubles down ... and wins big

Ronda Rousey's defeat to Amanda Nunes is a cautionary tale for UFC fighters | 
Josh Gross
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/31/ronda-rousey-amanda-nunes-ufc>
After being embarrassed by Amanda Nunes in Las Vegas on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/ronda-rousey-ufc-amanda-nunes>, 
many have speculated that Ronda Rousey won’t fight again. She’s noncommittal 
but we say she will enter the octagon in the first half of the new year, before 
Conor McGregor even books another fight, and get back to her winning ways. It 
won’t be at 135lbs, however. Rousey will venture up to the featherweight 
division and chase down a fight with Cris ‘Cyborg’ Justino (presuming she 
available after a PED tussle with Usada) in a last ditch effort to rebuild 
herself as a competitor and secure one more big-money fight.JG


The Washington Nationals will miss the playoffs

Although the Nationals did win the NL East by eight games in 2016, repeating 
in 2017 will be substantially more difficult. They should not expect Daniel 
Murphy to have the monster season that he had in 2016. Washington was also 
reportedly chasing some bigger names this offseason including starting pitcher
Chris Sale 
<https://twitter.com/JonHeyman/status/806203989184442368?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
and closerKenley Jansen 
<https://twitter.com/Ken_Rosenthal/status/806847500334284800>, among others, 
but were unable to land them. While having Max Scherzer and Bryce Harper on a 
roster can make any team a playoff contender, there are questions surrounding 
their role players including an oft-injured Ryan Zimmerman and an aging Jayson 
Werth. With the Mets’ power arms returning from injury, and other NL teams 
including the St Louis Cardinals and San Francisco Giants making moves this 
offseason, the Nationals will have a rockier road to October.EF

An NFL player will come out as gay
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbold-sports-predictions-for-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11a15eef4719fb017472da29980fe473377dc2f9%2F0_51_3129_1878%2F3129.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kobe%20returns%20and%20Tebow%20thrives%3A%20our%20bold%20sports%20predictions%20for%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbold-sports-predictions-for-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kobe%20returns%20and%20Tebow%20thrives%3A%20our%20bold%20sports%20predictions%20for%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbold-sports-predictions-for-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11a15eef4719fb017472da29980fe473377dc2f9%2F0_51_3129_1878%2F3129.jpg>
 Michael Sam was the first openly gay player drafted in NFL history. 
Photograph: Jasen Vinlove/USA Today Sports 
An active NFL player, one known to casual fans, will come out as gay. As of 
now, the specter of Michael Sam, the defensive end who came out prior to theNFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nfl> draft and ended up never playing in a 
regular season game, looms over the league as a missed opportunity. Sam’s story 
isn’t one that anyone wants to see repeated. Because of this, I fully expect 
the first out athlete in the league to be someone who is already established as 
an NFL-caliber player and has had significant experience dealing with the 
national media, two advantages that Sam never had.HF

The NHL takes actual steps to increase scoring

Yes, I know. This is supposed to be a bold prediction, and suggesting that a 
pro sports league will try to boost offense doesn’t exactly sound like going 
out on a limb. Every league knows that scoring sells, and every league makes 
sure the rulebook encourages plenty of it. It’s sports marketing 101.

But this is the NHL we’re talking about. The league has been talking about 
boosting offense for over two decades –literally 
<http://www.espn.com/nhl/story/_/id/14207776/nhl-brief-history-nhl-pretending-fix-scoring>
 – but they never actually do it. This year, the decided they’d tweak the 
goaltending equipment. Then, whoops, theydidn’t make the adjustments in time 
<http://www.sportsnet.ca/hockey/world-cup-of-hockey/streamlined-goalie-equipment-delayed-2017-18-season/>
, so nothing changed. That’s just how things go in the NHL.

But I think this year could be different. Maybe it’s wishful thinking, but 
today’s NHL is packed with exciting young talent like we haven’t seen in a 
generation. Surely now is the time to let them shine. Surely now is when we’ll 
finally get some forward thinking from a league addicted to its past. Surely we 
can’t do three straight decades of plunging scoring rates while the powers that 
be twiddle their thumbs and wonder why ratings are down.

Or maybe we can. But you asked for something bold. In the NHL, sadly, this 
qualifies.SM

The Los Angeles Lakers will make the NBA playoffs

I can hear you rolling your eyes through the computer. Real cute, but these 
predictions are supposed to be bold, right? The Lakers are currently only two 
games out of the eighth seed in the Western Conference. Granted, they are also 
only three games ahead of the cellar-dwelling Phoenix Suns, but that just goes 
to show you how mushy and undefined the bottom of the West is right now. Anyone 
could catch fire for a few weeks and find themselves volunteering to be 
demolished by the Warriors in four games this spring.

The Lakers were hovering around .500 before Thanksgiving, then lost 12 of 13 
during a brutal road trip made worse by injuries to Julius Randle, D’Angelo 
Russell, Nick Young, and Larry Nance Jr. A healthy Laker team still can’t play 
much defense, but they can score against anybody, as wins over the Warriors, 
Thunder, Rockets, and a short-handed Clippers team proves. Most importantly, 
they have as good a chance as anyone in the West basement. The Kings, Pelicans, 
Mavericks, Timberwolves, and Blazers all have true superstars, but what the 
Lakers can offer is something close to the team cohesion that defines the elite 
squads in theNBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba>. This is still a rough 
unit that is dragging a few ridiculous contracts down the court each night, but 
they have as good as chance as anyone right now.DS
 