
The Kremlin has ridiculed reports that Russia collected compromising material 
on the US president-elect,Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, as unfounded and laughable. 


Unverified reports by a former western counter-intelligence official published 
on Tuesday said Moscow had beencultivating, supporting and assisting Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
 for years and collected material – including from a hotel in the Russian 
capital – that could be used to blackmail him.

Dmitry Peskov, spokesman for the Russian president, Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, called the dossier “pulp 
fiction”, saying the Kremlin did not have compromising material on Trump nor on 
Hillary Clinton, as the documents also said.

“This is an absolute canard, an absolute fabrication, and it’s complete 
nonsense,” Peskov said in a statement. “The Kremlin does not engage in 
collecting kompromat,” he added, using a Russian term for compromising 
material. There is a long tradition inRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> of kompromat surfacing and leading 
to the disgrace of political figures and opposition activists.

Donald Trump's team says reports of Russian dossier are 'total garbage' – live 
updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2017/jan/11/trump-dossier-russia-has-compromising-material-on-president-elect-live-updates>
Russian state media dismissed the reports as more unproven accusations against 
the country, after areport published last week by US intelligence agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
 said Moscow had meddled in the 2016 presidential election to help Trump win.


“Its content was like a parody of poorly constructed kompromat,” the 
television channel Rossiya 24 said of the latest reports.

The Guardian has not been able to confirm the veracity of the documents’ 
contents, and the Trump team has consistently denied any hidden contacts with 
the Russian government.


Trump’s transition team did not immediately respond to a request for comment, 
but in a series of furious tweets on Wednesday morning, the president-elect 
blamed intelligence agencies for the reports and vehemently denied Russia had 
tried to use leverage over him:
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Russia just said the unverified report paid for by political opponents is "A 
COMPLETE AND TOTAL FABRICATION, UTTER NONSENSE." Very unfair!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819155311793700865> January 11, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819155311793700865> Donald J. 
Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Russia has never tried to use leverage over me. I HAVE NOTHING TO DO WITH 
RUSSIA - NO DEALS, NO LOANS, NO NOTHING!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819159806489591809> January 11, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819159806489591809> Donald J. 
Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
I win an election easily, a great "movement" is verified, and crooked 
opponents try to belittle our victory with FAKE NEWS. A sorry state!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819162968592183298> January 11, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819162968592183298> Donald J. 
Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Intelligence agencies should never have allowed this fake news to "leak" into 
the public. One last shot at me.Are we living in Nazi Germany?
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819164172781060096> January 11, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819164172781060096> 
Trump’s spokeswoman, Kellyanne Conway, and chief of staff, Reince Priebus, 
also described the allegations as “fake news”.

“We should be concerned that intelligence officials leak to the press and 
won’t go and tell the president-elect or the president of the United States 
himself now, Mr Obama, what the information is,” Conway said on the US TV show 
Late Night with Seth Meyers. “They’d rather go tell the press.”

Peskov said Moscow needed to “respond with the appropriate humour” to the 
allegations, but also called the news an “obvious attempt to harm our bilateral 
relations” with the US.

“There are those who bend over backwards to ratchet up tensions and continue 
the witch-hunt. This is necessary so relations remain in a state of 
degradation,” he said.

Rossiya 24 also cited a WikiLeaks tweet 
<http://www.vesti.ru/doc.html?id=2841438>, arguing that the reports’ “style, 
facts and dates show no credibility”. The news channel said Trump was being 
hounded by the media and politicians.


Other Russian media dismissed the allegations in the dossier as groundless. 
State news agency Tass published a longarticle 
<http://tass.ru/mezhdunarodnaya-panorama/3931588> about “what’s wrong with the 
spy dossier”, and several Russian media outletscovered 
<http://vz.ru/politics/2017/1/11/852929.html> unlikely claims that the entire 
dossier was fabricated by 4chan users.

An anchor on state TV Channel One, referring to the initial CNN report on the 
dossier,said 
<http://www.1tv.ru/news/2017/01/11/317602-razvedka_ssha_zayavila_o_yakoby_imeyuschemsya_u_rossii_kompromate_na_donalda_trampa>
: “American media, which support the Democrats, aren’t missing the opportunity 
to complicate the president-elect’s life as much as possible. The television 
channel CNN has put out the latest false story against Donald Trump ahead of 
his press conference.”

Nikolai Kovalyov, an MP and former director of Russia’s main security service, 
the FSB, also denied that Moscow had any compromising information on Trump.


“We don’t have such a practice in Russia; I can refer to my own work 
experience,”Kovalyov told <http://www.interfax.ru/russia/544848> the news 
agency Interfax. “There’s the sense that the Obama administration is throwing 
all its forces at compromising the winner of the presidential race, and they 
think that all tools are good.”

He also said Trump’s opponents “have enough compromising material at home”.

As the day went on, more and more Russian officials derided the dossier’s 
assertions. Foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharovasaid 
<https://www.facebook.com/maria.zakharova.167/posts/10212095992744773> Russian 
embassy official Mikhail Kulagin had left Washington as part of a planned 
rotation rather than being suddenly called back over fears his involvement in 
the Russian effort to influence the election would be exposed, as the dossier 
alleged. She called the reports “mind-numbing gibberish” and “inhumane 
nonsense”.

Another Russian MP, Sergei Zheleznyak, told Rossiya 24 he was confident that 
attempts to discredit Trump would fail and that the American people would unify 
behind their new president.

Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the head of the nationalist party LDPR, called the 
reports an “attempt ahead of time to cause a quarrel between the new president 
of the United States” and Russia, arguing no one in Russia could have thought 
in 2013 to collect compromising material on Trump.

Many Russian journalists and activists were worried by a line in the reports 
that said the FSB had cracked the popular encrypted messenger software 
Telegram. The software’s developer, Pavel Durov, said the line probably 
referred to a 2016 incident in which opposition activists’ accounts were 
hacked, apparently after text messages to authorise the service were 
intercepted.

Ritz-Carlton: staff silent at five-star hotel in Moscow

The Ritz-Carlton hotel where a Russian security agency allegedly collected 
compromising information on Trump with hidden cameras in 2013 is one of the 
most expensive places to stay in Moscow.

Built for $350m (£290m) in 2007 on Moscow’s most important street, Tverskaya, 
the Ritz-Carlton was the capital’s first premium luxury hotel. The site it 
occupies across from the Kremlin held a travellers’ tavern in the 18th century, 
the Hotel Paris in the 19th century and the landmark Intourist hotel in the 
20th century. The hotel has 334 rooms, including 65 luxury suites, as well as 
high-end restaurants, a rooftop lounge and even avodka sommelier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/jul/02/shopping.russia>.

The 240-sq-metre (2,550-sq-ft) presidential suite 
<http://www.ritzcarlton.com/en/hotels/europe/moscow/rooms-suites/the-ritz-carlton-suite>
 where Barack Obama and then Trump allegedly stayed costs 1m roubles (£13,700) 
a night. Remodelled in 2015, it includes a living room with a grand piano and 
library, a kitchen and dining room, a sauna and jacuzzi, marble bathrooms and 
panoramic windows overlooking the Kremlin and Red Square.

Trump alluded to the Ritz Carlton when he vehemently denied the allegations 
contained in the dossier during his press conference on Wednesday. He had 
always been aware of spying in hotel rooms, he said, adding: “I’m also very 
much of a germaphobe, by the way.”

On Wednesday, staff declined to speak to reporters and said the presidential 
suite could only be viewed by those who had booked it. Well-dressed guests 
speaking a variety of languages were drinking tea in the gilded lounge beneath 
the grand staircase as luxury cars pulled up outside. A tourist took a selfie 
in front of its imposing stone columns.

Asked about the Trump reports, the press service later said it did not comment 
on hotel guests.
 