
Kyle Edmund <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kyle-edmund> is the original 
quiet man of tennis. His voice rarely rises above a monotone hum, disguising a 
determination that is manifest quickly when he unfurls one of the most powerful 
forehands in tennis.

Roger Federer happy to be back fit and ready for the Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/14/roger-federer-australian-open-2017-melbourne-novak-djokovic-gambling>
He will need that sublimated energy and that withering point-gatherer to make 
an impression at thisAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open>, beginning on Tuesday 
against the Colombian world No91 Santiago Giraldo, a player he not only has 
never played but had never met until, quite by chance, they hit together a few 
days ago.

As Edmund revealed on Sunday: “I don’t know a lot about him. Before the draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/andy-murray-roger-federer-australian-open-quarter-final>
 came out I hit with him the day before the draw was made, funnily enough. It 
was good I got that hit, just to feel what it was like to play him. I read he 
made the second round four or five times here?”

Giraldo, in fact, has looked threatening here in the past and it took Marin 
Cilic to stop his progress in the second round six years ago,and Novak Djokovic 
the following year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jan/19/novak-djokovic-santiago-giraldo-australian>
 at the same stage. Edmund said: “He’s experienced and, when I played with him, 
I didn’t feel he was a typical South American clay‑court player with lots of 
spin and shape. His balls came through quite flat. I’ll discuss it with my 
coaches. If I get my game going on court I’ll feel confident.”

The Briton has been hitting the ball cleanly and with conviction before this 
tournament. If he can handle the power and guile of Giraldo – as he should do, 
ranked 45 places ahead of him – he can look to stiffer opposition in the 30th 
seed from Spain, Pablo Carreño Busta, then thedefending champion, Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
, who will have his own examination to come through in the first round against 
the Spaniard Fernando Verdasco, whoput five match points on him in Doha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/novak-djokovic-beats-fernando-verdasco-qatar-open-final>
 last week before the Serb hit a rhythm todefeat Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-qatar-open-match-report>
 in a three-set final of the highest quality.

Johanna Konta has form to repeat Australian Open run despite tough draw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/15/johanna-konta-australian-open> 
Edmund has benefited hugely from his training camps with Murray in Miami and 
arrived in Australia in great shape. “My pre-season was half in London and half 
in Miami,” he said. “We practised a lot together. There was Casper Ruud out 
there, Elias Ymer as well. We have different fitness trainers, so they have 
their own ideas of what they want to do but we do a lot of on‑court 
conditioning and drilling, resting, interval‑based stuff. I felt good. We’re 
not really competing, we’re working. It’s not a race or who can do the most 
reps. We’re hitting and going as hard as we can.

“The first time I did pre-season with him, I would have hoped there would be 
an improvement and I think after four years there has been.”

Edmund has endured cramp here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/18/kyle-edmund-out-australian-open-cramp-defeat-damir-dzumhur>
 before, when the heat can drain even the fittest players, but is confident he 
has prepared well to cope. “I hope so. We’ll find out. It’s been a year since 
that happened but I was OK at the French Open, played a couple of best‑of‑five 
Davis Cup matches and at the US Open. Hopefully, with that year on tour, the 
experience will help me.

“I got [cramp] when I was serving [last year], so we looked at what was 
impacting me on the serve. We did some sweat tests because sometimes cramp can 
just be a loss of fluid. I felt it way before I felt physically tired. We did 
some testing for that. It was a mixture of things but, even if we look at those 
areas, you still have to develop physically.”
 