
Kamasi Washington stood on the outdoor stage of Hollywood & Highland 
underneath the mall’s massive faux-Egyptian arch, dressed in a flowing grey 
tunic-and-pants set that brushed his grey Converse high-tops. Even in this 
anachronistic (albeit surreally grand) setting, the 34-year-old easily conjured 
another ecstatic solo from his tenor saxophone.

Since the release of his three-disc, 173-minute album The Epic in May, 
Washington has become a central figure in the resurgent Los Angeles jazz 
community, leading his band the Next Step. While a free concert at a shopping 
plaza in the heart of Hollywood’s tourist industrial complex might seem like a 
strange place for a cosmic soulful fusion outfit, it was no big deal for this 
crew that helped build its reputation by playing at DJ nights, rock venues and 
goth clubs around the city.

The audience was much more than just curious onlookers lured in while on their 
way from American Eagle Outfitters to the Cabo Wabo Cantina. Most of them – a 
nearly equal mix of black and white, a rarity for any gathering in this city – 
were there to see Washington. On one side of me was a beaming group of young 
students, while on the other was an ageing head who marvelled over the playing 
but wouldn’t shut up about how loud the duelling kick drums had been mic-ed. As 
the band took a break after their first set, Bubba Jackson, the KJAZZ DJ 
hosting the evening, continued to rile up the crowd. “Give it up!” he shouted. 
“This is real! Homegrown!”

Kamasi Washington: The Epic review – a spectacular new jazz odyssey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/18/kamasi-washington-the-epic-review-jazz>
Kamasi Washington was raised in LA, one of seven children of his musician 
father. Though he had to learn an instrument like all his siblings, he was more 
interested in the music of NWA until an older cousin made him a Lee Morgan and 
Art Blakey mixtape. He became a pre-teen obsessed with jazz and proved to his 
dad that he was ready to switch from clarinet to saxophone after learning a 
Wayne Shorter song in a day.

Like other talented children in South Los Angeles and its surrounding 
neighborhoods, he tested into one of the magnet programs housed elsewhere in 
the sprawling city. While these institutions help nurture specialized 
interests, they also have the unfortunate side-effect of siphoning off and 
separating many of the brightest kids from the already suffering local public 
schools. Once Washington entered high school he became involved in the LA Multi 
SchoolJazz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz> Band, a project run by 
now-retired teacher Reggie Andrews, where one of the main aims was to bring 
kids who had been scattered back to the predominantly African American parts of 
town where they lived to make music together.

Sometimes I’m the head, sometimes I’m the tail. Sometimes I’m the right leg, 
sometimes I’m the right arm
Kamasi Washington 
With only one year of experience on saxophone, Washington was already among 
the best players at Hamilton high school’s music academy, but the other 
students in Multi School made him realize how much farther he could go. “They 
sounded like the records,” he says. “Isaac Smith sounded like Curtis Fuller, 
Corey Hogan sounded like Sonny Rollins, Terrace Martin sounded like Jackie 
McLean. Already, at 13, 14, 15 years old.”

For over two decades Washington has been playing and performing with musicians 
he met at Multi School, now under the banner of the West Coast Get Down 
collective. While he leads the Next Step, he can easily reconfigure himself to 
be a supporting player in another member’s band. “Sometimes I’m the head, 
sometimes I’m the tail. Sometimes I’m the right leg, sometimes I’m the right 
arm,” says Washington.

These friends and collaborators have also racked up years of touring and 
recording with artists outside their fold. Washington’s first gig out of high 
school was playing in Snoop Dogg’s band, and he has since worked with acts 
including Raphael Saadiq, Lauryn Hill, Chaka Khan and Stanley Clarke. A fellow 
member, bassist Stephen “Thundercat” Bruner, may be best known for his solo 
output and collaborations with LA beat scene linchpin Flying Lotus, but he’s 
also worked closely with Erykah Badu and even spent time in the third 
incarnation of thrash metal pioneers Suicidal Tendencies.

While LA’s strain of jazz has been long been characterized by the diverse 
scope of sounds it brings in, this fusion is also the result of practicality. 
No one here can get by on jazz alone, so they have to be able to play whatever 
is asked of them. “It’s like Hollywood, everybody thinks they can do 
everything,” says Thundercat. “Your adaptability is the most important thing in 
your survival as an instrumentalist.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGNCd_ERZvZM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGNCd_ERZvZM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGNCd_ERZvZM&media=>
“We created who we are without influence,” says Washington. “We didn’t have to 
worry about how someone was going to criticize us, or if we were going to lose 
our deals, or get a bad review, because no one was talking about us, we had no 
deals.”

Days after the concert, KJAZZ’s Jackson, a veteran student and supporter of 
the genre, compared Washington to Miles Davis, Grover Washington Jr, and Jimi 
Hendrix over the course of a 20-minute conversation. “What you heard from 
Kamasi is the education that he got. He went back to the roots of jazz and 
brought it all together in a movement,” says Jackson. “You saw that crowd, you 
saw them dance, you saw them moved from where they were to another place. And 
that place was magnificent.”

Some see what’s now happening with jazz in the city as an offshoot of the 
producer and DJ-led beat scene centered around the weekly Low End Theory night. 
This perception largely exists because Flying Lotus’s Brainfeeder began 
stepping out with more jazz releases, including Washington’s The Epic, 
Thundercat’s solo discography, and Endless Planets by Austin Peralta, the 
prodigy pianist who died in 2012 at the age of 22. Washington instead explains 
that the jazz and beats communities actually grew parallel to each other, with 
some members crossing over between them (Lotus’s last album, 2014’s You’re 
Dead!, might be classified as a jazz fusion by some and he is famously the 
grand-nephew of Alice Coltrane) and sharing influences, like the scenes around 
the underground hip-hop-focused Project Blowed and Good Life Cafe in Leimert 
Park.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkamasi-washington-jazz-fusion-distils-musical-diversity-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437498780104%2F0b27dff9-5b59-412f-bda9-e34f6ef6cc68-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=LA%20jazz%3A%20how%20Kamasi%20Washington%20and%20Thundercat%20are%20breathing%20new%20life%20into%20the%20west%20coast%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkamasi-washington-jazz-fusion-distils-musical-diversity-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=LA%20jazz%3A%20how%20Kamasi%20Washington%20and%20Thundercat%20are%20breathing%20new%20life%20into%20the%20west%20coast%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fkamasi-washington-jazz-fusion-distils-musical-diversity-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437498780104%2F0b27dff9-5b59-412f-bda9-e34f6ef6cc68-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Where The Wild Things Are: Thundercat. Photograph: Brainfeeder 
While the association with the beat scene has certainly helped gain 
recognition for this community of LA jazz musicians, the biggest moment so far 
came earlier this year with their crucial involvement on Kendrick Lamar’s 
landmark album, To Pimp a Butterfly. Thundercat and multi-instrumentalist 
Terrace Martin were part of the project’s creative nucleus, and in the final 
month they brought in Washington to help round it out with extra composing and 
saxophone. “When I first heard the record, I heard a lot of the musical 
experiences of Thundercat. I heard a big, thick, humongous chunk of the 
experience of Terrace Martin,” says Washington. “[Lamar] let them put that much 
of their selves in there. I was happy to be a part of it, but I was really 
proud of them to have created something that beautiful.”

Most of Washington’s The Epic was recorded during a 30-day binge at a studio 
where the members of the West Coast Get Down often worked from 10am to 2am. 
They were recording material for all their projects, and of the 190 total 
pieces they put down, 45 of them were Washington’s. During the performance at 
Highland & Highland, he ceded much of his time to play songs by his other band 
members, including a lengthy psychedelic spirit-bender by keyboardist Brandon 
Coleman called Giant Feelings that Washington called one of his favorite songs.

So far Washington and the Next Step have largely only played in southern 
California, but at the end of July they will begin a months-long world tour. As 
for the rest of the music recorded during those Epic sessions, from the stage 
Washington only said, “They’re coming.” It sounded both like a promise and a 
warning.

 * Kamasi Washington’s The Epic and Thundercat’s mini album The Beyond/Where 
the Giants Roam are out now on Brainfeeder
 