
Labour’s “metropolitan squeamishness” meant it struggled to relate to English 
working-class voters in the run-up to last year’s general election, and its 
campaigners were like middle-class Ryanair passengers “having to stomach a 
couple of hours’ flight with people they shared little in common with”, former 
candidates argue in a new book.

In the forthcoming work, edited by the backbencher Tristram Hunt, five failed 
and five successful candidates who stood in English seats at last year’s 
general election, including the MP and former Ed Miliband adviserJon Cruddas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jon-cruddas>, reflect on their personal 
experiences on the doorstep as Labour drifted towards defeat – and warn that 
the party has increasingly lost touch with its working-class roots.

A British politician lost her job over a tweet: how to explain it to someone 
outside the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/21/emily-thornberry-resignation-explain-outside-britain>
Suzy Stride, who stood unsuccessfully for the Essex seat of Harlow – in a 
piece written with her campaign organiser Jacob Quagliozzi – says Labour’s 
strategy was to bus in scores of middle-class activists, who looked and sounded 
very different from many voters.

“Without doubt the most frequent thing people said to us on the doorstep was: 
‘You’re all the same.’ Increasingly, as time went on, we realised that ‘You’re 
all the same’ really meant: ‘You’re nothing like me’ or ‘You know nothing about 
my life’ – and to an extent they were right.”

They add: “Increasingly the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party was viewed like 
middle-class Ryanair passengers having to stomach a couple of hours’ flight 
with people they shared little in common with. It could be uncomfortable but it 
got you where you needed to go.”

If Labour is to rebuild its electoral fortunes between now and the next 
general election in 2020, it will need to find a way of appealing to its 
traditional working-class base, argues the book. To Hunt, this means reclaiming 
English patriotism.

“If we are in any way serious about taking on anti-politics and reclaiming the 
cultural affinity of the working class then unnecessary metropolitan 
squeamishness is simply unacceptable – nurturing a civic English patriotism is 
now absolutely essential,” he says.

Cruddas, who was responsible for drafting Labour’s manifesto, says Labour 
concentrated too much on “instrumentalised economics”, using phrases such as 
the “cost of living crisis”, instead of appealing to cultural or regional 
identities. He calls for “a Labour politics of recognition that there is a 
space for an English Labour party to represent the interests of the English 
people”.

Jeremy Corbyn is carrying out a “constitutional convention” to consider 
whether changes to the make-up of British politics – perhaps including more 
radical devolution than that promised by the government’s Northern Powerhouse – 
should be part of Labour’s appeal to the electorate.

But there are also concerns about the attitude of some senior Labour figures. 
Naushabah Khan, who was the unsuccessful Labour candidate in the byelection for 
the Kent seat of Rochester and Strood in 2014, uses her essay to vent her fury 
at thephoto tweeted by Emily Thornberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/22/labour-war-emily-thornberry-tweet-rochester-strood>
 – then shadow attorney general – during the campaign of a local house 
festooned with St George’s flags.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Femily-thornberry-rochester-tweet-labour-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F21%2F1416573631406%2FEmily-Thornberry--017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emily%20Thornberry%20on%20Rochester%20tweet%3A%20I%20made%20a%20mistake%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Femily-thornberry-rochester-tweet-labour-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emily%20Thornberry%20on%20Rochester%20tweet%3A%20I%20made%20a%20mistake%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F21%2Femily-thornberry-rochester-tweet-labour-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F21%2F1416573631406%2FEmily-Thornberry--017.jpg>
Emily Thornberry on Rochester tweet: I made a mistake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2014/nov/21/emily-thornberry-rochester-tweet-labour-video>
 “In one image Labour had almost destroyed its foundations, displaying a 
growing detachment from our roots,” she says. “The irony was not lost as, 
having grown up in an Asian household where the St George’s flag could be found 
hanging out of the window during any sporting event, I had also spent the day 
with my team driving around the constituency in a white van as part of the 
campaign.”

Jamie Reed, the Labour MP for Copeland, warns that Labour has failed to find 
an answer to the “deliberately insulting insinuation”, which caught the mood in 
the run-up to the Scottish independence referendum, that “to be English was to 
be Tory”.

“Daily life looks and feels very different in our deindustrialised towns, 
struggling rural villages and smaller cities and these communities are now 
engulfed in a quiet crisis – not just in the north of England, but in every 
part of our country,” he said.
 