
The Labour party is “in the shit” and risks turning into a sect, the former 
shadow education secretaryTristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt> has reportedly told 
students at Cambridge University.

Speaking to the university’s Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> club at an event entitled 
Principles, Politics and Pathway to Power, Hunt said: “My fear is algorithmic 
politics [where because] everyone shares the same views as you on social media 
and in your social circles you become a sect rather than a party.”

According to the Cambridge University student newspaper Varsity 
<http://www.varsity.co.uk/news/9147>, Hunt told students: “You are the top 1%. 
The Labour party is in the shit. It is your job and your responsibility to take 
leadership going forward.” A spokesperson for Hunt stressed that his comments 
specifically referred to the party’s defeat in the general election.

How to get young people interested in politics | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/03/how-to-get-young-people-interested-in-politics>
Hunt was one of a group of former members of the Labour shadow cabinet to rule 
out serving on Jeremy Corbyn’s frontbench if he was elected Labour leader and 
has been outspoken about the party’s need to prioritise efforts to return to 
government.

Speaking last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/08/social-media-disconnecting-labour-from-wider-public-says-tristram-hunt>
 at Sheffield University, Hunt argued that Labour had “marched decisively away 
from the views of voters on issues that are fundamental to our electoral 
prospects: immigration, personal financial interest, welfare, public services, 
and business”.

Asked about Corbyn’s leadership, Hunt reportedly told members of the Cambridge 
Labour club that Corbyn was “leader until he is not”, stressing that he had won 
60% of the vote. “The way you serve the Corbyn leadership is to be as 
dissenting and creative as possible,” he said, adding that the party was in a 
“period of intellectual renewal”.

Speaking on Monday, Hunt said: “My message to the students at Cambridge was 
clear: Labour has a mountain to climb if we are to recover from our defeat in 
May, and as the next generation of Labour activists they are absolutely central 
to our efforts to renew.

“I am confident that – with the support of committed Labour activists from 
across the country, and from all walks of life – we can build a strong, 
credible and forward-looking movement that promotes the interests of the many, 
not the few.”
 