
Labor has signalled its support for the concept of a much larger trade 
agreement than the Trans-Pacific Partnership.

The Turnbull government has sent similar signals after the election of Donald 
Trump, given the likely failure of the TPP.

A new consensus is emerging in Canberra in the lead-up to a meeting this 
weekend of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation group inPeru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/peru>.

Malcolm Turnbull says Trump's success proves economic gains must be shared
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/17/malcolm-turnbull-says-trumps-success-proves-economic-gains-must-be-shared>
The trade minister, Steve Ciobo, is already at the Apec summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/apec-summit>, and the prime minister, 
Malcolm Turnbull, left for Peru on Thursday night.

Ciobo travelled to the meeting prepared to talk seriously to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> about a relatively unknown trade 
deal, called the Free Trade Area of Asia Pacific, which is being advanced by 
the Chinese government.

The FTAAP would involve 21 countries, making it much larger than the 
12-country TPP.

One widely cited study 
<https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2438725> estimates the 
gains from FTAAP would be eight times that of the TPP – close to $2tn, or 
roughly 2% of world gross domestic product in 2025.

In an opinion piece published by the Australian Financial Review 
<http://www.afr.com/opinion/columnists/afr16opedciobo-20161116-gsqouw> on 
Thursday, and in an interview with the Financial Times before the Apec summit, 
Ciobo said he wanted to conclude a collective study on the FTAAP.

“With the future of the TPP looking grim, my ministerial counterparts and I 
will work to conclude a study on the Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific, which 
sets out agreed actions towards a future free trade zone,” he wrote.

He also said Australia had “long been a supporter” of the FTAAP concept.

Now Jason Clare, the shadow minister for trade and investment, has told 
Guardian Australia that the FTAAP concept is a good one, particularly because 
it would include the United States and China.

He said with the demise of the TPP Australia ought to focus on other trade 
opportunities. “I don’t think FTAAP is going to be finalised quickly. It’s a 
big project that will take time,” he said.

“But it does have the advantage over all other proposed regional trade 
agreements in that it includes both China and the United States.”

He said trade was an area of relative bipartisanship in Australia between 
Labor and the Coalition, and he saw the potential in FTAAP.

But he said a lesson from the election of Donald Trump, and from Brexit, was 
that a lot of people were “pretty angry, don’t trust politicians, and feel like 
they’re no better off today than they were a decade ago or worse”, so political 
parties ought to listen.

Australia and Asia Pacific had high hopes for the TPP. It's not necessarily 
over | Alan Oxley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/australia-asia-trans-pacific-trade-trump>
“The Labor party <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party> 
understands how important trade is in improving the lives of Australians, but 
it’s not just about trade,” he said.

“It’s about domestic reforms – like the minimum wage, negative gearing, 
education, skills reforms – a whole lot of things that need to be done in 
Australia if we’re going to reverse the trend of increasing inequality, and the 
trends that we’re seeing here and in the US and the UK of lower standards of 
living.

“Trade is part of something bigger, which is inclusive growth.”


Ciobo said on Friday that, besides the TPP and the FTAAP, a third potential 
Asia-Pacific trade deal had great potential.

“I’m pursuing the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership 
<http://dfat.gov.au/trade/agreements/rcep/Pages/regional-comprehensive-economic-partnership.aspx>
, or what’s called RCEP, with a view to what’s going to be good for Australia,” 
he told ABC radio.

“It has the potential, given it’s more than 50% of the global population, more 
than 30% of global GDP ... that if we are able to successfully land it over the 
coming months and year or so ahead, would create terrific opportunities for 
Australian businesses to export through a common set of rules across the 
region.”

The RCEP agreement involves 16 countries, including China, but it excludes the 
US. The Chinese government has long seen RCEP as an alternative to the 
US-driven TPP.

Clare told Guardian Australia that the key to security and prosperity in the 
Asia Pacific was to have the US and China getting along. “A trade agreement 
that involves both of them is very important,” he said.

“When you’ve got trade agreements that exclude one of them, that creates the 
risk that the other feels contained or isolated or excluded. If they’re both in 
an agreement, at the core of it, it helps to further enmesh those two 
economies.”
 