
The public will be invited to invest in new interest-bearing premium bonds 
which will specifically fund billions of pounds of investment in solar, wind 
and other forms of clean energy, ifLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> forms the next government.

Shadow energy secretary Caroline Flint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/caroline-flint> said the time had come to 
involve the public and local communities in financing and backing new green 
energy projects – as happens in Germany – in a way that would benefit the 
environment and give people an attractive financial return.

If Labour wins power, Flint says she will ask the Green Investment Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-investment-bank> – set up by the 
coalition to fund green investment – to oversee the management of new “green 
bonds”, which experts believes would yield far higher rates of return than many 
traditional methods of saving.

“We need to invest around £100bn in the electricity system alone by 2020 as we 
replace ageing and polluting sources of power with new, cleaner alternatives. 
But investment is running at half that level,” Flint told the Observer.

“I am very attracted to the idea of green bonds which, alongside institutional 
and international investment, could provide a good deal of the investment 
needed.”

Last year the Commons environmental audit committee said the Green Investment 
Bank was playing an important role, but needed new powers to boost investment 
in green energy if the UK was to meets its targets.

“More must be done to secure the required levels of green investment in areas 
such as low-carbon energy generation, energy efficiency, and transport,” it 
said.

“The Green Investment Bank has made a good start, making investments which 
will contribute to filling the gap in the required level of green investment. 
The bank needs to be able to borrow to significantly enlarge the scale of its 
work.”

Labour has already said it plans to allow the bank to borrow. But Flint also 
wants it to play a part in encouraging investment among the public, so that 
people in this country develop a financial and civic interest in community and 
green energy policy.

In many local communities in Germany, where the renewable energy market is far 
ahead of the UK, a majority of the population are investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/may/30/germany-renewable-energy-revolution>
in an increasingly decentralised green energy system, and see their investments 
yielding strong returns.

“We have to involve people in future energy and environmental challenges of 
our country,” said Flint. “One way to do that is to offer these kind of bond 
schemes.”

Last year the CEO of the Green Investment Bank, Shaun Kingsbury, said he could 
raise up to £60bn to fund low carbon energy infrastructure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jun/19/green-investment-bank-borrowing-restrictions-60bn-capital-markets>
, from windfarms to wave power, if the restrictions on his ability to borrow in 
the capital markets were lifted.

Experts believe the bond system could help bridge the remaining gap, in an 
industry that can yield returns of at least 8% a year.
 