
As the tourist board puts it: “Las Vegas just got more fabulous.” Last month, 
gay marriage was pronouncedlegal in the wedding capital of the world 
<http://www.reviewjournal.com/columns-blogs/politics/slash-politics/gay-marriage-legalized-nevada>
 – making the city the most symbolic of a host of destinations to open up to 
official same-sex ceremonies.

The US, in particular, is on a roll: in the past month alone, same-sex 
marriage has been legalised in 13 states – including the Pacific paradise of 
Hawaii. These locations join France, Brazil, New Zealand and the markedly less 
tropical UK. Now, same-sex couples can start dreaming of exotic ceremonies: 
beachside in Honolulu, perhaps; a classical reception in Paris, or an 
Elvis-themed shindig in Vegas.

Nowhere is the buzz felt more than at the gay-owned and operated Vivas Las 
Vegas <http://www.vivalasvegasweddings.com/> wedding chapel, which has already 
performed 50 same-sex marriages and had over 200 inquiries from around the 
world since it was legalised in Nevada last month. “It’s so important that 
same-sex couples have the same rights,” says Brian Mills, general manager at 
the chapel. “Not only from an economic standpoint, but from a moral and social 
one as well.”

For Neal Broverman, editor-in-chief of gay travel magazine Out Traveler 
<http://www.outtraveler.com/>, this is all part of a “sea change” going on 
right now with gay wedding destinations: “Ten years ago, people just did 
commitment ceremonies, but now there’s marriage equality in all these places 
where we were previously left out of the conversation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Flas-vegas-same-sex-marriage-destinations-gay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415374286325%2Fcbac7ea9-01a6-4091-b340-a4205963f655-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Las%20Vegas%20joins%20the%20destinations%20offering%20same-sex%20weddings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Flas-vegas-same-sex-marriage-destinations-gay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Las%20Vegas%20joins%20the%20destinations%20offering%20same-sex%20weddings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F08%2Flas-vegas-same-sex-marriage-destinations-gay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F7%2F1415374286325%2Fcbac7ea9-01a6-4091-b340-a4205963f655-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An Elvis-themed ceremony in Las Vegas. Photograph: John Locher/AP 
Of course, for destinations, same-sex marriage presents a lucrative 
opportunity. New research this week fromOut Now Global 
<http://www.outnowconsulting.com/> – which offers LGBT training for tourism 
staff and has also ranked the top LGBT destinations for 2015 –values the LGBT 
travel market at $200bn 
<http://www.wtmlondon.com/page.cfm/action=press/libID=1/libEntryID=2343/listID=1>
 a year. And as Broverman says, legalising same-sex marriage makes a “huge 
difference” to the way a destination is perceived in general.

“Our readers are very conscious of places that are resistant to LGBT rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lgbt-rights>,” he says. “LGBT people stay on 
top of which places are friendly and when they hear somewhere’s opened up, they 
see it as a place to go.”

John Tanzella, president of the International Gay and Lesbian Travel 
Association <http://igltafoundation.org/> (IGLTA), says there is a huge amount 
of hype in the US: “As destinations open up for weddings, people jump on them, 
and hotels and restaurants fill up. It will settle down, but there’s a very 
large LGBT community, and they want to support the people who support them.”

Some are cynical about destinations courting the “pink pound” but less 
interested in LGBT rights, but Tanzella feels the process is ultimately 
positive: “If anything, it builds bridges and creates a dialogue in the 
destination about the whole LGBT community.”

And the number of new wedding destinations is set to continue into the new 
year, when Florida is likely to legalise same-sex marriage.

“That’s a huge destination,” says Broverman. “I think people are really 
excited about it opening up in Florida, with Key West and Orlando. I know a lot 
of gay people who love Disney World.”

Out Now Global’s top 10 intended destinations for LGBT Travel in 2015

1 New York
2 Sydney
3 Amsterdam
4 Rio de Janeiro
5 Buenos Aires
6 San Francisco
7 London
8 Paris
9 Melbourne
10 Berlin
For the full rankings visit outnowconsulting.com 
<http://www.outnowconsulting.com/latest-updates/press-centre/new-research-lgbt-travel-where-will-gays-and-lesbians-holiday-in-2015.aspx>
 