
For once in his life, the oboist, conductor and Proms regular Nicholas Daniel 
<http://nicholasdaniel.co.uk/> will not be tuning into the Last Night party at 
the Royal Albert Hall. “I won’t watch it.” he said. “I’ll feel just a bit 
conflicted, quite honestly.

“I will feel conflicted between my love of Elgar, my love of British music, my 
love of the Proms and my love of Britain as part of Europe.”

The Last Night of the Proms is known for being fun, a chance for concertgoers 
to let their hair down, wave union jack flags and enthusiastically sing along 
to the national anthem, Land of Hope and Glory and Rule Britannia!

But this year’s party could have a different feel. For Brexit supporters it 
could well be the place to celebrate a historic moment. Remainers, like Daniel, 
may feel “queasy”. And then there are the musicians and singers on stage, many 
of whom are from EU countries, fearful of a future that might have a profound 
effect on their living if freedom of movement is curtailed.

Daniel, artistic director of next week’s Leicester international music festival
 <http://www.leicesterinternationalmusicfestival.org.uk/>, is British, teaches 
at a German university and is a married to a Pole.


He remembers being with his husband when it became clear that Britain had 
voted to leave. “It was the most depressing day that we’ve had in our life 
together, total disbelief,” he said.

“It’s like we’re a fortress and we’re pulling up the drawbridge. It has put a 
whole new slant on [the fact that] the first thing British people do when they 
meet is apologise. Now I have a very good reason to.”

This year’s conductor is Sakari Oramo, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jul/10/conductor-sakari-oramo-first-night-proms>
 a Finn who remembers listening to the Last Night on the radio when he was 
growing up. “I found it very noisy. It was hard to hear the music behind the 
noise,” he said.

Oramo, taking a break from rehearsals, told the Guardian he hoped the evening 
would be enjoyed for what it was: “A celebration of the eight weeks of glorious 
music that has happened at the Proms.”

He said the programme, which had not been changed as a result of the Brexit 
vote, had a very international mix with music by Borodin, Rossini, Donizetti 
and Offenbach. The star soloist will be the Peruvian tenor Juan Diego Flórez.

But he acknowledges the Last Night also has its celebration of British music. 
“It is not like a normal concert,” he said. “Normally when I’m asked I say: 
‘Oh, it’s just like a normal concert,’ but this one actually isn’t. This one is 
special with all the traditions that go with it and of course the noise, 
especially in the second half, and I think there might be more noise this year 
… who knows.”

Oramo is not expecting to do anything different, although he said he would not 
be sportingthe union jack waistcoat he wore in 2014, his first Last Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/14/the-last-night-of-the-proms-review-oramo-williams-jansen-henshall>
. “I’ll wear something very stylish I’m sure, but probably nothing so obvious 
this year.”

If there is more enthusiastic flag-waving, that’s fine, Oramo said. “If it’s 
so, then let it be. I have to do it because I’m contracted. Whatever I do, and 
I’m sure the orchestra feel the same way, we will do to the very best of our 
abilities. We serve the music.”

Oramo agreed there were fears among musicians about the future, but the 
concert hall was not the place to air them. “People are feeling very uneasy 
about the situation, that’s for sure. I’ve talked to musicians about the 
general situation but it has not affected us in that way. Everyone is there who 
was supposed to be there originally.”

Musicians are right to be worried, according to the consultant and cultural 
commentator James Inverne <http://www.jamesinvernemusic.com/>, who fears the 
British orchestral scene will be “wrecked” unless the right decisions are made 
after the Brexit vote. Arguably more than any other sector, classical musicians 
and singers rely on being able to work easily across Europe.

“I can tell you, having British artists work in the US is an enormous pain in 
the neck,” said Inverne. “It is an important market, they want to go there, but 
the sheer amount of work that goes into setting up a visa, and the expense, 
often deters American orchestras from employing overseas artists.”

He worries what impression the Last Night – “a wonderful thing, great fun” – 
might send out and that it could “ironically underscore the worries about the 
disharmony that Brexit might bring”.


Inverne added: “In the last 10 years or so it has managed to avoid being seen 
as parochial because Britain has been so connected to the world. London has 
been an international hub.

“There has been a sense of it being a party for the world which happens in 
London and the audience has been international, helped byProms in the Parks 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/847Crs5TrVJpsgF0xjDzmT/proms-in-the-park-2016-london-general-information-faqs>
.

“Post-Brexit and in the immediate few years when it is sensitive, I think they 
will want to be careful that this is not seen as a jingoistic celebration of 
the rejection of Europe, or any kind of preening, and that can be difficult 
because of the second half.”

It is, of course, not the first time the Last Night has been held at a 
sensitive time.Mark Elder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/01/mark-elder-conductor-portrait-artist>
 was famously replaced as conductor in 1990 after saying he did not wish to 
conduct Land of Hope and Glory and Rule Britannia! during the time of the Gulf 
war.

Programmes have been changed at the last minute because of events. John 
Adams’s Short Ride in a Fast Machine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5LoUm_r7It8> has the distinction of being 
dropped twice, in 1997 after the death of Diana and 2011 after the September 11 
terrorist attacks.

Concertgoers were also handed copies of the American national anthem to sing 
that year, recalled Peter Avis, a Proms regular for more than 50 years. “It was 
certainly different and was not so jolly and jumpy up and down as it would have 
been.”

Yes, the Last Night is patriotic, he said, but it also had a history of 
protest with people regularly taking in banners, whether that was in support of 
gay rights or the miners.A “refugees welcome” banner was something of a 
show-stealer last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/13/refugees-welcome-banner-steals-show-last-night-proms-royal-albert-hall>
.

There is a chance that many EU flags will be waved this year, with one 
crowdfunded campaign successfully raising £1,175 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/pro-eu-protest-planned-for-last-night-of-the-proms>
 for them. About two dozen volunteers will be outside the Royal Albert Hall 
hoping to persuade concertgoers to fly the flag instead of, or alongside, the 
union jack.

Avis, whose MA was about the Proms, said the Last Night seemed more 
nationalistic than in previous decades because of people in the boxes who saw 
it as an “event” where union flag waving was almost compulsory.

“It is the only thing a lot of people think the Proms does,” he said. “A lot 
of us don’t think of it being particularly patriotic and some balk at singing 
Rule Britannia!”


Avis, whose first Prom was the Last Night in 1961, has this year cut himself 
down to 20 concerts and will not be there on Saturday, although not because of 
Brexit. “We have got rather fed up with it. It’s so long and there is all this 
business of waving at everybody on the screens.”

BBC Proms lovers, like Daniel, stress that they have got nothing against the 
Last Night and there are no obvious calls for any changes because of Brexit. 
“The Last Night is a celebration of the Proms and a celebration of music-making 
and an opportunity to have a good singsong,” he said. “Let’s not knock that. 
And it is also, in this day and age, just great to see music on the telly, 
frankly.”

Many people will hope the whole evening is free of politics, and they can just 
enjoy the music and the daftness.

The former Proms director Sir Nicholas Kenyon, writing this week in the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/last-night-of-the-proms-nicholas-kenyon-brexit>
, acknowledged there might be a sense of foreboding this year but said the 
music being played had its roots outside Britain. “The inspiration our native 
music has derived from continental Europe and beyond has been deep and 
lasting,” he said.

How heavily Brexit looms on Saturday night remains to be seen. Certainly 
Oramo, who as conductor has to deliver a speech, is not likely to touch on the 
subject.

“I’m thinking about the speech day and night but I haven’t finalised it yet,” 
he said, correctly declining to reveal anything he might say.

“It is a challenge to put something together which contributes to the spirit 
of the evening but also has some meaning to it,” he said. “But I’m a musician, 
speaking to a musical audience.”


• Last Night of the Proms will be live on BBC2 and BBC1 from 7.15pm 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07w0bg2>.
 