
On a day in which the standout tie of the round between old Wimbledon and new 
Wimbledon has yet to be played 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/nov/30/neal-ardley-afc-wimbledon-mk-dons>
, it is easy for the romance of the FA Cup to be drowned out by the Premier 
League-based shrieking and hollering of Stelling, Merson and co on Soccer 
Saturday.

But some plucky non-leaguers are determined to enjoy their time in the 
relative spotlight, namely the Conference sides Lincoln City andMansfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mansfield> who played out a 3-3 
east-Midlands derby humdinger.

Matt Green had put Mansfield ahead on 21 minutes, before Alan Power equalised 
with a beautiful, curling 25-yard free-kick. Jamie Taylor and Power added close 
range finishes either side of a Louis Taylor strike for Mansfield, who left it 
late – Matt Read forcing a replay with a header in the 93rd minute.

Despite conceding so late, the Lincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> manager David Holdsworth praised 
his team: "We were so nearly there but I give credit to Mansfield for sticking 
at it. We had to do it the hard way but we won't be scared of going to their 
place for the replay."

Another all non-league affair saw the lowest placed team of the round, 
Hastings United, get a deserved draw at Harrogate Town. Having fallen behind to 
a Tom Platt header in the first half, Hastings's part-timer Jamie Crellin hit 
back just after the hour mark and ensured his team, who are 17th in the seventh 
tier of English football, will be in the hat for the third round to potentially 
face Premier League opposition.

Harrogate, playing in their first FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> second round, will travel to the 
south coast for the replay later this week.

The former Sheffield United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sheffieldunited> manager, Micky Adams, 
made his first return to Bramall Lane with his Port Vale side and came close to 
a upset, leading United 1-0 until the final minute of normal time, before 
Vale's injury-time collapse saw the home side come back to win 2-1.

A lifelong Sheffield United supporter, Adams was sacked as the Blades manager 
in May 2011 after five months in charge but has since leadPort Vale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portvale> to second in League Two – much 
of that success down to the prolific striker Tom Pope, who scored his 21st of 
the season in the first half.

Vale endured relentless United pressure throughout the second half and cracked 
in the 90th minute to a long-ball pumped deep into their area – Shaun Miller 
pouncing on a knockdown to poke home the equaliser. He grabbed the winner five 
minutes later from close range to send Adams home empty handed.

Nicky Adams opened the scoring for Crawley in their 3-0 win over Chelmsford, 
after his cross-shot crept in at the near post. After the Chelmsford striker 
Donovan Simmonds was sent off for a second yellow before the break, Crawley 
were totally dominant and had 38 shots in total, the most decisive of which 
were Billy Clarke's sweet volley to make it 2-0, and Gary Alexander's penalty a 
minute from time.

Calvin Zola scored for Burton against his former club Crewe to decide a tight 
tie at Gresty road; Coventry beat Morecambe 2-1 in front of only 6,339 at the 
Ricoh Arena and Barrow's tie against Macclesfield was called off because of a 
frozen pitch.
 