
London should have seen Peter Sellars 
<https://www.wacd.ucla.edu/people/28-people/faculty/133-peter-sellars>’ take on 
György Ligeti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/aug/27/gyorgy-ligeti-contemporary-music-guide>
’sonly opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/aug/27/le-grand-macabre-gyorgy-ligeti> 
in 1999, when the production he had unveiled at the Salzburg festival two years 
earlier was due to come to Covent Garden. But the then newly renovated Royal 
Opera House was still having technical teething problems and the show was 
cancelled. We’ve finally seen it now, though, more or less: the semi-staging 
that Sellars has devised for the London Symphony Orchestra’s performances with 
Simon Rattle follows the same 20-year-old line, setting Le Grand Macabre in a 
world of nuclear catastrophe.

Related: Don't Panic: learning to love Ligeti's Le Grand Macabre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/13/elizabeth-watts-ligeti-le-grand-macabre-barbican>

After the Salzburg production, for which Ligeti made the total revision of the 
score that’s now definitive, the composer publicly repudiated the reading of 
his stage work as apost-Chernobyl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/chernobyl-nuclear-disaster> parable. 
Two decades on, Sellars, however, has stuck to his approach. But with the stage 
strewn with drums of radioactive waste, characters wearing white coats or 
decontamination suits and backed by video footage of nuclear power stations and 
mushroom clouds, demonstrations against Trident and survivors sifting through 
the devastation of Hiroshima or Nagasaki, the whole thing seems muddled. Is 
this a critique of nuclear power or of nuclear weapons, or is it just saying, 
in a kneejerk way, that everything “nuclear” is bad?

None of this helps the dramatic coherence of Le Grand Macabre either. The 
production byLa Fura dels Baus staged at ENO seven years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/18/le-grand-macabre-coliseum-review>
 suggested the score had lost its subversive edge. Nothing in this performance 
contradicts that; in fact, it undermines what dramatic coherence there is, 
while the po-faced sermonising suffocates the anarchic black humour that is 
such a vital ingredient. From the grand macabre himself, Nekrotzar, who arrives 
in Breughelland to bring an end to everything but is too drunk to do his job 
properly, to the lovers Amando and Amanda, too wrapped up in each other to 
notice that anything apocalyptic is happening at all, everybody in the opera is 
a cartoon character. Turning them into nuclear operatives, besuited 
apparatchiks and victims adds nothing.
 A musical triumph … Peter Hoare (Piet the Pot), Frode Olsen (Astradamors), 
Pavlo Hunka (Nekrotzar) and conductor Simon Rattle. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
Musically, though, the performance under Rattle is superb. From the opening 
toccata played on car horns which parodies the canzona from Monteverdi’s Orfeo, 
to the radiant passacaglia that supports the final scene, everything in 
Ligeti’s score is heard more vividly than it could ever be in an opera house, 
and the playing of the LSO is astoundingly good. So, too, are most of the solo 
performances – fromPavlo Hunka 
<http://www.philharmonia.lviv.ua/artists/actors-629/?lang=en>’s lugubrious 
Nekrotzar andPeter Hoare <http://www.hazardchase.co.uk/artists/peter-hoare/>’s 
drink-sodden Piet the Pot,Frode Olsen 
<http://www.atholestill.com/artist.php?id=39> and Heidi Melton 
<http://www.heidimeltonsoprano.com/> as Astradamors and Mescalina the couple 
whose relationship is conducted entirely in S&M terms, toRonnita Miller 
<http://www.rayfieldallied.com/artists/ronnita-miller/> and Elizabeth Watts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/05/facing-the-music-elizabeth-watts>
 as the young lovers.

 Only Audrey Luna <http://audrey-luna.com/> as Gepopo, the chief of police, 
does not make the most of her coloratura nonsense aria. It’s normally one of 
the show-stopping moments, but then Sellars has Luna sing from a hospital bed, 
complete with one of histrademark drips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/aug/27/how-we-made-theodora>. As too 
often in this production, the tired old message has to come first.
 