
Talks for a free trade deal between Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the US face a serious 
impasse with “irreconcilable” differences in some areas, according to leaked 
negotiating texts.

The two sides are also at odds over US demands that would require the EU to 
break promises it has made on environmental protection.

President Obama said last week he was confident a deal could be reached. But 
the leaked negotiating drafts and internal positions, which were obtained by
Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> and seen by the 
Guardian, paint a very different picture.

TTIP is a very bad excuse to vote for Brexit | Nick Dearden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/25/ttip-vote-brexit-barack-obama-leave-eu-trade-deal>
“Discussions on cosmetics remain very difficult and the scope of common 
objectives fairly limited,” says one internal note by EU trade negotiators. 
Because of a European ban on animal testing, “the EU and US approaches remain 
irreconcilable and EU market access problems will therefore remain,” the note 
says.

Talks on engineering were also “characterised by continuous reluctance on the 
part of the US to engage in this sector,” the confidential briefing says.

These problems are not mentioned in a separate report on the state of the 
talks, also leaked, which theEuropean commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> has prepared for 
scrutiny by the European parliament.

These outline the positions exchanged between EU and US negotiators between 
the 12th andthe 13th round of TTIP talks 
<https://ustr.gov/ttip/ttip-round-information>, which took place in New York 
last week.

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
The public document offers a robust defence of the EU’s right to regulate and 
create a court-like system for disputes, unlike the internal note, which does 
not mention them.

Jorgo Riss, the director of Greenpeace EU, said: “These leaked documents give 
us an unparalleled look at the scope of US demands to lower or circumvent EU 
protections for environment and public health as part of TTIP. The EU position 
is very bad, and the US position is terrible. The prospect of aTTIP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ttip> compromising within that range is 
an awful one. The way is being cleared for a race to the bottom in 
environmental, consumer protection and public health standards.”

US proposals include an obligation on the EU to inform its industries of any 
planned regulations in advance, and to allow them the same input into EU 
regulatory processes as European firms.

American firms could influence the content of EU laws at several points along 
the regulatory line, including through a plethora of proposed technical working 
groups and committees.

“Before the EU could even pass a regulation, it would have to go through a 
gruelling impact assessment process in which the bloc would have to show 
interested US parties that no voluntary measures, or less exacting regulatory 
ones, were possible,” Riss said.

The US is also proposing new articles on “science and risk” to give firms 
greater regulatory say. Disputes over pesticides residues and food safety would 
be dealt with by the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation’sCodex Alimentarius 
<http://www.fao.org/fao-who-codexalimentarius/en/> system.

Environmentalists say the body has loose rules on corporate influence, 
allowing employees of companiessuch as BASF, Nestle  
<http://www.essen-ohne-chemie.info/ttip-pestizide/>and Coca Cola 
<http://www.essen-ohne-chemie.info/ttip-pestizide/> to sit on – and sometimes 
lead – national delegations. Some 44% of its decisions on pesticides residues 
have been less stringent than EU ones, with 40% of rough equivalence and 16% 
being more demanding, according to Greenpeace.

GM foods could also find a widening window into Europe, with the US pushing 
for a working group to adopt a “low level presence initiative”. This would 
allow the import of cargo containing traces of unauthorised GM strains. The EU 
currently blocks these because of food safety and cross-pollination concerns.

What is TTIP and why should we be angry about it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/ttip-what-why-angry-transatlantic-trade-investment-partnership-guide>
 The EU has not yet accepted the US demands, but they are uncontested in the 
negotiators’ note, and no counter-proposals have been made in these areas.

In January, the EU trade commissioner Cecilia Malmström said [pdf] 
<http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2016/january/tradoc_154173.pdf> the 
precautionary principle, obliging regulatory caution where there is scientific 
doubt, was a core and non-negotiable EU principle. She said: “We will defend 
the precautionary approach to regulation in Europe, in TTIP and in all our 
other agreements.” But the principle is not mentioned in the 248 pages of TTIP 
negotiating texts.

The European commission has also promised 
<http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2015/january/tradoc_153013.1%20TSD.pdf> 
to safeguard environmental laws, defend international standards and protect the 
EU’s right to set high green benchmarks in future.

But the new leak will not placate critics of the deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/23/ttip-eu-negotiators-appear-to-break-environmental-pledge-in-leaked-draft>
, who have pointed toattempts by fossil fuel firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/26/ttip-chevron-lobbied-for-controversial-legal-right-as-environmental-deterrent>
 and others to influence its outcome, as a sign of things to come.

The EU negotiators internal note says “the US expressed that it would have to 
consult with its chemical industry on how to position itself” on issues of 
market access for non-agricultural goods.

Where industry lobbying in regulatory processes is concerned, the US also 
“insisted” that the EU be “required” to involve US experts in its development 
of electrotechnical standards.
 