
An internal report into how the oil giant BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> monitors its refinery and chemical 
sites has revealed at least two near-miss accidents that could have caused 
deaths.

The report, leaked to Greenpeace 
<https://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/12/13/bp-leaked-report-sparks-concerns-safety/>
, concludes that “urgent attention” is required to improve how BP manages 
crucial engineering data across the world and that the company lags behind its 
competitors including Shell,Chevron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/17/chevron-hits-out-at-british-documentary-on-oil-pollution-in-ecuador>
, Petronas and ConocoPhillips.

One serious near miss was at BP’s huge oil refinery in Whiting, Indiana, in 
2014, where failures to record data properly led to $258m in lost production, 
the report found. Another was at BP’s chemical plant in Hull, UK, where a piece 
of equipment was not operated correctly, causing damages of $35-45m, while 
another failure saw critical blueprints that “had gone missing during critical 
operational activities”.

BP has suffered serious accidents in recent years, including the Deepwater 
Horizon explosion <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deepwater_Horizon_explosion> 
in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010, which killed 11 people, and anexplosion at its 
Texas City refinery 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Texas_City_Refinery_explosion> in 2005, which 
caused 15 deaths.

The internal report, produced in August 2015, said “inadequate management and 
use of engineering information has been a root cause or contributing factor in 
15% of the last 500 incidents”.

Deepwater Horizon review – BP oil spill drama captures heroics and heartache
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/deepwater-horizon-review-bp-oil-spill-drama-captures-heroics-and-heartache>
“It is clear that BP have again failed to act on [earlier] recommendations and 
address the issues raised,” said Prof Robert Bea, a safety expert at the 
University of Berkeley who produced reports forBP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> after explosions at its Grangemouth 
facility between 1987 and 2001. He told Greenpeace: “These failures could have 
very serious effects on the safety of the refinery operations.”

A spokesman for BP said: “BP is committed to safe, reliable and compliant 
operations. With that in mind, BP regularly conducts internal assessments in an 
effort to make improvements to its operations. This particular report focused 
on potential enhancements to how BP manages engineering data. It is not an 
analysis of any operational incidents, and any suggestion that this report 
indicates BP is wavering from its safety commitment is wrong.”

The internal report named a series of incidents including one at BP’s chemical 
factory in Geel, Belgium, where crucial relief valves were found to be missing 
or fitted with the wrong parts.

At BP’s oil refinery at Cherry Point, in Washington state, US, the report said 
there is no “single aggregated list of safety critical equipment and there have 
been instances where getting replacement equipment up and running was 
compromised due to incomplete data. Response time to failure is compromised by 
the various sources of data. This is seen as a significant concern during a 
response crisis.” Five years earlier the plant had been penalised for13 serious 
safety violations 
<http://bbjtoday.com/blog/li-cites-bp-cherry-point-13-serious-safety-violations/7105>
, including failure to keep records.

BP to pay $175m to investors over Deepwater Horizon spill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/03/bp-compensate-investors-deepwater-horizon-oil-spill>
The report also found 80% of BP staff working with engineering information did 
not believe it “is given adequate priority or resource to be safe, reliable and 
efficient”. It said 7,000 engineering information users in the company “waste 
up to an average of an hour a day finding, using and maintaining engineering 
information”.

BP made its first major investment in the Gulf of Mexico 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/12/01/bp-make-first-major-investment-gulf-mexico-since-disaster/>
 since the Deepwater disaster earlier in December. But the Democrat 
representative Raúl Grijalva, who sits on the House of Representatives 
Committee on Natural Resources, told Greenpeace: “BP’s attitude seems to be 
that disasters like the Deepwater Horizon oil spill are the cost of doing 
business, which tells me we need to crack down even harder than I thought. No 
company with BP’s international reach should be able to shrug at safety and 
maintenance issues and pass on the very high costs of their indifference to the 
rest of us.”

The BP spokesman said: “Over the last five years, BP’s safety record has 
steadily improved. The company’s total number of Tier-1 process safety events – 
the most consequential events involving an unplanned or uncontrolled release of 
materials – continues to fall and is below the average for the industry.”
 