
The Las Vegas Strip isn’t in Las Vegas. You’ve got to understand that before 
you can understand anything else about this glittering, 4.2-mile stretch of Las 
Vegas Boulevard described byWilliam L Fox 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=n_8AnqiU4UEC&pg=PR12&lpg=PR12&dq=the+most+aggressively+branded+and+promoted+concatenation+of+adult+theme+parks+in+the+world&source=bl&ots=-qqzXkaTGZ&sig=SiLomKdHsc_B6X97XBCoMhUBtx8&hl=en&sa=X&ei=zJLYVMqNBom07gbJwIG4CQ&ved=0CCMQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=the%20most%20aggressively%20branded%20and%20promoted%20concatenation%20of%20adult%20theme%20parks%20in%20the%20world&f=false>
 as “the most aggressively branded and promoted concatenation of adult theme 
parks in the world”. It is also among the most visited places on Earth, having 
surpassed Mecca back in 1999.

The Strip was created in Paradise 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradise,_Nevada>, an idyllically named township 
of Nevada’s Clark County formed by hotel builders who had already built 
strategically outside city limits as a means of minimising taxes, dodging 
regulations and avoiding utility disputes with the city proper. Since 
Paradise’s founding in 1950, the unabashedly capitalistic and hedonistic Strip 
has seen an astonishing buildup, especially during its two most notable boom 
times: the mob-run 1960s and the corporatised 1990s.

But what kind of an urban experience has resulted? To a first-time visitor 
(myself included), the Strip can look and feel like the concretisation of 
unplanned chaos – with its waves of pulsing lights and scrolling video screens; 
its “riot” of clashing, garish architectural styles; the wide central river of 
frequently gridlocked traffic; and the swarms of tourists, all dressed with 
aggressive casualness and milling blindly every which way. But does it make any 
sense at all to apply the term “urban planning” to the Strip? Or is this simply 
what happens when money dictates every aspect of a built environment?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423476797397%2Ff99abf05-adcc-4a09-b8cb-d5b599e5f576-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423476797397%2Ff99abf05-adcc-4a09-b8cb-d5b599e5f576-1020x612.jpeg>
 Architect Robert Venturi in Las Vegas in 1966. Photograph: Denise Scott 
Brown/VSBA 
“It seems to me that urban planning has had nothing to do with the Strip,” says
Michael Green 
<http://www.nevadahumanities.org/humanities-road-speakers/michael-green#inside>
, associate professor of history at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, and 
co-author of Las Vegas: A Centennial History. “For the most part, builders have 
been free to build as they please.”

In the early 1930s, says Green, “the building of the Hoover Dam and the 
nascent tourism industry turnedLas Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/las-vegas> into a city dependent on 
federal projects and visitors. Economic diversification always has been 
limited, so the attitude too often has been that if someone wants to build, 
unless it’s a real problem, let ’er rip!”

And rip it has. The dominance of this laissez-faire approach to architecture 
and urbanism produced, over the following decades, a flamboyant, unapologetic, 
gambling- and entertainment-driven pseudo-city that observers found compelling 
and repulsive in equal measure.

The repulsion eventually fuelled a great aesthetic controversy in 1972, when 
the architectsRobert Venturi <http://www.archdaily.com/tag/robert-venturi/>, 
Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour publishedLearning from Las Vegas 
<http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/learning-las-vegas>, which dared to approach the 
built environment of the Strip on its own terms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423477534691%2F4f7a4cd7-87e6-4432-963e-007ca8d442cc-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423477534691%2F4f7a4cd7-87e6-4432-963e-007ca8d442cc-2060x1373.jpeg>
 ‘Las Vegas is to the Strip what Rome is to the Piazza.’ Photograph: David 
Levene for the Guardian 
“Las Vegas is to the Strip what Rome is to the Piazza,” the trio declared, 
having a grand old time enumerating the freakish architectural mini-movements 
that had emerged there, from “Miami Moroccan, International Jet Set Style” to 
“Yamasaki Bernini cum Roman Orgiastic” to “Bauhaus Hawaiian”. But they also 
noted that, while the Strip originally “just grew”, they were seeing the 
emergence of “the usual building and zoning controls” and even a “Strip 
Beautification Committee”. It gets them worrying: “What will happen to the 
Strip when the tastemakers take over?”

More than four decades on, however, anyone setting foot on the Strip will soon 
realise – with relief or horror – that nobody remotely describable as a 
“tastemaker” has yet taken over. The place has, if anything, gone much further 
over the top, presenting visitors with streetside spectacles unthinkable in the 
era that Venturi, Brown, and Izenour were writing about: elaborate fountain 
shows at the Bellagio electronically choreographed to pop hits; canals dug into 
The Venetian hotel, complete with stripe-shirted gondoliers; a 541-foot replica 
of the Eiffel tower at a casino-hotel called, simply, Paris.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423481046286%2F4422e50b-c7e6-4025-a683-6f120b30e513-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423481046286%2F4422e50b-c7e6-4025-a683-6f120b30e513-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Venetian hotel, complete with gondoliers in striped shirts. Photograph: 
Alamy 
“There is a difference between the planning of the Strip versus other parts of 
the Las Vegas Valley,” Mario Bermudez, Clark County’s zoning planning manager, 
tells me. “On the Strip, we routinely review multimillion to multibillion 
dollar projects. Because of the tax and gaming revenue generated from these 
projects, the entire State of Nevada benefits. While other projects throughout 
the Valley do provide an economic benefit to the state and county, it is not at 
the same level as the Strip properties.

Bermudez highlights the need for close cooperation with private companies in 
order to address the challenge of “how to adequately provide services to such a 
concentrated area … The Strip is only four miles long, and the number of 
pedestrians and cars requires us to work very closely with the resort hotels 
and other businesses to provide for the adequate movement of people and cars. 
We negotiate development agreements to mitigate impacts such as traffic, water 
sewer and public safety.”

More local-government mechanisms have indeed engaged in recent decades – but 
mostly to facilitate the Strip’s demolition, rebuilding and upward expansion. 
“To streamline and speed up the permitting process for the Strip, Clark County 
set up a special team of planners: the High-Impact Projects team,” saysStefan Al
 <http://www.stefanal.com/>, associate professor of urban design at the 
University of Pennsylvania and author of a forthcoming book on the Strip. “They 
negotiate with corporations on a development agreement for each project” which 
dictates that the developer must include or fund certain pieces of public 
infrastructure.

Still, much remains as it ever was in this arrangement of, as Hal Rothman 
<http://articles.latimes.com/2007/mar/01/local/me-rothman1> put it in his 
history of Las Vegas,Neon Metropolis 
<http://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/neon-metropolis-hal-rothman/1113892646?ean=9780415926126>
, “little city-states, interrelated little kingdoms, entirely self-contained 
and at war for customers”. Enter any one of them, and you still contend with 
what Learning from Las Vegas calls the “intricate maze” that “disorients the 
occupant in space and time. One loses track of where one is and when it is. 
Time is limitless, because the light of noon and midnight are exactly the same. 
Space is limitless, because the artificial light obscures rather than defines 
its boundaries.”

But perhaps the most noticeable difference between today’s Strip and the one 
from which Venturi, Brown, and Izenour learned is in its relationship with 
cars. In the early 70s, they described casinos surrounded not by literal lakes, 
full of fountains and gondolas and what have you, but by lakes of parking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423483888794%2Fdbd346d6-ac94-44d1-8715-7c7f74f4057f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423483888794%2Fdbd346d6-ac94-44d1-8715-7c7f74f4057f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fireworks mark the opening of the Aria hotel-casino, centrepiece of the $8.5bn 
CityCenter project, in 2009. Photograph: Steve Marcus/Reuters 
“In the old Las Vegas, nobody walked anywhere,” writes Rothman, whereas by the 
21st century, the Strip had become a promenade: “A de facto one created not by 
planners but by the feet of thousands. Every day, tens of thousands stroll the 
Strip and drink in the spectacle.”

Not only did this transformation occur in the 1990s, before America’s current 
urban revival got into full swing (with its associated trend forgreater 
pedestrianisation 
<http://www.archdaily.com/465343/nyc-s-times-square-becomes-permanently-pedestrian/>
), but it occurred in a context where, according to Al, “gaming industry 
interests easily prevail in a context of unincorporation, fragmented 
government, a limited tax base, powerful gaming lobbies and the absence of a 
city hall. So what is fascinating about the Strip is how, in spite of these 
looser planning conditions, corporations became interested in implementing good 
planning and urban design principles.”

Of course, the builders of the Strip have long understood the appeal of 
traditional cities, or at least simulacra thereof. In addition to those 
replicas of Venice and Paris, visitors can also eat, drink, and gamble in 
spaces themed after mid-century New York and ancient Rome (resorts modelled on 
London and San Francisco also reached the planning stages in the early 2000s, 
before the economy soured). But no project more overtly articulates the Strip’s 
response to the comeback of the American city thanMGM’s CityCenter 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/17/realestate/commercial/citycenter-in-las-vegas-survives-a-case-of-bad-timing.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
, which opened in 2009 at a cost of nearly $10bn, the most expensive private 
development in the country.

Al describes CityCenter as the product of “the Bilbao effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2007/oct/08/architecture1>: the 
notion that buildings designed by celebrity architects bring in tourists, and 
in particular a higher-end type of visitor”. MGM’s version was to bring in 
name-brand architects such as Daniel Libeskind, Helmut Jahn and Norman Foster, 
and to install public art by the likes of Maya Lin and Claes Oldenburg. 
Furthermore, CityCenter is a mixed-use complex, including about 2,400 
residential units. “It goes against the casino design convention,” Al says, “by 
having towers that let in natural light and meet the street the way buildings 
do in other cities” – with retail spaces, not gaming. This has long made good 
economic sense; the Strip’s non-gaming revenue began exceeding its gaming 
revenue back in 1997.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423487192273%2F1ecb25c1-3152-4f8d-94b7-a497b99f27d9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423487192273%2F1ecb25c1-3152-4f8d-94b7-a497b99f27d9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Strip’s mixed-use CityCenter complex broke casino design convention by 
meeting the street with retail spaces. Photograph: Steve Marcus/Reuters 
“Superficially, one can claim that the newer hotel-casinos on the Las Vegas 
strip are more ‘urban’,” says Aseem Inam, associate professor of urbanism at
Parsons The New School for Design <http://www.newschool.edu/parsons/> who is 
currently writing a book about CityCenter. But, he warns, “some of these claims 
come more from the project developers” – as when MGM itself calls the project “
one of the world’s largest environmentally sustainable urban communities 
<http://www2.citycenter.com/press_room/press_room_items.aspx?ID=845>”, or when 
the Department of Comprehensive Planning, which oversees and approves projects 
on the Las Vegas Strip, promotes it “as an example of cutting-edge urbanism”.

“A closer look reveals it to be otherwise,” says Inam, citing the expense and 
absentee ownership of CityCenter’s condominiums, the confinement of its 
“so-called ‘public’ spaces” within private property, often with restricted 
access, and – contrary to the project’s claims of pedestrian-friendliness – “a 
prevalence of automobile-friendly features”, including four large parking 
garages and its main entrance, a “whopping” eight-lane “driveway” which 
pedestrians can’t cross, having instead to use a series of escalators and 
bridges. “While cars flow in and out of the property smoothly, pedestrians are 
made to do this dance, primarily to entice them into the shopping mall, 
restaurants, casino and hotel.”

And while CityCenter incorporates certain elements of “real” cities, the 
project seems wholly to have forgotten about others. Green recalls once being 
interviewed by MGM representatives about his take on CityCenter’s “mixed-use” 
nature: “I wondered what people were going to do for groceries and schools, and 
how traffic would be affected; the interviewers seemed shocked at the very 
idea.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423487067490%2Fa51a2c86-9475-486a-8edd-935e4599e843-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423487067490%2Fa51a2c86-9475-486a-8edd-935e4599e843-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Caesars Palace blocked casino mogul Steve Wynn’s plans for a private transport 
system. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
For all its vices, CityCenter does have virtues: the architecture itself 
(though Foster’s hastily built Harmon Hotel will be demolished before ever 
having opened); its six gold certifications from theUS Green Building Council 
<http://www.usgbc.org/About> (a degree of environmental friendliness that 
convinced the Nevada legislature to allow CityCenter an estimated$390m tax break
 
<http://www.lasvegassun.com/news/2007/may/20/tax-break-pulled-out-of-the-air-could-cost-state-9/>
); and, as part of its deal with the High Impact Project team, the inclusion of 
such public infrastructure as a fire station, contributions to a new police 
station, and an almost $2m contribution toward a storm water retention basin.

But as always in Las Vegas, the places of greatest interest aren’t in the 
public realm but the quasi-public private one. Or as Learning from Las Vegas 
puts it, “the relation between public space, public-private space, and private 
space is as intricate and intriguing as that of the Rome of the 
counter-reformation.” Though now considered an urbanist no-no due to their 
tendency to drain activity from the street, the countless elevated pedestrian 
bridges across Las Vegas Boulevard stand as an example: though very much 
private space, they nevertheless give rise to their own social and commercial 
ecosystems of buskers, beggars and entrepreneurs with coolers full of cold beer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423478647162%2Fe1708c0d-4864-4f92-a468-17a815a6ba34-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Learning%20from%20Las%20Vegas%3A%20what%20the%20Strip%20can%20teach%20us%20about%20urban%20planning&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flas-vegas-strip-learning-temple-excess%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F9%2F1423478647162%2Fe1708c0d-4864-4f92-a468-17a815a6ba34-1020x612.jpeg>
 This sign has marked the south end of the Strip since 1959. Photograph: Ethan 
Miller/AP 
Developments such as CityCenter have even gone so far as to build their own 
transportation systems – in its case, a free tram taking riders to the Monte 
Carlo Resort to the south and the Bellagio to the north. Casino mogul Steve 
Wynn, more than anyone elsethe maker of the modern Strip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/jul/21/art.artsfeatures>, 
planned in the 1990s to connect all his properties in this manner, but the 
formidable Caesars Palace, which stands between Wynn’s Mirage and Bellagio, 
refused him permission to cross its property.

Al characterises these trams not as proper transit, but as examples of 
developers employing “weapons of mass traffic” against one another. And while 
they point to the surprising potential of Las Vegas’s thoroughly private 
approach to urbanism, they also highlight its predictable limitations. The 
agonisingly slow bus lines running up and down the Strip will, for the 
foreseeable future, remain in dire need of a dedicated lane, and without proper 
public funding, theLas Vegas monorail  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/feb/16/useconomy.marketturmoil>that 
entered operation in 2004 has had to defer the dream of connecting the airport, 
the Strip and downtown.

The corporate consolidation of the gaming industry, has, at this point, put 
the majority of the buildings on the Strip into the hands ofjust three 
corporations <http://www.lvrevealed.com/deathwatch/casino_owners.html>. And 
while this certainly eases the construction of that quasi-public 
infrastructure, obviating many disputes over tram and overpass pathways, it 
could also, as Al says, result in a situation where “Las Vegas’s designers 
would be hindered, just like Disneyland’s, by the demands of a single client, 
resulting in blandness.”

Despite its endangered flamboyance, however, we can continue to learn from Las 
Vegas, especially on the question of whether private enterprise alone can 
produce a functional urban environment. The answers – both yes and no — are 
illustrated with characteristic vividness on the Strip.
 