
You know the scenario: you invite some friends over for dinner and they 
graciously accept. But then the caveats begin: “Elspeth is gluten- and 
dairy-intolerant, and I don’t eat meat, fish or eggs.”

Bread, milk, butter, cheese – the nation seems to have become intolerant of 
the foods that used to be household staples. Entire supermarket aisles are now 
devoted to “free-from” products, with the British market forgluten-free alone 
expected to grow to £561m 
<http://www.foodmanufacture.co.uk/Sectors/Bakery/No-sign-of-gluten-free-growth-stalling>
 by 2017. Whether it’s due to a genuine rise in food allergies, or simply 
because of a perception that “free from” is healthier, the trend for dairy- and 
gluten-free seems here to stay.

Yet humans have been eating wheat and dairy products for millennia, apparently 
without harm. Has something changed, orare the “free-from” advocates taking us 
for an expensive – and rather joyless – ride? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/25/gluten-free-diet-life-saving-fad>
 Part of the confusion stems from a muddling of the distinction between food 
allergy and intolerance. Food allergies do seem to be on the rise, but these 
are different from intolerances, for which there is no strong evidence of an 
increase – and in some cases, no specific medical explanation for their cause. A
2008 study published in the journalAllergy revealed 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1398-9995.2007.01570.x/pdf> that 
although 34% of parents reported food allergies in their children, only 5% of 
children were found to have a genuine allergy.

Gluten-free: health fad or life-saving diet?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/25/gluten-free-diet-life-saving-fad>
So what is the difference? Allergies, such as reactions to specific proteins 
in wheat or milk, involve the immune system, and can be life-threatening. 
Symptoms usually kick in within minutes of eating a problem food, and can 
include vomiting, lip swelling, a rash, wheeze, and a blocked or runny nose. 
They are also relatively rare – at least among adults. According to an 
Australian study, wheat allergy affects around 0.2% of adults, while cow’s milk 
allergy affects 0.1-0.5% of adults. For children, research suggests2-3% of 
babies are affected <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3070118/> in 
their first year of life.

Then there’s coeliac disease, which affects 1% of the population, and is an 
autoimmune condition that causes serious harm if sufferers eat even small 
amounts of gluten-containing foods. Antibodies are generated against the 
gluten, but these also attack cells lining the gut, resulting in malnutrition.

Around 13% of adults claim to react when they eat gluten foods: only 0.8% of 
these have coeliac disease

Food intolerances, on the other hand, tend to generate symptoms such as 
bloating or abdominal pain, and these set in more slowly – sometimes several 
days after eating a problem food. They also aren’t thought to involve the 
immune system. “Although a lot of the symptoms can be very unpleasant, they 
generally aren’t life-threatening and don’t do any lasting damage,” says 
Maureen Jenkins, clinical director of the charityAllergy UK 
<https://www.allergyuk.org/>.

Among the most commonly reported intolerances are those relating to dairy and 
gluten, but precise numbers are difficult to obtain because studies often rely 
on people self-reporting sensitivities to these foods. And while reliable 
diagnostic tests exist for food allergies andcoeliac disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jan/14/simpler-diagnosis-coeliac-disease-new-test>
, there are no reliable tests for food intolerances (with the exception of that 
forlactose <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lactose_intolerance>). That’s not to 
stop them being marketed, though. The tennis playerNovak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/23/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-us-open>
, for instance, was diagnosed with gluten intolerance using a technique called
applied kinesiology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2004/nov/06/shopping5>. Here, the 
person undergoing testing holds a food substance in his or her hand or mouth, 
while the practitioner looks for signs of muscle weakness. TheAmerican College 
of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=vbNdAwAAQBAJ&pg=PA223&lpg=PA223&dq=American+College+of+Allergy,+Asthma+and+Immunology+validity+kinesiology&source=bl&ots=SLEYq5aDMN&sig=Kh2JXpzQ5ot74SgzNfN0UZzLYY0&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CCsQ6AEwAmoVChMIve_QvtuexwIVJI7bCh1w_gnF#v=onepage&q=American%20College%20of%20Allergy%2C%20Asthma%20and%20Immunology%20validity%20kinesiology&f=false>
 has stated that there’s “no evidence of diagnostic validity” for the technique.
 Photograph: Getty Images 
Other tests may sound more scientific, but they’re not necessarily any more 
reliable. Take IgG (immunoglobulin G) testing, which looks for antibodies 
against food substances in the blood. Unlike IgE antibodies that mediate 
allergies, IgG antibodies are produced by most of us in reaction to the foods 
we eat. But, “there is no evidence that food-specific IgG antibodies are 
involved in any disease processes,” says Stuart Jones, principal biochemist at 
King George hospital, London. The European Academy of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology similarly states that IgG testing “does not indicate food allergy or 
intolerance”. And Tariq el-Shanawany, consultant clinical immunologist at 
Cardiff and Vale NHS Trust, says: “For the patients I’ve seen who have had it 
done, it hasn’t given them the answer that means their symptoms go away.”

That’s not to say that intolerance to food substances such as gluten doesn’t 
exist. Approximately13% of British adults claim to experience symptoms when 
they eat gluten-containing foods 
<http://journals.lww.com/eurojgh/Fulltext/2014/01000/A_UK_study_assessing_the_population_prevalence_of.6.aspx>
, according to one recent study – yet only 0.8% of the population have been 
formally diagnosed with coeliac disease. “There are non-coeliac patients who 
are reporting symptoms when they eat gluten. If you look at their gut tissue 
using a high-magnification microscope, you can see the small bowel is having a 
very rapid response to it,” says David Sanders, consultant gastroenterologist 
at Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. “This is not an allergy 
or coeliac disease, but something is happening to them.”

But is it actually the gluten that they are reacting to? Peter Gibson of the 
Alfred Hospital and Monash University in Melbourne conducted the world’s first 
randomised-controlled trial ofgluten in non-coeliacs with gut symptoms 
<http://www.gastrojournal.org/article/S0016-5085%2813%2900702-6/abstract>, 
which found they felt better when they went gluten-free. However, subsequent 
studies have convinced him that it’snot the gluten they’re reacting to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/aug/25/is-gluten-bad-for-your-health>
, but a set of sugars dubbedFodmaps 
<http://www.med.monash.edu/cecs/gastro/fodmap/> (fermentable oligo-, di-, 
mono-saccharides and polyols). These sugars attract water and feed 
gas-generating bacteria in the small intestine, resulting in bloating, 
flatulence and loose stools. People with sensitive bowels seem to have worse 
symptoms. “There’s no doubt that wheat is a major cause of bloating and 
abdominal problems. The trouble is that wheat has more than just gluten in it,” 
says Gibson. Although there may be a small subset of non-coeliacs who react to 
gluten through some as yet undiscovered pathway, he believes that for the vast 
majority, reducing the fodmap content of their diet could go a long way to 
easing their symptoms.

But this doesn’t mean they have to cut out all wheat, barley and rye, as 
people with coeliac disease do. “You can probably still have a schnitzel with 
breadcrumbs on it, but you couldn’t have a bowl of pasta,” says Gibson. And 
fodmaps are found in other foods, too: particularly onions. Eliminating all 
fodmap-containing foods would be the first step, but these could gradually be 
reintroduced until you discover the level that triggers your symptoms.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fleave-it-out-are-food-intolerances-fact-or-fad-gluten-dairy-free-from-coeliac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F10%2F1439224248081%2F5441fcf2-9dc8-4a1a-ae3b-9cc96d2e6a88-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Leave%20it%20out%3A%20are%20food%20intolerances%20fact%20or%20fad%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fleave-it-out-are-food-intolerances-fact-or-fad-gluten-dairy-free-from-coeliac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Leave%20it%20out%3A%20are%20food%20intolerances%20fact%20or%20fad%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Faug%2F16%2Fleave-it-out-are-food-intolerances-fact-or-fad-gluten-dairy-free-from-coeliac%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F10%2F1439224248081%2F5441fcf2-9dc8-4a1a-ae3b-9cc96d2e6a88-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Spaghetti sauce? A gluten-intolerant person might tolerate a garnish of 
breadcrumbs, but not a plate of pasta. Photograph: Alamy 
Many of those opting to buy gluten-free products aren’t doing it because of 
abdominal symptoms, however. Arecent survey of 100 British gluten-free shoppers 
<http://www.buzzback.com/infographics/going-against-the-grain-uk/> found that 
28% were doing it to boost their energy levels and 24% to lose weight; yet 
there’s no good evidence to support these purported health benefits. “A 
gluten-free diet is not healthier than any other diet,” Sanders says.

Starch is the main source of calories in grains such as wheat, but the starch 
content of wheat is similar to that of other carbohydrates, such as rice or 
potatoes. “I think the idea that wheat or gluten is associated with weight gain 
has really come from the opposite angle; if you start to cut these products 
from your diet, then you start to lose weight,” adds Gary Frost, chair in 
nutrition and dietetics at Imperial College London. This is particularly true 
of high-calorie foods such as cakes, biscuits, or cheeseburgers.

Apart from rubbing dinner party hosts up the wrong way, giving up gluten is 
unlikely to cause you much harm – provided you aren’t solely reliant on 
manufactured gluten-free products, which can be high in salt or sugar. The same 
can’t necessarily be said about avoiding milk and dairy products, however. 
These provide around a quarter of our daily protein requirement and up to 60% 
of other important nutrients such as calcium andphosphorus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/punctuated-equilibrium/2011/jun/03/1>. “My 
biggest worry about the current trend for ditching cow’s milk relates to bone 
development in children and adolescents, and its long-term effect on bone 
strength inpostmenopausal women <https://www.theguardian.com/society/menopause>
,” says Ian Givens, professor of food chain nutrition at the University of 
Reading. Dairy intolerance is at least a condition for which there’s an 
established mechanism: approximately 65% of the world’s population carries a 
genetic variant that means they’re unable to digest the lactose in milk. 
Instead, this sugar passes into the small intestine where it feeds bacteria 
that generate gas and bloating. Butlactose intolerance among Brits 
<http://www.nutrition.org.uk/nutritionscience/allergy/lactose-intolerance.html?start=1>
 is less common, affecting approximately 5% of the population. Temporarylactose 
intolerance <http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/lactose-intolerance/Pages/Causes.aspx>
 can also develop as a result of gastroenteritis and other illnesses, or after 
repeated courses of antibiotics. Even if you arelactose intolerant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2015/mar/02/going-dairy-free-hero-ingredients-lactose-intolerance>
, studies suggest that you may be able to drink up to around250 millilitres of 
milk <http://annals.org/article.aspx?articleid=745835> in one sitting without 
symptoms, and possibly twice this amount spread through the day if consumed 
with food.

Is gluten bad for your health?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/aug/25/is-gluten-bad-for-your-health>
So why are so many people ditching cow’s milk in favour of plant-based 
alternatives such as soy or almond milk? “I think a lot of people are buying 
products because they think it is trendy, or they assume those kinds of 
alternative milks are superior products,” says Sioned Quirke, a dietitian and a 
spokeswoman for the British Dietetic Association. “They are not a superior 
product in any way, shape or form.” With the exception of soy milk, plant-based 
milks are far lower in protein than cow’s milk. And unless they have been 
fortified, they are also poor sources of calcium and vitamin D. There’s also 
emerging evidence that people who consume large amounts of milk and dairy 
products are atlower risk of diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and colorectal 
cancer 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07315724.2008.10719750?journalCode=uacn20>
, possibly because of the calcium in milk. Another possibility is that 
widespread publicity about food intolerance is prompting many people with 
unexplained symptoms such as bloating or stomach cramps to self-diagnose dairy 
intolerance.A recent survey by Allergy UK 
<https://www.allergyuk.org/downloads/Corporate%20/Dairy-Intolerance-Report---Feb-2013-V3.pdf>
 revealed that 44% of people who class themselves as dairy intolerant have not 
been diagnosed as such by a doctor; instead, they have used online information 
or undergone non-conventional tests. Seventy two per cent have removed all 
dairy from their diets, even though yoghurt and hard cheese contain very little 
lactose and are unlikely to trigger symptoms.

Why then, are so many of us apparently eager to blame common foods for our 
ailments? “It’s a good thing that people are more aware of conditions like 
irritable bowel syndrome and lactose intolerance, but I think it tends to make 
people jump to conclusions when they’ve nothing wrong with them,” says Quirk. 
“Our bowels are very sensitive organs. If we have been ill, or if we’re 
stressed or run down, we often will have some type of bowel symptom.”

Meanwhile, leaping on the food-intolerance bandwagon, when you’d actually just 
prefer not to eat gluten or dairy, can make it harder for people with genuine 
food-related illness. “If someone goes into a catering outlet and claims that 
they have a dairy allergy, but then says ‘Well actually, I can eat some sorts 
of dairy but I can’t eat others,’ it may give caterers the impression that food 
allergies don’t need to be taken seriously,” says Moira Austin, helpline and 
information manager at the Anaphylaxis Campaign. “It can give people with true 
food allergies a bad name.”

If you do suspect you have a food intolerance, a key first step is to visit 
your GP. This is particularly important if you believe your symptoms are being 
caused by gluten; the coeliac disease test for coeliac disease only works if 
you’ve been eating the stuff daily for at least six weeks.

Assuming that food allergies and coeliac disease are ruled out, removing 
suspect foods from your diet is the logical next step. “If your symptoms 
improve and you then reintroduce the food and they come back, then that proves 
you’re intolerant,” says Jenkins. And yet many people who attempt such 
elimination diets aren’t doing them properly, she cautions: “Often people don’t 
exclude for long enough; you need to do it for about a month. And if it doesn’t 
make a difference, you need to reintroduce that food into your diet. Most 
people don’t have enough nutritional knowledge to replace [foods] with other 
things to get the essential nutrients they need.”

If you can hold up your hands and say you’ve been through these steps and 
you’re certain that gluten or dairy is the source of your problems, you’re 
probably correct: food intolerance is a real condition that deserves to be 
taken seriously. And, as a bonus, if you receive a proper diagnosis you 
may find your sceptical friends suddenly become a lot more tolerant of your 
intolerance.
 