
Leeds United have rejected offers of £7m from West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/westbrom>, Middlesbrough and Crystal 
Palace for Charlie Taylor, with the Championship side adamant they will not 
sell him in this window.

Taylor, who is injured and will miss the game against Derby County on Friday, 
submitted a transfer request last summer and has six months remaining on his 
contract. All three Premier League sides are looking to strengthen their 
options at left-back and believe the 23-year-old is ready to make the step up 
to the Premier League. Last week, Garry Monk, the Leeds manager, insisted he 
has no intention of letting any players leave in the January window.

“We do not have to sell anyone and we won’t be selling anyone,” he said. 
“It’ll only be incomings. There will be no one leaving in this window.”

Palace, West Brom and Aston Villa are battling it out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/aston-villa-jeffrey-schlupp-west-brom-crystal-palace>
 to sign Leicester’s Jeffrey Schlupp after Claudio Ranieri admitted the Ghana 
international has asked to leave the club.

Leicester rejected a £9.5m bid from Palace this week but it is understood they 
have accepted an improved offer which takes the value of the transfer to almost 
£12m with add-ons.

Schlupp, who was surprisingly left out of the Ghana squad for the Africa Cup 
of Nations, has rarely featured for the Premier League champions this season 
after a proposed move to The Hawthorns was blocked by Ranieri last summer. Tony 
Pulis is once again interested in signing the 24-year-old who came through 
Leicester’s academy.

“I spoke with him and he spoke with the club. He’s not happy,” Ranieri said on 
Thursday. “Jeff is a fantastic man and player. I said if he wants to go he can 
go but it’s also important to get the right money. He can go for the right 
money. He has great potential and I’m very sad to lose him but you have to 
understand we have three very good left-backs – Ben Chilwell, Christian Fuchs 
and him. We want to keep one experienced and one young.”

Graham Taylor, former England manager, dies at the age of 72
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/graham-taylor-dies-72-england-aston-villa-watford> 