
A legal action against Fifa over its alleged complicity in the mistreatment of 
migrant workers in Qatar ahead of the 2022World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> has been filed with a 
Swiss court.

The Netherlands Trade Union Confederation confirmed on Thursday that Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> has been “summoned to appear in the 
commercial court in Zürich” in a case it has brought against the world 
governing body on behalf of the Bangladeshi migrant worker, Nadim Sharaful 
Alam. The Confederation also confirmed that the Bangladesh Free Trade Union 
Congress (BFTUC) and the Bangladesh Building and Wood Workers Federation 
(BBWWF) are also supporting the action.

“The Swiss court is asked to rule that Fifa acted wrongfully by selecting 
Qatar for theWorld Cup 2022 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2022> without demanding the 
assurance that Qatar observes fundamental human and labour rights of migrant 
construction workers, including the abolition of the Kafala system,” read a 
statement from the Netherlands Trade Union Confederation (FNV). “The Swiss 
court is furthermore requested to rule that, in the run-up to the 2022 World 
Cup, Fifa ensures that the rights of migrant construction workers are 
safeguarded, by insisting on adequate and effective labour reforms in Qatar, 
that are actually implemented.

“The Bangladeshi Unions BFTUC and BBWWF have decided to join the case as many 
of their members left Bangladesh to work in Qatar. These unions are actively 
engaged with issues pertaining to the rights of migrant workers and in the 
global fight for the protection of the rights of migrant workers in Middle 
East, specificallyQatar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar>.”

Fifa was made aware of the claim on 10 October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/fifa-faces-legal-challenge-over-qatar-migrant-workers-world-cup-2022>
 and quickly rejected the allegations made against them. Four months earlier, 
Federico Addiechi, Fifa’s head of sustainability, also released a statement in 
response to a critical report from Amnesty International in which he insisted 
the governing body “is fully committed to do its utmost to ensure that human 
rights are respected on all Fifa World Cup sites and operations and services 
directly related to the Fifa World Cup”.

While the damages sought by Alam are relatively modest, if the action is 
successful it could open the door for hundreds of thousands of migrant workers 
to make similar claims that could run into tens of millions of pounds and 
further damage the credibility of a tournament that has faced intense criticism 
ever since Fifavoted in December 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/dec/02/qatar-win-2022-world-cup-bid> 
to hold the World Cup in the tiny Gulf state.
 