
Tackling climate change is the “biggest economic opportunity” in the history 
of the US no matter who holds political office, the Hollywood star and 
environmental activistLeonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio> said on Friday.


Leonardo DiCaprio meets Trump as climate sceptic nominated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/leonardo-dicaprio-donald-trump-green-jobs>
“There are a few very prominent people that still deny the overwhelming 
conclusions of the world’s scientists that climate change is largely 
human-caused and needs immediate urgent attention,” he told aUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> awards ceremony.

 But “the truth” about climate change has spread like “wildfire”, he said.

 DiCaprio’s comments, as he received a prize for his work as a global citizen, 
did not refer to the US president-elect, Donald Trump, by name but were a 
thinly-veiled reference to his views andnominations of climate sceptics with 
oil industry ties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/15/trump-cabinet-climate-change-deniers>
 for cabinet posts.

 Earlier this month, 42-year-old DiCaprio and the head of his foundation met 
Trump and his team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/leonardo-dicaprio-donald-trump-green-jobs>
, reportedly arguing that support for renewable energy could create millions of 
jobs.

 Trump has suggested climate change is a hoax and raised the possibility of 
withdrawing US support for a new global accord to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions which most scientists believe are driving up sea levels and causing 
more droughts and violent storms.

 “In less than 100 years of our pollution-based prosperity, we humans have put 
our entire existence in jeopardy,” said DiCaprio, who releasedhis own 
documentary, Before the Flood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/before-the-flood-review-leonardo-dicaprio-climate-change-documentary>
, on the impacts of global warming two months ago.

 DiCaprio, who won an Oscar this year for playing a fur trapper battling 
nature in The Revenant, said his documentary was the most viewed “in history 
... [showing] just how much the world cares about the issue of climate change”.

 But he said the battle to address it was far from over, calling on the world 
to implement the Paris agreement on climate change, which came into effect in 
November, and to “go further”.

People everywhere are acting to curb the damage to humans, nature and wildlife 
from a warming planet, DiCaprio said – from putting a price on carbon emissions 
to buying cleaner cars, eating less meat, and businesses vowing to be 
carbon-neutral.

Climate change denial in the Trump cabinet: where do his nominees stand?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/15/trump-cabinet-climate-change-deniers>
 “To those who may be discouraged by naysayers, let me remind you, the 
environmental awakening is all over the world and the progress we have made so 
far … has always been because of people, not governments,” DiCaprio told the 
United Nations correspondents association event in downtown New York.

 DiCaprio, who has worked closely with outgoing UN secretary general, Ban 
Ki-moon, on climate action, congratulated him for “elevating the significance 
of climate change to one of fundamental global sustainability and peace”.

 Without Ban’s persistence, the world would never have made so much progress 
on climate change, culminating in the Paris agreement sealed in December 2015, 
DiCaprio said.

 Earlier on Friday, Ban said acting on climate change meant “jobs, growth, 
cleaner air and better health”, adding that leaders of top companies, governors 
and mayors understood this.

 The Paris agreement was “a precious achievement that we must support and 
nurture”, he told his final press conference at the United Nations. “There is 
no turning back.”
 