
Dear Bonnie,

You have no idea how hard you are about to work, how much you will need to 
sacrifice or the resilience that you will develop to cope with the journey 
ahead.


Forget the comparison to roller coasters; think about the most addictive 
box-set you have ever watched and add trapdoors and parachutes. This is a 
tough, adrenaline-filled ride that you can’t get enough of. Each day, you hit 
“play next” and even when you are enjoying the highest of highs, you know that 
there is a monster waiting for you around every corner.


Retain and nurture the rose-tinted passion and excitement that you have for 
the business you are about to launch – and don’t let the bumps get you down. 
Along the way, you will be faced with countless challenges that will slowly 
chip away at your bubbly, creative spirit, but this is your most precious asset.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fletter-to-my-younger-self-put-friendships-aside-startup-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F278fec056298b7bd9955f43ecf2e2b00a101a938%2F0_170_683_854%2F683.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Letter%20to%20my%20younger%20self%3A%20you%20will%20have%20to%20put%20friendships%20aside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fletter-to-my-younger-self-put-friendships-aside-startup-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Letter%20to%20my%20younger%20self%3A%20you%20will%20have%20to%20put%20friendships%20aside&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fletter-to-my-younger-self-put-friendships-aside-startup-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F278fec056298b7bd9955f43ecf2e2b00a101a938%2F0_170_683_854%2F683.jpg>
 Bonnie aged 25. 
It will take three long years before you will be able to transform your idea 
into a real product, and another three years to get it properly trading in the 
market.


That first time you sell your first product to an unassuming customer, 
shopping in Selfridges, when you secretly follow them to the check-out to watch 
them pay for it, will make all the hard work worth it.


Outside of your products, the most important thing will be your team. You will 
put together a motley crew of talents, before nurturing them into a tight-knit 
family that will propel your creations to successes.


But I need to warn you of one of the hardest things you will have to deal 
with. You will find letting anyone go from your team absolutely excruciating. 
There is nothing entertaining about sacking someone, despite what The 
Apprentice has shown you. It will stress you out and make you doubt yourself.


On the day you sack them, you will fear how they’ll react. You’ll wonder if 
they will be able to find another job; if you’ve made the right decision. There 
will be tears, and you will feel terrible. You will feel responsible for their 
sudden loss of security and wish you could give them another chance.

In the back of your mind, you will feel like you have failed in some way; like 
you’ve failed in your decision to hire them, like you’ve failed the whole team. 
When you took them on you will have felt so sure about your choice.


And while it is one of the most awful tasks of being a business owner, it will 
be vital if you want to grow a strong business.The decision will be far more 
defining than you could imagine. It will be the coming of age of your business.

In a small business, you can see very quickly if someone is struggling in a 
role. Of those staff that do go, many will continue to be friends with you and 
you will remain a mentor to them in their careers. Just because they are not 
compatible with your company doesn’t mean they wouldn’t be perfect somewhere 
else.


Letter to my younger self: I envy you and your innocence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/dec/03/letter-to-my-younger-self-envy-you-your-innocence>
Finally, be kind to yourself. Don’t beat yourself up for making the wrong 
decisions; these mistakes will happen constantly in the early days, and 
recovering from them quickly and moving on will be key to your success and 
enjoyment of the path that you have chosen.


Keep going, be honest with yourself and find time to smell the roses in 
between.

Bonnie, aged 31

Bonnie Chung is the founder and director of Miso Tasty <https://misotasty.com/>
.


Are you an entrepreneur who would like to write a letter to your younger self? 
Email us at smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com to take part in this series.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 