
Suicides, self-harm, homicides and assaults may be at an all-time high (
“Suicide, self-harm, stabbings and riots – prisons reach crisis point” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/12/staff-shortages-british-prisons-bedford-pentonville-truss>
, News) but deaths have always been endemic in the prison system.

Suicide, self-harm, stabbings and riots – prisons reach crisis point
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/12/staff-shortages-british-prisons-bedford-pentonville-truss>
This sustained death toll reflects the desperate reality of overcrowded, 
dehumanising and violent prisons and the failure to protect those in its care. 
Our organisation,Inquest <http://www.inquest.org.uk/about/home>, has worked for 
more than 30 years with families bereaved by prison deaths and sees the 
traumatic impact these have on generations of family members. Inquest after 
inquest highlights repeated, systemic failures and the inappropriate use of 
prison for a range of different groups who should simply not be there.

A constant stream of inquest findings, investigations, inspectorate and 
monitoring reports and inquiries into prisons, from Baroness Corston to Lord 
Harris, has produced rigorous, evidence-based recommendations to protect the 
health and safety of prisoners and staff in British jails. Yet the vast 
majority of these have been systematically ignored and not acted on.

Prison is an ineffective and expensive intervention that does not work, as 
demonstrated by high reconviction rates. It fails prisoners, victims and 
communities.The justice secretary, Liz Truss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/prisons-in-england-and-wales-given-boost-of-2500-new-staff-to-tackle-violence>
, talks about prison reform but her proposals will not relieve the current 
crisis.

The only way to halt the increasing and morally indefensible tide of prison 
deaths and violence is to dramatically reduce the prison population, invest in 
alternatives and transform the nature and culture of prisons, so they become 
places of last resort, where rehabilitation is more than a rhetorical fantasy.
Deborah Coles, director, Inquest
Professor Joe Sim, Liverpool John Moores University, trustee, Inquest
Professor Steve Tombs, Open University, trustee, Inquest


Orwell against warmongers


I very much agree with the thrust of Nick Cohen’s post-US election column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/12/world-in-crisis-back-to-normal-soon-i-know>
 (Comment), including his assertion that for liberals, “thinking about class, 
not instead of but along with gender and race would be a step forward”. So it 
may seem pedantic to complain that he surprisingly prays in aidWH Auden’s poem 
Spain 
<https://sites.google.com/a/upr.edu/modernpoetry/Student-Blogs/ivan-andres-rodriguez/spainbywhauden>
 and what he even more surprisingly callsGeorge Orwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/jun/01/hard-conjure-spirit-orwell>
’s “uncharacteristically incoherent attack” on it.

Orwell actually wrote in Inside the Whale that the poem was “one of the few 
decent things that have been written about the Spanish war”. But he did indeed 
have a serious – and extremely coherent – criticism of it: that Auden’s phrase 
“necessary murder” could “only be written by a person to whom murder is at most 
a word”. Orwell was tilting at the “warmongering to which the English 
intelligentsia gave themselves up in the period 1935-39” and that he believed 
“was largely based on a sense of personal immunity”.

Perhaps it is uncharitable to say that by leaving for the US in 1939, Auden 
managed to maintain that “immunity”, unlike Orwell who, having fought in Spain, 
remained in London, while persistently but vainly applying to serve in the 
armed forces, despite his ill health. But I know, out of Auden and Orwell, who 
most sensible people, liberals included, would rather go into the jungle with.
Donald Macintyre
Oxford

Home-schooling hang-up


Home-schooling has many benefits, especially for bullied children | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2016/nov/13/home-schooling-many-benefits-bullied-children>
I wholeheartedly agree with Sonia Sodha’s comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/06/state-sometimes-wiser-than-parents>
 (6 November andLetters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2016/nov/13/home-schooling-many-benefits-bullied-children>
) on the lack of supervision of home-educating parents. I would like to 
petition for a change in the law that would allow local education authorities 
to reach children who do not attend school.

Parents doing a good job with their offspring would surely be allowed to 
continue, but those parents who seem to be satisfying their own opinions and 
disregarding the needs of their children could be challenged about the benefit 
of their offerings. Why is every recent government so hung up on parental 
rights to the detriment of every child’s education?
Sheila Chase
Huddersfield

Scottish university roll-call


In “1,000 years of world-class universities” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/13/what-will-brexit-mean-for-british-universities>
 (Special Report), the gap between 1096 and 1878 should have been filled with 
the University of St Andrews (1413), the University of Glasgow (1451), the 
University of Aberdeen (King’s College) (1495) and the University of Edinburgh 
(1593). A second University of Aberdeen college, Marischal College, was founded 
in 1593, prompting Aberdonians to boast that for several hundred years they had 
as many universities as the whole of England.
Harry D Watson
Edinburgh

PR and the ballot-box paradox


Your editorial (“A victory for rage and fear. Trump will let down his 
supporters and the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/13/observer-view-on-donald-trump-victory-us-election-hillary-clinton>
”, Comment) refers to the peculiarities of the American electoral system: “
Hillary Clinton won a majority of the popular vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2016/nov/11/clinton-won-more-votes-trump-won-the-election-and-its-not-the-first-time>
 [actually 47.79% compared with Trump’s 46.30% at time of writing] but was 
handsomely beaten in the race for electoral college votes.” True, but, compared 
with the UK parliament’s electoral system, where the Tories won an overall 
majority of seats with only 36.9% of the vote, it doesn’t seem so “peculiar”. A 
suggestion: why not promote PR?
John Smithson
Huddersfield
 