
“The trouble with Hillary,” said a fellow watcher of Clinton’s second debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/09/presidential-debate-reactions-trump-clinton>
 with Donald Trump, “is that she comes across as the liberal consensus 
personified.” Exactly so, and anti-liberalism is one of the threads that 
connects Trumpism, theBrexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, Poland’s nationalist 
populist government, Putinism and much else.

If only women voted, Trump would lose. We need men on our side | Jessica 
Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/women-voters-donald-trump-national-map-2016-election>
We liberal internationalists need to keep taking apart the mendacious, 
demagogic claims of anti-liberal populists such asTrump, Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/12/nigel-farage-donald-trump-ukip-meps>
 and Poland’s former prime minister Jarosław Kaczyński. This should not, 
however, prevent us coming to an honest reckoning about the shortcomings of the 
version of liberalism that, over the past quarter-century, came packaged with 
globalisation.

Those to whom populists appeal have a mixture of economic, social and cultural 
grievances about the consequences of free-market liberal globalisation. Of 
course the mix varies from country to country, but they also have much in 
common. Economically, they have often lost out, or at least not benefited as 
much as others. Their incomes have stagnated or declined, while jobs have gone 
to India or China (where, it’s important to note, many hundred millions of 
beneficiaries from globalisation are to be found), sometimes to immigrants 
prepared to work for less money, to younger people better able to adapt in a 
rapidly changing economy, and to machines in a period of unprecedented digital 
automation.

Socially, they see, just up the road, in the richer parts of their town or 
country, and on their TV screens, people who have done spectacularly well while 
they have been struggling. Bankers who crashed the western financial capitalist 
economy, by creating whatAlan Greenspan’s biographer Sebastian Mallaby 
<http://www.cfr.org/international-finance/man-knew/p37530> recently called 
“this mad system that blew up”, have for the most part come away with their 
fortunes untouched. It’s the rich who get the pleasure, it’s the poor who take 
the pain.

Reflecting on a book about top bankers, Francis Fukuyama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/27/francis-fukuyama-end-history-books-interview>
 says: “One of the really big issues … is whether we are actually living in a 
kind of oligarchy of the sort we attribute to places like Russia or 
Kazakhstan.” That’s Fukuyama talking, not Karl Marx. The worst of these bankers 
amply deserve the label “basket of deplorables”, which Clinton so ill-advisedly 
applied to “half” of Trump’s supporters.

Culturally, the left-behind say, “I don’t recognise my country any more.” That 
phrase embraces the impact of immigration, the spread of social liberalism and 
the sheer pace of change all around them. There is a strong temptation to blame 
it on the Other. In France, the finger is pointed at Muslims. So women musttake 
off their burkinis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/french-police-make-woman-remove-burkini-on-nice-beach>
, while the shameless Nicolas Sarkozytries to steal Marine Le Pen’s xenophobic 
thunder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/nicolas-sarkozy-not-all-french-people-share-same-roots>
.

In Poland, the populists demonise Muslim refugees nobody has actually met 
because the government has refused to take in more than a handful of them, and 
liberal, decadent western notions about awoman’s right to choose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/06/victory-abortion-rights-empowered-polish-women>
, gay partnerships and “gender”.

In Britain, for further contrast, it’s the Poles themselves who are the target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/05/death-arkadiusz-jozwik-post-referendum-racism-xenophobes-brexit-vote>
 of white working-class anger. When canvassing for Britain to remain in the EU, 
I also met several Asian British people who complained about the wave of 
eastern European immigrants. So here the “bloody foreigners” are white, 
Christian Europeans, while the people complaining about them are sometimes 
Muslims. In the United States, the white identity politics of Trumpism is 
directedagainst Mexicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
 as much asMuslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
. But always there is some Other.

Populists channel these widespread grievances into paranoid paths. But the 
grievances nonetheless have a foundation in reality and it behoves us to 
recognise that the causes do lie, at least in part, in free-market, globalised 
liberal capitalism as it has developed since its historical triumph in 1989.

How to stop ​Nigel Farage​ being the face of Britain in the US | Arwa Mahdawi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/11/britain-nigel-farage-donald-trump-better-role-models>
Yes, this is the world we liberal internationalists built – even if we didn’t 
all have our own hands in the bankers’ till. Although Eurosceptics habitually 
denounce the EU as bureaucratic, dirigiste,étatiste and all other 
Franco-Belgian horrors, actually the economic, social and cultural causes of 
the Brexit vote lie more on the other side of the union’s Janus face: the 
European commission as motor of liberalisation and globalisation, bringing down 
barriers.

Remember that the EU’s foundational “four freedoms” are not Franklin 
D Roosevelt’s (from want and fear; for religion and speech), but free movement 
of capital, goods, services and people. The free trade agreements denounced by 
Trump are part of the same international tapestry. As has often been pointed 
out, early 21st-century globalisation recalls a famous passage in Karl Marx’s 
Communist Manifesto: “The need for a constantly expanding market for its 
products chases the bourgeoisie over the entire surface of the globe. It must 
nestle everywhere, settle everywhere, establish connections everywhere.”

But now, instead of “workers of all countries, unite!” the battle cry is 
“populists of all countries, unite – against one another!” If these populist 
nationalist counter-revolutions are to be averted, what should liberals do?

Implement timely reform, of course. “Inclusive growth” is the slogan of one of 
the more successful liberal politicians in today’s world,Canada’s Justin Trudeau
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>. “An economy that works 
for everyone 
<https://www.hillaryclinton.com/issues/an-economy-that-works-for-everyone/>,” 
says Clinton. But how?

As the German historian Jürgen Kocka reminds us in his short history of 
capitalism, this economic system has an inherent tendency to plunge into 
crisis, often starting with financial crises “as in 1873, 1929–30 and 2007–08”, 
but then impacting on the welfare of broad sectors of the population and 
leading to social and political turmoil. This effect is particularly acute 
because of what Kocka calls “capitalism’s current phase of financialisation”. 
As he also points out, markets have always depended on a framework that only 
politics can provide – government and law at home, international order abroad.

As we are now seeing with the run on the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/pound-drops-further-after-davis-hints-uk-could-leave-single-market>
, national sovereignty is only as effective as currency and bond markets allow. 
And this is a world of giant supranational corporate octopuses that would have 
Marx rubbing his hands with schadenfreude.

Banks move billions around at the click of a mouse. Bankers, along with 
Russian and Chinese oligarchs, salt away their ill-gotten gains using the 
services of Panamanian lawyers. In a conjuring trick worthy of Houdini, Apple 
seems to have ended up paying tax on much of its European profit in a place 
called Erehwon. In 2014,Facebook paid just £4,327 in UK tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/oct/11/facebook-paid-4327-corporation-tax-despite-35-million-staff-bonuses>
. No single state can hold down these giant octopuses.

And so we come to a final twist. It’s not just that conservatives such as 
Theresa May are looking to a larger role for the state to save liberal 
capitalism from the anger the Brexit vote revealed. It’s that effectively 
addressing the cross-border effects of globalised liberal capitalism will 
actually require more international cooperation, at the very moment when 
populist nationalists are leading so many countries in the opposite direction. 
To remedy the unintended consequences of globalisation we need more liberal 
internationalism, not less.
 