
Centrica has walked into new controversy by obtaining a licence to drill for 
oil and gas in the Arctic. 
<https://www.regjeringen.no/no/aktuelt/announcement-23rd-licensing-round-awards/id2500936/>

The owner of British Gas, fresh from rows over annual domestic energy profits, 
has been awarded rights to explore in the Barents Sea off Norway.

Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> said it was 
astonishing that Centrica would risk the enormous financial costs of a spill in 
such pristine waters when larger companies such as Shell had recently abandoned 
operations in the Alaskan Arctic.

“Much bigger players than Centrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/centrica> have been forced to acknowledge 
that the frontiers-led growth model is fundamentally flawed,” said Charlie 
Kronick, an oil campaigner with Greenpeace UK. “The industry just isn’t capable 
of exploring in the Arctic safely, let alone profitably, so this folly could 
raise British bills for the sake of oil and gas which we really, really don’t 
need.”

A spokeswoman for Centrica said it had no plans to drill in the Barents Sea at 
this time, saying its focus was on concessions further south in the Norwegian 
and North Seas. But she said that the company would take the utmost care to 
weigh up any risks if it did look at drilling in the Barents Sea. “Clearly, 
before we started to do anything, we would undertake a comprehensive 
environmental survey to identify any issues and reduce any potential risk to 
the environment.”

Centrica has been reducing its capital spending on exploration and development 
spending but says it still needs to find or buy gas if it is going to serve the 
needs of its 14 million residential customers.

Centrica is among a group of oil and gas companies, including the local group 
Statoil, which have won licences from the Norwegian government. The only other 
British firm is Tullow Energy.

Tord Lien, the Norwegian oil minister from the rightwing Progress party, said 
he hoped his country could be entering a new era of hydrocarbon riches.

“The industry’s interest in new acreage shows that the Norwegian continental 
shelf remains attractive. The potential is huge. If the companies are 
successful in their exploration, northern Norway will enter a new era.”

Greenpeace said the credibility of Norwegian ministers had been wrecked by the 
decision to press ahead with licensing in a sensitive area, although one where 
there are already two working oil and gas fields: Snøhvit and the just-opened
Goliat 
<http://www.eni.com/en_IT/media/press-releases/2016/03/Eni_starts_production_of_Goliat_Norwegian_field.shtml>
.

Kronick said: “On Friday the Norwegian government signed an Arctic protection 
agreement with the US, Canada, Russia and the other Arctic states, and less 
than a week later, they have completely undermined their credibility by 
awarding licences to drill there to 13 companies.”
 