
Lifesavers have expressed alarm at the “horrific” start to the summer holiday 
period, urging swimmers, particularly men, to avoid taking risks in the water.


Seven people have drowned in NSW alone this week, and police continued to 
search for a man feared drowned in a river in Wagga Wagga on Thursday, and 
teenager Tui Gallaher, who went missing at Maroubra beach inSydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> on Tuesday.

A 60-year-old man, Geoffrey Blackadder, died trying to rescue young relatives 
from 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/27/police-warn-swimmers-after-five-drowning-deaths>
 a rip at Wooli beach on the NSW north coast on Monday, while another man, aged 
56, drowned at Merry beach at Kioloa on state’s south coast.

Police warn swimmers after five drowning deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/27/police-warn-swimmers-after-five-drowning-deaths>
The body of a 25-year-old man was found in western Sydney on Tuesday morning, 
after going missing on Monday while swimming in the Nepean river. Two 
27-year-old men have also drowned this week, one in Kangaroo Valley in 
Shoalhaven and another in Wattamolla lagoon at the Royal national park, south 
of Sydney.

The majority of the deaths have involved men, matching a longer-term trend of 
males accounting for between 80% to 90% of drownings. 
<http://www.royallifesaving.com.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/18085/RLS_NDR2016_ReportLR.pdf>
 The Royal Life Saving Society chief executive, Justin Scarr, described the 
start of the holiday period in NSW as “horrific”. He also warned that flooding 
in central Australia posed an added risk of drowning deaths.

Scarr said the overrepresentation of men in NSW’s recent drowning deaths was 
not surprising. “Men are more likely to overestimate their skills and 
underestimate how dangerous the conditions might be. They’re more likely to 
consume alcohol while swimming or boating,” he said.

Scarr said drowning deaths had been reducing generally in the past decade due 
to a range of factors, including improvements in backyard pool safety, 
awareness campaigns and improving signage around dangerous rivers.

He said many deaths, including the recent drowning of a Nepalese student in 
NSW, involved swimmers who had weak water safety knowledge or poor swimming 
skills. “I just think that we need to look after each other,” Scarr said. 
“Locals need to look out for visitors and describe to them the safest places to 
swim. Remind them of the importance of life jackets and the dangers of rivers.”

Surf Life Saving Australia coastal safety and risk manager, Shane Daw, said 
the spate of drowning deaths in NSW had been alarming and surprising. “We 
certainly are surprised, any drowning is one too many. At Christmas time, it’s 
a tragedy, and the key thing that we keep saying to people is water safety has 
to be paramount at all times,” Daw told ABC. “To have the spate of drowning 
deaths that we’ve had over the past few days is a tragedy, and it has alarmed 
us.”

The deaths come as new research suggests more than 40% of inland waterway 
drownings were linked with alcohol,according to Fairfax 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/almost-half-of-drowning-deaths-linked-to-drinking-new-research-finds-20161220-gtfhuy.html>
. Of those cases, 70% would have been too drunk to drive, according to the 
paper, soon to be published in the Accident Analysis and Prevention journal.

Scarr said men were more likely to drink and swim. “They really need to 
understand the risks of drinking and any kind of waterway,” he said.
 