 There is a tendency whenever there is an incident or an issue which could 
conceivably be viewed through a prism of ethnic or religious identity for the 
media or politicians to seek out 'community leaders'. In the rush to talk, few 
stop to think how representative these people might be. But we should. Everyone 
agrees that many British Muslims feel alienated and disenfranchised. Their 
voices, 1.5 million of them, need to be heard. It is not right that the Muslim 
Council of Britain, a group that boycotts a ceremony to honour the multi-faith 
victims of the Holocaust and often supports hardline views that are far from 
universally accepted by all Muslims, should monopolise that function.
The problem has been exacerbated by a number of factors. At least 600,000 
British Muslims are younger than 21. This means that out-of-touch elders 
brought up in foreign traditions of worship or political activism cannot claim 
to speak for them. Neither do their MPs have much credibility. The vast 
proportion of young British Muslims can barely remember a government other than 
Tony Blair's, a government which totally ignored their loud opposition to the 
Iraq war. It is difficult to convince them, therefore, that their voice is 
heard in Whitehall or Westminster. A final factor is the ignorance of our 
politicians, most of whom cannot tell whether or not their collocutors are 
representative.

This is not just a problem for Britain. France, which has at least five 
million Muslims, set up a Muslim council three years ago which is elected by 
delegates from the country's mosques. Hardliners have become disproportionately 
dominant there, too. No easy solutions present themselves. But 'community 
leaders' must not be those who shout loudest. The government needs to launch a 
wide-ranging consultation and ask Britain's Muslim community who, if not their 
MPs, might represent their views fairly. It must also listen to the answer.
 