
Last week you carried a news item (Report, 14 January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/14/philip-pullman-resigns-oxford-literary-festival-patron-pay-authors>
) in which prominent authors called on publishers and writers to boycott 
festivals that don’t pay them. If they mean events where no writers are paid, I 
wholeheartedly support them. If, however, they want a boycott of festivals 
where some writers are paid and others not, all they will achieve is a decline 
in the number of opportunities for established and new authors to present their 
work.

Philip Pullman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/philippullman> states that 
“only the authors … are expected to do it for nothing”. In most cases, this is 
patently not true. Those who actually do it for nothing – indeed often 
contribute financially – are the organisers and supporters. If an author has a 
“name”, they are bound to attract an audience, which means that relative 
unknowns are able to enjoy an equal degree of publicity on the strength of 
their colleagues’ prominence. It is only fair to pay the well-known authors 
more since, without them, there would be little or no audience at all.
Ed Tonkyn
King’s Lynn Literature Festivals

• This weekend Robert Burns will be celebrated “the world o’er 
<http://www.robertburns.org/works/496.shtml>”. While it is well known that 
Abraham Lincoln always carried a book of Burns’ poems in his pocket, maybe 
Burns was more widely appreciated at his death in 1796 and shortly thereafter 
than we realise, for example by the great German poet Friedrich Schiller? Burns 
penned his great tribute to the brotherhood of man in 1795. Schiller originally 
wrote his Ode to Joy in 1785, but amended it in 1803 specifically to include 
the line “Alle Menschen werden Brüder” which closely reflects “When Man to Man 
the world o’er, shall brothers be for a’ that”. It was the 1803 version which 
Beethoven included in his Ninth Symphony. Could a Schiller (or Burns) expert 
advise whether he might have read Burns, either in the original or translation?
John Birkett
St Andrews, Fife

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 