
More than half of the world’s cities already experience water shortages on a 
recurring basis 
<http://voices.nationalgeographic.com/2013/05/08/tapped-out-how-will-cities-secure-their-water-future/>
. Karachi – the largest city in South Asia – is facing another summer of water 
shortages,one out of three of India’s big cities 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/22-of-Indias-32-big-cities-face-water-crisis/articleshow/22426076.cms>
 are facing a water crisis, and at the height of the drought in São Paulo last 
year,9 million Brazilians 
<http://www.humanosphere.org/environment/2015/12/water-crisis-brazil-largest-city-americas-drying/>
 were subject to government-enforced water rationing.

Growing urban populations are compounding the stress on freshwater resources, 
and some cities have turned to extreme and expensive measures to get freshwater 
to its citizens. Mexico City’s biggest single source of water is the Cutzamala 
reservoir system, located 120km away, and the arid Middle East is home to70% of 
the world’s desalination plants 
<https://thewaterproject.org/water-crisis/water-in-crisis-middle-east>, located 
mainly in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait and Bahrain.

But cities in the global south – expected to bear the brunt of urban 
population growth over the next few decades – urgently need to find ways to 
deliver water cheaply, reliably, and sustainably. This is no small task and, 
aside from the barriers of financing and infrastructure, city authorities can 
only achieve so much during their relatively short time in office.

So how can we achieve institutional change that would allow solutions to be 
found, despite routine changes in governance? Can urban water security be 
achieved, or is it an insurmountable problem to which populations must adapt? 
What can be done with existing resources, or do we need a new wave of water 
innovations?

Join an expert panel on Thursday 23 June from 3-4.30pm BST to discuss these 
questions and more.

The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the 
comments section (below). Get in touch via globaldevpros@theguardian.com or
@GuardianGDP <https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter to recommend someone 
for the panel. Follow the discussion using the hashtag#globaldevlive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23globaldevlive&src=typd>.

Panel 

Justin Abbott, director and global water skills leader, Arup 
<http://www.arup.com/>, Leeds, UK, @jabbajma <https://twitter.com/jabbajma> 
@ArupGroup <https://twitter.com/ArupGroup>
Justin focuses on the sustainable management of water, with expertise in water 
scarcity and risk, wastewater treatment, water quality and urban water 
management.

Mariana Matoso, research officer, Overseas Development Institute 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/>, Dili, Timor-Leste, @marianamatoso 
<https://twitter.com/marianamatoso>
Mariana is a water governance specialist with knowledge of water management 
models, pro-poor service delivery, and water infrastructure financing.

Robert McDonald, lead scientist, The Nature Conservancy <http://www.nature.org>
 Global Cities programme, Arlington, USA,@RobIMcDonald 
<https://twitter.com/RobIMcDonald>
Robert researches the impact and dependencies of cities on the natural world, 
and helps direct the science behind TNC’s urban conservation work.

Farhana Sultana, associate professor, Syracuse University <http://www.syr.edu>
’s Maxwell School, Syracuse, USA,@Farhana_H2O <https://twitter.com/Farhana_H2O>
Having worked at UNDP, Farhana has conducted extensive research on water 
governance, international development, sustainability, social justice, and 
gender.

Edoardo Borgomeo, senior editor, Global Water Forum 
<http://www.globalwaterforum.org/>, London, @GWFWater 
<https://twitter.com/GWFWater>
Edoardo also works on water resources and climate change issues at the 
Environmental Change Institute at the University of Oxford.

Darlene Damm, Principal Faculty, Singularity University 
<http://www.singularityu.org>, Mountain View, USA, @darlenedamm 
<https://twitter.com/darlenedamm>
Darlene is principal faculty of Global Grand Challenges at Singularity 
University and leading initiatives and organisations in the field of social 
innovation for 20 years.

Vijay Jagannathan, Senior Fellow, World Resources Institute 
<http://www.wri.org>, Washington, USA, @worldresources 
<https://twitter.com/WorldResources>
Having worked at the World Bank in India, Vijay is also now secretary general 
of CITYNET, a network of 120 cities and partner organisations in the Asia 
Pacific region.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 