
There is no downside to winning a derby in the fourth minute of added time but 
for Sadio Mané the joy of Monday at Goodison Park will make it harder to leave 
Liverpool for theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> next month. He 
believes Jürgen Klopp’s team will improve and sustain the challenge to the 
league leaders Chelsea in his absence.

Mané secured his place in Liverpool affections with the late goal that 
defeated Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/everton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 in the 227th Merseyside derby and transformed a costly goalless draw into a 
crucial three points. His place in Klopp’s team will soon be vacated, however, 
when the Senegal international departs for the ACN in Gabon after Liverpool’s 
Premier League game at Sunderland on 2 January.

Jürgen Klopp says his Sadio Mané mistake at Dortmund is Liverpool’s gain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/18/jurgen-klopp-dortmund-sadio-mane-mistake-liverpool>
Senegal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal> are one of the 
favourites for the competition having qualified with a 100% record and been 
drawn in a group featuring Algeria, Tunisia and Zimbabwe. Should Aliou Cissé’s 
side progress to the latter stages – the final is in Libreville on 5 February 
and the third-place play off 24 hours earlier – Mané will miss Liverpool’s FA 
Cup third round tie at home to Plymouth Argyle or Newport County, both legs of 
the EFL Cup semi-final against his former club Southampton plus Premier League 
games against Manchester United, Swansea City, Chelsea and Hull City.

The 24-year-old admits his absence will be painful but says the strength of 
Liverpool’s squad will ensure it is only felt on a personal level. “It will not 
be easy for me to go with Senegal next month,” Mané says. “I would love to 
carry on playing with my team-mates and help my team but I think they will 
understand because it is my country and it is my dream.

“I will be wishing them good luck but without me the team will be the same, 
even better. They will cope. [Philippe] Coutinho will come back. [Joël] Matip 
will come back and [Daniel] Sturridge is back now. I am very happy for him. It 
has not been easy for him being out. He has had a lot of injuries but you know 
he can deliver important performances. That is why the team will be strong.”

Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> returned to second 
in the table with their derby victory and the manner of success, recovering 
from a subdued first-half display to control the match and chasing the win 
until the end, was a statement of intent, according to Mané.

“I think wins like this show we will be there. We are not thinking about 
Chelsea. We are focusing on our team and it was important to get the three 
points at Everton. We take each game at a time. It is still early to talk about 
what is going to happen but one of our ambitions is to go far as possible and 
we are going to try to do that.”

Mané described his winner as “a little bit lucky” but he was the first to 
react when Sturridge’s shot rebounded off the post and left Ramiro Funes Mori 
and Ashley Williams, Everton’s central defenders, trailing in pursuit of the 
rebound. The striker has scored eight goals in 18 appearances since arriving 
from Southampton for £34m in the summer.

His captain, Jordan Henderson, believes Mane’s game has improved in only six 
months of working with Klopp. “I always knew he was a good player,” Henderson 
says. “I had watched him at Southampton and could tell what he was like from 
playing against him. Since he has come here, he has gone up another level. That 
is credit to the manager for helping him improve. It is also credit to him for 
wanting to improve. He has been fantastic and he will be a big miss when he 
goes away with Senegal but we have got players who can step in and we will deal 
with it. Whoever takes his place, it is up to them to carry on his work.”
 