
As the battle for Aleppo reached its brutal climax last December, the rest of 
the world was able to read and listen to the stories 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/people-in-east-aleppo-say-goodbye-on-social-media-2016-12>
 of civilians trapped in the battered city. The hashtag#Aleppo  
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Aleppo?src=hash&ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>went viral on 
social media as residents provided a rolling commentary of the conflict, and to 
saytheir last goodbyes 
<https://twitter.com/Rami_Zien/status/808657603484155904?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>.

Technology has transformed how the rest of the world views and responds to 
crises. After the Haiti earthquake in 2010, NGOs and humanitarian agencies 
turned to crowd sourcing information to reach survivors: the mapping platform
Ushahidi <https://www.ushahidi.com/> was used to map SMS requests for help. 
Since then,Google’s Person Finder 
<https://google.org/personfinder/global/home.html> has been used to help 
reconnect families after floods in Pakistan, the 2013 Japan earthquake, and 
more.

Could mapping tech revolutionise disaster response?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/25/could-mapping-tech-revolutionise-disaster-response>
The current refugee crisis has even been defined by the digital age – BBC 
Media Action’s viral immersive film 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2016/bbc-media-action-refugee-film>
 where your phone becomes a refugee’s phone showed just how vital these methods 
of communication are in connecting to families and sharing advice on migration 
routes. Food and water are no doubt a vital need, but so are phone charging 
facilities and mobile networks.

Technology has already transformed humanitarian action, so how can tech play a 
bigger role in the future? Are there ways technology can help with early 
warning of humanitarian disasters? And how can humanitarian organisations 
utilise the power of social media to reach those who need most help?

Join an expert panel on Thursday 19 January, 2-3.30pm GMT, to discuss these 
questions and more.

The panel

Patrick Meier, humanitarian technology consultant, WeRobotics 
<http://www.werobotics.org>, Washington DC, US, @patrickmeier 
<https://twitter.com/PatrickMeier>, @werobotics 
<https://twitter.com/WeRobotics?lang=en-gb>
Patrick is an internationally recognised expert on humanitarian technology, is 
the author of Digital Humanitarians and executive director of WeRobotics

Jean-Martin Bauer, analyst, World Food Programme <http://mvam.org>, Rome, 
Italy,@bauer_jm <https://twitter.com/bauer_jm>, @mobileVAM 
<https://twitter.com/mobileVAM>
Jean-Martin is a food security analyst exploring the use of mobile technology 
to collect data in emergency and conflict settings

Rosa Akbari, senior technology for development advisor, Mercy Corps 
<http://www.mercycorps.org>, New York, US, @mercycorps_uk 
<https://twitter.com/mercycorps_uk>
Rosa helps leverage lowest common denominator technologies throughout Mercy 
Corps’ programming worldwide

Pete Masters, Missing Maps project coordinator, Médecins Sans Frontières 
<https://www.msf.org.uk/>, Glasgow, Scotland @pedrito1414 
<https://twitter.com/pedrito1414>, @TheMissingMaps 
<https://twitter.com/TheMissingMaps>
Pete manages Missing Maps, a crowdsourced mapping project, for MSF

Gisli Rafn Olafsson, Humanitarian Advisor, NetHope <http:// 
http://www.nethope.org>, San Francisco, US, @gislio <mailto:@gislio>
Gisli is the former emergency response director for NetHope. He coordinated 
the ICT aspects of most major humanitarian responses in the last decade

Daphne Jayasinghe, senior policy and advocacy adviser, economic programmes, 
International Rescue Committee <https://www.rescue-uk.org/>, London, UK 
@djayasinghe <https://twitter.com/djayasinghe>
Daphne is the IRC cash relief advocacy lead. She was previously at ActionAid, 
Save the Children and Amnesty covering gender and food security policy

Kate Hargreaves, director of Crown Agents Foundation, London, UK @crownagents 
<https://twitter.com/crownagents>
Kate oversees the Crown Agents Foundation, focusing on delivering public good 
benefits for development. The Foundation draws on the experience of Crown 
Agents supporting supply chain, healthcare and financial management 
improvements in fragile and emerging economies

Dikolela Kalubi, programme manager, ICRC <http://www.icrc.org>, Geneva, 
Switzerland
Dikolela is an ICRC engineer in charge of a partnership between the ICRC and 
the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne aiming to carry out joint 
R&D projects

Ian McClelland, outreach and engagement adviser, Humanitarian Innovation Fund, 
Elrha <http://www.elrha.org/hif>, London, UK @ianmcclelland 
<https://twitter.com/ianmcclelland>
Ian works to build and maintain links between the HIF team, the projects we 
fund, and the wider humanitarian community

The live chat is not video or audio-enabled but will take place in the 
comments section (below). Want to recommend someone for the panel or ask a 
question in advance? Get in touch viaglobaldevpros@theguardian.com <mailto: 
globaldevpros@theguardian.com> or @GuardianGDP <https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP>
 on Twitter. Follow the discussion using the hashtag#globaldevlive 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23globaldevlive&src=typd>.
 