
One can only imagine how many dustbins have been kicked and desks banged by 
Sky Sports’ department for hyperbole as they come to terms with not having the 
rights to show the New Year’s Eve game between Liverpool andManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>. After Red Monday and 
Mersey Monday this could have been Shit-hot Saturday. Instead BT Sport is 
broadcasting it and no doubt banking on a sizeable number of people tuning in 
before heading out to celebrate the arrival of 2017.

Daniel Sturridge happy with Liverpool support role as he nears full fitness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/daniel-sturridge-liverpool-support-role>
The appeal is obvious. Second against third and a game between two sides who 
exist almost permanently on the front foot. They are the Premier League’s 
highest and joint second-highest scorers this season with 84 league goals 
between them and, if their most recent matches are anything to go by, in no 
mood to slow down. In this era of super managers it is also difficult not to be 
seduced by everything that comes with Jürgen Klopp andPep Guardiola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola> sharing a touchline for 
the first time since they were Bundesliga adversaries. The pair are, to use 
that well-worn cliche, box office.

Guardiola was at Anfield on Tuesday night to see Liverpool beat Stoke City 4-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/liverpool-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 and from his seat in the main stand he may well have felt a sense of 
trepidation as the home side delivered a performance brimming with the 
attacking verve that has marked them out as genuine title-challengers. Yet the 
Catalan may also have taken encouragement from the manner in which Stoke opened 
the scoring after 12 minutes, with Jonathan Walters’ near-post header exposing 
the frailties which, for all Liverpool’s defensive improvements under Klopp, 
continue to undermine them. Uncertainty in the area and – you guessed it – a 
goalkeeping error.

Overall Liverpool defended well against Stoke but Sergio Agüero, available for 
Saturday’s encounter having served a four-game suspension, will fancy his 
chances of piercing the backline, as no doubt will Kevin De Bruyne, David 
Silva, the rejuvenated Yaya Touré and the returning Raheem Sterling. But so, 
too, will Liverpool’s own attackers, partly because City have their own 
defensive issues and partly because they themselves are in such fine form. The 
win against Stoke took them to 45 Premier League goals for the season, six more 
than City from the same number of games played. The Merseyside club have also 
scored four or more goals at Anfield on four occasions and created enough 
opportunities against Stoke to surpass the6-1 spanking they handed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/liverpool-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 to Watford in early November.

In a little over 14 months in charge Klopp has formed an outstandingly 
menacing unit, full of relentless and clever movement. Indeed it is telling 
that Daniel Sturridge, who alongside Luis Suárez was so crucial to Liverpool’s 
last title charge, in 2013-14, had to wait until the 70th minute of Tuesday’s 
match to score his first league goal of the season. His barren spell has gone 
relatively unnoticed as Sadio Mané, Roberto Firmino, Adam Lallana and others in 
red have run riot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fliverpool-v-manchester-city-new-years-eve-lallana-firmino%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09f0d90f3755bbfda2830880e38dd3453706a6d9%2F0_27_1568_941%2F1568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%20v%20Manchester%20City%3A%20a%20game%20that%20threatens%20to%20live%20up%20to%20the%20hype%20%7C%20Sachin%20Nakrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fliverpool-v-manchester-city-new-years-eve-lallana-firmino%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%20v%20Manchester%20City%3A%20a%20game%20that%20threatens%20to%20live%20up%20to%20the%20hype%20%7C%20Sachin%20Nakrani&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fliverpool-v-manchester-city-new-years-eve-lallana-firmino%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09f0d90f3755bbfda2830880e38dd3453706a6d9%2F0_27_1568_941%2F1568.jpg>
 Yaya Touré, right, celebrates with David Silva after scoring in Manchester 
City’s 3-0 victory over Hull City on Boxing Day Photograph: Matt 
McNulty/JMP/Rex/Shutterstock 
Liverpool will attack City, City will attack Liverpool, both defences will 
concede and the noise will be close to deafening. Cue, the sceptics will say, a 
drab goalless draw and that cannot be ruled out given these sides will be 
playing their 22nd and 28th matches of the season respectively, with both doing 
most of the passing, most of the pressing and most of the running in those 
encounters. Tiredness may well kick in and in that regard it was notable how 
sluggish City looked before scoring three times late on in their3-0 win at Hull 
on Boxing Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/hull-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
. Ultimately, however, they got the job done to make it three successive wins 
for a side who appeared to be slipping into full-crisis mode when they lost 4-2 
amid a shower of shambolic defendingat Leicester on 10 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/rejuvenated-leicester-prey-on-citys-defensive-weaknesses>
.

That fightback has been matched by Liverpool following their own troubling 
spell earlier in the month, when theylost 4-3 at Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/04/bournemouth-v-liverpool-premier-league-live>
 anddrew 2-2 with West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/liverpool-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
 in the space of seven days. Since then Klopp’s men havebreezed past 
Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/middlesbrough-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
,won the Merseyside derby in deserved and dramatic style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/everton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 and, on Tuesday, recovered handsomely from an early setback. Now comes 
arguably their toughest challenge of the season and a game both sides need to 
win, given that Chelsea are expected to beat Stoke themselves earlier in the 
day and, for a couple of hours at least, go nine points clear at the top. 
Neither Klopp nor Guardiola will want a draw and neither, it can safely be 
assumed, will be going out to get one.

Nothing is certain in football but Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> v Manchester City under the 
Anfield lights should deliver fireworks on a day when skies across the world 
will be littered with them.
 