
Liverpool insist they have no desire to get into a club vs country row over 
Joël Matip’s availability for Cameroon and only want to support the player’s 
own decision not to go to theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>.

The club are resigned to losing Sadio Mané to Senegal’s involvement in the 
tournament this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/liverpool-sadio-mane-africa-cup-of-nations-senegal>
, but understood the situation with Matip was different. He has not played for 
Cameroon in more than a year after a disagreement with the national team, while 
still a Schalke player, and said as long ago as September that he did not wish 
to be considered for the Africa Cup of Nations.

Liverpool actually thought Matip had retired from international football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/15/joel-matip-liverpool-schalke-transfer-signing>
, but if so the Cameroon coach Hugo Broos did not appear to get the message and 
named him in his squad. The German‑born defender still has no intention of 
joining Cameroon in Gabon but Broos has indicated he may ask Fifa to invoke 
sanctions. If the ruling body suspects Liverpool of influencing the player’s 
decision or preventing him from joining up – something the club are adamant is 
far from the case – they could prevent him playing domestic games for the 
duration of the tournament.

Matip has been on the sidelines over the festive period with an ankle injury 
butLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> expect him to be 
ready for a return soon. They would be surprised were Fifa to take action 
against the player, for they were under the impression that Cameroon had 
accepted the fact of his retirement some time ago.

Speaking on the subject last month Jürgen Klopp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> said he was relaxed about 
the situation. “The players make these decisions by themselves, there is 
nothing the club can do,” the Liverpool manager said.

The West Bromwich Albion right-back Allan Nyom also told Broos he wanted to 
stay at the Hawthorns to keep his place in Tony Pulis’s side.
 