
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> could be without 
Joël Matip for the next month as the row over the defender’s availability 
rumbles on.

The 25-year-old, who has not played for Cameroon since September 2015, was 
withdrawn from selection by the club forthe 1-1 draw at Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 on Sunday as Fifa failed to provide the necessary guidance on the player’s 
eligibility.

Liverpool could yet test the regulations by playing Matip in the FA Cup replay 
against Plymouth on Wednesday – the defender is fit after an ankle problem and 
Liverpool are confident that they have the right to do so because the player 
has retired from international football. Jürgen Klopp will make the final 
decision.

Despite Matip’s assertion to his national association that he does not want to 
be considered for selection they still made attempts to call him up for the 
Africa Cup of Nations. With no likelihood of an agreement being reached with
Cameroon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cameroon>, Liverpool asked Fifa 
specifically to clarify the status of a player who has no desire or intention 
to represent his country. However, the world governing body appears to have 
ducked the issue and insists the regulations are clear.

Jürgen Klopp calls for Fifa to make a decision over Joël Matip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/liverpool-football-jurgen-klopp-joel-matip-fifa-cameroon-manchester-united>
Unless Cameroon cede to Matip’s request he will have to sit out the entire 
period for which he should have been released – according to Fifa guidelines – 
plus an additional period of five days. Any attempt by Liverpool to play the 
defender without Cameroon’s consent would lead to a Fifa disciplinary committee 
investigation.

“We can confirm that Liverpool FC contacted Fifa about the matter,” a Fifa 
spokesman said. “Our services answered by directing the club to the applicable 
provisions, in particular its article 5. Fifa also indicated that any potential 
violation of the applicable provisions would need to be investigated by the 
Fifa disciplinary committee.”

Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend’s action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/16/premier-league-10-talking-points-southampton-manchester-city>
Article 5 to which Fifa refer states: “A player who has been called up by his 
association for one of its representative teams is, unless otherwise agreed by 
the relevant association, not entitled to play for the club with which he is 
registered during the period for which he has been released or should have been 
released pursuant to the provisions of this annexe, plus an additional period 
of five days.”

The final of the Africa Cup of Nations is not until 5 February so should 
Cameroon make it all the way in the competition Matip would, in theory, not be 
available until 10 February – the day before Tottenham Hotspur’s trip to 
Anfield. That would mean he would miss potentially six more matches – if 
Liverpool beat Plymouth in their FA Cup third round replay on Wednesday – 
including the visit of Chelsea on 31 January.
 