
Loris Karius is set to return to the Liverpool goal for Sunday’s FA Cup tie 
againstPlymouth Argyle <https://www.theguardian.com/football/plymouthargyle>, 
with Jürgen Klopp confident his compatriot has benefited from a spell out of 
the spotlight.

Joel Matip and Allan Nyom left out of Cameroon’s Africa Cup of Nations squad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/joel-matip-allan-nyom-left-out-of-cameroon-africa-cup-of-nations-squad-liverpool-west-brom>
The 23-year-old goalkeeper has not featured in Liverpool’s past five matches 
having lost his place to Simon Mignolet following costly mistakesagainst 
Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/jurgen-klopp-tells-loris-karius-to-close-his-ears-to-criticism>
and West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/liverpool-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
. Although Mignolet has impressed on his return to the side, Klopp is expected 
to rotate his goalkeepers for the third-round tie at Anfield. He believes the 
decision to withdraw Karius from the fierce criticism and debate that 
surrounded his form last month will prove beneficial in the long term.

Asked whether the £4.7m summer signing from Mainz could start on Sunday, Klopp 
replied: “Big chance. He trained outstandingly, which was good to see. It is 
difficult to speak about things in public because you make it a big story and 
that is part of the problem, but we cannot ignore the pressure you make. We 
have to cope with it and deal with it and that is why we made the change.

“I am sure Loris will benefit from this step back or step aside. Simon has 
done an outstandingly good job since he has been playing again and Loris has 
forced him to train at the highest level because we have two really good 
goalkeepers. It was good for him.”

The Liverpool manager also has Joe Gomez in line for his first start since a 
Europa League game at home to Sion on 1 October 2015, having recovered from 
cruciate ligament and achilles injuries.Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> face Southampton in the first 
leg of the EFL Cup semi-final on Wednesday and after a demanding festive 
schedule, Klopp admits fresh legs are a necessity. “We have to rotate,” he 
said. “It is not because of the last game [a 2-2 draw at Sunderland] but maybe 
the next game in this case. I’m pretty sure we will see a few fresh legs.”

Philippe Coutinho and Joël Matip will not be available to face the League Two 
side Plymouth although Klopp described the pair as “on a good way” in their 
recovery from ankle injuries. Jordan Henderson remains absent with a heel 
problem and Daniel Sturridge has not trained this week having sustained an 
ankle injuryat the Stadium of Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/sunderland-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
. The striker could return to training before the Plymouth game, however.
 