
It was somewhat surprising that Liverpool and Manchester City, two teams 
renowned for their attacking firepower and defensive shortcomings, produced 
only three shots on target combined in Liverpool’s 1-0 victory on New Year’s 
Eve. But that statistic should be considered evidence of Liverpool’s excellent 
game management –after going ahead in the eighth minute through Georginio 
Wijnaldum’s bullet header 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/liverpool-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 from Adam Lallana’s left-wing cross, they shut down the game impressively.

In truth, Pep Guardiola’s side had started better and Wijnaldum’s goal was 
somewhat against the run of play. But thereafter, Liverpool’s first-half 
performance was outstanding, a brilliant demonstration of the principlesJürgen 
Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> emphasises, and a 
complete success in terms of nullifying City’s attacking threat. There was a 
range of simple but effective tactics. Klopp ordered his players to press high 
up when Claudio Bravo had the ball, preventing him from distributing it short 
to the centre-backs and forcing him into unusually long, often aimless 
clearances downfield. Liverpool were generally quicker to the second balls. 
Liverpool also counterpressed in typically fervent fashion, attempting to win 
possession immediately after it had been conceded.

But when City had long spells of possession, Liverpool’s midfielders largely 
dropped off and formed a solid shape, helped by the use of the hard-working 
Roberto Firmino as the central forward, rather than the natural strikers, 
Divock Origi or Daniel Sturridge. Jordan Henderson sat deep, marking Kevin De 
Bruyne, while Sadio Mané and Lallana, playing as part of the front three, 
dropped alongside Emre Can and Wijnaldum, keepingLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> extremely compact in midfield.

Combined with an unusually aggressive offside line against Sergio Agüero – 
which once forced Simon Mignolet to sweep way outside his penalty box – it 
meant Liverpool squeezed the space around City’s attacking midfielders 
brilliantly. De Bruyne could not receive possession in dangerous positions and 
went wandering towards the flanks. David Silva occupied his usual inside-left 
position and found pockets of space but City could not work the ball into him, 
while on the right Raheem Sterling stayed wider,but James Milner stood up to him
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/31/liverpool-manchester-city->
 excellently, and the Anfield crowd enjoyed jeering Sterling’s unsuccessful 
crosses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fliverpool-defence-roberto-firmino-manchester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1122ddb80e167f8b4a6820e2378973a1cc7e23aa%2F0_0_678_657%2F678.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liverpool%20defence%20starts%20with%20Roberto%20Firmino%20to%20nullify%20Manchester%20City%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fliverpool-defence-roberto-firmino-manchester-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liverpool%20defence%20starts%20with%20Roberto%20Firmino%20to%20nullify%20Manchester%20City%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fliverpool-defence-roberto-firmino-manchester-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1122ddb80e167f8b4a6820e2378973a1cc7e23aa%2F0_0_678_657%2F678.jpg>
 Adam Lallana and Sadio Mané retreated into midfield, preventing City from 
finding their attacking midfielders Composite: Guardian 
Liverpool’s attacking threat was minimal and there were few notable attacks 
after they went ahead – but they nearly went into half-time 2-0 up when Lallana 
and Firmino pressed to dispossess Yaya Touré on the halfway line, but Firmino 
waited a split-second too long to release Lallana, who was caught offside. It 
would have rounded off a near-perfect first-half performance.

Guardiola’s major half-time alteration was simply switching De Bruyne and 
Silva, placing the latter in the central role behind Agüero. While De Bruyne is 
superb at exploiting open spaces and driving forward on the break, Silva is a 
neater, more intricate player, capable of working his magic in congested 
positions between the lines. Silva stepped up the tempo but few of his 
team-mates responded – at one point he expressed his frustration when a quick 
burst and pass into Touré was not met with a return ball. Silva came closest to 
an equaliser, drifting right to receive possession before cutting inside and 
firing a left-footed shot wide of the far post.

Georginio Wijnaldum gives Liverpool deserved win against Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/liverpool-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
It summarised the Spaniard’s plight – usually a man tasked with playing killer 
balls into the box, he was so frustrated by the poor movement of his team-mates 
that he was forced to do everything himself.

The second half was a flat, scrappy contest, and City rarely forced genuine 
spells of pressure. They found more space between the lines after Henderson 
departed through injury, but Agüero barely threatened a Liverpool defence that 
sat much deeper after the break. It was surprising that Guardiola waited until 
the final five minutes before making his final two changes: Jesús Navas was 
introduced in place of Pablo Zabaleta with City switching to a 3-4-2-1 system, 
then Kelechi Iheanacho was summoned as a Plan B.

It is strange to be questioning Guardiola’s lack of interference, after half a 
season where it often felt his constant experimentation was disturbing City’s 
rhythm, but it felt like he did not have any answer to the questions posed by 
Klopp’s efficient Liverpool side. This was not a vintage Liverpool performance, 
but it is difficult to imagine anyone else will nullify Guardiola’s City this 
effectively.
 