
Liverpool have been forced to withdraw Joël Matip from their match against 
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> on 
Sunday after failing to get clearance from Fifa.

Everton v Manchester City: Premier League - live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/15/everton-manchester-city-premier-league-live>
Matip, who was poised to return at Old Trafford after an ankle injury, has 
been in dispute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/joel-matip-liverpool-cameroon-africa-cup-of-nations-hugo-broos>
 with Cameroon over his availability for the Africa Cup of Nations. He has not 
played for Cameroon in more than a year after a disagreement with the national 
team, while still a Schalke player, and said as long ago as September that he 
did not wish to be considered for the tournament.

However, Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> have so 
far been unable to get clearance over his eligibility to play against United 
from the world’s governing body and have therefore left him out of the matchday 
squad.

“Liverpool Football Club can confirm Joël Matip has been withdrawn from 
selection for today’s Premier League fixture at Manchester United as the club 
continues to seek clarity from Fifa as to the player’s eligibility,”read a 
statement 
<http://www.liverpoolfc.com/news/first-team/250478-liverpool-fc-statement-on-joel-matip>
.

“Matip, who was not included in Cameroon’s final squad for the Africa Cup of 
Nations tournament, has previously communicated his withdrawal from 
consideration for international selection, with his last appearance forCameroon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/cameroon> occurring in September 2015.

“The Cameroon Football Federation have failed to confirm that Matip can 
therefore play club football during the period of the Africa Cup of Nations. 
Liverpool have subsequently repeatedly sought, as a matter of urgency, clarity 
from Fifa in this regard. This includes assurances the player was called up for 
the tournament in accordance with the world governing body’s regulations.

“It is Liverpool’s view that the player should be available for club football 
during the period of the competition and will continue to work for a speedy and 
unambiguous resolution.”

Liverpool are not the first Premier League club to be frustrated because of 
international clearance delaying a player’s eligibility, with West Bromwich 
Albion and Bournemouth both facing similar situations in recent weeks.

The Bournemouth striker Benik Afobe was unable to feature against Arsenal this 
month because DR Congo did not give clearance to Fifa in time, while Allan Nyom 
has not played in West Brom’s past two matches, owing to a similar 
circumstances.

The Liverpool defender Nathaniel Clyne also misses the match at Old Trafford 
because of a rib injury hesustained in the EFL Cup defeat at Southampton. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-claude-puel-southampton-efl-cup>
 The abdominal injury to Clyne means the defender misses his first league match 
of the season. The 18-year-old Trent Alexander-Arnold replaces the full-back in 
Jürgen Klopp’s starting lineup and will make his first Premier League start.
 