
Lleyton Hewitt wants Nick Kyrgios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> on Davis Cup duty as much for 
the young talent’s own interests as he does for Australia’s cause. Kyrgios is 
in a fitness battle to be ready for this weekend’s World Group playoff with 
Slovakia in Sydney after a hip injury cut short his US Open title quest in New 
York.

If he is ruled out, Kyrgios will have gone two years without contributing a 
point for Australia in the Davis Cup while also having never won a live rubber 
in a World Group fixture. By the same age, Hewitt had contested threeDavis Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/daviscup> finals, won a title and beaten 
three world No1s in the century-old teams’ competition.

John McEnroe calls on Nick Kyrgios to make decision about career after US Open 
defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/injury-ends-nick-kyrgios-us-open-bid-in-third-round-clash-with-illya-marchenko>
It would be unfair to say Davis Cup defined Hewitt, but it was certainly the 
making of him – and now he’d love to see the competition play a part in 
Kyrgios’s development.

“Nick hasn’t played probably as many big matches in Davis Cup yet so I’d 
really like him to play in a big tie and have a big result as well for 
himself,” Hewitt told AAP. “I think that would make him a lot better Davis Cup 
player moving forward for the next few years.

“Nick and Bernie [Tomic] are such big-match players and leading forward they 
could be real leaders in the Davis Cup if we’re going to win a title in the 
next three to five years as well.

“I would love to have them both in the team. Bernie has always played 
extremely well in the Davis Cup.”

Hewitt’s challenge to Kyrgios comes as Australia bid to regain their place in 
the 16-team World Group for the 2017 Davis Cup. With the world No15 in doubt, 
John Millman is on standby to make his Cup debut in the grasscourt tie starting 
at Olympic Park on Friday.

The tie marks the first time Australia have ever played Slovakia in Davis Cup.
 