
Hayes Valley

San Francisco's 1989 earthquake damaged the Central Freeway so much that it 
was eventually torn down. The development attracted shops, bars and restaurants 
to the urban jumble around Hayes St, west of Van Ness. New greenspace along 
Octavia St added to the area's appeal. Now you can check out the shipping 
container food pop-ups at Octavia and Hayes or hop on a bike tour withStreets 
of San Francisco <http://www.sosfbiketours.com>. Not far away, you can choose 
from events at the newSF Jazz Center  <http://www.sfjazz.org/center>,or more 
traditional symphony, ballet or opera performances.

Hayes St shops tend to be very personal, with owners curating their favourite 
local and international designers. Catherine Chow and Corina Nurimba ofAzalea 
Boutique <https://www.azaleasf.com> are a perfect example. Their shop has a 
casual-chic mix of clothing and accessories for both men and women. Stock 
includes more than 100 styles of trend-setting jeans, T-shirts, fog-defying 
sweaters, and boots and flats that will conquer the city's hills. Helpful sales 
staff make for a fun shopping experience. If you're in the mood for a little 
pampering, there's also a nail bar.

One of the hottest restaurant reservations in town, Rich Table 
<http://richtablesf.com> offers creative fare from husband/wife chefs Evan and 
Sarah Rich. The duo has an impressive pedigree, from Bouley in New York to top 
local spots, and they offer an ever-changing menu of stunning cuisine that is 
as surprising as it is satisfying. They specialise in unusual ingredient 
combinations that come together in wonderful ways. For example, their sardine 
chips--a slice of potato threaded through with a sardine and then fried. Or 
spring onion soup, with shrimp and green strawberries. Or bone-marrow roasted 
cauliflower with mandarinquats (a hybrid of mandarin and kumquat). Chances are, 
the odder it sounds the better it will taste, in the case of this menu.

Yes, there are actual rickshaws at Rickshaw Stop <http://www.rickshawstop.com>
, a club in a former sound stage. They are just one element of the funky, yet 
fun décor that includes red velvet curtains, hanging lamps, candles and an 
eclectic collection of furniture. It comes together to make for an arty, indie 
hangout that plays host to live pop, rock and acoustic performances, release 
parties, the occasional comedy night (CollegeHumor.com 
<http://www.collegehumor.com>'s Jake & Amir, for example) and a monthly story 
slam. It's all perpetually cool.

The Mission District
 Viracocha...a chameleon of a space. Photograph: National Geographic Image 
Collec/Alamy 
Epicentre for all things trendy, the Mission District has deep Latino roots, 
including an original Spanish-era mission. Traditionaltaquerias and Mexican 
groceries can still be found, particularly along 24th St. But stroll Valencia 
St between 15th and 20th, and you'll find the latest shops, restaurants and 
bars. The party's spilling over onto Mission St, too, just a block to the east. 
Young chefs and entrepreneurs have been drawn to the Mission by lower rents and 
small storefronts that now host an eclectic buffet of offerings, from hipster
Fellow Barber shop <http://www.fellowbarber.com> to bean-to-bar Dandelion 
Chocolates <http://www.dandelionchocolate.com>.

One of the Mission's hottest bars, Trick Dog <http://www.trickdogbar.com/>, is 
operated by a trio of local mixology masters, the Bon Vivants, who shake up 
some of the best cocktails in town. The original drink menu was based on 
Pantone colours, then segued to cocktails represented by signs of the zodiac 
(Leo, for example, is Leblon Cachaça, Mandarine Napoleon, condensed milk, guava 
and stout, served over crushed ice). The food menu pairs perfectly, with modern 
takes on classic bar food: the house-made beef jerky is cured with Nectar IPA 
and served with horseradish crème fraîche; the Scotch egg is soft-boiled, with 
brandade, purple potato salad and romesco. Whatever you eat, don't miss the 
shatteringly crisp thrice-cooked fries. Join the crowd around the bar in this 
former warehouse space, or head to the mezzanine for table dining.

Viracocha <http://viracochasf.com/#!//> is a chameleon of a space. You might 
pop in to buy a refurbished typewriter or to play a tune on one of the antique 
pianos. But you'll also find handmade furniture, vintage cameras, records and 
'zines, letterpress greeting cards and the odd Japanese sculpture. There's a 
selection of clothing - some re-designed from vintage pieces - and a smattering 
of new accessories. For $10 a month, you're allowed to borrow books from their 
private lending library, curated by local editors, writers and booksellers. 
Downstairs is an underground performance space that has hosted poetry readings, 
folk singers and a brass band.

The Mission already has a bowling alley, but Urban Putt 
<http://www.urbanputt.com> has upped the fun and games with the city's first 
indoor miniature golf course (opens 5 May). This being San Francisco, there are 
robotics, sly references to local icons (the Transamerica building has the 
obligatory windmill attached) and even a hole with a simulated earthquake. A 
musical hole includes a xylophone staircase, others feature motion-sensitive 
lights andRube Goldberg <http://www.rubegoldberg.com> gadgetry, like an 
Archimedes' screw <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Archimedes'_screw>. Above the 
14-hole course, a restaurant offers comfort classics like burgers, poutine with 
duck confit and cornmeal-crust pizza. At course level, a slightly different 
menu focuses on snacks, such as fried green olives and skewers of chicken with 
waffles.

Mid-Market
 The Cavalier...San Fran's take on a hunting club 
Thanks to an influx of high-tech firms, the Mid-Market area of San Francisco 
is attracting new restaurants and watering holes. The neighbourhood stretches 
from 5th St to 10th St along Market St, the city's main downtown thoroughfare, 
and south a block to Mission St. Lured by tax incentives, companies including 
Twitter and Zendesk have added new life to this part of town, while restaurants 
like AQ and TBD pioneered the area. The former Furniture Mart that Twitter 
calls home will continue to evolve with restaurants and retail being built as 
well as condos going up next door.

The Cavalier <http://www.thecavaliersf.com> is San Francisco's take on a 
hunting club, with décor that tends toward cushy, tufted booths lorded over by 
stuffed animal heads. It all seems to work, making The Cavalier an unusual 
cross-over scene for both the city's old guard and techie new guard. You'll 
find Welsh rarebit, fish and chips, and other British classics on the menu, but 
with a Californian twist. For example, devilled crab and rock shrimp are served 
with cucumber slices rather than with bread, and the rarebit is actually a 
soufflé. The bar offers easy-drinking Pimm's cups, rum punch and other classic 
cocktails. As the Cavalier is adjacent toHotel Zetta 
<http://www.viceroyhotelgroup.com/en/zetta>, it serves all day, including 
breakfast.

Michelin two-star chef Daniel Patterson chose Mid-Market for his casual outpost
Alta CA <http://altaca.co>, which serves ingredient-driven Californian fare 
with some Eastern European influences. The space has an industrial feel, warmed 
up by rough wood pillars and retro-feel furniture. Towering metal shelving 
separates the dining room from the kitchen, but you can still check out the 
action by peeking around the plates, wines, books and various other knickknacks 
stored on the open shelves. Dishes to try include the beef tendon puffs and the 
cracked wheat porridge with hen of the wood mushrooms - or go a bit more 
traditional with house-made pastrami or a burger. The bar staff make tonics, 
syrups and bitters in-house, as well as barrel-aged cocktails. Alta CA is a 
welcome exception, open until 2am, unlike most restaurants in the city which 
close well before midnight.

Dogpatch
 San Francisco Museum of Craft and Design 
Located on the blocks surrounding Third St, roughly between Mariposa and Cesar 
Chavez streets, Dogpatch has a history of factories, warehouses and shipyards. 
Today, industrial buildings, like the American Can Company, are home to art 
studios and entrepreneurs. Old dive bars have been renovated and restaurants 
have moved into the area, partially drawn by the influx of housing and 
businesses to nearby Mission Bay. Companies likeRickshaw Bags 
<http://www.rickshawbags.com>, chocolatiers Poco Dolce  <http://pocodolce.com>
andRecchiuti <https://www.recchiuti.com/index.html>, Dogpatch WineWorks 
<http://www.dogpatchwineworks.com> and French butcher Olivier 
<http://www.oliviersbutchery.com> add to the creative vibe.

By making the move to a former industrial space in Dogpatch, the San Francisco 
Museum of Craft and Design <http://www.sfmcd.org> was able to increase 
exhibition space by 50%. One of the few US museums dedicated to contemporary 
craft and design, it doesn't have a permanent collection, but stages 
exhibitions around themes or individual artists. You might see the work of 10 
artists who excel at cardboard sculpture or unusual pieces by conceptual 
metalsmithJennifer Crupi <http://jennifercrupi.com>. Past exhibitions have 
included jewellery, San Francisco graphic design and the design process of
Herman Miller <http://www.hermanmiller.co.uk>. The museum shop, once a loading 
dock, features unique, hand-made items.

Beloved Haight-Ashbury fixture Magnolia Pub & Brewing Company 
<http://magnoliapub.com/dogpatch.html> has also taken advantage of Dogpatch's 
industrial spaces to expand their brewing capacity and openSmokestack <> (opens 
23 April), a new barbeque-oriented restaurant (check the bar's website for 
restaurant opening information). Executive chef Dennis Lee of popular modern 
Korean restaurantNamu Gaji <http://www.namusf.com> is behind the menu, and you 
can expect a wide variety of craft brews from Brewmaster Dave McLean, topping 
the dozen usually on tap at their original pub. The look is similar to the 
original Magnolia, with a timeless "urban archeology" décor.

Russian Hill
 Swan Oyster Depot. Photograph: Renée S. Suen/flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/sifu_renka/4736872058/> 
One of San Francisco's older residential neighbourhoods - and home to the 
city's famed "Crookedest Street 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lombard_Street_(San_Francisco)>" - Russian Hill 
is undergoing a renaissance along its main thoroughfare, Polk St. New housing 
has brightened up lower Polk, and restaurateurs are adding new options to a 
scene that includes one of San Francisco's most venerable establishments, Swan 
Oyster Depot. Polk St is also one of locals' favourite streets for strolling 
and shopping, with a tempting assortment of boutiques and quirky shops.

Cutting-edge crafts and jewellery can be found at Velvet da Vinci 
<http://www.velvetdavincigallery.com>, which takes its name from an old TV 
series. The gallery curates shows with both local and international artists, 
and on any given day you might find unique earrings, astonishing wire 
sculptures or enameled copper vessels. A favourite stop for museum curators and 
art world insiders, the gallery has gained a cult following with intriguing 
exhibitions, like the one titled "Anti-War Medals". Many of the sales staff are 
craftspeople themselves, and take pleasure in explaining the techniques behind 
the pieces on display.

The owners of Michelin-starred Acquerello <http://www.acquerello.com> have 
launched a more casual Russian Hill spot,1760 <http://www.1760sf.com> (named 
for its address--not colonial-era food), with their son, sommelier Gianpaolo 
Paterlini, at the helm. Paterlini heads up an interesting Italian- and 
French-focused wine programme, and also creates special events including Grower 
Champagne Mondays. The menu is set up for sharing, with a bounty of eclectic 
small plates and pastas, though items like beef short ribs and a fried duck 
sandwich should satisfy bigger appetites. The modern, subdued décor attracts a 
young crowd, but the dining room buzz means you might be shouting to your table 
companion rather than whispering sweet nothings.

Gayle Keck is an award-winning travel and food writer living in San Francisco

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 