
A warning about the impact of the Brexit vote on financial services jobs has 
been issued by the head of theLondon Stock Exchange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/londonstockexchangegroup>.

Xavier Rolet said at least 100,000 positions could be lost if the City loses 
its ability to process euro-denominated transactions.

Rolet – who has also insisted he does not think London will be stripped of its 
role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/lse-chief-xavier-rolet-merger-deutsche-borse-london-stock-exchange>
 in the (£440bn-a-day clearing business – said on Friday that jobs would be 
lost across the UK and not just in the capital’s financial district.

“We estimate, conservatively, that at a very minimum 100,000 jobs, in risk 
management, compliance, middle office, back-office support functions – by the 
way not just in London, up and down the country – are implicated in supporting 
this business and clearly could be at risk,” the Frenchman toldBloomberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bloomberg> Television on Friday.

“But the point is that there are very, very few financial centres around the 
world that could accommodate such a global business,” said Rolet,who has agreed 
a £20bn merger with Deutsche Börse. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/16/london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse-agree-merger-terms-costs>

Stock exchange merger is now caught in the Brexit crossfire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/sep/12/stock-exchange-merger-is-now-caught-in-the-brexit-crossfire>
The role London plays in handling trades through clearing houses such as 
London Clearing House, in which the LSE has a stake, has proved contentious 
even before the result of the 23 June referendum.

Last year, an EU court in Luxembourg ruled that the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> lacked the powers 
to dictate clearing of euro-denominated trades.

Rolet told Bloomberg it was possible that business could move. “Is it possible 
that the whole thing could move? “Of course it is … the London Stock Exchange 
Group via the London Clearing House operates a very successful clearing 
business and is currently licensed to operate in for example, in what I believe 
could be frankly the only logical alternative to London, if that came to pass, 
and that is the New York market.

“The physical possibility of moving, as well as the economic consequences, are 
rather complex.

“The notion of separating, for example, the clearing of euro-denominated 
interest-rate swaps from US dollar-denominated interest-rate swaps, just 
doesn’t make any economic sense and probably cannot be achieved, even from a 
regulatory or legal standpoint.”
 