
The original assessor who backed plans for a multibillion-pound super-sewer 
beneath the river Thames has said his decision was based on incorrect 
information, as crews begin work on the project.
Chris Binney, the chairman of the 2005 steering group that recommended the 
Thames Tideway tunnel as the solution to London’s wastewater problems, has 
questioned whether it was worth the £4.2bn estimated cost.
Guardian virtual reality projects 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/vr-richlink/embed.html> 

The seven-year project – the biggest upgrade to the capital’s sewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/ng-interactive/2016/nov/10/subterranean-london>
 since Joseph Bazalgette oversaw their construction in the 1850s – is intended 
to stop wastewater from overflowing into the Thames at times of heavy rainfall.

Engineering crews have already begun damming sections of the Thames to sink 
shafts to the required depth, but Binney now says it is unnecessary and that 
the government ought to have looked at alternative solutions.

His original decision was made on the basis of information that “turns out not 
to have been factually correct”, he told the Guardian.

“The modelling that was done showed it was downstream of Chelsea Bridge where 
this was needed but now downstream of Chelsea Bridge is fine,” Binney said. 
“There is doubt about quite a lot of the quoted spill frequencies. I don’t 
believe the model is robust, nor do the people who actually verified the model.

“In broad terms I think it is a waste of about £4bn … and it is largely the 
ThamesWater <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> customers that will 
pick up the bill.”

Thames Water, London’s privately owned water supplier, says the 15-mile sewer 
will collect almost 18m tonnes of sewage every year that would otherwise be 
pumped into the Thames.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flondon-super-sewer-is-waste-of-4bn-says-assessor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c0ca73dcf3070e735758698afe261fe75c103c8%2F0_252_3676_2206%2F3676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20super-sewer%20is%20waste%20of%20%C2%A34bn%2C%20says%20assessor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flondon-super-sewer-is-waste-of-4bn-says-assessor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20super-sewer%20is%20waste%20of%20%C2%A34bn%2C%20says%20assessor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Flondon-super-sewer-is-waste-of-4bn-says-assessor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c0ca73dcf3070e735758698afe261fe75c103c8%2F0_252_3676_2206%2F3676.jpg>
 Joseph Bazalgette (standing top right) oversees the construction of London’s 
sewers in the 1850s. Photograph: Otto Herschan/Getty Images 
The Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) has said it 
is needed to bring the capital’s ageing sewer system up to date and is the only 
solution that will meet environmental requirements in the shortest time and 
most cost-effective way.

However, Binnie says the most up-to-date analyses show that the issues the 
super-sewer is designed to solve are not as bad as previously thought. 
Meanwhile, the National Audit Office (NAO), the government’s spending watchdog, 
has raised questions over a financial plan for the project that would leave 
taxpayers footing the bill in the event of cost overruns or a fresh crisis in 
global credit markets.

A private company, set up by the government and Thames Water, will own, manage 
and finance the sewer during construction. One-third of the cost is being 
contributed by Thames Water, while the remaining £2.8bn will be raised from 
private investors.

To encourage investors, they will receive an income from the project from the 
very start, while the government will indemnify them against a number of risks. 
When the tunnel is finished, the company will supply sewerage services to 
Thames Water on a 125-year concession, with the cost borne directly by 
customers through a fee added to bills.

The NAO had been originally set to report this autumn. However, this has now 
been pushed back into the new year. In the meantime, work on the sewer is under 
way, with engineers preparing to sink shafts at three sites to lower the boring 
equipment that will dig the tunnel.

Binney said: “I think virtually everybody has accepted that there is nothing 
we can do to stop it. [In the future] we need to be a lot more careful about 
the information on which these types of projects are assessed and make sure you 
really do have to construct it.

“I am not criticising Thames Water. They were instructed by government to get 
on with it and they have done so ... The fault lies with government and to a 
certain extent with theEnvironment Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/environment-agency>, which provided 
insufficiently robust information.”

A Defra spokesperson said: “In the 21st century, London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> should not have a 19th-century sewage 
system that pours untreated waste into the Thames every time there is heavy 
rainfall.

“The Thames Tideway tunnel is privately financed and delivered, with no public 
money expected to be spent on its construction, and will modernise our 
capital’s ageing sewage system. The modelling used to assess the sewer is 
recognised as industry-leading and is regularly refined and updated. The 
Environment Agency has revisited the early findings of 2005 using this and 
found they are still accurate.”

• The byline on this article was corrected on 22 November 2016. 
 