
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> has already breached annual 
pollution limits just one week into 2016, and only weeks after the government 
published its plans to clean up the UK’s air.

At 7am on Friday, Putney High Street in West London breached annual limits for 
nitrogen dioxide (NO2), a toxic gas produced by diesel vehicles that has been 
linked to respiratory and heart problems.

Under EU rules, sites are only allowed to breach hourly limits of 200 
micrograms of NO2 per cubic metre of air 18 times in a year, but this morning 
Putney broke that limit for the 19th time. Chelsea and Kensington is expected 
to do the same later today.

Oxford Street has almost certainly also broken the limit already, having 
breached the hourly level a thousand times last year, but the monitoring 
station has malfunctioned.

Campaigners said it was “breathtaking” the breach had come so early, though 
Oxford Street breached the annual limit in two days in 2015 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/oxford-street-pollution-levels-breached-annual-limit-just-four-days-into-2015-9959849.html>
.
Map of London NO2 pollution 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/london_pollution/giv-27167g3spz2WNr1Hc/>
Nationally, a roadside near the South Wales town of Swffryd appears to be the 
only other place to have broken the hourly limit, though it is still far from 
having breached the annual limit. Other sitesrecording high 
<http://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/data/data_selector> readings 
<http://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/data/data_selector> so far this year include ones 
in Aberdeen, Belfast, Exeter, Glasgow and Stoke-on-Trent, and several other 
roads in London.

The UK has been in breach of EU NO2 pollution limits for five years now and 
last springwas ordered by the supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/29/supreme-court-orders-uk-to-draw-up-air-pollution-cleanup-plan>
 to publish an action plan on how to tackle the major health crisis, following 
a challenge by environmental law group ClientEarth.

The resulting government plan was published in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/17/illegal-air-pollution-will-blight-many-uk-cities-for-at-least-five-years>
, but London, Birmingham, Leeds, Liverpool, Cardiff and Edinburgh and other 
major cities will still be in breach of NO2 limits for at least another five 
years, despite the new measures. Private passenger cars are exempt from the 
plan.

Attention on the harm caused to human health by NO2 came to the fore last year 
when it was revealed that VW had cheated NO2 emissions tests in the US, with 
the scandalaffecting 1.2m diesel cars in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/30/vw-emissions-scandal-12m-uk-cars-affected>
. Next week, VW UK bosses will be quizzed by MPs on the Environment, Food and 
Rural Affairs committee on diesel pollution and what they are doing to make 
cleaner cars.
UK cities exceeding NO2 limits 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1QM6MaJVCX8zTeHR8aO9o-3HVpjfijuKGfkjCOEFKWiE>
Andrew Grieve, an air quality analyst at King’s College London, which measures 
London’s air pollution levels, said the early breach in the capital was not 
extraordinary looking at data from previous years.

“It’s just [that] central London, and London as a whole, have a really huge 
problem with NO2. Breaching so early in the year really just illustrates how 
big a problem it is,” he told the Guardian. He added that there were lots of 
similar roads to those that breached limits earlier but did not have monitors 
on them.

Campaigners and politicians blamed the government for the breach.

Alan Andrews, a lawyer for ClientEarth, said: “This is exactly why we are 
taking the government back to court [over the plan it published in December]. 
Its failure to deal with illegal levels of air pollution, which causes 
thousands of early deaths in London every year, is a scandal.”
 Air quality readings for nitrogen dioxide (red line) in London (Putney High 
Street) in January 2016. The hourly limit is 200 micrograms of NO2 per cubic 
meter. Photograph: London Air Quality Network 
Simon Birkett, founder and director of Clean Air in London, said: “It is 
breathtaking that toxic air pollution in London has breached the legal limit 
for a whole year within a few days.”

Labour MEP, Seb Dance, said the government should ‘put up or shut up’: 
“Receiving this dubious accolade has become a depressing annual event for 
London. NOx [which includes NO2] kills thousands of Londoners every year, but 
the government shows no inclination to take proper action.

“Tory ministers say the right things, but in reality they have lobbied hard 
against ambitious new EU air quality targets and have let car manufacturers off 
the hook after the VW scandal. It’s time for the UK government to put up or 
shut up.”

Jenny Jones, a London Assembly Green Party member, said the breach 
demonstrated failures by the mayor of London and national government.

A spokeswoman for the environment department said: “Tackling air pollution is 
a priority for this Government and that is why last month we published plans 
setting out how we will improve the UK’s air quality through a new programme of 
Clean Air Zones and continued investment in clean technologies.”

A spokesman for the mayor of London’s office said: “The mayor is leading the 
most ambitious and comprehensive package of measures in the world to improve 
London’s air quality. His recent £10m bus retrofit programme has led to a 
sustained reduction in NO2 concentrations on Putney High Street.”

A report commissioned by mayor Boris Johnson last year found that nearly 9,500 
people die prematurely each year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/nearly-9500-people-die-each-year-in-london-because-of-air-pollution-study>
 because of the capital’s dirty air. A ultra low emissions zone is due to begin 
in 2020 in London to help tackle the problem.

Across the UK, particulate pollution – distinct from NO2 – is blamed by Public 
Health England for about 30,000 premature deaths a year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/estimating-local-mortality-burdens-associated-with-particulate-air-pollution>
.

That estimate was expected to double to 60,000 annual deaths last year to take 
into account the additional impact of NO2. However, the government committee 
working on the scienceconcluded in December 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/485373/COMEAP_NO2_Mortality_Interim_Statement.pdf>
 that so far it has proved too hard to separate deaths from particulates known 
as PM2.5s and those from NO2.

Despite the difficulty of distinguishing between the two, it said that “it 
would be sensible to regard NO2 as causing some of the health impact found to 
be associated with it in epidemiological studies.”
 