
Just a few months ago, the momentum behind the plans for a new concert hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/17/london-new-concert-hall-simon-rattle-acoustics-design>
 in the City of London seemed irresistible. Conceived as a world-class new home 
for the LSO, as the orchestra looked forward to a new era under its incoming 
principal conductor, Simon Rattle, it was a venue that would attract the cream 
of visiting orchestras from around the world. The scheme to build the new hall 
on the current site of the Museum of London had beengiven the green light in a 
feasibility study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/16/278m-concert-hall-musuem-of-london-site>
undertaken by the former artistic director of the National Theatre, Nicholas 
Hytner, and received backing from the government in general andchancellor 
George Osborne 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/long-term-economic-plan-for-london-announced-by-chancellor-and-mayor-of-london>
 in particular.

Those who thought the whole thing an unnecessary extravagance, a vanity 
project dreamed up by Rattle and Nicholas Kenyon, director of the Barbican 
Centre, at a time when arts organisations across the country werestruggling to 
fund performances in the spaces that already existed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/22/new-concert-hall-classical-music-simon-rattle>
, were drowned out by those determined togive the returning hero Rattle 
whatever he wanted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/03/simon-rattle-is-the-seismic-creative-shock-uk-classical-music-needs>
. The deal, apparently, was as good as done.


Government pulls its funding for London concert hall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/04/government-pulls-funding-for-world-class-london-concert-hall>
However, amid the swirling financial uncertainty that has followed the Brexit 
vote, it always seemed unlikely that theCity of London 
<http://www.cityoflondon.gov.uk/Pages/default.aspx>, which is already a 
generous benefactor of the Barbican, would easily find the sums necessary for 
such an ambitious scheme. Now Theresa May’s government has withdrawn its 
support for the early stages of the project,and that, apparently, is that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/04/government-pulls-funding-for-world-class-london-concert-hall>
.


The fact remains that London already has plenty of concert halls, including 
more medium-sized ones than it realistically needs and can convincingly fill 
most of the time, and two respectable, if not truly exceptional, full-sized 
ones in the Barbican Hall and the Royal Festival Hall. There may not be an 
auditorium in the UK capital that comes close to the warmth and clarity of the 
sound in the finest European halls, such as Symphony Hall in Birmingham, the 
Concertgebouw in Amsterdam or the Musikverein in Vienna, butneither is the 
sound in the current Barbican or the Southbank’s Festival Hall as disgraceful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/09/julian-lloyd-webber-royal-festival-hall-acoustics-new-concert-hall-london>
 as some suggest.

One of the ironies of Rattle’s campaign is that where the LSO’s Barbican 
concerts under his predecessor Valery Gergievoften sounded overbearing and 
coarse-grained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/oct/09/gergiev-and-the-lso-fond-farewells-or-sighs-of-relief>
, his own recent performances with the orchestra there have revealed so much
more subtlety and refinement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/01/lso-simon-rattle-review-krystian-zimerman>
, suggesting that not all the previous problems can be blamed on the acoustics.


LSO/Simon Rattle review – glorious season finale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/01/lso-simon-rattle-review-krystian-zimerman>
Potentially, London already has two first-rate arts complexes, even if one of 
them, theSouthbank Centre <http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/>, seems more 
interested these days in functioning as a drop-in centre and internet cafe than 
in presenting the year-round programme of top-quality music-making it was 
designed for. Had the Southbank Centre been fulfilling its proper role 
effectively in recent years, one suspects, attracting the full range of 
international talent it should, then the clamour for yet another space across 
the river might have been less insistent.

Meanwhile, the Barbican <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/barbican> 
continues to go from strength to strength and offer an ever-increasing range of 
world-class music as well as theatre. It has been so successful in recent 
years, one can understand why Kenyon and his team were so keen to add another 
venue to their roster. That, though, is not apparently to be.
 