
A boutique merchant bank run by the former Nomura trader Simon Fry is among 
several firms to have approached one of the biggest shareholders in the 
crisis-hit Japanese internet portal Livedoor about acquiring its 12.7% stake in 
the business.

A spokeswoman for the London-listed Crosby Capital said the group specialised 
in investing in complex, turnaround prospects in the far east. She cited a 
recent investment in the Tokyo-based oil and gas exploration group IB Daiwa.

Livedoor is to delist next month after being enveloped, since January, in a 
suspected share manipulation scandal. The group's chief executive, Takafumi 
Horie, has departed and is among five former executives indicted for allegedly 
falsifying accounts. One of the group's corporate advisers has apparently 
committed suicide.

Fuji TV is Livedoor's second-biggest shareholder with a 12.7% stake, and has 
had a strategic partnership with the web portal for almost 12 months. This 
month the network said it intended to sue Livedoor for losses connected with 
its stake, which was put up for sale.

Crosby Capital said yesterday that it had expressed an interest in acquiring 
the Fuji TV stake. The London-listed firm is the investment banking arm of Hong 
Kong-listed Techpacific, which controls 82% of shares. Two years ago it was 
reversed into an Aim shell company, Skiddaw, in which Mr Fry's business 
associate Andrew Regan held an interest.

Mr Regan is best known for his failed hostile bid for the Co-op in 1997. Last 
summer Mr Regan's investment vehicle Corvus made Â£4.5m from the sale of its 
interest in the oil and gas assets trader Lodore Resources to fellow 
shareholder IB Daiwa, which is controlled by Crosby. Corvus had been a founder 
shareholder in Lodore. Mr Fry is a director of Corvus.

Yesterday, Fuji TV's chairman, Hisashi Hieda, told the daily Nihon Keizai 
Shimbun that several offers had been received for the network's stake in 
Livedoor. Usen, a cable group, is among those reported to be interested. 
Livedoor shares rose more than 15% yesterday to close at 76 yen.
 