
Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> is to increase the 
number of his signature “New Routemaster” buses on the capital’s streets to 
1000 with what could be the final bulk delivery of the bespoke vehicle, which 
none of his potential successors as London mayor have pledged to continue 
buying after the election on 5 May.


The board of Transport for London (TfL), which Johnson chairs, on Wednesday 
approved the purchase 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/corporate/publications-and-reports/board-papers> of a 
further 195 vehicles from manufacturer Wrightbus of Ballymena at what is 
understood to be a significantly lower price than was paid for the first 805, 
of which 600 are already in service.

The new cost per bus being agreed with manufacturer Wrightbus of Ballymena is 
expected to be around £310,000-£315,000, which is much closer to that of 
off-the-peg diesel-electric “hybrid” buses than the £354,000 paid per bus for 
TfL’sinitial bulk consignment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/jun/19/new-bus-london-boris-johnson> of 
600 New Routemasters in 2012 and approximately £325,000 foran additional 200 
<http://www.mayorwatch.co.uk/tfl-to-buy-200-new-routemaster-buses-with-improved-ventilation/>
 in 2014. The London Assembly’s budget and performance committeeheard in 
September 2015 
<http://www.london.gov.uk/moderngov/documents/b13215/Minutes%20-%20Appendix%201%20-%20Transcript%20Wednesday%2002-Sep-2015%2010.00%20Budget%20and%20Performance%20Committee.pdf?T=9>
 that TfL had “no plans” to take its order up to 1000 buses at that time 
although Johnson had said he hoped that2000 would be in service by 2020 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/file/16207/download?token=FrawHvNb>. 


The price drop is described as largely a reflection of the hybrid bus market 
becoming more competitive, although it has also been indicated that uncertainty 
about the New Routemaster’s future was a contributory factor. Despite Johnson 
and TfL previously insisting that the “Boris Bus” would attract customers from 
other cities in the UK and elsewhere, none have come forward.


Labour candidate Sadiq Khan, who said on Tuesday that if elected he will take 
over from Johnson as TfL chair,wrote last month 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/comment/comment/sadiq-khan-how-i-could-freeze-our-transport-fares-from-now-until-2020-a3147976.html>
 that he would “freeze purchases” of the New Routemaster as a way of making 
budget savings to help pay for his promised four-year public transport fares 
freeze. Responding to TfL’s decision he welcomed the drop in price but 
confirmed he would still introduce “a moratorium” on buying New Routemasters if 
elected and that he would “want London to only be buying electric hydrogen or 
truly hybrid buses” by the end of 2020 as part of seeking to improve air 
quality.


Liberal Democrat candidate Caroline Pidgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/jan/26/london-mayor-race-the-liberal-democrat-vision-of-caroline-pidgeon>
 too has cast doubt on the New Routemaster’s future, describing Johnson as 
“obsessed with getting as many of them as possible on to London’s roads before 
he leaves City Hall” and arguing that, whilst the lower price is welcome, “they 
remain considerably more expensive than comparable hybrid double deckers” when 
“a better policy would ensure that London has hundreds of single and double 
decker fully electric buses on its roads as quickly as possible.


Sian Berry, who is running for the Greens, said she would welcome “new 
versions of the bus that are better for people in wheelchairs so they are no 
longer in conflict with parents in buggies” and had cleaner engines. Berry 
notes that full intellectual property rights to the bus will revert to TfL once 
it has bought 1000 of them. This will mean that competitors to Wrightbus could, 
if they wished, produce models incorporating similar features without fear of 
legal challenge for copyright infringement.


 Conservative candidate Zac Goldsmith, Khan’s closest rival in the mayoral 
race, has repeatedly praised Johnson,describing him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/jan/20/ten-things-zac-goldsmith-wants-you-to-know>
 as “a fantastic mayor”, but has yet to say what he would do about the New 
Routemaster. No response has so far been received from his campaign to requests 
for a comment. Last November,Goldsmith told LBC radio 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/zac-goldsmith-let-electric-cars-use-bus-lanes--120113> 
that “within two or three years there will be no point in having bus lanes” 
because by then “everyone” would be driving around in electric cars.

The New Routemaster was a flagship Johnson policy when he became mayor in 2008 
and was intended to combine the best of new, green technology with a revival of 
hallmark features of the originalLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
Routemaster, including a second crew member (or conductor) and an open rear 
platform, which passengers could use to board or leave the bus between stops at 
will.


However, both conductors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2014/oct/09/boriss-bus-a-political-journey-part-42-no-more-conductors>
 and theopen platform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/jun/23/boriss-bus-a-political-journey-part-43-no-more-hop-on-hop-off>
 are being phased out and TfL has acknowledged that the latest technology is 
set to improve on the higher emission standards initially achieved by the New 
Routemaster’s groundbreaking “series hybrid” engineering, which involves a 
small diesel engine charging batteries which power an electric engine, rather 
than the bus switching between parallel diesel and electric modes, as with 
other hybrids. The newest models will have windows that can be opened following 
well-publicised complaints about a lack of ventilation in the summer.


Claims that problems with some of the batteries from the original supplier 
(now replaced) resulted in New Routemasters running “entirely on diesel” were 
denied by TfL, whichpointed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/jul/24/boriss-bus-a-political-journey-part-44-the-flat-battery-affair>
 that the vehicle’s “driveline 
<http://www.wrightbusinternational.com/datasheets/Routemaster%20spec%20sheet.pdf>
” makes this impossible. Even so, it is privately conceded by the transport 
body that theonly wholly surviving unique key feature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/03/new-routemaster-old-london-bus-boris-johnson>
 of the bus Johnson commissioned is its distinctive bodywork and interior 
design.
 