
With over half the world’s population now living in cities, and two billion 
more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/19/two-billion-more-people-live-cities-alejandro-aravena-habitat-3>
 people due to join them by 2035, urban “liveability” has become a pressing 
concern.

What can be done to make city living safer, healthier and less alienating? How 
can design tackle rising urban inequality and promote social integration? And 
what, if anything, is the role of the private sector?

A panel of property developers, charities, city councils, architects and 
academics gathered to discuss these questions at a Guardian Roundtable, chaired 
by Guardian journalist and editor Tess Riley and supported by property and 
infrastructure company Lendlease.

Building community

The world’s most liveable cities (think Melbourne, Vancouver, Vienna) are not 
necessarily the richest or most beautiful, according to Helene Joffe, professor 
of psychology at UCL, yet they excel in sociability: friendly streets, mixed 
neighbourhoods, vibrant public spaces.

“When we ask people to think about their city aspirations, we find social 
connectedness comes out top of the list,” said Joffe. “People want to be part 
of a community in cities.”

Floating homes: a solution to flooding, crowded cities and unaffordable housing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/29/floating-homes-architecture-build-water-overcrowding-cities-unaffordable-housing>
Scott Cain from Future Cities Catapult, a centre for the advancement of smart 
cities, concurred: “Regardless of whether you’re an introvert or an extrovert, 
social interaction remains the most important factor in wellbeing.”

Ageing cities expert June Crown said ensuring older people aren’t excluded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/07/age-friendly-cities-loneliness-older-people-housing-planned-community-serenbe-atlanta-lyft>
 from our bustling cities is a key part of this. A number of initiatives are 
working to address this, includingGoodGym 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/video/2014/jun/26/ideal-fit-goodgym-combining-exercise-good-deeds-video>
, which incorporates visits to the elderly into people’s jogging routines, and
Love Your Neighbour <https://northlondoncares.org.uk/love-your-neighbour>, 
which pairs young professionals with older residents in their communities.

Apart from anything else, Love Your Neighbour highlights how much young people 
crave community, said Alex Smith, founder of the North London Cares charity 
that runs the programme.

The rise of vertical cities

Central to what’s happening in our cities is what’s unfolding on our streets. 
The key word for Yolande Barnes, director of world research at Savills, is 
“density”: the more people you can squeeze in per block, the more chance of a 
hustle-and-bustle ambience. She cites the Centro district of Madrid and New 
York’s Chinatown as classic archetypes of tightly packed neighbourhoods with a 
buzz.

Urban density is in vogue among commercial property developers. If we are to 
avoid ever more urban sprawl, the current argument goes, cities need to grow 
upwards rather than outwards.

But does building dense, vertical cities mean we are effectively saying 
farewell to green urban spaces? Not necessarily, said Paul King, managing 
director of sustainability and external affairs at Lendlease in Europe.

King gave the example of Elephant and Castle, a south London district renowned 
for brutalist concrete, being regenerated by Lendlease. Although the area will 
be more densely populated than before, the £3bn project includes street trees, 
pedestrian areas, water recovery systems and roof gardens, he said.

Achieving sustainability without density isn’t always easy. Sue Riddlestone 
described a housing project Bioregional is currently pursuing in London. All 
600 proposed homes are sustainably designed and “truly affordable”, and the 
financing is in place. But securing land on which to build the development at a 
viable price is nigh-on impossible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fbuilding-liveable-cities-loneliness-affordability-green-spaces-air-pollution-rooftop-gardens-community-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfb7026ec49ecb61d3f5057fa857f1e68de7d823%2F0_194_4722_2834%2F4722.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Loneliness%2C%20affordability%20and%20green%20spaces%3A%20the%20challenge%20of%20building%20liveable%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fbuilding-liveable-cities-loneliness-affordability-green-spaces-air-pollution-rooftop-gardens-community-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Loneliness%2C%20affordability%20and%20green%20spaces%3A%20the%20challenge%20of%20building%20liveable%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fbuilding-liveable-cities-loneliness-affordability-green-spaces-air-pollution-rooftop-gardens-community-cycling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfb7026ec49ecb61d3f5057fa857f1e68de7d823%2F0_194_4722_2834%2F4722.jpg>
 Bioregional’s BedZed “eco-village” development in south London. Photograph: 
Alamy 
“We can’t compete with a developer that is coming in just to do a really big 
tower and isn’t thinking about any of these things,” she said. “So we just 
won’t win sites and we won’t be doing these developments.”

Can cities ditch cars?

Corinne Swain, a planning specialist at Arup, urged people to consider green 
space as more than just parks and recreation grounds –living walls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2015/oct/21/new-york-seoul-ten-top-urban-designs-cities-water-sustainable-architecture-living-roofs>
, veg-patches on rooftops, even plant-strewn “green scaffolding” can bring 
nature and greenery to urban neighbourhoods. “There are benefits in terms of 
noise mitigation and air pollution too,” said Swain.

For Tom Platt at advocacy group Living Streets, “walkability” trumps a verdant 
park or pretty canal any day. “Green access is important for people’s health, 
but the biggest health impact streets and green access have is in enabling 
physical activities,” he argued.

For cities to become more pedestrian- and cyclist-friendly, their streets need 
to be wrested back from the automobile. That won’t be easy. Cars increasingly 
dominate our lives and the “political difficulty” of restricting people’s 
access to private transport is substantial, Platt said.

Gurgaon: what life is like in the Indian city built by private companies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/04/gurgaon-life-city-built-private-companies-india-intel-google>
Yet it’s not impossible to reverse the tide. Copenhagen, for example, now has 
more people using bicycles than cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/30/cycling-revolution-bikes-outnumber-cars-first-time-copenhagen-denmark>
. Bioregional, meanwhile, has designed a residential development in south 
London suburbia where car-parking and road space are radically restricted. 
Because people walk rather than drive, opportunities for them to bump into one 
another have increased, said Riddlestone.

Government... and beyond

Historically, the job of designing cities has fallen to planning departments, 
local authorities and a host of other government agencies and organisations – 
and all attendees agreed the state must continue to set the goalposts.

Yet making our cities liveable isn’t just the government’s job. While social 
enterprises such as theLibrary of Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/23/library-of-things-peak-stuff-sharing-economy-consumerism-uber>
 andStreetbank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cardiff/2010/sep/16/streetbank-lending-website-going-in-cardiff>
 (both of which enable local people to share everyday items) are helping 
engineer sociability into our cities, property developers have a key role to 
play. King said Lendlease now sees communal spaces in apartment blocks as 
“essential” and rooftop allotments are considered in all new developments.

Despite the positives, the disconnect between the drive for profits and the 
need for affordable housing remains a concern. Seb Klier, London campaigns 
manager at Generation Rent, criticised the desperate lack of business 
investment in social housing and the ability of private landlords to evict 
renters at short notice: “We’ve got a massive growing population of private 
renters and we do need some sort of policy change to ensure that security of 
tenure is there for these people.”


Klier suggested reintroducing long-term or even lifetime tenures would be a 
positive step and urged the government to “think very strongly” about how land 
owned by the state could be used to maximise affordable housing.

At the table

 * Tess Riley (chair) deputy editor, Guardian Sustainable Business

 * Yolande Barnes director, world research, Savills

 * Scott Cain chief business officer, Future Cities Catapult

 * June Crown special adviser on ageing cities, World Health Organisation 

 * Sally Hogg consultant, public health, Bristol City Council

 * Helene Joffe professor of psychology, UCL

 * Paul King managing director of sustainability and external affairs, Europe, 
Lendlease

 * Seb Klier London campaigns manager, Generation Rent

 * Julia Park head of housing research, Levitt Bernstein/interim chair, Royal 
Institute of British Architects housing group

 * Helen Pineo associate director – cities, BRE

 * Tom Platt head of policy and communications, Living Streets

 * Sue Riddlestone chief executive and co-founder, Bioregional

 * Ben Rogers director, Centre for London

 * Alex Smith founder/CEO, North London Cares

 * Corinne Swain Arup Fellow, planning, Arup  