
In Los Angeles, the US’s most congested city, commuters spend a hellish 164 
hours a year stuck in a traffic jam 
<http://www.tomtom.com/en_gb/trafficindex/city/LOS>. Mention rush hour on the 
405 or the 101 and drivers will roll their eyes and groan. With a reputation 
for gridlocked highways, smog and an unwieldy public transport system, the car 
capital of America is a daunting city to navigate.

The I-10 from Downtown to Santa Monica is notoriously slow at weekends, when 
it can take up to two hours to drive the 17½ miles. But from this weekend, many 
Angelenos will finally be able to make a less stressful trip to the coveted 
beachside town. In what mayor Eric Garcetti describes as a “game changer”, the 
city has spent $1.5bn on the new Expo Line extension to the coast. Seven 
additional stations and 6.6 miles of new track mean that, as of 20 May, sun 
seekers can hop on a train, surfboard under one arm, in Downtown LA, and hit 
the beach 46 minutes later.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flos-angeles-new-expo-line-train-santa-monica-beach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a6630e03071206e87d91c653ebe22ccea81e715%2F0_0_2048_1363%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Los%20Angeles%E2%80%99%20new%20rail%20extension%20makes%20its%20way%20to%20the%20beach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flos-angeles-new-expo-line-train-santa-monica-beach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Los%20Angeles%E2%80%99%20new%20rail%20extension%20makes%20its%20way%20to%20the%20beach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flos-angeles-new-expo-line-train-santa-monica-beach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a6630e03071206e87d91c653ebe22ccea81e715%2F0_0_2048_1363%2F2048.jpg>
 Way to go … ‘passengers have the smug satisfaction of overtaking stationary 
traffic’. Photograph: Steve Hymon/Metro 
On an unusually grey morning the week before the launch, I am in a carriage 
full of press departing a concrete platform above Culver City, nine miles from 
Downtown, where the Expo Line used to finish. Undulating canopies and palm 
trees make it feel different from other city metro lines. Gliding at street 
level, passengers have the smug satisfaction of overtaking stationary traffic. 
The driver sounds his horn at pedestrians unused to dodging trains and, right 
on cue, the sun appears as the train arrives at the beach. On the open-air 
platform everyone inhales, sniffing the Pacific air.

“It’s an emotional moment,” says Garcetti. “For the first time in 60 years, 
you can go from the skyline to the shoreline by train. You can eat your way 
across this line, you can see art across this line, and you can go to school 
across this line.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flos-angeles-new-expo-line-train-santa-monica-beach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51929c8aaf4ac5353d573b72330ec643be22d798%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Los%20Angeles%E2%80%99%20new%20rail%20extension%20makes%20its%20way%20to%20the%20beach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flos-angeles-new-expo-line-train-santa-monica-beach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Los%20Angeles%E2%80%99%20new%20rail%20extension%20makes%20its%20way%20to%20the%20beach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Flos-angeles-new-expo-line-train-santa-monica-beach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51929c8aaf4ac5353d573b72330ec643be22d798%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
 West coasting … Angelenos can now take the Expo Line to Downtown Santa Monica 
station. Photograph: Alexander Spatari/Getty Images/Moment Open 
With trains running until 3am at weekends, visitors will also be able to drink 
their way across the line. Starting with a sundowner atThe Bungalow 
<http://thebungalowsm.com/>, one of Santa Monica’s raucous hangouts, I decide 
to put this theory to the test, working my way east back to LA. Culver City 
itself is an arty neighbourhood on the rise, with a standout gastropub,Father’s 
Office <http://fathersoffice.com/>, a quick stroll from the station. After I’ve 
sampled a few of the mind-boggling selection of craft beers on tap (subdivided 
into malty, hoppy, spicy and herbaceous), the barman suggests I take a portion 
of crispy pork rinds with mole sauce as a subway snack. They’re still popping 
as I hop off at Crenshaw, a somewhat intimidating mid-city station where jazz 
lovers and locals rub shoulders atLiving Room 
<https://www.facebook.com/LIVINGROOM2636/>, a dive bar of black leather and 
mirrors.

Back on the Expo, with the high-rises glittering closer, I reach 7th Street and
Clifton’s <http://www.cliftonsla.com/>, an iconic Downtown hangout where swing 
dancers are kicking their heels to a live band under the branches of a giant 
redwood. With a nightcap in hand and sand still between my toes, I feel that, 
tonight at least, LA’s sprawl is a little less sprawling.

• A one-day LA Metro pass with a TAP card (electronic ticket) costs $7; a 
one-way ticket is $1.75,metro.net 
<https://www.metro.net/projects/expo-santa-monica/>
 