
The Louvre museum lost nearly €10m (£8.6m) last year after a drop in visitor 
numbers blamed onfears of terrorism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/23/france-hit-by-drop-in-tourism-strikes-terror-attacks>
 and closures caused by the risk of flooding.

Jean-Luc Martinez, head of the Parisian institution, said it had been “a 
difficult year” for most tourist sites in the French capital and the museum had 
finished the year with 15% fewer visitors than in 2015 – down about 2 million 
people to 7.3 million.

Despite the gloomy figures, he said he was hopeful ticket sales would improve 
in the coming year.

“We finished with a loss of €9.7m, without counting the lower takings at the 
bookshops and restaurants,” Martinez told Le Figaro. “Everything is being done 
to deal with this. The situation is worrying, but I am calm about it. We 
already had a similar drop in 2001 after the September 11 attacks when the 
number of visitors dropped by 36%. After that, it took three years for us to 
recover our previous number of visitors.”

The number of French visitors has remained stable, but the Louvre has lost 
international tourists put off by the series of terrorist attacks inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> since January 2015. There was also a 
drop in school visits because of increased security following the November 2015 
attacks across the city.


Renovation work – since completed – under the famous glass pyramid, now one of 
the Louvre’s main entrances, also hit the size and number of fundraising 
evenings that could be held.


In June, it was forced to close for several days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/02/deaths-as-flash-floods-hit-france-germany-and-austria>
 as the Seine rose and threatened to flood its galleries.

While Americans remained faithful to the Louvre, the museum welcomed 61% fewer 
Japanese, 53% fewer Russians, 47% fewer Brazilians and 31% fewer Chinese, 
Martinez said.

The figures came as a blow for the Louvre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2017/jan/06/louvre-worlds-greatest-gallery-visitor-numbers-paris-nice-terror-attacks>
, which had been aiming for 10 million visitors last year, after hitting an 
all-time high of 9.7 million in 2012 and becoming the world’s most visited 
museum, but it was not the only Paris museum to be affected.

The Musée d’Orsay also saw the number of visitors drop by 13%, but the 
Pompidou Centre’s ticket sales increased by 2%, thanks to a rise in French 
visitors.


The number of visitors to Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> 
dropped overall by 6% in 2016, according to the city’s Tourism Observation 
Office.


Martinez said making France attractive once more to tourists was “an enormous 
challenge” for the country, its capital and the whole Paris region. He said 
security measures at the Louvre had been increased to allay foreign tourists’ 
fears.


“We are improving all aspects of the visit … but I’m not going to chase 
visitors for the sake of having visitors. I want to improve how we welcome the 
public. Since we reorganised the entrance hall and began selling tickets for 
certain hours on the internet, the level of visitor satisfaction has grown by 
17 points. Now there are only around 15 days of the year during certain parts 
of the museum are overcrowded.”


Asked whether the Louvre was staging exhibitions that were popular with the 
public – last year’s display of work by the 18th-century sculptor and designer 
Edmé Bouchardon attracted only 87,000 visitors – Martinez said: “The Louvre’s 
programme must reflect the wealth of its collections.” He added that the museum 
was in the process of modernising the galleries containing many of its 
permanent collections of paintings and furniture.






 