
Vegas. Sin City. Lost Wages. Nice place to visit but you wouldn't want to live 
there … Whoa, not so fast. Us Las Vegans love it here, but there are certain 
rules to follow.

First, we avoid the Strip. If we are hit with the urge to swoon to Andrea 
Bocelli, we just grab a stiff one and wait for it to pass. Second, we "locals" 
cultivate the perception that we are cheap. And businesses have listened so a 
night on the town is a thrift-shop expedition of wine, women and song.

First the wine: Happy Hour is a huge moving party. Poppy Den 
<http://www.vegaspoppyden.com> is at Tivoli Village 
<http://www.tivolivillagelv.com/>, an upscale retail and office centre in the 
northwest section of town. Poppy Den is a small space, so head for the bar – it 
opens on to a large patio. The other night, cute bartenders served me all the 
champagne I could handle and a nice tuna devilled egg for all of $10.

For something more polished for happy hour, I hit Fleming's 
<http://www.flemingssteakhouse.com> - it's a white-tablecloth, wood and leather 
steak place, famous for its $6 offerings. Due Forni (3555 Town Center Drive, +1 
702 586 6500,dueforni.com <http://www.dueforni.com>), a little way south, does 
the same thing but with Italian flair, although they screen very odd old movies 
– some with a lot of bouncing breasts – in the retro 1970s dining area.

Food comes next. Try Oscar's (1 Main Street, +1 702 386 7227, ) downtown, for 
a walk down memory lane. Named after former mayor Oscar Goodman, who began as a 
defence lawyer forcolourful characters 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/video/watch/?id=50148507n>, he bills the steakhouse as 
a place for "beef, booze and broads". Photos from Vegas' past grace the walls, 
and Frank and Dean sing in the bar. You might run into former Mayor Goodman, or 
the current Mayor Goodman – his wife, Carolyn.
 Poppy Den, Las Vegas 
Now for the song. Monday night at the Bootlegger 
<http://bootleggerlasvegas.com/> (7700 Las Vegas Boulevard South, 
bootleggerlasvegas.com) is the place to be. It's owned by a lady named Lorraine 
who started as a singer and rose to lieutenant-governor (and never stopped 
performing). It has velvet walls, waiters in spats, thousands of photos of old 
Vegas, and a lounge room like those the Rat Pack performed in. Sit at the first 
set of tables to have the singers practically in your lap.

On Mondays, most shows on the Strip are "dark" – while the headliners rest, 
the back-up talent steps up. Music experience starts at Bootleggers at 9pm and 
runs until the last guest passes out or goes home. If your tastes run down and 
dirty, tryDouble Down <http://www.doubledownsaloon.com/> (4640 Paradise Road, 
doubledownsaloon.com), a ramshackle bar that serves Ass Juice.

For a nightcap, there's DCR <http://thedowntownlv.com/> (111 Las Vegas 
Boulevard South, thedowntownlv.com), where most of the light comes from the 
back-lit bottles behind the bar. The entertainment is a huge one-way window 
giving the patrons inside an unimpeded view of the struggles of those on the 
outside trying to guess how to open the freakin' door. Don't get put off – it's 
a fun game.The Lady Silvia <http://www.theladysilvia.com/> is a speakeasy with 
no sign – on Hoover Street, west of the Strip, look for the neon 140/150 over 
an unmarked door. Or tryFrankie's Tiki Room <http://www.frankiestikiroom.com> 
(1712 West Charleston, frankiestikiroom.com) with torches, grass thatch, and 
wooden flooring.

Every night on the town must end at Drink and Drag 
<http://www.drinkanddrag.com/index.php>. Enjoy dancing, bowling (free if you 
bowl in your underwear), young men in tightie-whities, and others in gowns, 
jewellery and make-up, who sing and dance to Diana Ross. All are welcome and 
have a wonderful time. Sorta like Vegas.

Deborah Coonts, author of The Lucky O'Toole Las Vegas Adventures

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 