
No matter what part of the world you live in, it’s easy to overindulge at 
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> – whether it’s 
on winter warmers such as bourbon or scotch, or on festive glasses of bubbles 
in warmer climates.


 With a little foresight and planning, it’s easy to switch to Christmas 
tipples that punch above their weight in the flavour stakes but won’t knock you 
out in terms of booze content.

 If you really want to watch how much you’re drinking, take a leaf out of the 
professional bartender’s book and invest in ajigger 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shot_glass#Jigger> – this ensures you pour 
consistent quantities of booze every time you make a drink.

1. Amari alpini

 For many of us, nothing says Christmas like the smell of evergreen trees – 
pines, firs, cedars, etc.

Italy’s amari alpini (that’s “alpine bitters” in English) possess more than a 
hint of that same evergreen scent, alongside herbal hints of chamomile, 
spearmint and juniper. Made in the Italian Alps – the mountainous region that 
borders Switzerland, and takes more than a few cultural cues from its northern 
European neighbours – these amari alpini are a distinct category within the 
broader family of Italian amari.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9fee714c4f8eea06a3dfcc41bc67e7a8aeab966%2F0_0_800_600%2Fmaster%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Low-grog%20eggnog%3A%20Christmas%20cocktails%20that%20won't%20knock%20you%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Low-grog%20eggnog%3A%20Christmas%20cocktails%20that%20won%27t%20knock%20you%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9fee714c4f8eea06a3dfcc41bc67e7a8aeab966%2F0_0_800_600%2Fmaster%2F800.jpg>
 Amaro Alpino hails from the Italian Alps. Photograph: amaroalpino.it 
 While Italian amari and aperitivo bitters are currently having something of a 
moment – considerthe popularity of the Aperol spritz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/09/beyond-the-aperol-spritz-five-cocktails-perfect-for-spring>
 and the Negroni – amari alpini remain underrepresented on the global market. 
The good news is that as the amaro craze shows no sign of slowing down, 
importers and distributors are more willing to take a chance on more recondite 
local specialties from various parts of Italy (no doubt hoping to find the next 
Campari or Aperol).

The most widely available amaro alpino is Bràulio 
<http://www.camparigroup.com/en/brands/liqueursothers/braulio> – now owned and 
made by Italian beverage giant Gruppo Campari. But other, smaller brands can be 
found with some patience and luck.

 With their low alcohol by volume (most clock in around 20%) and their 
refreshingly complex, wintery aromas, amari alpini make an excellent sipper for 
after Christmas dinner. You can enjoy one simply on the rocks or, for something 
more refreshing, mix one up in a spritz as they do in Bormio, Bràulio’s home 
town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24172ac52ff67ab5824c18fdb0b8777cc4e25c8a%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Low-grog%20eggnog%3A%20Christmas%20cocktails%20that%20won't%20knock%20you%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Low-grog%20eggnog%3A%20Christmas%20cocktails%20that%20won%27t%20knock%20you%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24172ac52ff67ab5824c18fdb0b8777cc4e25c8a%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 An after-dinner spritzer that delivers a taste of the Alps by the pool. 
Photograph: Yulia-Images/Getty Images/iStockphoto 
Make it at home: alpine spritz


 120ml chilled dry white wine (pinot grigio or similar)
30ml amaro alpino
30ml soda water

 Build ingredients in a wine glass. Stir briefly to incorporate and top with 
ice. Garnish with a slice of orange or a sprig of mint.

 You can replace the white wine for prosecco or another dry sparkling wine if 
you’d like something bubblier, but part of its charm is its retro nature 
(traditionally, Italian spritzes were made with still wines, not sparkling 
ones).

Pair it with a movie: The James Bond thriller Quantum of Solace has some 
lovely shots of the Italian Alps – even if the film itself is a bit of a downer.

2. Chartreuse hot chocolate

 At 55% ABV, green chartreuse is nobody’s idea of a low-proof drink. In fact, 
I still have mental scars from wild nights out drinking it in my misspent 
youth. But just because something is fearsomely high-proof, doesn’t mean the 
only way to drink it is to smash shots.

You can, for instance, use a small quantity of it as a flavouring agent, as 
the French do with green chartreuse and hot chocolate.

 Green chartreuse is something of a love-it-or-hate-it proposition. For some, 
its sweetness, high proof and strongly herbaceous character (it contains the 
extracts of 130 different botanicals) make it mother’s milk, while for others 
those same characteristics make it as appealing as Agent Orange. The genius of 
blending it with hot chocolate is that it can please both crowds – those 
inclined to love it will still detect its signature flavour, which shines 
through pretty much anything you mix it with; while those inclined to loathe it 
will find it much more approachable when lengthened. It also helps that 
chartreuse and chocolate go extremely well together.

 This traditional apres-ski drink makes a delicious winter warmer – just bear 
in mind its relatively low ABV is about the only thing it has going for it, 
health-wise.

Pair it with a movie: The characters in Ruben Östlund’s Force Majeure – a 
chilly social drama set in the French Alps – could probably have done with a 
few of these.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e58c14fc51e08be905e64260b04fe9b338fa8e4%2F0_219_4197_2519%2F4197.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Low-grog%20eggnog%3A%20Christmas%20cocktails%20that%20won't%20knock%20you%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Low-grog%20eggnog%3A%20Christmas%20cocktails%20that%20won%27t%20knock%20you%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e58c14fc51e08be905e64260b04fe9b338fa8e4%2F0_219_4197_2519%2F4197.jpg>
 The low alcohol by volume of the chartreuse hot chocolate is about all it’s 
got going for it, health-wise. Photograph: Jill Mead for the Guardian 
Make it at home: chartreuse hot chocolate 

 One cup hot chocolate
15ml (or more, to taste) green chartreuse

 Make hot chocolate according to your own taste. Before serving, spike with 
green chartreuse and stir briefly to incorporate. Garnish with a float of 
whipped cream on top.

 While you might be tempted to go for the cheaper and lower-ABV yellow 
chartreuse, avoid this if possible – the more pungent green version is better 
at cutting through the chocolate.

3. Sherry eggnog

 Eggnog is the American Christmas drink par excellence – even if the 
commercially available versions these days are a pale shadow of the drink’s 
former glory.

Fortunately for your tastebuds, it’s relatively easy to whip up a big batch of 
delicious ’nog – but recipes for homemade alcoholic eggnog are usually loaded 
with serious quantities of bourbon, brandy or rum.

 There’s an easy solution if you’re after a lower-proof version: simply swap 
out the brown spirits for an oxidatively aged sherry.

Sherry – the real stuff from Spain, that is – is loaded with the same 
complexity of flavour as any high-quality brown spirit, with about half the 
ABV. The richly nutty flavours of an oxidatively-aged sherry work perfectly 
with the creaminess of the eggnog.

 The hardest part of making this swap is finding the right sherry to fit the 
gap. Sherry isn’t just one ingredient, but is actually arather diverse spectrum 
of different styles of wine 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/01/19/AR2009011901234.html>
 – some bone-dry and flinty, others sweet enough to be a dentist’s wet dream. 
In order to make the recipe below (adapted from David Wondrich 
<http://www.esquire.com/food-drink/drinks/a26590/eggnog-recipe-1213/>) work, 
you’ll need to procure a sherry that is both dry and oxidatively aged; look for 
one labelled “oloroso”, “palo cortado” or “amontillado”, and avoid any labelled 
“manzanilla”, “fino”, “pedro ximénez”, “moscatel” or “cream”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F292abac40fd4366427a801bb8f45a6411e109d5c%2F0_0_4140_5110%2F4140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Low-grog%20eggnog%3A%20Christmas%20cocktails%20that%20won't%20knock%20you%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Low-grog%20eggnog%3A%20Christmas%20cocktails%20that%20won%27t%20knock%20you%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flow-grog-eggnog-christmas-cocktails-that-wont-knock-you-out%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F292abac40fd4366427a801bb8f45a6411e109d5c%2F0_0_4140_5110%2F4140.jpg>
 The trickiest part of a sherry eggnog is finding the right sherry. Photograph: 
Jupiter images 
Make it at home: sherry eggnog (serves 12)

 750ml (one bottle) dry, oxidatively aged sherry (oloroso, palo cortado or 
amontillado)
10 whole eggs
150g sugar
1L full-cream milk

 Separate the egg whites and yolks. Mix sugar with yolks until the sugar has 
dissolved. Add sherry and gently stir until incorporated, then add milk and 
repeat. Using a beater, whip the egg whites until they form soft peaks. Gently 
fold the whipped whites into the mixture, then refrigerate for an hour or so to 
rest. When serving, garnish individual cups with freshly grated nutmeg and/or 
cinnamon sticks.

 Some people like to age their alcoholic eggnog – this is not advised for a 
sherry eggnog, as sherry’s lower ABV makes the eggnog more susceptible to 
pathogens such as salmonella. Eggnog contains raw eggs, so should not be 
consumed by pregnant women, the elderly and people with compromised immune 
systems.

Pair it with a film: Bruce Robinson’s Withnail and I – just for the sheer camp 
enjoyment of Richard Griffiths’s character Uncle Monty, who loves a cheeky 
sherry or three.
 