
DAY ONE: TEMPLES AND SHOPPING

Morning

Luang Prabang means “city of the Golden Buddha Phra Bang”, a 83cm statue of 
which is believed to be the source of the city’s protection since the 14th 
century. On his marriage to a Khmer princess, warrior Fa Ngum was given the 
diminutive statue by his father-in-law, the King of Angkor, and it has since 
bounced back and forth between Bangkok and Luang Prabang in wars with Siam (now 
Thailand). Since 2013, however, it has sheltered in the golden Haw Pha Bang in 
the grounds of the Royal Palace.

The Royal Palace 
<http://www.visit-laos.com/luang-prabang/royal-palace-museum.htm> (entry £3), 
built by French colonialists between 1904-09, is a blend of Lao and French 
architecture, hallmarked by the royal symbol of Laos – a three-headed elephant 
under a parasol. The living quarters are spartan but the throne room shines 
with mosaic emerald palms, lapis lazuli elephants, silver rivers and golden 
robes. Don’t miss the royal cars exhibition with the royal logo embedded in car 
doors and number plates. Opposite isMount Phousi 
<http://www.visit-laos.com/luang-prabang/mount-phousi.htm> (entry £2– pay about 
half way up) best climbed at sunset.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe42e9d23d67ba42cc6aba66540c68d0984ba8d05%2F0_223_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe42e9d23d67ba42cc6aba66540c68d0984ba8d05%2F0_223_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Wat Mai temple. Photograph: Marc Dozier/Getty Images 
Next, head to the Wat Mai palace (entry £1), built in 1788, known for its 
glorious bas-relief work, golden stencilling of its sim (assembly hall), and 
for the ritual cleansing of the Phra Bang during Lao New Year.

Walk along the main Sisavangvong peninsula road, ducking into the left-hand 
alley for a drink (and to view handicrafts) at the Luang PrabangArtisans Cafe 
<http://www.luangprabangartisanscafe.com/> and to see local houses 
cheek-by-jowl with spruced up plots rented by foreigners. Walk towards the end 
of the peninsula passing the French-built school, theHotel Villa Santi 
<http://villasantihotel.com/> and the Three Nagas Hotel, with its vintage 
Citroën and Mercedes cars parked outside. Pause at the early 18th-century Wat 
Sene (entry free), with its sweeping four-tiered roof, before heading to the 
16th-century Wat Xieng Thong (entry £2), described by Auguste Pavie, the first 
French vice-consul in Luang Prabang, as “famous for its sloping curved roof 
with three levels overlapping one another, as if it were an immense bird 
preparing to fly”. Search for its dazzling Tree of Life mosaic and, in the 
grounds, the immense funeral chariot of King Sisavang Vong.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F605577bdea9032c3837d13863d60afdcfe2919d4%2F0_202_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F605577bdea9032c3837d13863d60afdcfe2919d4%2F0_202_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 A night market in Luang Prabang. Photograph: Vincent Jary/Getty Images 
Opposite Wat Xieng Thong is Queen Design, where you can buy handmade Hmong 
batik wrap skirts, andArticle 22 <https://article22.com/> peacebomb jewellery, 
fashioned from war scrap metal; next door, Noi sells baskets and cases from 
Khmu communities in remote Sam Neua.

Lunch at L’Elephant Vert <http://www.elephant-restau.com/elephantvert/> with 
its “living” cuisine set menus (from £12) serving tomato carpaccio and 
coriander and mustard mousse, or at small Cafe Toui where friendly Toui serves
souisi pa (fresh fish poached in coconut, basil and a red-chilli broth) for 
about £4 and a twist on the Cuban mojito, a “cojito”, made with Lao basil, 
lemongrass and Malibu rum.

Afternoon

After lunch, wander through the myriad alleys and streets. Close to L’Elephant 
Vert isGallery Asiama <http://www.asiama.fr/> where south-east Asian textiles 
specialist Dr Linda S McIntosh sells select wares; next door, Alain Ménoni 
sells his digital and silver print photographs of Laos.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F209bebf916b2e78658250f495f9f28f8ceb922ea%2F235_0_7061_4237%2F7061.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F209bebf916b2e78658250f495f9f28f8ceb922ea%2F235_0_7061_4237%2F7061.jpg>
 Wat Xieng Thong temple with its famous roof. Photograph: Ketkarn 
Sakultap/Getty Images 
Returning to the main road, you’ll find Ock Pop Tok Heritage (selling vintage 
Laos textiles) andPassa Paa <http://www.passa-paa.com/> store (in the same 
alley as the Artisans Cafe and selling bags and cloth stitched with modern 
takes on indigenous motifs). Try silkworm poo tea (with a nutty edge!) in its 
pretty garden. Tuk tuk out toOck Pop Tok’s 
<http://ockpoptok.com/create/classes/> riverside location to learn weaving, 
Hmong batik and bamboo weaving (from £24). Hungry after class? BeginBackstreet 
Academy’s Fear Factor Food Tour 
<https://www.backstreetacademy.com/luang-prabang/990/fear-factor-food-tour-dishes-you-will-not-forget>
 (£14), a three-hour munch through chicken feet, goat’s blood, duck foetus and 
pig’s intestine at street stalls and roadside pit stops; itskhaipen (Mekong 
riverweed snack) cooking class is fascinating too (£15).

For a tranquil take on Luang Prabang, glide out on a new, stylish Bounmi 
<http://bounmi.com/> cruise along the Mekong with expat Adele Frigon, who 
provides insider info on sights along the river (from £16) accompanied by red 
lao lao (rice whisky made from purple sticky rice). Post sunset, head into town 
to graze around the night market (tasting grilled chicken or fish on bamboo 
skewers from £1.50-£5), a bowl of noodle soup (£1.50), and sweets made from 
coconut (80p-£1.60), or dine on tilapia ceviche at hotspotTangor 
<http://letangor.com/>. Later, settle in for a cocktail and offbeat 
conversation at Elizabeth Vongsaravanh’s artsyIcon Klub 
<http://www.iconklub.com/>, followed by gourmet tapas for the peckish (the 
pulled-pork sliders are great) and full cocktail repertoire at Brit-owned525 
<http://525.rocks/#welcome>.

DAY TWO: FOOD, MUSIC AND DRINK

Morning
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdc86a6e25888cfafa6f55d61644053966f5b9f7%2F0_164_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdc86a6e25888cfafa6f55d61644053966f5b9f7%2F0_164_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Woman making saa paper in Ban Xang Khong. Photograph: John Elk III/Getty 
Images/Lonely Planet Images 
Rise early to take part in a sacred ritual: the giving of alms. There are some 
35wats in town and every morning the saffron-robed monks walk through the 
centre, collecting rice for their day’s food. (There are strict rules on 
participation, observation and photography so seek advice so as not to disrupt 
the monks). Afterwards, browse at the morning market (6.30-10am): rice 
lollipops, wasp cocoons (the pupae are considered a delicacy), buffalo lung, 
betel-nut bark and leaves, live toads and catfish. For an insight into Laos’ 
culinary staple, sticky rice, enrol atLiving Land 
<http://www.livinglandlao.com/index.php/en/>, 5km from Luang Prabang, for a 
lesson and a chance to work in a paddy field (£23.50). Lunch atKhaiphaen 
restaurant 
<http://www.tree-alliance.org/our-restaurants/khaiphaen.php?mm=or&sm=kp>, 
supported by Friends International which trains young people for employment, 
for a good chickenlaap (minced chicken with diced veg and mint) and pandan 
panna cotta.

Afternoon

Cycle out to the village of Ban Xang Khong, 1km north, and watch the 
conversion of mulberry tree bark into homemade, petal-spatteredsaa paper before 
buying at the handful of shops. Back in town, bike or walk toTaec 
<http://taeclaos.org/>, an excellent non-profit museum where exhibitions 
showcase Laos’s ethnic groups’ clothes and crafts (entry £2.50). It also offers 
Hmong embroidery and Khmu bamboo-weaving classes (from £10). From here, make 
your way to the south side of Mount Phousi to Wat Visoun (entry £2), crowded 
with golden buddhas and housing a jumbled cluster of artefacts. Search out the 
ceremonial swan, a huge, carved wooden red-eyed bird vessel, whose purpose was 
to channel holy water in a purification ritual for a Lao king on coronation. 
Spend the rest of the afternoon drinking at the bars that line the Nam Khan 
river back road, or zone out atUtopia <http://www.utopialuangprabang.com/>, 
overlooking the water. For even more relaxation, book in for a massage. There 
are spas for all budgets: near Wat Visoun is the no-frills Lao Red Cross 
massage (a few pounds); the affordable L’Hibiscus Spa (from £6); or the 
indulgent Lao Coffee Body Wrap (£50) at theSofitel <http://www.sofitel.com> 
Luang Prabang.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceec6a117eda4b3571bd1f669cd4b5451eef9968%2F0_136_4164_2499%2F4164.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceec6a117eda4b3571bd1f669cd4b5451eef9968%2F0_136_4164_2499%2F4164.jpg>
 Kuang Si Falls. Photograph: Getty Images 
At Garavek <http://www.garavek.com/>, hear folk tales in English at a small 
theatre at 6.30pm (£4) to the backdrop ofkhene music played on a bamboo-reed 
instrument. With tour guideSaeng Touly 
<https://nl.linkedin.com/in/saeng-touly-69aa0284>, you can visit the last Hmong 
khene maker in Luang Prabang province, who will show you his craft and play 
soulful tunes. Saeng can then take you around the corner forkhao piak (tapioca 
and rice noodle soup with herbs, spices, chicken or beef) on a street known to 
locals as “noodle soup road”. Khene devotees should look upThe Paradise Bangkok 
Molam International Band, <https://paradisebangkok.officialstore.co.uk/Shop/>
featuring a 70-year-old player.

Laos is famous for its do-it-yourself barbecues, known as sindat. Pitch up on 
the Mekong River road, lined with mango, tamarind and coconut trees, as well as 
huge fig trees prickled by bromeliads, and look for the “BBQ Buffet Mekong” 
sign. Tuck in from 6-10pm for £6 per person. If you feel like being waited on, 
cross the Nam Khan river toDyen Sabaí 
<https://dyensabairestaurant.wordpress.com/> (bamboo bridge access is 50p 
return crossing before 6pm), set in a lantern-festooned garden. For western 
fare, track down funSecret Pizza <https://www.facebook.com/pizzasecret/>, run 
by an Italian-Lao couple. After dinner, bar hop “bar street”. TheRed Bul Bar 
<http://redbulbarluangprabang.com/> is a guaranteed party spot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff53d6a2179aa9a17b05579076eb597359ac741fa%2F0_100_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff53d6a2179aa9a17b05579076eb597359ac741fa%2F0_100_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Ock Pop Tok. 
DAY THREE: OUT OF TOWN

Morning

Thirty kilometres from Luang Prabang (£5 in a tuk tuk) are the turquoise, 
postcard-perfect Kuang Si Falls (8.30am-5pm). Head out on your own early to see 
them empty of visitors and glittering in the sunlight at the beginning of the 
day. On site isFree the Bears <http://www.freethebears.org/>, where more than 
20 Asian black moon bears, rescued from the illegal wildlife trade, are kept in 
enclosures. Close by is the vibrantKuang Si Butterfly Park 
<http://www.luangprabang-laos.com/Kuang-Si-Butterfly-Park>, opened two years 
ago by a Dutch couple. For a great Lao lunch, or a few Japanese dishes, head 
back to town toSonphao <https://www.facebook.com/Sonphao-722590867807423/> run 
by the delightful Shingo.

Afternoon

There are a couple of choices. Either, take the vehicle-carrying boat (50p per 
foreigner) from behind the Royal Palace to the left bank of the Mekong. Climb 
up the hill and turn right onto a pebble path to a string of temples which each 
cost about £1 to enter – the pretty 16th-century sloping-roofed Wat Xiengman, 
hilltop Wat Chomphet, and the historic Wat Long Khoun, which boasts 
extraordinary colourful murals and was the meditation retreat of Laos kings 
before their coronations. Hidden in the Chomphet district jungle, for those 
tenacious enough to track it down, is the royal cemetery (with the tomb of the 
mother of the last king of Laos). Then take a boat 25km upstream (from £20) to 
the Pak Ou caves, where thousands of Buddha statues are secreted inside. During 
Lao New Year (Pi Mai), the caves are thronged with pilgrims.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb47bcdf613ce7c66f97f105b61789edf5f204287%2F0_115_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luang%20Prabang%20in%20three%20days%3A%20sightseeing%20itinerary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fluang-prabang-laos-three-day-holiday-itinerary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb47bcdf613ce7c66f97f105b61789edf5f204287%2F0_115_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 Buddhist monks collecting alms early in the morning. Photograph: Santiago 
Urquijo/Getty Images 
Alternatively, end the day with the fun Tamarind Cooking Class 
<http://www.tamarindlaos.com/cooking-school/> at its lakeside school (£21) and 
experience a great entrée into cooking some of Laos’s most emblematic and tasty 
foods, such as the above-mentioned laap.

Opening in November, 2km downstream, the Pha Tad Ke Botanical Gardens 
<http://pha-tad-ke.com/>, the first in Laos, will brim with Lao plants and 
flowers and offer a cafe, restaurant, shop and workshops (£28 for boat 
transport and garden entry).

Return for de rigeur beerlao on the Mekong at sunset at any one of the bars 
lining the Mekong Road. Purchase your souvenirs at the night market (5-10pm), 
which sets up from the post office roundabout to the Royal Palace on Sisavang 
Vong Road. Buy embroidered story books, cloth purses, paper parasols, upcycled 
cement bags, tea and spices.

Claire Boobbyer travelled with Audley Travel (01993 838 000; audleytravel.com 
<https://www.audleytravel.com/>)
 