
Madrid’s city council is on the verge of temporarily slashing the number of 
cars allowed into the city centre by half as the Spanish capital struggles with 
high levels of air pollution.

With levels of nitrogen dioxide rising above permitted levels, the city 
authorities have activated a series of anti-pollution measures, reducing the 
speed limit on the M30 orbital motorway around the centre and banning parking 
in the area for non-residents. Authorities are also urging people to use public 
transport wherever possible.

The boina, or beret, of smog that hovers over Madrid prompted the council to 
introducea raft of strict traffic protocols last year 
<http://elpais.com/elpais/2015/09/23/inenglish/1443009788_783477.html>. In 
mid-November 2015,nitrogen dioxide levels in the city centre reached almost 
double 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/29/traffic-madrid-spain-air-quality>
 theWorld Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs313/en/>.

On Tuesday, the council said that although the threshold had been met to enact 
a measure forbidding 50% of vehicles from entering the centre – those with 
number plates ending in even numbers allowed on even days and those ending in 
odd ones on odd days – the move would be suspended because many people were 
returning from the long All Saints’ Day bank holiday weekend.

“However, the Madrid city council asks people not to head into the central 
area in order to lower the levels of NO2 pollution,” it said in a statement. 
“As an alternative, we recommend the use of public transport.”

Should nitrogen dioxide levels remain high on Wednesday, the council will 
bring in the odd/even ban in Madrid’s seven central districts. Emergency 
services vehicles are exempt from the ban, as, among others, are taxis, 
zero-emission cars, motorbikes and removal vans.

A number of cities have similar schemes. Last November, the mayor of Paris, 
Ann Hidalgo,won a fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/03/paris-to-stop-traffic-when-air-pollution-spikes>
 with the French government to introduce emergency traffic bans during 
pollution spikes that would see alternate driving days based on number plates.

The city has banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/02/paris-drives-old-cars-off-the-streets-in-push-to-improve-air-quality>
 old, more polluting cars registered before 1 January 1997 from the city’s 
streets from Monday to Friday, 8am to 8pm.


In March, the WHO warned that outdoor air pollution has risen 8% globally in 
the past five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/air-pollution-rising-at-an-alarming-rate-in-worlds-cities>
, with billions of people around the world now exposed to dangerous air.

Outdoor air pollution causes more than 3m deaths a year 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v525/n7569/full/nature15371.html> – more 
than malaria and HIV/Aids – and is now the biggest single killer in the world.
The UN says air pollutants such as sulphates, nitrates and black carbon 
penetrate deep into the lungs and the the cardiovascular system, posing huge 
risks to human health. The toll of toxic air is expected to double as urban 
populations increase and the number of cars in the world reaches 2bn by 2050.
 