
The Palestinian president has expressed hope that a Middle East conference in 
France will set a timetable to end settlements – as Israel pushed ahead with 
plans to build thousands of homes in contravention of arecent UN resolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
.

Israel threatens to give Trump 'evidence' that Obama orchestrated UN resolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/israel-un-resolution-settlements-obama-trump>
Mahmoud Abbas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahmoud-abbas> spoke days 
after a US abstention allowed the security council to condemn Israeli 
settlements in the West Bank and east Jerusalem as a “flagrant violation” of 
international law.

Addressing a meeting of his Fatah party on Tuesday, Abbas said: “The 
[resolution] proves that the world rejects the settlements, as they are 
illegal, in our occupied land including east Jerusalem.”

He also said: “The decision lays the foundation for any future serious 
negotiation … and it paves the way for the international peace conference 
slated to be held in Paris next month, and we hope this conference comes up 
with a mechanism and timetable to end the occupation.”

However, , Jerusalem authorities are set to approve thousands of new housing 
units in the eastern sector of the city this week, despite the resolution.

France is expected to host a Middle East conference on 15 January – days 
before the US president, Barack Obama, leaves office. Dozens of countries could 
endorse an international framework for peace between Israel and the 
Palestinians at the meeting. The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, 
vehemently opposes such activity, saying it undermines the negotiating process, 
and hasrefused to participate 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-israel-palestinians-france-idUSKBN1321NL> in 
the Paris conference.

Netanyahu has repeatedly called on Abbas to meet for direct talks without 
preconditions. Abbas has refused unlessIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> ends settlement construction first.

 Palestinians lay claim to the West Bank and east Jerusalem – home to holy 
sites sacred to Jews, Muslims and Christians – as part of their future state. 
Israel says settlements, along with other core issues such as security, should 
be agreed in peace talks.

Meanwhile, the pro-Netanyahu daily newspaper Israel Hayom reported that the 
Jerusalem district zoning committee was meeting on Wednesday to discuss 
approving fresh construction work in that part of the city.

“We remain unfazed by the UN vote, or by any other entity that tries to 
dictate what we do in Jerusalem,” said the deputy Jerusalem mayor, Meir 
Turgeman, who heads the zoning committee. “I hope the Israeli government and 
the new US administration will support us, so we can make up for the lack [of 
construction] during the eight years of the Obama administration.”

Netanyahu was outraged by the resolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/israel-un-resolution-settlements-obama-trump>
 and has declared a number of steps in response to the measure.

Israel summoned ambassadors from council members, including the US, to 
protest. And Netanyahu has apparentlysnubbed the UK prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/netanyahu-snubs-may-over-un-settlements-vote-israeli-media-says>
, Theresa May, refusing to meet her on the sidelines of the world economic 
forum in Davis. He has recalled his nation’s ambassadors to New Zealand and 
Senegal and cancelled a January visit to Israel by Senegal’s foreign minister. 
He also ended Israeli aid programmes to the African country.

On Monday, Israel escalated its already furious war with the outgoing US 
administration,claiming that it has “rather hard” evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/israel-un-resolution-settlements-obama-trump>
 that Obama was behind the UN resolution.
 