
The M3 remains partially closed at Fleet in Hampshire after a major fire at a 
service station on Wednesday night.


Fifty firefighters from Hampshire and Surrey battled the flames, which 
reportedly broke out in a restaurant at the southbound services at 10.30pm. 
Nobody was injured.

The M3 southbound was partially closed on Wednesday night between junction 4a 
at Fleet and junction 5 at Hook due to smoke billowing across the lanes.

One lane, with the sliproad, is likely to remain closed until Thursday 
afternoon, a Hampshire police spokesman confirmed. Traffic alert services from 
the BBC and AA both reported significant delays on the M3 southbound on 
Thursday morning.

The service station, operated by Welcome Break, has been badly damaged. “No 
one was injured in the incident but there is significant fire and smoke damage 
to the building. An investigation will be carried out to establish the cause of 
the fire,” a statement by Hampshire fire service said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmajor-fire-at-fleet-services-leads-to-partial-m3-closure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa3ffbe0b712d4b1fcb011ea3f691edde9897241%2F65_0_1558_935%2F1558.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Major%20fire%20at%20Fleet%20services%20leads%20to%20partial%20M3%20closure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmajor-fire-at-fleet-services-leads-to-partial-m3-closure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Major%20fire%20at%20Fleet%20services%20leads%20to%20partial%20M3%20closure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fmajor-fire-at-fleet-services-leads-to-partial-m3-closure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa3ffbe0b712d4b1fcb011ea3f691edde9897241%2F65_0_1558_935%2F1558.jpg>
 The blaze was brought under control in the early hours of Thursday. 
Photograph: HampshireFireService/Twitter 
A fire service spokesman told the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-hampshire-38325180>: “It started in one 
of the restaurants in the services and it spread from there, but we have 
stopped it from spreading throughout the whole building.”

A witness told local website Get Hampshire 
<http://www.gethampshire.co.uk/news/local-news/m3-fleet-services-fire-massive-12323730>
: “The fire started from KFC as a machine exploded ... The flames spread very 
quickly. I have never seen anything like it.”

By Thursday morning, fire officers had contained the fire but continued to 
check for hotspots and areas that could reignite, a spokesman told the 
Guardian. An investigation is likely to start on Thursday afternoon.

The Welcome Break chief executive, Rod McKie, said: ”The fire has caused 
extensive damage to Fleet South. Thankfully none of our staff or members of the 
public at the site have been injured.

“We are extremely grateful to the firefighters who tackled the blaze and will 
assist with their investigations. The main amenities building in Fleet South 
will remain closed until further notice. Fleet North is fully open.”

 