
Watch enough men’s tennis and eventually you will be able to identify a top 
player simply from their grunts. Roger Federer is excluded from this 
discussion, of course, as he is far too refined to make any noise during a 
rally. But the rest of the Big Four are always at it. Rafa Nadal has his 
relentless droning urghs,Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> clearly took inspiration 
from Street Fighter for his chilling two-part raa-urgh bellow, which really 
should be accompanied by him pulling nunchucks out of his shorts, while Andy 
Murray mixes it up by punctuating his imitation of Mini-Me in a vent with the 
startled wail of a man whose best mate has bantered him off by sliding an ice 
cube down his back.

They all have their merits. Yet none of those efforts can match the 
bloodcurdling, guttural snort from Juan Martín del Potro whenever he unleashes 
one of the trademark bone-crunching forehands that almost knocked Murray off 
his feet inlast Sunday’s Olympic final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/andy-murray-beats-juan-martin-del-potro-rio-2016>
, a snort so dismissive that it could earn him the role of most terrifyingly 
muscle-bound henchman in the next James Bond film. With his mighty 6ft 6in 
frame, the hulking Argentinian would look and sound the part.

He might be a gentle giant off court, a character who loves to engage the 
crowd by wincing in mock agony after draining rallies, but that wrecking ball 
of a forehand is the main reason his emphatic return has been greeted with such 
warmth. Tennis has not been short of historic moments this year. Djokovic 
completed the career slam when he finallywon the French Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/french-open-2016-final-novak-djokovic-beats-andy-murray>
 in May, Murray became a double Olympic champion a month afterwinning his 
second Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/andy-murray-wins-wimbledon-2016-milos-raonic>
 and Serena Williams equalled Steffi Graf’s record of 22 grand slam titles when
she triumphed in SW19 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/09/serena-williams-angelique-kerber-wimbledon-womens-final-report>
.

Trophies are not the only way to measure success, however, and a player who 
dredges up the necessary resolve to make it back on court after losing almost 
two seasons to injury deserves the utmost respect. That wretched injury to Del 
Potro’s left wrist almost robbed us of one of sport’s most ominous sounds. The 
visceral thrill of his forehand, one of the most potent shots in the game when 
it is struck at full power, would not be quite the same without those 
complementary no-nonsense macho barks. Close your eyes and he could be wielding 
a giant hammer instead of a tennis racket or punching slabs of meat in a 
freezer. It is the sound of a man rowing a Viking boat through a sea of custard 
on his own. A growl that could crack open a walnut or turn a lion’s mane white.

Isn’t it great to have Del Potro back? There were times when he almost gave up 
during his rehabilitation from wrist surgery. There were false starts, regular 
setbacks, a nagging fear that he would have to accept the inevitable and call 
it quits. Having played four matches in 2015, collecting a paltry $23,475 in 
prize money and falling to 1,045th in the rankings, he made a tentative return 
on the clay earlier this year but decided not to appear in the French Open.

His appearance at Wimbledon was his first at a grand slam in two and a half 
years but few people expected him to win hissecond-round match against Stan 
Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/01/juan-martin-del-potro-stan-wawrinka-wimbledon>
, the world No4. Wawrinka had stepped into the void created by Del Potro’s 
injury, challenging the dominance of the Big Four by winning the Australian 
Open in 2014 and the French Open last year, and the Swiss was dominant in the 
first set.

Yet Del Potro fought back to win in four sets and, although he ran out of 
steam against Lucas Pouille in the third round, here was a reminder why he was 
seen as the fifth Beatle of tennis before injury struck him down. After all, 
Wawrinka was 28 when he made his breakthrough in Australia. Del Potro was 20 
when he became the first player to beat Nadal and Federer in the same grand 
slam, beating the latter in an unforgettableUS Open final in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/sep/15/juan-martin-del-potro-us-open>.

Seven years on from that scintillating five-set win, a revitalised Del Potro 
heads to New York as a strong contender to win his second grand slam title, for 
all that his conditioning will be tested by two weeks of five-setters in the US 
Open, which starts on Monday 29 August. Djokovic is floundering, Federer is 
injured and Nadal is no longer the remorseless force of old.

Andy Murray beats Milos Raonic to power into Cincinnati Masters final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/andy-murray-milos-raonic-cincinnati-masters>
Del Potro did not fully trust his wrist when he faced Wawrinka, struggling to 
hit through his two-handed backhand, often relying on tame slices. In Rio, 
however, he looked more confident on that side – one two-handed backhand down 
the line against Murray was exceptional – and victories against Djokovic in the 
first round and Nadal in the semi-final were proof of his rising level. Beating 
Murray over five sets in the final was too much of a physical challenge, 
especially on a hard court that was so slow it was likened to clay, but Del 
Potro’s threat cannot be overlooked on the faster surfaces at Flushing Meadows.

There were no ranking points on offer in Rio, only national pride and sporting 
greatness, so Del Potro’s silver medal did nothing for his ranking, meaning 
that the world No141 needed a wild card to gain entry to the US Open. Someone 
is going to be in for a nasty shock in the first round. The rest of us will be 
listening intently. Get ready for Delpo to make some noise.
 