
Ridding inner London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> of virtually all 
diesel vehicles would solve the capital’s air pollution crisis, according to 
research published as the high court is due to rule on the government’s air 
quality plan.

Illegal levels of air pollution cause about 9,500 early deaths a year in London
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/nearly-9500-people-die-each-year-in-london-because-of-air-pollution-study>
 and a new report from theInstitute for Public Policy Research 
<http://www.ippr.org/> (IPPR) sets out a series of measures to solve the 
problem.

Imposing charges on all diesel cars and banning diesel taxis, plus stricter 
limits for trucks and buses, are central to the plan, which modelling by 
scientists at King’s College London show would deliver clean air. Boosting 
public transport, cycling and walking are also vital, according to the report, 
as is a national scrappage scheme for old diesel vehicles.

The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has proposed strong new measures to tackle 
air pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/londoners-overwhelmingly-back-sadiq-khans-air-pollution-crackdown>
 but the IPPR proposals go further. Khan has joined a legal action against the 
government by NGO ClientEarth, which says the national plan does not cut 
illegal levels of air pollution in the “shortest possible time”, as required by 
law.

ClientEarth defeated the government in the supreme court in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/29/supreme-court-orders-uk-to-draw-up-air-pollution-cleanup-plan>
 but argues that even thenew plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/17/illegal-air-pollution-will-blight-many-uk-cities-for-at-least-five-years>
 prompted by the defeat is still illegal. The judgment from the new challenge 
is expected in the high court on Wednesday morning.

In October, it was revealed that George Osborne, then chancellor, had blocked 
moves to charge diesel cars for entering cities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/18/treasury-blocked-moves-to-charge-diesel-cars-to-enter-polluted-uk-cities>
 due to worries over cost and alienating drivers. In April, a cross-party 
committee of MPs said air pollution in the UK was a “public health emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/27/uk-air-pollution-public-health-emergency-crisis-diesel-cars\>
”.

Traffic is the major cause of air pollution in cities, with diesel vehicles 
especially dirty.Paris is already taking steps 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-36169815> to phase out diesels, as are 
cities across Germany 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-07/germany-to-get-tough-on-dirty-diesels-by-empowering-city-bans>
.

“Air pollution in London is at lethal levels,” said Laurie Laybourn-Langton, 
one of the IPPR report authors. “Bringing these levels down will save lives and 
make the capital more pleasant and prosperous for all Londoners. This won’t be 
easy and so our plan includes a number of measures that reduce the cost to 
Londoners of cleaning up transport.”

“The fact that air pollution is an invisible and odourless killer has meant 
that we have been sleepwalking into a health crisis that has already claimed 
thousands of lives,” said a trio of medical professors, Jonathan Grigg, Chris 
Griffiths and Stephen Holgate, in a foreword for the report.

“The benefits of moving away from diesel and fossil-fuel vehicles to health, 
to the economy, and to the climate will be significant. All we need is the 
political courage to do so.”
 