
Just off Miami’s busy Calle Ocho, the thoroughfare that is the beating 
cultural heart of the city’s Cuban community, there rises a splendid ceiba tree 
whose roots erupt from the ground like waves from the sea, and whose vast 
branches throw shade far to either side.

All around the gnarled roots and tucked into the tree’s hidden crevices, one 
finds the offerings of the faithful: candles, bags of food, feathers, bones. In 
this modern metropolis, whose vaulting skyscrapers a mile away reflect the 
near-blinding sun, the saturnalia surrounding the ceiba attests to the 
lifeblood of the Afro-Cuban religion ofsantería, and Miami’s eternal place in 
the imagination ofel exilio, as the Cuban community is often referred to.

I’ve lived in Miami off and on since the mid-1990s. As much as anywhere in the 
United States – my native country with which I have an often conflicted 
relationship – it counts as home. Landing back in Florida from Haiti, Paris or 
elsewhere,Miami <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/miami> always seems to 
offer the singular trick of providing some of the efficiency and convenience of 
living in the US while never seeming entirely a part of it.


Miami has long been a kind of quasi city-state that evokes strong reactions 
from visitors, especially those from more anglicised parts of the country who 
cannot make themselves understood in English to a large part of the local 
population – an experience that annoys and alarms them.

The strangest city in what is perhaps America’s strangest state, Miami is now 
home not just to Cubans but to thousands of Argentines, Brazilians, Colombians, 
Haitians, Jamaicans, Mexicans, Nicaraguans, Venezuelans and practically every 
other Latin American nationality, with sizeable populations of Russians, 
Indians, Persians and Orthodox Jews as well.

It’s a unique case in the history of the US where the identity of a city was 
born, in a sense, in another country
Armando Valladares  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435315827207%2F2e787b3f-ddea-4a74-81e4-c1c39b427eb6-2060x1387.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America's%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US's%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America%27s%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US%27s%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435315827207%2F2e787b3f-ddea-4a74-81e4-c1c39b427eb6-2060x1387.jpeg>
 Miami is now home to thousands of Latin Americans, with sizeable populations 
of Russians, Indians, Persians and Orthodox Jews. Photograph: Alamy 
The city has become so micronised that what is commonly thought of as “Miami” 
in the popular imagination is, in fact, a series of semi-independent small 
cities – some only a few blocks long – within the urban sprawl of Miami-Dade 
County (population 2.6 million). It fronts a long sweep of the blue-green 
Atlantic to the east and finally peters out in the miasma of the Everglades 
swamp to the west and the necklace of the Florida Keys to the south.

A young city (it was only incorporated in 1896 in what was then mostly 
wilderness), Miami is often said to have been founded on bootleg liquor and 
built its skyline on an infusion of cocaine money in the 70s and 80s (at the 
height of its cocaine wars in 1980 to 1981, the city had the world’s highest 
murder rate). Nearly 30 years ago, the crime writer Edna Buchanan wrote that 
Miami had been “a sleepy resort” that had transformed to attract “year-round 
... concentrations of everything corrupt, bizarre or dangerous from everywhere 
in the world”.

Above all, Miami is a place of exile where newcomers try to construct a new 
life. Upon arriving from Cuba in 1980, theauthor Reinaldo Arenas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/jun/08/cuba.artsfeatures> – who as a 
teenagedbarbudo had fought with Castro’s forces but was then imprisoned and 
tortured both for being an independent intellectual and gay – declared Miami “a 
barren and pestiferous peninsula ... trying to become for a million exiles, the 
dream of a tropical island”.


No fan of the city, Arenas quickly decamped to New York, where he committed 
suicide in 1990. Miami, however, continued to percolate like a spoonful of Café 
Bustelo coffee from the cafe colada that residents traditionally drink every 
afternoon at 3:05 (the city’s area code). And it has become something more 
interesting than many had thought possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435790527299%2F809d01dd-580b-4ffa-8f14-83de6ae6554f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America's%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US's%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America%27s%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US%27s%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435790527299%2F809d01dd-580b-4ffa-8f14-83de6ae6554f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A Cuban exile in ‘Little Havana’ in Miami after the announcement of restored 
diplomatic ties between Cuba and the US. Photograph: Carlos Barria/Reuters 
In his office in West Miami near the city’s airport – a few blocks away from a 
branch of the city’s El Palacio de los Jugos Cuban eateries where thepan con 
lechón hints at the divine – Armando Valladares sits surrounded by photos of 
himself with political leaders: Ronald Reagan, George HW Bush, Florida senator 
(and Miami native and presidential candidate) Marco Rubio. Now white-haired, 
bespectacled and elegant, Valladares spent 22 years in Cuban prisons for – 
among other perceived offences – refusing to put an “I’m with Fidel” sign on 
his desk at the Ministry of Communications in 1960. Upon his release in 1982, 
he became a United States Ambassador to the United Nations. After residing in 
Washington for many years, he moved to Miami about 15 years ago.

“The Cubans have demonstrated their ability and their quality of work here,” 
Valladares says. “It’s a unique case in the history of the United States where 
the identity of a city was born, in a sense, in another country.”

The Cuban aspects of Miami’s identity appear to be far less monolithic than 
they once were, though. Many younger Cuban-Americans support theeasing of 
relations with Cuba that US president Barack Obama has been pursuing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/14/obama-remove-cuba-list-state-sponsors-terrorism>
 with the island’s rulers. Events such as theO’ Miami poetry festival 
<http://www.omiami.org/about/> bring Cuban cultural groups such as Omni Zona 
Franca <http://omnizonafranca.blogspot.co.uk/> (from eastern Havana’s housing 
estates) to Miami on a regular basis, demonstrating that the city’s Latin vibe 
is more thanHoy Como Ayer (Today Like Yesterday), as one long-standing club 
wistfully calls itself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435791024781%2F3327e8ed-1532-4b26-be8f-c85944c0164d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America's%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US's%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America%27s%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US%27s%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435791024781%2F3327e8ed-1532-4b26-be8f-c85944c0164d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A mural in Miami’s Little Haiti neighbourhood. Photograph: Frederic 
Soltan/Corbis 
If Miami represents a refuge for Cubans, it serves as no less of one for 
Haitians who, fleeing a downward economic spiral and the tyranny of some of the 
country’s leaders, have made a profound impact on Miami’s cultural life over 
the last several decades.

Along a once-neglected stretch of Northeast 2nd Avenue in the heart of the 
Haitian immigrant community, a cultural flowering has taken place that has seen 
the opening of the Little Haiti Cultural Center and its Caribbean Marketplace – 
a replica of the famedMarché en fer (Iron Market) in the Haitian capital, 
Port-au-Prince <https://www.theguardian.com/world/port-au-prince>. Exuberantly 
coloured murals by local artists adorn walls, and every Friday night theRara 
Lakay band marches through the neighbourhood 
<http://thefrontlinemusic.com/tag/rara-lakay/>, beating on drums and blowing on 
plangent bamboo vaksin trumpets, whose bleat more evokes the deep Haitian 
countryside than an American city.

“I have seen this city grow culturally,” says the Haitian painter Edouard 
Duval Carrié <http://www.edouard-duval-carrie.com/>, who arrived in Miami from 
Paris in 1992. “When I moved here it was really a [cultural] desert. That has 
changed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435790888503%2Febe91d77-2e0d-4741-8e23-760958e2cdfc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America's%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US's%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America%27s%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US%27s%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F1%2F1435790888503%2Febe91d77-2e0d-4741-8e23-760958e2cdfc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A protest in Miami over the killings of Mike Brown, Eric Garner and Israel 
‘Reefa’ Hernandez. Photograph: Steve Rhodes/Demotix/Corbis 
Carrié maintains his studio in Little Haiti. Famous for his painting of 
Haitian dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier in a wedding dress 
<https://www.pinterest.com/pin/38913984250352579/> (an image that did not 
endear him to the regime), his space now seems a precursor of the area’s 
renaissance. What was once a district many outsiders approached with 
trepidation now attracts hundreds of people to the outdoor concerts of its 
monthlyBig Night in Little Haiti 
<http://www.rhythmfoundation.com/series/big-night-in-little-haiti/>.

“This is the doorway to the United States,” Carrié says. “The particularity of 
Miami is that it has this very ebullient immigration that makes it quite 
fascinating.”

But Miami’s growth into the multicultural metropolis it is today has had a 
sinister side, too. In the 1960s, the city built the southern extension of 
Interstate 95 directly through the heart of the Overtown district, an area that 
had been a cultural mecca for black culture in the south. “Overtown was a very 
pleasant place,” says Enid Pinkney, the 83-year-old daughter of an immigrant 
from the Bahamas (one of the first non-indigenous communities to settle in 
Miami).

Dispersed to other areas of the city, black residents often found themselves 
met with hostility. After the 1980 acquittal of four white and Latino police 
officers for the murder of black businessman Arthur McDuffie,at least 18 people 
died in rioting <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1980_Miami_riots> and property 
destruction topped $100m. Fatal police shootings touched off riots in the city 
at three other points during that decade.


Police departments throughout the county gained a reputation for violence and 
corruption that intervening years have done little to diminish, with Miami 
Beach police famouslyfatally tasering teenage Colombian-American graffiti 
artist Israel Hernandez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/08/florida-teenager-taser-death-investigation>
 in 2013. That same year, a report by the US Justice Department found that City 
of Miami police had “engaged in a pattern or practice of excessive use of force 
<http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-releases-investigative-findings-city-miami-police-department-and-officer>
 through officer-involved shootings in violation of the Fourth Amendment of the 
Constitution” and that the department was tainted by “deficient tactics, 
improper actions by specialised units, as well as egregious delays and 
substantive deficiencies in deadly force investigations”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435316901488%2F2d367dc7-e523-455e-8f66-7d86f305cd2d-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America's%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US's%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America%27s%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US%27s%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435316901488%2F2d367dc7-e523-455e-8f66-7d86f305cd2d-2060x1374.jpeg>
 A mural of depicting Miami’s Hispanic community, with the words: ‘Long live 
our race!’ Photograph: Alamy 
Outside observers often remain mystified by Miami. Three years ago, the author 
Tom Wolfe attempted to capture it as he had1980s New York in The Bonfire of the 
Vanities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/10/bonfire-of-vanities-tom-wolfe>, 
and instead spewed forth aright-wing caricature titled Back to Blood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/nov/04/tom-wolfe-back-blood-review> 
that showed no grasp of the place the city has become. Such misconceptions are 
helped along by gaffe- and scandal-prone local politicians, whose peccadillos 
include everything from floating the idea to shut down all the city’s libraries 
to close a budget gap, to the by-now standard (for Miami) cash-for-favours 
schemes.

In some areas, things have gone over the top. In South Beach – once a slum for 
retirees and poor immigrants, now a gay mecca and nightlife hotspot – crass 
commercialisation has resulted in a kind of Vegas-by-the-sea ambiance, with 
even the famed Lincoln Road, once a redoubt of local restaurants and retailers, 
now housing little more than chain stores and the bewildered tourists they prey 
upon. The preponderance of “juniors” (a derisive term for the rich scions of 
Latin America’s economic elite) in the city can be somewhat off-putting, as it 
seems not only the language and music of that elite is being imported, but 
their class system, as well.

The city has blossomed and has a new cultural heritage

But the city has blossomed from the place that Reinaldo Arenas despised. The 
greatCuban poet and anthropologist Lydia Cabrera 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lydia_Cabrera>, who was during her lifetime one 
of the world’s foremost authorities on Afro-Cuban religion, spent the latter 
part of her life based in Miami, and donated her abundant collection of papers 
to the university here. It was home, too, for one of Haiti’s greatest poets,
Félix Morisseau-Leroy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/F%C3%A9lix_Morisseau-Leroy>
, for the last 17 years of his life. And, as testament to the city’s new 
cultural heritage, a new major institution, thePérez Art Museum Miami 
<http://www.pamm.org/>, opened next to the waters of Biscayne Bay in 2013; the 
Art Basel festival <https://www.artbasel.com/miami-beach> attracts thousands to 
the city every year; and theMiami Book Fair <http://www.miamibookfair.com/> is 
an autumn staple of the literary calendar.

Perhaps more representative of the city than South Beach today are the 
northern reaches of Miami Beach, an area that is still home to many 
working-class residents despite spiralling property prices, where the lilting, 
almost Italianate sound of Argentine Spanish mixes with the caressing sounds of 
Brazilian Portuguese in the bodegas and on the beach. TheBuenos Aires Bakery & 
Cafe <http://buenosairesbakeryandcafe.com/> – an establishment on Collins 
Avenue, only steps away from the sea – sells a variety of pastries that would 
make anyporteño misty-eyed with nostalgia as well as several different kinds of 
the leafy, highly caffeinatedmate 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mate_(beverage)> beloved in South America, and 
does a brisk business.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435316453109%2F5a37c64c-a5d8-4338-b33f-286307da19d7-2060x1415.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America's%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US's%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Making%20sense%20of%20Miami%3A%20what%20America%27s%20refuge%20city%20says%20about%20the%20US%27s%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F02%2Fmiami-florida-cuba-multicultural-metropolis-diversity-hispanic-haiti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435316453109%2F5a37c64c-a5d8-4338-b33f-286307da19d7-2060x1415.jpeg>
Lucha libre star Blue Demon Jr waves the Mexican flag after winning a wrestling 
match in Miami. Photograph: Getty Images/Joe Raedle 
When one drives south towards the Florida Keys – where the last island, Key 
West, is a mere 90 miles from Cuba – the county begins to descend into 
farmland. It was here that, in the early part of the 20th century, a 
Latvian-born eccentric named Edward Leedskalnin created an extraordinary 
structure known as theCoral Castle <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coral_Castle>
, out of coral-formed limestone. As he worked alone and without advanced 
equipment, just how Leedskalnin created his “castle” remains something of a 
mystery – with explanations ranging from some secret mastery of the Earth’s 
magnetic field to telekinesis.

Today, other dreams are played out in Miami-Dade’s fields, and exist in the 
imaginings of the many migrant workers who toil here, scant miles from the 
glittering high-rises of downtown Miami. Surrounded by fields of squash, okra, 
beans and tomatoes, the community of Homestead, despite its tropical locale, 
evokes the somnolent Midwestern communities of aRay Bradbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ray-bradburyhttp://www.theguardian.com/books/ray-bradbury>
 story. Low-rise buildings, train tracks and empty playground swings greet the 
visitor, and in the street one hears the melange of accents and dialects from 
the agricultural workers here: Mexican, Guatemalan, Haitian, Jamaican.

In the offices of the immigrant support group WeCount! 
<http://www.we-count.org/> just off of North Krome Avenue (which shares its 
name with one of the US’s most infamous immigration detention centres located 
nearby), the connection between Homestead’s rural lushness and the city rising 
only a few miles away seems obvious.

“The Mexicans are the ones that put the food on Miami’s table,” says Catalina 
Santiago, an 18-year-old high school student who came to the US with her 
agricultural-worker parents from the Mexican state of Oaxaca a decade ago. “But 
they are always spoken of in a condescending manner.”

Miami, the great world city, is drowning while the powers that be look away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/11/miami-drowning-climate-change-deniers-sea-levels-rising>
On the street below, where Santiago sits with her brother and a number of 
other immigrants, dusk falls and Homestead sees Mexican families gathering for 
Sunday-night dinner at restaurants such as Casita Tejas. When they rise for 
work early the following morning, some will be met by Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement officers and local police, who will be waiting to check their 
immigration status and arrest them for probable deportation if they are 
undocumented (as many are, a state of affairs on which Florida’s agriculture 
depends).

Perhaps it is impending apocalypse, natural and man-made, that makes Miami’s 
frivolity all the more poignant. If climate change predictions are to be 
believed, large parts of Miami – Miami Beach, Key Biscayne, Virginia Key – will 
be under water in coming years, a phenomenon helped along by the fact that many 
Florida politicians, includingGovernor Rick Scott 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rick_Scott> and the aforementioned Senator 
Rubio, deny that climate change can be linked to human activity.

Driving home north along US1, the skyline of Miami rises above the flat land, 
its concrete and steel wrapped in the warmth of the tropical sunset. A city of 
outsiders, refugees and immigrants that – in its reflection of present-day 
America’s diversity – feels in many ways more “American” than the 1950s 
small-town Americana that some politicians and commentators are perpetually 
nostalgic for.

 * Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion  