
As a young actor, Sir Michael Caine was once rehearsing a play involving an 
improvised scene between two other actors, after which he had to enter via a 
door on the stage. In the tumult of the improvisation, a chair was knocked 
over, blocking Caine’s entrance. Unsure of how to handle it, Caine asked the 
director what he should do.

“Use the difficulty,” came the terse reply.

“What do you mean?” asked Caine.


“Well, if it’s a comedy, trip over the chair; if it’s a drama, pick it up and 
smash it.”


Next week 
<http://bathfestivals.org.uk/music/event/the-prince-consort-with-jason-rebello/>
, my classical song collective, thePrince Consort 
<http://www.theprinceconsort.com/>, is teaming up with jazz pianist Jason 
Rebello <http://ccgi.rebello.plus.com/main/> for a performance at Bath 
international music festival 
<http://bathfestivals.org.uk/music/event/the-prince-consort-with-jason-rebello/>
. Armed with a piano each, Rebello and I will be joined by tenorNicholas Mulroy 
<http://nicholasmulroy.com/> and mezzo Anna Huntley 
<http://www.ycat.co.uk/artist/anna-huntley>. We’ll be taking classical songs 
and presenting them in a new way, improvised, while keeping some elements 
constant and “using the difficulty” to create something fresh and alternative.

Schubert songs will have their vocal lines fully intact, but with completely 
improvised accompaniments from Rebello. Other famous songs by Brahms, Fauré and 
Strauss will be performed straight, but with improvised links between the songs 
connecting major to minor, fast to slow, German Lied to French mélodie.


Beethoven was well known for having improvisational “riff-offs” with other 
musicians

It has been common for classical and jazz composers to look to each others’ 
styles for inspiration – Bernstein, Ravel and Debussy all drew on jazz language 
in their scores – but it is less common to see musicians drawing from each 
other’s genres as performers.


We have mostly lost the art of public improvisation as classical musicians, 
but it used to be commonplace. Beethoven, Mozart and Liszt were eclectic, 
all-round musicians and not pigeon-holed as a pianist, composer or improviser. 
On tour, Liszt would take themes he had heard locally and incorporate them into 
his recitals. Beethoven was well known for having improvisational “riff-offs” 
with other musicians – in a manner not dissimilar to the rival factions of the
Pitch Perfect movies, albeit with less awesome hai 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YVpk2Lq8YCI>r 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XgllOHzZ1EU>.


In classical music tuition, we are not doing our young pupils justice if we 
don’t encourage improvisation at an early stage. There is an idea that in 
beginners’ piano lessons you have to start at middle C and very slowly work 
outwards: “the tyranny of middle C”, as my teacherPhilip Fowke 
<http://www.trinitylaban.ac.uk/students-staff/staff-biographies/philip-fowke> 
used to describe it. Only when you are “advanced” can you dare attempt the 
really low and high notes. This goes against everything that a child naturally 
wants to do. My four-year-old sat down at the piano the other day and 
immediately wanted to explore the whole keyboard, especially the highest and 
lowest notes. Allowing beginners the freedom to improvise and experiment 
fosters an immediate familiarity with the entire keyboard and encourages both 
musical and physical freedom.


So how can the process of jazz help us? 

Sometimes, as classical musicians, we’re so terrified of copying another 
artist that we are afraid to try on their stylistic traits. It is common for 
jazz musicians to transcribe solos from other players’ recordings to add to 
their own armoury of ideas. It forces them to listen deeply to the music.

When you have stopped a recording on one chord 10 times just to identify each 
note, you hear all the elements in a much clearer way. You begin to feel 
harmonic changes between chords, rather than just playing them.

Jazz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jazz> musicians learn and play along 
with their favourite solos; composers imitate other composers’ styles then take 
what they want from each experience and add it to the ingredients that make up 
their own playing or compositions. Classical performers, however are often too 
scared to imitate, fearful that we might become clones. But surely it is worth 
playing along with Horowitz and Rubinstein, occupying their musical shoes for a 
while.


You have to follow the music, rather than have it follow you
Peter Katin 
The performance mindset in improvisation, by its very nature, has to be in the 
moment; you can’t be thinking back or ahead, and you have to react to what is 
happening in the present. Things happen too quickly to respond consciously and 
it has to operate from a subconscious level. Jason Rebello pointed out to me 
that when you really know a classical piece, the space that you can get into to 
perform it – as if it was coming from you – is exactly the same space that you 
would get into when you improvise.


This can be a confidence-builder in any musician. To improvise you have to 
allow yourself to be vulnerable and trust that you can follow the music and let 
it take you to where it wants to go. The British pianistPeter Katin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/29/peter-katin> used to advise me 
that this was a critical factor in playing from memory. “You have to follow the 
music, rather than have it follow you,” he told me.


At Bath we are experimenting in bringing both our worlds together: drawing on 
our hard-earned skills within our own genres but merging the two in 
performance. We’ll all be out of our comfort zones, but that is what makes for 
the most exciting music.


• The Prince Consort and Jason Rebello are at the Wiltshire Music Centre on 25 
May 
<http://bathfestivals.org.uk/music/event/the-prince-consort-with-jason-rebello/>
.


 * Bath international music festival runs until 29 May 
<http://bathfestivals.org.uk/music/>.  