
At Palma airport, sharp-eyed visitors may be perplexed by the mysterious 
hexagonal boxes many people are carrying. They’re not for odd-shaped hats, but
ensaïmadas Mallorquina, the Balearic island’s unique pastry.

This spiral of dough is thought to date back to the 17th century when it was 
fiesta food, but its exact origins are unknown. Some people believe its coiled 
shaped was inspired by Moorish turbans, or that it has Jewish roots, influenced 
by the Sephardic pastrybulemas, even though it contains lard, or saïm, which 
gives it its name.

Imagine a brioche crossed with a croissant, and biting through a slightly 
crunchy exterior to layers of light, flaky pastry. Small ones are eaten for 
breakfast, often with a cup of chocolate so thick you could stand your spoon up 
in it, at cafes such as Palma institutionCa’n Joan de S’aigo 
<http://www.canjoandesaigo.cat/en> . Supersized ones are made to order and can 
feed a family. It’s a popular treat after midnight mass on Christmas Eve and 
always a mainstay at festive markets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fmallorca-spain-foodie-traveller-pastry-cake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc23fa66cc1ad9c1abdef2b9bdd9a252dbc877917%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mallorca%E2%80%99s%20mystery%20festive%20pastry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fmallorca-spain-foodie-traveller-pastry-cake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mallorca%E2%80%99s%20mystery%20festive%20pastry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fmallorca-spain-foodie-traveller-pastry-cake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc23fa66cc1ad9c1abdef2b9bdd9a252dbc877917%2F0_0_4368_2912%2F4368.jpg>
 A boxed ensaïmada. Photograph: Alamy 
The most traditional is the plain, sugar-sprinkled ensaïmada lisa. But they 
also come topped with apricot and apple, or stuffed with pumpkin jam, known as
cabello de ángel or angel hair because of the strands that pop out of the 
pastry when it’s cut open.

Ever versatile, ensaïmada de sobrasada is a fusion of two of Mallorca’s most 
iconic products. Sobrassada, a spicy cured pork sausage made from native black 
Iberian pigs and a hefty hit of paprika, soaks into the sweet pastry, staining 
it orange and transforming it into a savoury treat.

Taste them at Forn Fondo <http://www.fornfondo.es/>, which has been in the 
Llull family for four generations and stocks 20 varieties, orFornet de la Soca 
<http://www.fornetdelasoca.com/info/?lang=en> , an old-school panadería that 
specialises in authentic recipes and organic ingredients.
 