
Marouane Fellaini <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marouane-fellaini> has 
been handed a one‑year contract extension in order stop the midfielder leaving 
Manchester United on a free transfer in the summer.

Despite a somewhat erratic time at Old Trafford following his arrival from 
Everton in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/04/manchester-united-marouane-fellaini>
, Fellaini is seen by José Mourinho as part of United’s future and there has 
been interest in the player from abroad, with Milan believed to be among the 
clubs monitoring his availability.

The 29-year-old Belgian’s contract expires at the end of the season but United 
have exercised an option to extend it by 12 months.

Manchester United still making up for Louis van Gaal’s expensive lost time | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/12/manchester-united-morgan-schneiderlin-jose-mourinho>
Fellaini, who scored his first goal of the season in the 2-0 victory against 
Hull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/manchester-united-hull-city-efl-cup-match-report>
 in the first leg of their EFL Cup semi-final on Tuesday, signed a four-year 
contract containing the option of a further year when he joined the club from 
Everton in a £27.5m deal in 2013.

Meanwhile, Juan Mata <https://www.theguardian.com/football/juan-mata> believes 
United have the strongest mentality and are playing with the highest level of 
confidence he has witnessed at the club since his arrival three years ago.

The win against Hull was United’s ninth victory in a row. That is the club’s 
longest winning sequence since early 2009, when Sir Alex Ferguson’s side 
recorded 11 consecutive wins. Mourinho’s team host Liverpool in the Premier 
League on Sunday hoping to defeat their fiercest rivals and close the gap to 
the second-placed side to only two points.

Mata was signed by David Moyes for £37.1m in January 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/25/juan-mata-completes-move-manchester-united>
, and has played under the four men who have managed United since Ferguson 
retired in May 2013 – Moyes, the interim manager Ryan Giggs, Louis van Gaal and 
Mourinho.

“In terms of results this is the best I have known at Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>,” the Spaniard, who 
opened the scoring against Hull, said . “In terms of the confidence and the 
mentality we are showing yes it is the best time since I have been here.

“Nine wins in a row feels very good. We are playing better. Not so good some 
games but we are winning and when you don’t play your best game but you are 
winning it is a strong mentality and this club should have that always.

“Now we have a massive game against Liverpool. Nine games in a row but 
football has no past, you have to live in the present and the present is 
Liverpool. It is always very special because of the history of both clubs. We 
will try to create a special game for everyone who likes United.

“They are doing very well. They have a very good manager, they have a good 
squad and are playing good football. They play offensive football and it will 
be difficult. Let’s see what the season brings for us. But we are in a good way 
now. We are closer to Wembley [in the EFL Cup], still alive in the FA Cup and 
having good results in the Premier League, plus the Europa League. We have so 
many options to fight for.”

Despite enjoying a standout season Mata does not always start for Mourinho. 
“It is very important that the manager changes the team,” the 28-year-old said. 
“He changes different players and everybody is performing. When you give 
someone a chance and they take it is difficult for the manager to decide what 
to do then. But it is very good for the group and to win games. Everybody is 
playing well and training well.”

Mourinho was the Chelsea manager who sanctioned Mata’s sale to United, and the 
playmaker believes the Portuguese has adjusted to life at United. “He has 
changed. It is a different environment, it is a different club and squad,” he 
said. “You always play depending on the different players you have. This club 
has always been known that they play one kind of football which is attacking 
football and creating chances. We are doing that. He is happy with the 
performances.

“Everyone can see the players are playing with more confidence. He is the same 
person, same staff almost but what has changed is the environment.

“The last two or three years have not been the best in the history of the club 
but hopefully the next ones will be very good and hopefully I can be here to 
live it and to celebrate very important things with this club. I can imagine it 
will be amazing. The fans are very good and you can imagine what it would be 
like if we won an important trophy. That would be amazing.”

Mata added: “It is very important to be consistent if you want to win things 
and that is one of the things the manager has always said. He said we needed to 
find this routine of always winning and we have done that in the last two 
months and we have to keep that going.

“It is not good to celebrate things too early. We are very happy with what we 
are doing but there are still months to go and hopefully we can celebrate at 
the end.”
 