
It was a thrilling, breathless night, full of everything that football at its 
highest level should be, and when it was all done Manchester City could reflect 
on the kind of result they have craved since the bags of gold arrived from Abu 
Dhabi and the story of this club changed forever. They had not only beaten 
Barcelona but they had done it the hard way, coming from behind, and they have 
spent so long waiting for a victory of this magnitude it automatically takes 
its place as their most gratifying in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> to date.

Any success against a side featuring Lionel Messi, Neymar and Luis Suárez has 
to be cherished but perhaps the most satisfying part for Pep Guardiola’s team 
is what it showed about their competitive courage and the shift in mentality 
compared with City’s previous attempts to overcome perhaps the most beautifully 
constructed club side there has ever been.

Manchester City manage the impossible and keep Lionel Messi in check | Paul 
Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/01/manchester-city-lionel-messi-barcelona-champions-league>
City played with a level of self-belief that has never been witnessed in these 
assignments. No one could accuse them of being cowed in the presence of the 
team Guardiola described as “the best” and there has never been a night when so 
many of their A-listers have reached the point of maximum expression all at 
once. Kevin De Bruyne can reflect on an evening when he outshone a four-time 
Ballon d’Or winner. Ilkay Gündogan, with two of the goals, had his finest game 
yet in City’s colours and, finally, after six attempts, this fiercely ambitious 
club knows what it is like to confrontBarcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> and do the tormenting rather 
than the other way around.

True, there were long, difficult periods when Messi, Neymar and Suárez 
bewitched them with their speed, thought and movement. Nicolás Otamendi still 
does not seem to comprehend that the most accomplished centre-halves stay on 
their feet and Guardiola’s first comment in his post-match press conference was 
to find fault with the team’s first-half display. Yet City had their own 
attacking trident in De Bruyne, David Silva and Sergio Agüero and, ultimately, 
those three wore down their opponents. De Bruyne’s free-kick to make it 2-1 was 
a peach but his through ball in the buildup to Gündogan’s second goal was 
another reminder of his exquisite ability. Raheem Sterling added his own menace 
and, as a test of nerve, Guardiola’s men passed with distinction.

More than anything, they did not seem afflicted by the inferiority complex 
that has shaped previous encounters. They rode their luck at times, most 
notably when the ball came off Agüero’s hand before the final goal. There was a 
period in the first half when the game threatened to run away from them – “we 
were really in trouble,” Guardiola reflected – and Messi’s goal, following a 
stunning breakaway, was not the only time the home side left the suspicion they 
still lack a certain amount of defensive knowhow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmanchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F601a50b8885749c6bf91471d0f463dad53700499%2F139_99_3531_2119%2F3531.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manchester%20City%20stun%20Barcelona%20in%20breathless%20Champions%20League%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmanchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manchester%20City%20stun%20Barcelona%20in%20breathless%20Champions%20League%20victory&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmanchester-city-barcelona-champions-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F601a50b8885749c6bf91471d0f463dad53700499%2F139_99_3531_2119%2F3531.jpg>
 Ilkay Gündogan scores his second and Manchester City’s third goal against 
Barcelona. Photograph: Darren Staples/Reuters 
Yet City deserve immense acclaim for refusing to buckle and they can also look 
back to the moment, 11 minutes in, when the Hungarian referee, Viktor Kassai, 
made the kind of mistake that felt incongruous for a night of football royalty. 
Kassai was badly mistaken to think Sterling had tried to deceive him into 
awarding a penalty and City would have gone away with legitimate grievances if 
they had lost the game from that point.

Television replays confirmed Samuel Umtiti had clamped his left foot on 
Sterling. It was a clear penalty and for a while the soundtrack to the night 
was of raucous disgruntlement. Too much was happening, however, for the crowd 
to linger on the injustice and, if nothing else, that incident might also have 
encouraged the home side to think Barcelona were vulnerable at the back.

Guardiola had talked beforehand about Barça’s habit of “provoking mistakes” 
from their opponents but now it was happening the other way around, too.

“In the first 38 minutes we saw the best team in the world,” Guardiola said of 
his former club. But everything changed with the calamitous pass that Sergi 
Roberto subsequently aimed across his own half. Agüero was first to the loose 
ball, turning it to the right for Sterling to drive into the penalty area. 
Sterling decided against shooting and his pass across the six-yard area was 
weighted perfectly for Gündogan to turn in the equaliser.

Selfless Sergio Agüero lights spark that fires Manchester City to victory | 
Andy Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/02/sergio-aguero-manchester-city-barcelona-champions-league>
Suddenly the home side looked reinvigorated, with De Bruyne becoming 
increasingly influential after the interval. The Belgian’s free-kick was the 
outstanding moment of the night, aimed expertly into the top corner of 
Marc-André ter Stegen’s goal, and he was superb during those exhilarating 
passages when City attacked from every angle and there was the rare sight of a 
Barça team looking rattled in the extreme.

There were still plenty of occasions when City’s opponents showed, in flashes, 
their attacking brilliance and an almighty scare for the home team when John 
Stones and Otamendi both reminded us of their occasional frailties only for 
André Gomes, teed up by Suárez, to thud his shot against the crossbar. That, 
however, came at a point of the game when City were creating chance after 
chance. Agüero was fortunate not to be penalised for the handball that left 
Gündogan with a simple finish for his second goal but it was also true that 
Barça suffered during the second half in a way that is seldom seen. That alone 
made it feel like a special occasion.

The downside for City was Fernandinho’s injury and they will have to learn 
they cannot defend as recklessly as they did for Messi’s goal, stemming from an 
attack of their own that left seven of Guardiola’s players, including 
three-quarters of their defence, stranded at the other end of the pitch. 
Overall, however, there was the sense that City had reached new heights. They 
looked like a team with nothing to be afraid of.
 