
Manchester City have a terrible record at Anfield and so does Sergio Agüero. 
The striker returns against Liverpool on Saturday night after afour-match 
suspension, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/pep-guardiola-sergio-aguero-manchester-city-chelsea>
 though any hopes that he might galvanise the away side’s attack should be 
tempered by the knowledge that he has failed to score in all seven of his 
previous visits, five for City and two for Atlético Madrid.City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/30/yaya-toure-reborn-star-manchester-city-league-title>
 have won only once at Anfield in the past three decades, back in 2003 when 
Nicolas Anelka scored both their goals.

All that was pre-Pep Guardiola, however, and City’s new manager is upbeat 
about the present, if not the past. “We are going to try and change that 
statistic,” he said. “We know it is always difficult there, most teams find it 
tough, not justManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity>. You have to try and 
match their intensity.” And Agüero will make a difference, Guardiola insists. 
“We have done quite well without him, we have produced some good performances 
apart from the one at Leicester. But he’s our best striker, so of course he is 
important for us.

Pep Guardiola says he learned from Jürgen Klopp and praises attacking style
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/pep-guardiola-learned-from-jurgen-klopp-praise-attacking>
“Can you imagine all the other teams in the Premier League playing without 
their best striker for seven games in the first half of the season? It would be 
tough for them, like it was tough for us. But we are still only one point behind
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>. At Anfield we 
finish the first half of the season. Hopefully in the second leg Sergio can 
play all the games.”

That will depend on how well Agüero keeps his temper under provocation, now 
that he has already served a couple of bans, and the same applies toRaheem 
Sterling, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 who is bound to be singled out for special attention by the crowd after the 
manner in which he departed Anfield. Guardiola knows what to expect. “It is 
difficult when the crowd is not on your side but Raheem will have to deal with 
it,” the City manager said. “We are going to try and handle the situation but 
obviously he must keep a focus on what he has to do himself, that’s the only 
way he can handle it and it will form part of his growth and help him become a 
better player.”

Sterling has looked an improved player this season, even if his level dropped 
a little a month or so ago. “We must remember how young he still is,” Guardiola 
said. “In the first part of the season he was our key player up front. Then 
around a month ago he was a little bit down, he was no longer showing the same 
aggression, but in the last two or three games he has come back and we need 
that.

Yaya Touré the reborn star in Manchester City’s war to win league | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/30/yaya-toure-reborn-star-manchester-city-league-title>
“We need his one on ones, his attacking with the ball. He still has to learn 
to read the game a little bit more, when to play one or two touches, when to 
go, when to try a dribble, but that is all part of the learning process.

“Raheem has talent and he’s a fighter. We are delighted at what he has shown 
so far and in the last few games he has been decisive. He scored a goal against 
Arsenal and won us a penalty against Hull when the game was tough.”

John Stones is back in contention for City but in addition to long-term 
absentee Ilkay Gündogan, the visitors have Leroy Sané and Vincent Kompany still 
requiring treatment.

Guardiola has some idea of what to expect at Anfield having been there with 
Barcelona and having joined the crowd to refresh his memory with the match 
against Stoke City earlier in the week, though he says it is only one of 
several atmospheric grounds in England.

“There can be a special atmosphere, but I think you can say the same about 
White Hart Lane, Old Trafford and perhaps a few other grounds in the Premier 
League,” he said. “One of the good things about coming to a new country is that 
there a lot of new things to discover, and taking Manchester City to Anfield is 
one of them.”
 