
Medal-winning athletes and anti-doping officials have told the Guardian they 
believe footballers are subject to less stringent anti-doping procedures as it 
emergedManchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> 
are likely to be fined around £25,000 if found guilty of breaching the Football 
Association’s “whereabouts” rules.

City have been charged for failing to provide accurate information 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/manchester-city-charged-anti-doping>
 about training arrangements and player whereabouts on three occasions over a 
12-month period. However none of their team will face sanction because under 
the World Anti-Doping Agency’s code, teams cannot commit an anti-doping rule 
violation. Yet in individual sports, if an athlete misses three tests in a 
12-month period they can face up to a two-year ban.

Manchester City charged in relation to FA rules on anti-doping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/manchester-city-charged-anti-doping>
Andrew Steele, a member of the British 4x400m team at the 2008 Olympics who 
were retrospectively awarded a bronze medal owing to Russian doping, said he 
did not see why there were different rules for team sports. “The emphasis 
should still be on players to fill out their whereabouts forms, not their 
clubs,” he said, suggesting it was part of a wider problem.

“Individual sports like athletics have been held up for vilification due to 
high-profile doping cases, while other sports like football seem to somehow 
manage to avoid the controversy. Now, either people just don’t cheat in 
football or people are getting away with it.”

Craig Pickering, a world championship 4x100m medallist, agreed there was a 
perception football was treated differently. “Compare how Lizzie Armistead was 
treated recently after her missed-tests/filing errors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/02/lizzie-armistead-olympic-reprieve-questioned-fellow-athletes>
, and City’s filing errors,” he said. “They’re not direct like-for-like 
comparisons but they’re similar enough. Mark Richardson was handed a two-year 
ban for taking nandrolone in 1999 but Jaap Stam and Pep Guardiola were handed 
five and four-month bans just a few years later.”

Richard Ings, a respected former head of the Australian Anti-Doping Agency, 
said the case highlighted what he called a “gross inconsistency” in the Wada 
code. “The same obligations do not apply to professional athletes in some team 
sports as they do to individual athletes,” he said.

Manchester City’s doping test charges explained: why they are in trouble
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/manchester-city-doping-test-charges>
“The theory is, that as the team travels together and trains together why 
should we get 16 people in the squad to put in the paperwork?

“But the practicality is that professional team players are treated much more 
leniently than professional individual sport athletes. It’s not so much an FA 
issue, it’s a gross inconsistency in the Wada code.”

Joseph de Pencier, the chief executive of iNADO, which represents national 
anti-doping organisations, said there had been talks to consider how to make 
the rules work better for team sports. “I have no doubt the case of Manchester 
City will spark some evaluation and I hope some improvement,” he added.

City have until 19 January to respond to the FA charge but they expect to 
claim the violations occurred because information was not updated following a 
change to training routines.

It is understood that while the FA’s disciplinary commission has some 
discretion, the organisation’s guidelines suggest a £25,000 fine is appropriate 
for a Premier League club that breaches this particular rule.

The chair of UK Athletics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics>, Ed 
Warner, said he was surprised at City’s mistake. “This appears an extraordinary 
corporate lapse that really lets down the club’s players who will now have to 
play under a cloud of unnecessary suspicion,” he said. “Presumably there will 
be consequences for the staff responsible for the whereabouts data.”
 