
The Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> 
defender Bacary Sagna has been charged with misconduct by the Football 
Association following the “10 against 12” Instagram post he made earlier this 
month.

The 33-year-old uploaded an image 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/manchester-city-bacary-sagna-fa>
 with the caption “10 against 12.. but still fighting and winning as a team” on 
the social-media website afterthe 2-1 win over Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-city-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
 on 2 January, later amending the post to read “still fighting and winning as a 
team”.

Manchester City target Holger Badstuber joins Schalke on loan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/manchester-city-holger-badstuber-schalke>
The referee Lee Mason had sent off midfielder Fernandinho during the Premier 
League contest and Sagna’s comment could have been construed as questioning the 
official’s integrity.

An FA statement announcing Sagna’s charge read: “Bacary Sagna has been charged 
for misconduct contrary to FA Rule E3 (1). It is alleged that a comment posted 
on social media by the Manchester City defender constituted improper conduct in 
that it questioned the integrity of the match official and/or alleged and/or 
implied bias on the part of the match official, and/or brought the game into 
disrepute. He has until 6pm on 13 January 2017 to respond to the charge.”

Meanwhile, John Terry will serve a one-match ban after Chelsea’s appeal against
his sending off in the FA Cup tie against Peterborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/08/antonio-conte-john-terry-chelsea-peterborough-united>
 was rejected.

Defender Terry, making his first start since the EFL Cup exit at West Ham in 
October and first appearance since November, was adjudged to be the last man 
when he fouled Lee Angol and was shown a straight red card by referee Kevin 
Friend in Sunday’s game.

The Premier League club put in an appeal, which the FA confirmed on Tuesday 
afternoon had been unsuccessful, meaning the suspension stands, ruling Terry 
out of the match against champions Leicester on Saturday.

Middlesbrough defender Daniel Ayala will serve a three-match ban after failing 
in a bid to have his red card against Sheffield Wednesday overturned.
 