
Manchester City could face fresh sanction from Uefa after crowd trouble 
erupted during theirChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group game against 
Celtic on Tuesday night.

Fighting broke out among several supporters in the 73rd minute of the 1-1 draw 
at the Etihad Stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/manchester-city-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
 before being contained by a heavy security presence. The trouble occurred in 
the lower tier of the home section closest to Celtic’s fans and is likely to 
prompt an investigation by European football’s governing body, who last season
fined Manchester United £44,342 and Liverpool £43,577 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/18/uefa-charge-manchester-united-liverpool-europa-league-trouble>
 for disturbances during their Europa League meeting at Old Trafford.

Patrick Roberts goal earns brave Celtic a draw at lacklustre Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/manchester-city-celtic-champions-league-match-report>
There were reports that 13 people were arrested in total. Earlier, Greater 
Manchester police confirmed aCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> fan had been arrested in 
Piccadilly Gardens for throwing a hamburger at a police horse.

Uefa’s control, ethics and disciplinary body may also take unkindly to City 
supporters once again booing the Champions League anthem before kick-off. The 
club was charged over the same incident last season, although no such draconian 
action has been taken when the anthem has been booed during this campaign.

Celtic took an early lead at the Etihad with a fine goal from Patrick Roberts, 
the 19-year-old who is on loan at the Scottish champions from City, before 
Kelechi Iheanacho levelled in a frenetic opening to the game. Pep Guardiola, 
the City manager, said he was aware of Roberts’ talent, despite the teenager 
making only three brief appearances for the club since arriving from Fulham in 
an £11m deal in 2015.

“We know his quality. He has good qualities as a winger, one on one, he works 
defensively,” said Guardiola. “He has good potential. We try to help our young 
players play every single week to see how they are going to develop. Then in 
the end you have to take a decision. If we are going to try to fight with the 
big clubs in Europe, to do that is not easy. Young players have to play 
regularly.”

Roberts will return to City when his loan deal expires at Celtic next summer. 
Their manager, Brendan Rodgers, believes the England under-20 international has 
the ability required to make the grade at the Etihad.

“It can’t have been easy for him playing against his parent club but he 
handled it well,” said Rodgers. “He showed he is in the right place at this 
moment in his career. It is no good him sitting on the bench and not playing. 
It is great thatManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> allowed him to come to 
us. He is a top young English talent.

“He has the quality to fit in at City, no doubt about that. I am sure he will 
come back here in the summer and Pep and his staff will have a real look at 
him. They will be encouraged. He is a young English talent and I’m sure there 
will be a big career for him.”
 