
One reading of José Mourinho’s criticism of Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> supporters is that it 
is hardly going to enamour the manager to them. This is a constituency who have 
to hear the chant, “Fergie’s right/your fans are shite”, from their opposite 
numbers on most match-days at Old Trafford.

Mourinho’s calling out of the faithful came after Tuesday night’s 2-0 defeat 
of Hull City in the EFL Cup semi-final first leg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/manchester-united-hull-city-efl-cup-match-report>
. The Portuguese’s complaint was that if the volume for Liverpool’s visit on 
Sunday was not higher the hope of beating United’s fiercest rival is materially 
reduced.

José Mourinho urges Manchester United fans and team to step it up for Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-hull-city>
The manager timed his lecture cutely. When your side have just made themselves 
favourites to reach next month’s EFL Cup final going into the return leg at the 
KCom Stadium in two weeks’ time with a ninth consecutive victory you are 
preaching from a position of strength.

The alternative reading of Mourinho’s pop at the fans is this: he is making a 
strong and vital point. And he is merely raising an issue that stretches back 
to Roy Keane’s attack onthe prawn sandwich brigade in November 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2000/nov/10/newsstory.sport> and Sir Alex 
Fergusonlikening the atmosphere to a funeral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2008/jan/02/newsstory.manchesterunited> 
after a 1-0 win over Birmingham City just over seven years later.

The truth may be unpalatable for the supporters but the volume on Tuesday was 
insipid and Old Traffordis disappointingly muted in most matches. This was 
illustrated by what occurred when Anthony Martial began warming up during the 
second half of the Hull match. On seeing him the Stretford End became vocal. 
The sound was uplifting as they regaled him with: “Tony Martial came from 
France/English press said he had no chance/50 million down the drain/As Tony 
Martial scores again,” and the East Stand, which is opposite to the Stretford 
End, joined in.

The moment showed up precisely what had been missing and just how quiet it 
was. Suddenly Old Trafford had a vibrant, overpowering atmosphere, its sound 
cathedral-like in resonance and the affect on mood sense-tingling. But just as 
quickly the East Stand fell quiet again and so, too, did the stadium.

Mourinho’s post-match words for the fans should not have surprised, though: 
the 53-year-old has form for questioning the support of whichever club he is 
managing.


After a 2-1 Chelsea win against Queens Park Rangers in November 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/01/chelsea-qpr-premier-league-match-report>
 before a 41,486 Stamford Bridge crowd, a downbeat Mourinho said: “At this 
moment it’s difficult to play at home because playing here is like playing in 
an empty stadium. When we scored was when I realised: ‘Woah, the stadium is 
full. Good.’ I was looking around and it was empty, but not in terms of people 
because it was obviously full.” Cue opprobrium from Blues fans.

Mourinho had also had the same problem at Real Madrid. There, he took aim at 
supporters on at least three occasions. In November 2011, after a 7-1 win over 
Osasuna, he said: “I want to thank some of the fans that were behind one of the 
goals. Because not for them the stadium would have seemed empty.”

The following year Mourinho was disappointed at the “30” and “300” supporters 
at matches at Rayo Vallecano and Getafe, each of which are in Madrid. Later in 
2012 this was the manager’s take on a 2-2 home draw with Borussia Dortmund in 
the Champions League: “If, like me, you have been here for two and a half 
years, you are used to the ‘cold’ atmosphere.”

United fans are not alone, then. And this is not the first time Mourinho has 
complained about them. In August, after only two games in charge, he denied it 
was down to him to recreate the Old Trafford fear factor. “Not me,” he said. 
“The team, yes, and the fans too. I think everything starts there, the relation 
between the team and the fans. If at Old Trafford a couple of thousand away 
opponents can be more supportive and noisy than 70-odd thousand, then we are in 
trouble and it means there is no connection between the team and the 
supporters.”

On Tuesday there were 65,798 souls inside Old Trafford yet still the vibe was 
low-key. On Sunday there will be a sell‑out 75,000 and Mourinho wants the 
complete opposite for Jürgen Klopp’s side, as he seeks the win that would cut 
the five-point advantage held by the Premier League’s second-place team. In 
this context, his plea to make the stadium a cauldron should be welcomed by 
fans – Mourinho the arch-winner is merely being himself. He wants the noise to 
go off the scale forLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> 
and to make it as intimidating as possible for them, and as easy as is possible 
for his players. This does not seem too shabby a ploy for the manager of 
Manchester United.
 