
Pep Guardiola has admitted he is concerned Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> have a fight on their 
hands to remain in the top four but claims he prefers to have that worry rather 
than be relaxed at the top of the table.

Pep Guardiola insists he has ‘no plans to retire’ from football any time soon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/pep-guardiola-insists-he-has-no-plans-to-retire-from-football-manchester-city>
“I would rather be worried than calm and relaxed, especially with these 
contenders,” the City manager said. “All of the top six are achieving good 
results but two are not going to qualify for the Champions League next season. 
We are going to take one game at a time until we arrive in the last six or 
seven games then see what our position is, see if we are contenders to win the 
league or not because I think this season is going to be a tough one.”

Guardiola bases that opinion on the form of the present top six, currently 
looking unlikely to change composition between now and the end of the season. 
“One team is already out in front and there are six all fighting for four 
positions, if not the title itself,” he said.

“Manchester United would have been much higher up the table last season with 
the points they have now because last season all the leading teams made 
mistakes. This time they are all playing well and the English league is showing 
why it is different to Germany or Spain. In those countries you have maybe two 
or three big teams each season. Here there are six and they are all good.

“In the second half of the season I think it is likely the title will be 
decided by results when top-six teams play each other, always assuming they 
continue to keep beating the sides lower down the league. That is not something 
you can always predict in England, but I think it is possible to be certain at 
this stage that games between top-six teams are going to be important. In Spain 
I had Real Madrid or Atlético to worry about, in Germany it was Dortmund or 
Leverkusen but here you know from the beginning there are some really good 
managers and good teams.”

City have the respite of the FA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/fa-cup-third-round-draw> 
before league hostilities resume. The fixture list takes them to Goodison Park 
a week on Sunday and Guardiola is not expecting any favours. “Everton are not 
even in the top six but they have been beaten at home this season only once,” 
he said. “And that wasby a single [Liverpool] goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/19/everton-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 after almost 100 minutes. There are six contenders for the title in England 
but that does not mean there are no other good teams. We cannot start thinking 
of Liverpool or Chelsea until we have played at Everton.”

With the possible exception of Willy Caballero for Claudio Bravo – a normal 
cup competition switch in goal, nothing to do with the latter’s performance
against Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-city-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
 – Guardiola will name a first-string team for the FA Cup tie at West Ham 
United on Friday night.

“I will try to win the game,” he said. “It will be a tough match away from 
home against a Premier League side, so I will not be rotating. I like the 
English cup competition. In Spain it is a little bit predictable but theFA Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fa-cup> is more like the cup competition 
they have in Germany. It is a proper knockout, with small teams able to beat 
big teams.”

Bravo was criticised at the weekend for his inability to deal with the cross 
that let to Burnley’s goal at the Etihad and although his manager stillbelieves 
the goalkeeper was fouled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/pep-guardiola-denies-manchester-city-discipline-problem-after-latest-red-card>
 and should have received more protection, Guardiola accepts Bravo needs to 
adapt to the English game. “We are all trying to do that,” Guardiola said. 
“Claudio is a good goalkeeper and an intelligent guy. He will realise for 
himself what needs to be done and I am sure he will be able to adapt.”

Guardiola is determined to adapt as well and is willing to admit there are 
times when he has been too demanding. “Sometimes I have been wrong about my 
players,” he said. “What I have started to feel over the last few games is that 
it is not always the fault of the players. This season we have changed so many 
things about and the players have been exceptional, amazing. When I saw how 
they fought to win against Burnley, playing with 10 men for 65 minutes, it was 
emotional for me as coach. To win that game was a special moment. My players 
showed me how good they are because Burnley are not an easy team.”

Guardiola is surprised at the number of red cards City have picked up. He 
refused to discuss his team’s disciplinary problem in the aftermath of the game 
against Burnley, in which Fernandinho was dismissed for the third time this 
season, but admits he cannot always see the difference in red and yellow cards 
in this country.

“I see other games and situations, and sometimes the criteria of why decisions 
are made here are completely different,” he said. “My other teams in Barcelona 
and Bayern Munich were always first in the Fair Play League, the lowest number 
of red and yellow cards, so I am a little bit surprised at what has happened, 
though I always try to be positive and tell my players to respect the rules.”
 