
Why are the club in trouble?

Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> have 
been charged by the Football Association with failing to give anti-doping 
officers accurate information about player whereabouts three times over a 
12-month period.

Does that mean City’s players could face bans?

No. In individual sports, athletes are responsible for updating their details 
on the whereabouts system – and can be sanctioned for two years if they miss 
three tests in a 12-month period. In team sports the player’s club is 
responsible for keeping anti‑doping officials updated. The World Anti‑Doping 
Agency has no provision for team anti-doping rule violations, which is why City 
have been charged under FA rules and are facing a code of conduct charge 
instead.

Manchester City charged in relation to FA rules on anti-doping
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/manchester-city-charged-anti-doping>
So what exactly did City do wrong?

All clubs are required to let the FA know by 10am on Monday the days each 
player will be training that week, the start and finish times of training, and 
the home address of the player and any address at which they regularly reside 
overnight. This administrative task allows UK Anti-Doping officials to know 
when they can turn up to carry out random tests. On three separate occasions 
City had inaccurate information about the whereabouts of their squad when 
anti-doping officers came to visit.

So what happens when a club have the wrong whereabouts details of players when 
the testers turn up?

It depends. If there are four players or less involved, the club isn’t 
penalised. Over five players, however, and they get a strike against them. Each 
missing player would also get a strike against them because they should have 
provided an alternative testing slot and location. Under FA rules, three 
strikes in 12 months would lead that player facing a ban – just like in other 
sports.

What happens next?

City have until 19 January to formally respond but they are not expected to 
contest the charge. They are likely to claim the violations were because of 
administrative errors. The case will be heard by a three-member disciplinary 
commission, which is expected to fine the club around £25,000. The chances of a 
points deduction or player suspension are zero. While the commission has some 
discretion, FA guidelines suggest a fine of £25,000 is an appropriate entry 
point for Premier League clubs for this particular breach of its rules.

How many tests does Ukad carry out in English football each year?

Around 2,000. That might sound like a lot – but when divided by the 92 league 
clubs and nine Women’s Super League teams it is less than 170 tests a month on 
average. And while it is the case that Premier League players are tested far 
more frequently than League Two sides, one report last year found around a 
third of Premier League footballers were not tested at all in 2015.

What is the FA’s response?

The FA points out that its anti-doping officers will usually choose players 
more likely to play – so testing a team’s third-choice goalkeeper makes far 
less sense than the star striker. It is also the case the Premier League is the 
only professional football league where players have to give notice of their 
whereabouts and can be visited by testers at home.

What else does the FA do around testing and player education?

The FA insists it has the most comprehensive drugs testing programme in world 
football. They also insist it is not the case players are only drug tested at 
training sessions – they are also tested at their home as well, even if they 
have been at training earlier in the day. The FA also pays for the UK 
Anti-Doping Agency to take blood from players for their athlete biological 
passport and stresses it has a widespread anti- doping education programme that 
includes a players’ essentials app, staff visits to clubs to talk through rules 
and regulations and wallet-sized reminder cards.

Are there any obvious flaws in the system?

The FA doesn’t require clubs to provide player whereabouts in the close 
season, while players only have to provide a residential address where they 
regularly reside overnight. That means from late May to July, players could be 
away on holiday and be taking banned substances with minimum chance of being 
caught.

What do the experts make of the Manchester City case?

According to Richard Ings, a respected former head of the Australian 
Anti-Doping Agency, there is a “gross inconsistency” when it comes to team 
sports in the Wada code. “If you are an individual athlete, the Wada code is 
prescriptive about your obligations for providing whereabouts information, and 
what the sanction will be if you don’t do it,” Ings says. “But the same 
obligations do not apply to professional athletes in some team sports. It’s not 
so much an FA issue, it’s a gross inconsistency in theWada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wada> code between the obligations of 
individual professional athletes in individual sports and those who happen to 
be playing in team sports.”
 