
FRIDAY NIGHT BLIGHTS

Well, you can’t say they didn’t warn us. “The Scotland fixture really does 
excite people. It’s the fixture which will capture the imagination,” roared Mr 
Roy back when the draw was made last July. “It’s a very fierce rivalry with 
Scotland and that’s good.” Gordon Strachan beamed that “the whole of Scotland 
and England will look forward to the games”. Well look forward no more. Or at 
least hardly any more. Fully 475 days after the nations’ names were plucked out 
of their respective hats, it’s matchday.

Brace yourselves, Britain. This is big. “We all know how big the game is,” 
bloated Harry Kane. Well,he might, but readers based abroad, ignorant perhaps 
of the unique social, political and historical significance of this special 
day, may need some assistance to understand precisely how gargantuan this 
fixture is. And The Fiver, as ever, is here to help. We’ve scavenged the best 
pre-match interviews – which may not be much but is as close as we get to 
proper reporting – to let the experts reveal Friday night’s full significance. 
“It’s a huge game, we can’t beat about the bush on this one. This is so big and 
so great,” whoops Strachan. “It’s very, very special,” blooters England’s 
stand-in dugout-warmer Gareth Southgate. “It’s a bit of history, a game people 
might remember for years to come. Without a shadow of doubt games like this are 
the reason I’m involved in the game. That’s the beauty of football, to be 
involved in big matches.” That’s right, England v Scotland is the beauty of 
football. Let that sink in for a moment. But that’s not all, oh no.

Gareth Southgate’s pitch for England post adds edge to Scotland encounter | 
Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/10/gareth-southgate-england-scotland-gordon-strachan>
Strachan’s captain, Darren Fletcher, called it “a monumental moment and one I 
am looking forward to and excited about and relishing”, before adding: “It 
doesn’t get much bigger than this – there will be a little more fire in the 
belly.” Jordan Henderson, who will be lining up against him in midfield, said 
“it is a massive game”, revealing that “if you look at the history of the 
fixture, it’s not a normal game”. Jack Wilshere was a lone dissenting voice, 
saying only that “it’s a big game”. Piffle, said Scotland’s Barry Bannan, who 
became captain of Team Massive by insisting it “is a massive game” and that 
victory “would be a massive boost” (adding that Scott Brown’s return will also 
“be a massive boost” because “he’s a massive player”). Other members of Team 
Massive include potential England debutant Michael Keane (“It’s a massive 
fixture” and “a big game”), Scotland’s David Marshall (“It’s a massive 
occasion”) and his team-mate Ikechi Anya (“It’s a massive game for us”). Former 
Scotland captain Paul Lambert says “it’s a huge game for Scotland and equally 
so for England”, while former future England manager Brendan Rodgers reckons 
“it will be a big game and I’m looking forward to it”.

Aren’t we all. Reader, savour this moment. There are only a matter of minutes 
remaining in which we can bask in the sheer wonder of the elephantine encounter 
that towers mightily ahead of us. Because once it kicks off we’ll be forced to 
face up to the manifest averageatbestness of the two sides, and then in 580 
days’ time the 2018 World Cup will kick off, one of these teams will be knocked 
out in the group stage, the other won’t be there at all, and we’ll have to come 
to terms with the fact that the game was pretty much irrelevant all along.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Paul Doyle from 7.45pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of England 2-1 Scotland, 
while Simon Burnton will be on hand for World Cup clockwatch action. And then 
at 12.45am GMT, Graham Parker will be in the saddle for USA! USA!! USA!!! 2-0 
Mexico <https://www.theguardian.com/football>.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“I was always confident that this would be the case as there was no evidence 
against me” – a criminal inquiry has been opened into a single suspected case 
of bribery following the investigation into alleged corruption in football. But 
it’snot against Sam Allardyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/criminal-investigation-opened-into-single-suspected-case-of-football-bribery-daily-telegraph>
.

BLOODY HELL, IT’S A SECOND STORY

As USA! USA!! USA!!! basks in the orange glow of its new status as The Country 
That Jiggered Itself Even More Thoroughly Than Brexit Britain, attention now 
turns to see if its football/soccer/it’s called football because it’s played 
with your feet/soccer was actually its original name/there are too many breaks 
in NFL/yeah, well baseball is just rounders/FOOTBALL, LET’S JUST CALL IT 
FOOTBALL team can restore some national pride with an epic victory in Friday 
night’s World Cup qualifier.

Yup, the country can forget all about the deeply racist rhetoric that has 
spewed from the day-glo maw of its president-elect as Jürgen Klinsmann’s team 
face [Fiver checks the fixture list] … Mexico. Ah. But fear not, because 
Klinsmann reckons everything is going to be just fine. “Football worldwide 
connects people … it’s purely a sporting event,” he hurrahed, suggesting he may 
have missed that weekend in Marseille.

Still whatever happens off the pitch, it should be a cracker on it. The game 
will be played at Columbus Crew’s Mapfre Stadium, a venue at which USA! USA!! 
USA!!! have never lost to Mexico. Or anyone else, come to think of it. American 
hopes are embodied by Christian “The New Freddy Adu But Actually Good” Pulisic 
while Mexico have become more organised – if a little less passionate than they 
were under Miguel Herrera – under the leadership of Juan Carlos Osorio (if we 
forget about the 7-0 smacking against Chile last summer). USA! USA!! USA!!! may 
want to win this one anyway: it’s going to be a long and tiring away trip if 
they have to climb over that wall. Speaking of which …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-two-stories-we-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92018e65f09f49ef9349140dde1fe24133323553%2F155_2_2516_1915%2F2516.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Manifest%20averageatbestness%3B%20and%20orange%20glow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-two-stories-we-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Manifest%20averageatbestness%3B%20and%20orange%20glow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-two-stories-we-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92018e65f09f49ef9349140dde1fe24133323553%2F155_2_2516_1915%2F2516.jpg>
 It’s on. Photograph: John Dorton/ISI/Rex/Shutterstock 
FIVER LETTERS

“So, Tim Howard wants to keep the politics out of the USA! USA!! USA!!! v 
Mexico match (yesterday’s Bits and Bobs). So what does he do if Mexico get a 
free-kick on the edge of the box, then?” – Dale Sellers.


“At Swindon Town we’ve seen several big-name directors of football over the 
years: Ossie Ardiles, Glenn Hoddle, Paolo Di Canio, Maurice Malpas. But none of 
these would even get close to licking the boots of our new hero, Tactics Tim 
(yesterday’s Quote of the Day) … Big Cup veteran, winner of the 2012-13 U21 
Premier League – Group 2, and true visionary of the game. With his tactical 
nous and keen eye for fashion, this season I expect nothing less than 
promotion, an inaugural Golden Gilet award, and a County Ground touchline 
littered with the endless reams of flipped pages. And for those cynics who 
think this appointment has anything to do with Tim once being Swindon chairman 
Lee Power’s housemate and best man –who’s the headmaster now 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.birminghammail.co.uk%2Fsport%2Ffootball%2Ffootball-news%2Faston-villa-tim-sherwoods-best-10328725&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNG_soSyPAkBXy0Tc_lscVfKUZsXgw>
?” – James Hunter.


“Can I be one of 1,057 to express my shock and heartbreak that The Fiver has a 
sub-editor (yesterday’s Fiver)? Imagine how bad their 2016 is going?” – Sam 
Easterbrook (and no others).

“Can I be the 1,057th pedant to point out that Norfolk canal boats are not 
particularly narrow (yesterday’s Fiver); narrowboats ply their trade on other 
parts of inland waterways network, such as the Grand Union Canal, which runs 
roughly along the line of the M1 motorway from London north-westwards towards 
Rugby, then Birmingham. Norfolk rivers such as those that link the Norfolk 
Broads are wider than most canals and do not have locks which are even narrower 
than the canals which do have locks; if The Fiver’s mind was as narrow as a 
narrowboat it would be as narrow as a narrow thing on a very narrow day” – 
Peter Dymoke (and 1,056 others).

“Never pass up a chance to watch Alan explain 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QjyDdE2WF3M> – ‘I’m under a cow’” – Hugh 
Fordham.

“Re: The Donald’s favourite English football team (yesterday’s Fiver letters). 
Hmm … He’s very rich but has also been very indebted, his detractors would have 
anyone but him, his loud verbal rants are memorable and he thinks the whole 
world is against him, yet he has enjoyed notable success. I wonder why Lord 
Ferg and his Manchester United tenure spring to mind” – Diego García.


“Trump seems too fickle and opportunistic to commit to a particular team. 
Instead he’ll just claim to support whoever wins the league that season, 
brazenly denying ever having followed anyone else. So, at the moment, it’ll be 
Leicester. Quite fitting I suppose, matching Trump’s own storyas an underdog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/11/leicester-city-finances-football-league-financial-fair-play-investigation>
 to win against the odds. Of course, a better reflection of his character would 
see him down at Glanford Park cheering on Firewall FC” – David Wall.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
letter o’the day is Hugh Fordham, who receives a copy of Football Manager 2017 
<http://www.footballmanager.com/games/football-manager-2017> from those good 
people at Football Manager Towers, and it’s out now! We’ve got plenty more 
copies to give away, so if you want one, keep the letters coming.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email – is expensive, but supporting us isn’t. If you 
value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

Argentina are stewing over their 3-0 shellacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/brazil-argentina-world-cup-qualifier-2018-match-report>
 at the hands of Brazil. “We are more than aware that we have to change a lot,”
sniffed Lionel Messi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/argentina-brazil-lose-world-cup-qualifying-media-catastrophe>
. “We can’t be giving away any more points.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-two-stories-we-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d259c14602ae2b45dbf58a05966de9eccaf998c%2F0_0_3500_2330%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Manifest%20averageatbestness%3B%20and%20orange%20glow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-two-stories-we-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Manifest%20averageatbestness%3B%20and%20orange%20glow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-two-stories-we-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d259c14602ae2b45dbf58a05966de9eccaf998c%2F0_0_3500_2330%2F3500.jpg>
 We’ll call you. Photograph: Pedro Vilela/Getty Images 
This is fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/howard-wilkinson-advise-fa-next-england-manager>
.

Wales boss Chris Coleman can’t hide how chuffed he’s feeling about the return 
of Aaron Ramsey against Serbia. “There’s not a team on the planet he couldn’t 
play for when he’s at his best,”whooped Coleman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/wales-aaron-ramsey-serbia-world-cup-qualifier>
. “That’s not a biased opinion because I’m a Welshman and we all love Rambo. 
I’m looking at it clinically. He could play for anyone.”

Manchester City still think Claudio Bravo and Vincent Kompany will be 
available for next weekend’s trip to Crystal Palacedespite both getting knacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/manchester-city-confident-over-fitness-of-claudio-bravo-vincent-kompany>
 on international duty.

Albanian police say they’ve taken extreme steps to secure Saturday’s World Cup 
qualifier between Albania and Israel. “Sincerely, I don’t think that is a bad 
advertisement for Albania, on the contrary,” tooted Israeli ambassador Boaz 
Rodkin.

And Nathalie Boy de la Tour is the first female French Professional League 
president after Raymond Domenech’s candidacy was snubbed by the general 
assembly.

STILL WANT MORE?

Not football, but do watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/nov/11/greg-rusedski-takes-on-guardian-writer-jacob-steinberg-at-tennis-video>
.

Carlisle United are on the up and up, reports Louise Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/11/keith-curle-carlisle-louise-taylor>
, and Keith Curle’s tough love is a big reason why.

Joey Barton is one of the worst signings in Scottish fitba’s modern era, 
reckons Ewan Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/11/joey-barton-rangers-divorce>
, and the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers should have seen it coming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-two-stories-we-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F397713a5dfde73bb3cf352662411b8207b3bb227%2F0_96_3084_1850%2F3084.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Manifest%20averageatbestness%3B%20and%20orange%20glow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-two-stories-we-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Manifest%20averageatbestness%3B%20and%20orange%20glow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-two-stories-we-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F397713a5dfde73bb3cf352662411b8207b3bb227%2F0_96_3084_1850%2F3084.jpg>
 Onwards, again. Photograph: Ian Rutherford/PA 
Ewan is back with more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/11/scott-brown-old-pals-act-long-shot-gordon-strachan-scotland-england>
 positive Scottish football vibes: on why the Gordon Strachan-Scott Brown 
double act is unlikely to end well.

Get ready for an incredibly awkward encounter in Colombus, writes Graham Parker
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/11/usa-mexico-world-cup-qualifier-team-news>
.

Gareth Southgate’s flirtation with the full-time England manager role adds a 
bit of spice to the chicken korma that is England v Scotland,writes Daniel 
Taylor in not so few words 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/10/gareth-southgate-england-scotland-gordon-strachan>
.

Are Barcelona about to sign Stoke’s Glen Johnson? Well … The Rumour Mill 
ponders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/football-transfer-rumours-are-manchester-united-eyeing-mesut-ozil>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>

‘THERE IS A CRACK IN EVERYTHING. THAT’S HOW THE LIGHT GETS IN’
 