
A year on from the “Dieselgate” scandal that engulfed Volkswagen, damning new 
research reveals that all major diesel car brands, including Fiat,Vauxhall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vauxhall> and Suzuki, are selling models 
that emit far higher levels of pollution than the shamed German carmaker.

The car industry has faced fierce scrutiny since the US government ordered 
Volkswagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/18/epa-california-investigate-volkswagen-clean-air-violations>
 to recall almost 500,000 cars in 2015 after discovering it hadinstalled 
illegal software on its diesel vehicles to cheat emissions tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/25/volkswagen-scandal-qa-what-you-need-to-know-about-diesel>
. But a new in-depth study by campaign groupTransport & Environment (T&E) 
<http://www.transportenvironment.org/publications/dont-breathe-here-tackling-air-pollution-vehicles>
 found not one brand complies with the latest “Euro 6” air pollution limits 
when driven on the road and that Volkswagen is far from being the worst 
offender.

“We’ve had this focus on Volkswagen as a ‘dirty carmaker’ but when you look at 
the emissions of other manufacturers you find there are no really clean 
carmakers,” says Greg Archer, clean vehicles director at T&E. “Volkswagen is 
not the carmaker producing the diesel cars with highest nitrogen oxides 
emissions and the failure to investigate other companies brings disgrace on the 
European regulatory system.”

The eco guide to electric vehicles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/03/eco-guide-to-electric-vehicles>
T&E analysed emissions test data from around 230 diesel car models to rank the 
worst performing car brands based on their emissions in real-world driving 
conditions. Fiat and Suzuki (which use Fiat engines) top the list with their 
newest diesels, designed to meet Euro 6 requirements, spewing out 15 times the 
NOx limit; while Renault-Nissan vehicle emissions were judged to be more than 
14 times higher. General Motors’ brands Opel-Vauxhall also fared badly with 
emissions found to be 10 times higher than permitted levels.

The new models are not breaking the law and the manufacturers say they comply 
with all current regulations. But cars are are able to be on the road because 
of the difference between emissions produced in lab tests and real on-road 
driving situations.
Graphic on Euro 6 NOx emission limits across the industry 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/sep/2016-09-18T17:51:48/embed.html>
Since September 2015 new diesel cars have had to comply with a new European 
exhaust emissions standard called Euro 6 which set a limit of 0.08g per km. The 
new rules heralded a significant reduction from the previous “Euro 5” standard 
which allowed 0.18g per km. NOx pollution is considered to be a serious public 
health risk, causing theearly deaths of 23,500 people a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/13/government-passing-the-buck-air-pollution-campaigners>
 in the UK alone.

The report – which also drew on data from investigations conducted by the 
British, French and German governments, as well as alarge public database 
<http://equaindex.com/equa-air-quality-index/> – surprisingly found Volkswagen 
to be selling among the cleanest diesel vehicles under the Euro 6 rules. Archer 
says this was not, however, evidence of the carmaker “learning its lesson” as 
these models were available before last year’s scandal broke. The Dieselgate 
engines were mostly of the previous Euro 5 era which were sold between 2011 and 
2015.
Graphic on Euro 5 NOx emission limits across the industry 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/sep/2016-09-18T17:58:44/embed.html>
T&E estimates that there are 29m “dirty” diesel cars and vans on Europe’s 
roads – a number that is still growing – with 4.3m of them being driven in the 
UK. The group classify a car as “dirty” if emissions are more than three times 
over the relevant NOx limit. Archer argues that a mass recall of dirty Euro 5 
and 6 vehicles is required given the average lifetime of a car is 17 years. 
“Software upgrades could easily be implemented to ensure the exhaust systems 
operate in normal driving conditions as the law clearly states,” he argues.

For Euro 5 vehicles, the five worst performing companies were, in order of the 
highest emissions: Renault (including Dacia), Land Rover, Hyundai, 
Opel/Vauxhall (including Chevrolet) and Nissan. For current Euro 6 cars a 
different pattern emerges. The worst performers are: Fiat (including Alfa 
Romeo) and Suzuki (to whom Fiat supply engines),Renault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/renault> (including Nissan, Dacia and 
Infiniti), Opel/Vauxhall, Hyundai and Mercedes-Benz.

Last month French investigators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/01/french-inquiry-confirms-widespread-irregularities-in-diesel-emissions-data>
 said they had found that a large number of diesel cars emitted much higher 
levels of pollution than their European manufacturers claim. According to the 
independent committee’sreport 
<http://www.developpement-durable.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/Rapport_Commission_independante.pdf>
, around a third of the 86 diesel vehicles tested produced levels of NOx well 
above European limits. The results echosimilar findings in tests by the UK’s 
Department for Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/23/diesel-cars-pollution-limits-nox-emissions>
.


In a statement Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) said an internal review had 
confirmed that its diesel engine applications complied with emissions 
regulation. It added: “The EU is working towards the adoption of a new testing 
procedure to bring it closer to what one would expect under real driving 
conditions. FCA supports these efforts and welcomes the introduction of new 
regulations which should provide clarity for customers and the industry.”

Mike Hawes, chief executive of the UK trade body the Society of Motor 
Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT) said the tests conducted by various 
governments had consistently shown the tested vehicles to be legal. “The 
differences between official laboratory tests and those performed in the ‘real 
world’ are well known, and industry acknowledges the need for fundamental 
reform,” he added.

UK government 'falling behind' on electric car pledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/01/uk-government-falling-behind-on-electric-car-pledge>
A spokesperson for Hyndai said the company meets all current regulatory 
standards: “New Euro 6 cars are built using the best available technology to 
comply with these regulations and they produce less NOx emissions than their 
predecessors. Hyundai Motor takes environmental compliance extremely seriously 
and is committed to meeting forthcoming new targets and to significantly 
improving the environmental performance of its vehicles.”

Renault, Opel/Vauxhall, Mercedes-Benz, Land Rover and Nissan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> did not respond to requests for 
comment on the report.

The EU has tightened emissions regulations and from September 2017 diesels 
that emit more than double the lab limit for NOx on the road will be banned 
from sale. Hawes added that next year’s introduction of an on-road Real Driving 
Emissions (RDE) test, as well as tougher lab tests, would help to provide 
consumers with the “reassurance that manufacturers are delivering on air 
quality”.
 