
The recount is a distraction. Only a strong left can beat Trump | Kate Aronoff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/election-recount-distration-jill-stein-democratic-party>
I live in one of the poorest parts of Virginia, and I’m one of the few members 
of my family and community who do not support the president-elect. The fact 
that my own rust-tinged trailer is distinguished by a lack of signs in favor of 
Trump is a personal point of pride.


I begin each day by mentally preparing myself for whatever Donald Trump’s 
latest assault on working people is.His choice for treasury secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/steven-mnuchin-expected-to-be-named-us-treasury-secretary>
, Steve Mnuchin, was especially difficult to swallow. It is a horribly 
dangerous choice for poor people everywhere, including the rural, white and 
working class like me and my neighbors. It will hurt many of those whose 
support for Trump has been among the most stringent and vocal.


Here in the Appalachian mountains that I love, the bucolic scenery is offset 
by stark markers of rural poverty. Dilapidated barns, abandoned farm- and 
outhouses, and mobile homes. Areas in nearby small towns and communities reveal 
more than a few empty, bank-owned homes. This isn’t all that surprising, 
considering that the area I live is one of the poorest in the state of 
Virginia. Yet despite their relative ubiquity, I’m gobsmacked by the 
juxtaposition of the name Trump, synonymous with exorbitant wealth, in front of 
a rusting mobile home every time I see one.

According to the many Trump supporters I know, Trump won their loyalty because 
of his so-called outsider status and promise to not only take on, but 
dismantle, a corrupt, ineffectual political establishment.

Many of these people, myself included, have struggled financially due to job 
loss and foreclosure. We often have had to rely on things like public 
assistance to get by. Is our collective financial instability the fault of a 
crooked political establishment? Many people here sure think so.


One of Trump’s most apparent and effective ways of playing up 
anti-establishment credentials was calling out and criticising Hillary 
Clinton’s ties with Wall Street bigwigs like Goldman Sachs. Despite being a 
billionaire himself, Trump’s lack of political experience helped enable his 
populist appeal. He claimed to want to save the middle class – in part by 
changing current tax laws that allow billionaires to pay lower taxes on their 
enormous paychecks. Trump singled out hedge fund managers in particular as “
getting away with murder 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/donald-trump-the-hedge-fund-guys-are-getting-away-with-murder/>
” because of the current tax laws.


I am a Democrat in rural, red-state America. My party abandoned us | Jane 
Lindsday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/15/rural-america-working-class-voters-democrats-donald-trump>
And yet Mnuchin, the man Trump has tapped to lead the Treasury, is a former 
Goldman Sachs banker, Hollywood film financier and hedge fund founder and 
manager who profited so greatly from the global financial crisis of 2008 that 
he was called “the foreclosure king”. Mnuchin has been widely criticized for 
profiting from increasing the number of foreclosures, particularly those 
involving reverse mortgages that are typically held by the elderly. The bank he 
chaired has also beenaccused 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/11/17/news/steven-mnuchin-cit-onewest/> of banking 
practices that discriminate against people of color.


Like the rest of Trump’s appointees, Mnuchin is an affront to poor people who 
have been victims of foreclosure, including the white, working-class ones in my 
community. Many people here lament the fact that the size of their families and 
networks have dwindled because people have been forced to relocate out of 
economic necessity. I can’t help but worry and wonder how many more empty homes 
(mobile or otherwise), will be soon dot the landscape I love so well if his 
appointment is confirmed.

 