
French far-right presidential candidate Marine Le Pen has cheered Ford’s 
decision to shift investment from Mexico to the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/donald-trump-general-motors-tax-chevrolet-cruz>
, describing the move as a victory for the protectionist policies she champions.

Trump's tweets keep US manufacturers on their toes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/trumps-tweets-keep-us-manufacturers-on-their-toes>
In a New Year’s address to journalists, Le Pen said Ford’s decision is proof 
that “protectionism works, when it is led by determination, and when a country 
can exercise its economic independence”.

The Front National (FN) party leader, a top candidate in France’s presidential 
election next spring, has already suggested that Trump’s victory, along with 
the Brexit vote, could have a favourable impact on her own campaign.

Le Pen is a self-proclaimed patriot who campaigns against immigration, the 
European Union and a system of politicians and financial institutions that she 
claims is hampering France’s progress. “Political will pays,” she said. “The 
proof is whatDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
obtained.”

One of Le Pen’s deputies, Florian Philippot, singled out the French car 
industry as a proponent of outsourcing and said the “same arguments, the same 
will, the same tools” used by Trump would be employed in aFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> run by the FN. He added: “We can 
imagine an equivalent solution.”

Le Pen was not the only French presidential candidate to lavish praise on 
Trump for Ford’s decision.

The fear of Marine Le Pen – w​ill the next political earthquake happen in 
France?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/the-fear-of-marine-le-pen-will-the-next-political-earthquake-happen-in-france>
Arnaud Montebourg, a former economics minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/17/arnaud-montebourg-french-bernie-sanders-plotting-a-shakeup>
 seeking the Socialist party candidacy, also proposes protectionist measures to 
help French industry. “I see that Donald Trump used the Montebourg method!” he 
joked at a news conference yesterday. “A strong and protecting state is a state 
which pays attention to the country’s industrial and economic interests … 
because it’s a power struggle between politics and economy.”

Montebourg advocates state intervention to protect national interests and keep 
jobs and companies in the country.

As economy minister from 2012 to 2014, he was responsible for a decree 
broadening the government’s right to intervene when foreign companies want to 
buy firms the state considers vital, for instance in energy, transport, health 
and communications.

Montebourg added that he would levy a supertax on banks to raise €5bn (£4bn) 
if elected president in May and that he was prepared to nationalise a bank too. 
“The five biggest French banks made a profit of €25bn last year, so I propose a 
supertax of €5bn,” he said.

Montebourg is among seven hopefuls running for the Socialist candidacy in a 
two-round primary this month. President Francois Hollande, accepting his 
personal unpopularity, is not seeking a second term.
 