
Even when slightly out of sorts, Maria Sharapova is still the most formidable 
opponent in women’s tennis andSamantha Stosur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur>, whose form swings like a 
reed in a storm, barely inconvenienced the Russian on her way to the fourth 
round of the French Open.

Beating the former US Open champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/12/samantha-stosur-wins-us-open> 
6-3, 6-4 in an hour and 40 minutes was the perfect workout for Sharapova’s 
match on Sunday against the No13 seed, Lucie Safarova, who had a tougher time, 
defeating Sabine Lisicki 6-3, 7-6.

The best match of day six was the first one on Court Philippe Chatrier, where 
Mirjana Lucic-Baroni could not extend her fairytale run, losing in three close 
sets to France’s No29 seed, Alizé Cornet. However, the 33-year-old Croat,such a 
lauded winner over the 2014 finalist Simona Halep on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/27/mirjana-lucic-baroni-simona-halep-french-open>
, left some wise words behind her.

Sports quiz of the week: FA Cup final, French Open and Jürgen Klopp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/29/sports-quiz-week-fa-cup-final-french-open-jurgen-klopp>
“In these big countries – France, England, USA, Australia – when they have 
younger players, they make them into a superstar before they even win a match 
or two. For us, we really have to earn it, and I think that’s the difference.

“It’s fun for French players. It’s a bit easier than it is for, let’s say, 
Croatians. They get more opportunities and wildcards but the rest of us, when 
we get there, I think we hold on to it a little tighter. I would say just keep 
believing. Don’t take the losses too hard. Ups and downs are going to happen, 
no matter what – unless you’reRoger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> or Serena Williams or Rafael 
Nadal here at the French.”

Federer’s progress remains as smooth as a well-poured coffee. With uncanny 
mathematical symmetry, he improved as the shots flowed, beating the promising 
young Bosnian Damir Dzumhur 6-4, 6-3, 6-2 in an hour and 28 minutes.

Later he had some wise words, too, on Novak Djokovic’s place in the game’s 
pantheon of greats. “Very high already. He’s still got some way to go. Maybe he 
doesn’t have as many grand slams yet as others [Federer: 17, Nadal: 14] but 
he’s got a ton of Masters 1000s, which not many people talk about – which I 
find extraordinary.”

What was mildly extraordinary was the fact Federer’s compatriot Stan Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka> beat the American Steve 
Johnson by the same score in only a minute longer. Talk about synchronising 
your Swiss watches.

Wawrinka won 19 points in 22 visits to the net but said he would not be fooled 
into coming forward rashly against Gilles Simon in his next match, having 
fallen for that ruse against him here three years ago.

“You shouldn’t go when he wants you to go,” Wawrinka said. “You have to go 
when you want to do it yourself, when you feel like it. That makes a big 
difference.”

On a sad note, a pigeon was killed when it flew into the Hawk-Eye camera 
during Richard Gasquet’s five-set win over the Argentinian Carlos Berlocq.

“There were feathers all over the place,” the Frenchman observed. “It’s a 
tough death.”
 