
The chief conductor of Amsterdam's Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra, Mariss 
Jansons <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mariss-jansons>, is to step down 
after leading the world-famous ensemble for a decade.

The RCO announced on Tuesday that the celebrated conductor will retire at the 
end of the 2015 season from what is widely considered to be one of the greatest 
posts in the orchestral world.

The news of his departure came as a surprise even to those in his orchestra, 
despite health concerns. In April 1996, Latvian-born Jansons nearly died on 
stage in Oslo from a heart attack while conducting the final pages of Puccini's 
La Boh√®me. An official at the RCO said: "It's no secret that he has health 
problems."

The exact date of the 71-year-old's last performance has not been determined, 
the RCO said, adding: "The orchestra, management and the chief conductor want 
to make a point of stating that they are parting on excellent terms and with 
deep mutual respect."

It said: "Mariss Jansons has always been able to inspire the orchestra and 
lead it in great performances. Due to his knowledge, commitment and 
involvement, he is much loved by both musicians and his audiences."

The son of a conductor, Jansons studied violin in St Petersburg before 
travelling to Vienna and Salzburg to learn under the internationally renowned 
conductors, Hans Swarowsky and Herbert von Karajan.

He went on to conduct the BBC Welsh Symphony orchestra before becoming chief 
conductor at the RCO in 2004.

Musicians and classical critics played tribute to Jansons's long and eminent 
career as a conductor.

Dominic Seldis, the RCO's principal double bass player, said Jansons was "more 
dedicated than anybody I've ever worked with" and he would miss him terribly.

"Mariss pushes himself so incredibly hard and he worked fifty times harder 
than all of us put together," said Seldis. "Yes, news of his departure was a 
surprise but in a way it's a relief because his health has not been getting any 
better."

He continued: "We will all remember him for his detail, passion and immense 
musicality and knowledge. He is the don. There is nothing in every score he 
conducts that he hasn't read, researched, discussed, thought about and worried 
about.

"Working with him, the depth of knowledge and musicality is amazing. It was a 
complete and utter privilege to have worked with him and it is even more of a 
privilege to call him a friend. I will miss him but I'm delighted that he has 
finished on a high that is fitting to both a great conductor and a great man."

Seldis said that while Jansons's replacement still remained unknown, he 
believed the RCO was ready for the next chapter.

"The orchestra is on great form," he added. "We've had the most unbelievable 
year, with our 125th anniversary, so we are now just looking forward to whoever 
steps up."

Jansons was appointed assistant to the conductor Yevgeny Mravinsky of the 
Leningrad Philharmonic Orchestra in 1973. From 1979 to 2000 he was chief 
conductor at the Oslo Philharmonic Orchestra.

The classical critic Geoffrey Norris described Jansons as "one of the greatest 
conductors of his generation" and praised his inspiring and humanising touch.

"Jansons always said that he likes his performances to be cosmic and I think 
when he's at his best, this is what you get," said Norris. "You find yourself 
completely transported by his musicianship and the way he can inspire 
orchestras to achieve their absolute best."

He added: "I've been following Jansons since the 1980s when he was conductor 
of the BBC Welsh Symphony Orchestra. He cut his teeth there and I remember even 
in those days you felt that you were listening to a musician of extraordinary 
ability who could really transform you as you listened.

"He has a very rare ability to communicate his ideas to orchestras and inspire 
them in their music making."

Nicholas Kenyon, the managing director of the Barbican, which hosted the RCO 
in 2012, also paid tribute.

"The partnership between Mariss Jansons and the Concertgebouw has been one of 
the world's great musical relationships over the last decade and they have just 
given us three unforgettable Bruckner symphonies at the Barbican," he said.

"It's of course a huge pity that will be coming to an end next year and I hope 
Mariss will continue giving us his peerless music-making for many years to 
come."

Jansons will continue in his post as chief conductor of the Bavarian Radio 
Symphony Orchestra in Munich, where his contract lasts until 2018.
 