
Carved from a single gritstone block 
<http://www.peakscan.freeuk.com/peak_district_geology.htm>, the trough in the 
centre ofAllendale <http://visitnorthumberland.com/allendale> is fed by a 
cast-iron pipe set in a stone retaining wall. Around it, ivy-leaved toadflax, 
still bearing mauve flowers, tumbles from its roothold between loosely mortared 
joints. Fallen leaves shine through two feet of gin-clear water.

The remains of a bucket stand, now a thin loop of metal, are suspended over 
the surface, a reminder of the importance of this source of clean drinking 
water in preventing cholera. The trough was installed by the philanthropist and 
former minerIsaac Holden 
<http://www.weardalemuseum.co.uk/Isaac%20Holden%20cross%20curricular%20activities%20for%205%20to%209%20year%20olds.pdf>
. Lettering inscribed on an arched panel to the right reads: Isaacs Well AD 
1849.

Where the waters run clear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/23/country-diary-water-runs-clear>
I cross the marketplace to the churchyard, relishing the warmth of November 
sun on my back. An obelisk dedicated to Holden stretches tall above the other 
memorials. The low angle of light slants over its mossy base, illuminates 
threads of ballooning spiders and silver curls ofrosebay willowherb 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/rosebay-willowherb>. There are the 
sounds of late autumn: the yack of jackdaws, a starling imitating a blackbird, 
a robin’s thin song, the chatter of sparrows picking through a nearby gutter.

More than 600 people paid to erect this monument to Holden’s “untiring 
diligence in originating works of charity and public usefulness”. Forced to 
find alternative work by illness and the closure of a nearby lead mine, he 
walked the valleys and moors selling tea. At the same time, driven by Methodist 
beliefs, he sold his poems and copies of “his likeness”, adaguerrotype postcard 
that cost six pence <http://www.npvm.org.uk/objects/58/index.htm>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fmark-landscape-itinerant-tea-seller-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6a6fc4f2bda479e654c3b3d1625a4f49ca588d7%2F0_14_640_445%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marks%20made%20on%20the%20landscape%20by%20an%20itinerant%20tea%20seller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fmark-landscape-itinerant-tea-seller-country-diary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marks%20made%20on%20the%20landscape%20by%20an%20itinerant%20tea%20seller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fmark-landscape-itinerant-tea-seller-country-diary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6a6fc4f2bda479e654c3b3d1625a4f49ca588d7%2F0_14_640_445%2F640.jpg>
 The memorial in Allendale churchyard. Photograph: Susie White 
That image would be displayed on mantelpieces all over the area, from isolated 
farmsteads to fell-side miners’ cottages (perhaps even on what is now mine, 
though there is no record of this). His fundraising provided for a penny 
savings bank, chapels, a clothing fund, a hearse and a hearse house.

The 36-mile Isaac’s Tea Trail 
<https://www.northumberlandlife.org/teatrail/Page1.asp> begins at the well and 
traces his route beside theEast and West Allen rivers 
<http://explorenorthpennines.org.uk/allen-valleys>, crossing heather moorland 
on old trackways, linking farms and villages. Past lime kilns and quarries, a 
Roman fort and lead mines, the footpath dips in and out of layers of history 
and landscape, a celebration of an individual who made a difference.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>




 