
Hundreds of figures in the arts and science, including Oscar-winning actor 
Mark Rylance <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mark-rylance>, artist Conrad 
Atkinson, composer Matthew Herbert and author Naomi Klein, have called for BP’s 
new five-year sponsorship deals with some of Britain’s leading cultural 
institutions to be cancelled.

Rylance, who is the former artistic director of Shakespeare’s Globe theatre 
and star of Steven Spielberg’s new film The BFG, heads a list of 214 
signatories toa letter in the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/actors-accuse-bp-of-exploiting-the-arts-0j2dj7b5t>
 claiming that BP uses art sponsorship to help develop its interests in oil 
extraction, which must be reduced to avoid rapid climate change.

It comes after BP announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/bp-sponsorship-arts-organisations-british-museum-national-portrait-gallery>
 it would invest £7.5m in the British Museum, National Portrait Gallery, Royal 
Opera House and Royal Shakespeare Company last week. Other signatories include 
actor Ezra Miller, Nigerian poet Nnimmo Bassey, environmentalist Jonathon 
Porritt, and climate science historian Naomi Oreskes, who have called the deals 
“outdated and unacceptable”.

The letter, organised by Art Not Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil>
, a coalition of campaign groups, continues: “We cannot afford another five 
years of BP-branded culture. We believe museums, theatres and galleries are 
public institutions that must play a positive role in taking urgent climate 
action and defending human rights.

“If the world is to avoid rapid and devastating climate change in the coming 
decades, most of the oil on BP’s books cannot be burned. Meanwhile, the company 
continues acting in defiance of the Paris agreement on climate change, and 
harming lives every day - despite community resistance from the Gulf Coast to 
West Papua to Australia.”

The letter adds that it has become cheaper for BP to get its brand on major 
museums and theatres (£375,000 a year for each institution, on average) than 
the cost of a short billboard campaign. “Surveys show that a majority of 
Londoners, and the British Museum’s own staff, are againstBP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bp> sponsorship,” it says.

Anna Galkina, from Art Not Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/oil>, 
said in a statement: “Oil sponsorship is meant to buy artists’ silence and 
audiences’ approval, and silence the people who live on the frontlines of oil 
extraction and climate change.”

Earlier this year, BP ended its 26-year sponsorship of Tate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/11/bp-to-end-tate-sponsorship-climate-protests>
 and 34-year sponsorship of Edinburgh International Festival, blaming the 
“extremely challenging business environment” rather than years of protest 
against the deals - including demonstrators spending 25 hours scrawling climate 
change messages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/14/tate-modern-climate-activists-bp-protest>
 in charcoal on the floor of Tate Modern’s Turbine Hall.

The British Museum, National Portrait Gallery, Royal Opera House and Royal 
Shakespeare Company <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc> (RSC) have also 
seen creative protest performances criticising their relationship with BP. 
Theatrical protest group BP or not BP? invaded the RSC’s stages repeatedly in 
2012 when BP sponsored a series of plays there, and have performed without 
permission in the British Museum 18 times. Art collective Liberate Tate also 
performed at several of the institutions.

A previous open letter to Dr Hartwig Fischer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/03/british-museum-bp-sponsorship-hartwig-fischer-climate>
, the new director of the British Museum in April, signed by Rylance, Emma 
Thompson, Mark Ruffalo and shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, called on him to 
drop BP as a sponsor.

Catherine Mallyon, executive director of RSC, said: “The contribution of BP 
means that we can offer £5 tickets to 16 to 25-year-olds, allowing many young 
people the chance to see our work all over the country. We know that people 
value this opportunity as they can come to see our work on a regular basis. It 
also helps us to introduce a new audience to Shakespeare and live theatre.

“As a charity we receive income from many important sources, which includes 
the business sector. It is one of the ways the RSC is funded, alongside ticket 
sales, public investment, private philanthropy and commercial activity. In a 
challenging funding environment we look continuously to maintain existing 
support and secure new partners, and every one of our relationships helps us to 
deliver our work, on and off the stage, to the widest possible audience.”

A spokesperson for the British Museum said that BP sponsorship had enabled the 
museum to host a series of exhibitions and events. “From understanding the 
Emperor Hadrian and the legend of the Vikings, to the significance of 
Indigenous Australia and the Mexican Day of the Dead, these exhibitions and 
events have been enjoyed by millions of visitors to the museum and have 
deepened understanding of the world’s many cultures and their 
interconnectedness. The museum is grateful to BP who have confirmed they will 
continue to support theBritish Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/british-museum> exhibition programme for a 
further five years.”

Alex Beard, chief executive of the Royal Opera House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/royal-opera-house>, said: “One of the 
benefits of such long‐term support [from BP] is that you can really build and 
develop a partnership, and to have the BP Big Screen programme consistently 
providing opportunities for people up and down the country to access 
world‐class ballet and opera for free is fantastic.”

BP declined to comment directly on the letter but pointed out that in total 
more than 50 million people have engaged with BP supported arts and cultural 
activities since 1990. When announcing £7.5m deal last week, Peter Mather the 
BP Group regional vice-president, Europe said: “Our continued support will 
enable these institutions to forward plan engaging, educational and powerful 
exhibitions and performances that will be enjoyed by millions here in the UK 
and beyond.”
 