
Could there be a sweeter confection to put before a TV audience than Mary 
Berry: Secrets From Britain’s Great Houses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/04/mary-berry-secrets-from-britains-great-houses-british-bake-off-new-series-bbc>
?

I mean, it has everything. It has secrets. It has stately homes. It has secrets
in stately homes: I can’t be the only one who thinks immediately of Lady Mary 
humping 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/downton-abbey/8819485/Downton-Abbeys-Turkish-diplomat-sex-scandal-is-not-fiction.html>
 that Turk to death at Downton. It has a zeitgeisty smack of Britishness. It 
has Mary Berry.

I was delighted by last week’s announcement that the three women regulars from 
The Great British Bake Offhave all been given new shows 
<http://www.heart.co.uk/showbiz/tv/gbbos-mary-mel-sue-their-own-tv-shows-bbc/#IxIqhaSYodLRc3U2.97>
 to present.

Quite right too. Those women are intensely watchable; they all have stardust 
about them.Mary Berry <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/mary-berry> is 
clearly a shimmering gem and has been lauded as such ever since she was 
rediscovered and relaunched asBake Off’s glamorous granny.

Less so with Melanie Giedroyc and Sue Perkins; it annoyed me for years that, 
while everyone talked constantly about Mary and Paul, nobody seemed to mention 
Mel and Sue. They were just there, like the trees and the food mixers. When TV 
reviewers raved about the series, the tent got mentioned more often than the 
presenters.

It wasn’t until Mel and Sue announced their retirement from Bake Off (after 
its shock departure from the BBC this summer) that people openly discussed – 
perhaps even realised for the first time – how vital to the show’s success was 
their particular blend of wit and charm.

So, I am delighted they all have new shows. One feels sorry for Paul Hollywood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/08/the-great-british-bake-off-will-stay-the-same-on-channel-4-says-paul-hollywood>
, who’s probably backed the wrong horse. I’ve met Paul Hollywood a few times 
and he seems like a really nice man, plus he’s very good on TV. The kicking 
he’s had, just for sticking nervously with the series rather than the channel, 
is ridiculous. It’s only light entertainment, it’s not Aleppo.

Besides, if Paul Hollywood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/paul-hollywood> had remained part of 
the Fab Four, we might have been denied the new projects that the remaining 
women are launching individually. They sound amazing, as if a board game had 
been constructed in which the squares were “things people like”, the counters 
were Mary, Mel and Sue, and programmes were created according to which counter 
happened to land where.

Mary Berry clearly landed on the Downton Abbey square. Sue Perkins got “Indian 
travel”, hence the forthcoming three-parter in which Perks goes up the Ganges.

Mel Giedroyc must have rolled a double, landing on both “talent contest” and 
“Gary Barlow”, resulting inLet It Shine 
<http://www.digitalspy.com/tv/let-it-shine/feature/a801988/gary-barlow-let-it-shine-bbc-one-show-tickets-auditions-prize/>
, a talent contest in which Gary Barlow tries to cast a West End musical based 
on the hits of Take That.

It probably sounds like I’m taking the mickey. But I’m not; this might be an 
excellent way of making television. In the book world, my own late father did 
the exact same thing.

In 1975, my father <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alan_Coren> looked up the 
most popular subjects in Britain – those about which people were most likely to 
buy books – and put them together to create an irresistible lure for readers. 
The result wasGolfing for Cats, a book with a swastika on the front.

“Even more books about fishing have been sold than books about golf,” he 
wrote, “butFishing for Cats, conjuring up as it did the image of someone 
leaning over a bridge with a mouse on the end of a string, stretched, I felt, 
ambiguity to an intolerable limit.”

My father would have liked Mary Berry: Secrets From Britain’s Great Houses. As 
will we all.

I simply do not understand why all culture isn’t constructed like this. Why 
should the invention of new things be any more complicated than simply 
identifying the things we already like and then jamming them together? Any 
other approach is spitting in the eye of the paying public. An insult to 
democracy. A refusal to respect the will of the people.

Here are my pitches for the television of 2017.

Dancing with Antiques


Former Strictly judge Len Goodman whirls round the floor at Blackpool with a 
series of baroque console tables, 18th-century armoires and old chess sets, 
steering them elegantly through the samba and the Viennese waltz while audience 
members shout bids for the items and their owners look disappointed.

The Queen Gets a Hatchimal


As monarch, the Queen is able to get her hands on the otherwise sold-out 
“must-have” toy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/14/hatchimal-christmas-toy-you-cant-get-christmas-best-seller>
 of Christmas 2016. In this observational documentary, narrated by Sir David 
Attenborough, Her Majesty nurses the Hatchimal into life and tends it 
carefully, occasionally asking “Is this it?”, “But what does it actuallydo?” 
and “Two hundred quid online, you say?”

Show Me the Way to Go Foam


Over the course of this simple, nine-part recipe series, underdog football 
heroes Leicester City teach us how to make eight different flavoured coffees. 
In week one, it’s gingerbread latte. Week two is butterscotch frappuccino. Week 
three is mocha mochaccino. Week four is chocolate mojitoccino. Week five is 
macchiato with Skittles spilt in it by mistake. Week six is eggnogspresso. Week 
seven is “A-berry-cano”. Week eight is Nescafé. Week nine is just a recap of 
the previous weeks. “We all love home-cooked food,” says Jamie Vardy. 
“Sometimes we just have to remember to stop, take the time and actually make 
it.”

Ant and Dexit


The lovable Geordie presenters debate the pros and cons of triggering article 
50. Staunch Remainer Ant is in favour of a more gradual move in that direction. 
Dec’s fury at his moaning comedy partner’s refusal to respect the mandate 
nearly brings the pair to blows!

Bear Grylls’ Dog Hospital


The rugged survivalist nurses lovable ailing canines back to health, but then, 
when he gets hungry, eats them.

Up All Night to Get Lucario


Harry Styles plays Pokémon Go.

Mrs Patmore’s <http://downtonabbey.wikia.com/wiki/Beryl_Patmore> Goal of the 
Month


Self-explanatory.
 