
I hear shrill ululating cries from inside a windowless stone room, then 
frenzied drumming. Following it inside, I’m startled to see a mysterious woman 
lying on the ground, her head entirely shrouded and her hands tied in plastic 
bags. I’m relieved to learn that all the noise is in preparation for a wedding, 
and this is the bride: traditionally she covers her face for three days before 
the ceremony, and her hands have just been hennaed. The room is in a tiny 
village among oases near Chinguetti, central Mauritinia. We (my husband and I, 
and our sons, aged two and four) are travelling around its boundlessly rising 
butterscotch-blond dunes in the Adrar region, staying in ancient caravan towns.
Mauritania map. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/mauritania_travel/giv-31114HFVYklpGCjll/>
Hard-pushed to pinpoint Mauritania on a map? You’re not alone. It’s south of 
Western Sahara and north of Senegal, on the west African coast. And it’s 
enormous (nearly twice the size of France). Years previously I’d travelled 
across the Niger Sahara with a salt caravan, and the allure of it never left 
me. Then I was footloose and fancy-free; now I have two children. We often 
stared at maps together, and I’d wonder about the huge, empty expanse of 
Mauritania west of Niger. I imagined it to be similar. I was right.

And this is a country where you can explore the Sahara without breaking the 
bank, by camping and staying in guesthouses. If you have a head for adventure, 
it makes the ideal family holiday: the spaces are huge and there’s no malaria 
in the central Adrar region. I organised the trip using local travel agent
Chinguitty Voyages 
<http://www.mauritaniatours.com/tourism-vacations-mauritania.html>, which 
sorted us out with a car, a driver, an English-speaking guide and a cook.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443185789588%2F856f05e9-c30a-45b4-82f3-605d06174227-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443185789588%2F856f05e9-c30a-45b4-82f3-605d06174227-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The writer’s husband and son, Archie in the dunes close to Tergit. Photograph: 
Kate Eshelby 
Nouakchott, the capital, is a sprawl of low-rise candy-coloured buildings that 
seem to grow haphazardly out of the desert. We spend our first night atAuberge 
Diaguili <http://www.diaguili.com/>, a six-bedroom riad owned by a 
French-Mauritanian couple. It’s on a quiet street and full of colourful 
furniture, with ahaima (Moorish tent) in the leafy courtyard, which our 
children love. Outside, the pavement is a sea of sand. Here the desert is like 
an overbearing mother, never quite letting go. Swathes of sand sweep in 
everywhere.

The country is immediately exotic, with men dressed in sky-blue bobos (long 
robes) billowing in the ever-present wind, their eyes peering from beneath 
turbans. The golden and creamy white sand of the desert is pure and silky to 
the touch. There are no scraggy bushes or even footprints; it curves up into 
huge peaks, carved into troughs by the wind.
 Young women in Ouadane display traditional henna tattoos. Photograph: Finbarr 
O'Reilly/Finbarr O'Reilly/Reuters/Corbis 
The culture remains vehemently nomadic, with tents plonked in the middle of 
the city and camels wandering about. I ask for directions to a particular 
building. “There are no fixed addresses. We’re not one for cities,” Mohamedou, 
our guide, replies. “In the late 1950s, Nouakchott was little more than a 
fishing village. But recently it has grown fast, people driven here by droughts 
killing their animals.”

Donkeys trot by pulling carts. A long stretch of road is lined with tents, 
where people come to drink camel milk and eat barbecued goat. In the early 
evening the camels are being milked, and drinking water from old baths.

Noukachott spreads along the coast between the Atlantic and the desert. Down 
on the shore, the sun glints on boldly painted pirogues bobbing on 
surfing-sized waves. Men sing as they haul colossal fish onto the sand. “The 
seas are some of the world’s richest,” Mohamedou says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443185990549%2Fdf0becc6-41d3-4f5d-8157-023af6bc9311-2060x1358.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443185990549%2Fdf0becc6-41d3-4f5d-8157-023af6bc9311-2060x1358.jpeg>
 The town of Chinguetti, once a renowned centre of Islamic learning, is now 
being reclaimed by the desert. Photograph: Remi Benali/Corbis 
Tourism, though, has suffered here in recent years. In 2008, the Dakar Rally, 
which passes through Mauritania, was cancelled because of terrorist threats (it 
has been held in South America ever since) and theForeign Office advises 
against travel here <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/mauritania>. Yet 
we meet foreigners working here who assure us it is not dangerous (the Spanish 
embassy recently lifted its ban) and we certainly feel safe.

One thing does dismay my husband, however. Arriving at midnight, after flights 
with two young children, he is looking forward, perhaps naively, to a drink. 
But his clandestine duty-free bottle is instantly confiscated. This Muslim 
country is strictly dry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443110154850%2Fc9803e3f-5a3b-4022-b6b9-7dab47479627-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443110154850%2Fc9803e3f-5a3b-4022-b6b9-7dab47479627-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Preparing lunch. Food is eaten sitting cross-legged on the ground. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Next day we drive out into the desert proper, heading north past 
weather-battered villages and brightly patterned tents. Most of the country 
looks as if it could pack up and move at any moment. The tarmac road quickly 
turns to sand. We stop for lunch (delicious chicken with dates and rice) in a 
mud house with mats on the floor while a sandstorm whips up outside. Food is 
eaten sitting cross-legged on the ground, using our hands. Chatter and laughter 
fill the room as Mohamedou, Mohamed Lemine, our driver, and Saliq, our cook, 
play with our boys.

Back in the car, we see no one for miles, just wide savannah with acacia 
trees, alternating with flat treeless expanse. One tent is in such a remote 
spot it’s staggering that the family living here survives. We drive past 
towering cliffs and mesas and through rocky desert to the deep Amogjar canyon, 
which is reminiscent of Utah.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54f9317f2bf036c7725230339f142dd9dfdaf900%2F0_0_634_479%2F634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54f9317f2bf036c7725230339f142dd9dfdaf900%2F0_0_634_479%2F634.jpg>
 Kate’s son, Zac, riding a camel with the family’s guide, Mohamedou. 
Photograph: Kate Eshelby 
Mauritania was an important crossroads for camel trains carrying dates and 
salt across the desert, and Chinguetti is one of four survivingksours 
(fortified trading villages), along with Ouadane, Tichit and Oualata. Now 
Unesco-listed, they grew to be prosperous towns in the middle ages. Chinguetti 
– said locally to be the seventh most holy city of Islam – became a hub of 
learning and a meeting place for pilgrims travelling to Mecca. Its old 
libraries are full of ancient books of poetry and astronomy, leather-bound and 
etched in gold, though sadly at the one we visit, Fondation al Ahmed Mahmoud, 
the books sit in cardboard boxes, caked in dust.

Many Chinguetti homes, with acacia-wood doors leading to courtyard interiors, 
now lie abandoned and half-buried in sand. “Lots of people have left the old 
towns now,” says Mohamedou. At its heart, the mosque’s dry-stone minaret turns 
gold in the setting sun as turbaned men squat outside, chanting their prayers. 
Back across a wideoued (dry river bed) flanked by dunes is the new town of 
dry-stone houses with low windows (against the heat), flat palm roofs and 
traditional triangle motifs cut into the walls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3987fa19bb11f0507fd090bdd254f2986caa5ee2%2F0_0_1000_714%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3987fa19bb11f0507fd090bdd254f2986caa5ee2%2F0_0_1000_714%2F1000.jpg>
 Courtyard at La Gueïla 
“We have date and hibiscus homemade jam,” Sylvette says, serving us breakfast 
in her welcoming guesthouse,La Gueïla <http://www.lagueila.com>, just off 
Chinguetti’s main street. She tells us how she came here from France and fell 
in love with the Sahara, spending time in the deserts of Algeria, Mali and 
Niger, too.

We climb the internal tower to look out over the town and dunes, and later eat 
a candlelit dinner here, laid out on a mat with cushions, under the stars. A 
small fountain tinkles in the lush garden, bold with bougainvillea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443107492461%2F18e73bd3-3b82-4dac-9694-102744a470b7-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443107492461%2F18e73bd3-3b82-4dac-9694-102744a470b7-1020x612.jpeg>
 The view from the La Geula guesthouse, Chinguitti. Photograph: Kate Eshelby 
We spend hours sliding down the big apricot and cream-yellow dunes that soar 
away from the town, enjoying the sand’s cool softness between our toes and 
shrieking with excitement at the glorious openness and space. We straddle the 
lip of one gigantic dune, only to find a view of another. One night we come 
here to eatméchoui – a traditional nomads’ feast of goat slow-cooked over a 
fire sunk into the sand. Afterwards we lie counting shooting stars.

From Chinguetti, we ride camels into the desert, and out of the glare we 
suddenly see an incongruously green oasis. Wheat blows among date palms, 
vegetable plots and raised wells full of clear water. Close by are houses made 
from camel grass (the tufts we’ve seen sprouting from dunes). They’re empty, 
but only for now. “Duringgaytna, the date harvest, these villages are full,” 
Mohamedu says. I enter one house – it is instantly cool, like a larder.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443108020673%2Fde8dfd9c-f78f-4705-8810-18962bf81cb0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F24%2F1443108020673%2Fde8dfd9c-f78f-4705-8810-18962bf81cb0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Auberge Vasque guest house in Ouadane 
We push on north-east to Ouadane, our driver weaving skilfully across the sea 
of dunes. There’s a boy tending his flock of goats. Two men whizz by on white 
camels. We stop and Zac, our four-year-old, enjoys leading a camel off into the 
sand. Ouadane is an old town built from terracotta rock, rising from, and 
blending into, the surrounding cliffs.

Here we stay at Auberge Vasque, run by the charismatic Zaida, who is a haratin,
a freed slave in Mauritania’s complex caste system. The only other guests are 
Isabel, who is from Portugal and has a gallery in Nouakchott selling locally 
sourced art and antiques (mainly to expats), and a Frenchman who teaches in the 
capital.

We spend our days picnicking in the desert under robin-egg blue skies, visit 
Qur’anic schools – usually under a tree rather than in a classroom – where 
children learn the Koran by heart from wooden slabs; we climb on to the 
rooftops, looking out over the mosque’s rock minaret and down into the oldest 
house, now a museum, full of bygone treasures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c39997f8b00d7f426f70a43afaed84ce1994e4f%2F35_19_1444_1021%2F1444.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mauritania%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Sahara&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fmauritania-sahara-africa-desert-family-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1c39997f8b00d7f426f70a43afaed84ce1994e4f%2F35_19_1444_1021%2F1444.jpg>
 Camping at Tergit. Photograph: Kate Eshelby 
On our way back, we stop at Tergit, another oasis, where the water flows out 
of a mountainside. This time there are springs to dip in, under a canopy of 
palms. We walk along a shallow stream, the boys laughing as fish nibble our 
toes. That night we camp among seductively curved dunes, wind-rippled slopes 
and silence. Life is good. In fact, it’s time for another tea. A short sweet 
explosion of hot liquid, heated in the sand over coals.

As the sun sinks quickly, Mohamedou, Mohamed Lemine and Saliq bow to pray in 
unison. Terrorism is not Islam. This is Islam. Three men who look after us, 
form firm friendships with our children and whip up scrumptious desert feasts.


• An eight-day trip with Chinguitty Voyages 
<http://www.mauritaniatours.com/tourism-vacations-mauritania.html> costs £2,000 
for a family of four, including guide, 4x4 plus driver, cook and all 
accommodation and food. If booked separately,Diaguilli guesthouse 
<http://www.diaguili.com/> charges £55 a night for a family room, La Gueïla 
<http://www.lagueila.com/index1.html> and Auberge Vasque both £30. Hiring a 4x4 
with a driver costs £65 a day and a guide £20. Flights to Nouakchott via 
Casablanca cost about £595 return withRoyal Air Maroc 
<http://www.royalairmaroc.com/uk-en>. The trip can also be organised through 
UK-basedNative Eye Travel 
<http://nativeeyetravel.com/tours-holidays/mauritania/> for £5,200 or £2,499pp 
on a group tour. Visas can now be issued at the airport for €120, paid in 
euros. The best time to visit is late October-early April
 