
Max Mosley <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mosley> has dismissed fears 
voiced across the newspaper industry of potentially crippling legal costs if a 
controversial new media regulation law is enacted.

The comments by Mosley, who funds the state-backed press regulator Impress, 
which has failed to gain the backing of any leading newspapers, follow claims 
by the Sun editor, Tony Gallagher, that the media regulation law is an attempt 
to“blackmail” the press <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b086ly6q>.


The debate over section 40 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013, which could make 
newspapers pay the legal costs of people that sue them over articles even if 
they lose in court, comes before the end of the government’s consultation on 
the legislation on 10 January. It is also consulting on whether part two of the 
Leveson inquiry, relating to phone hacking and police links with the media, 
should go ahead.


“The whole point of section 40 is that it makes possible inexpensive 
arbitration between a newspaper and an individual,” Mosleytold BBC Radio 4’s 
Today programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b086s608#play> on Tuesday. 
“Section 40 only applies if [a publisher] doesn’t agree to go to independent 
arbitration. [It] is vastly cheaper than going to court. If a newspaper refuses 
to belong to a [government-] recognised regulator then, of course, if it is 
taken to court it will end out paying both sides. If a newspaper insists on the 
luxury of a high court hearing they pay both sides. If they go to inexpensive 
arbitration it costs nobody anything.”


On Monday’s edition of the BBC radio show, Gallagher attacked the possibility 
of section 40 being implemented as “blackmail” to try to force newspapers to 
joinImpress <https://www.theguardian.com/media/impress>.


“Essentially, it is an attempt to blackmail newspapers into joining the 
government’s regulator, a state-sponsored regulator, and no self-respecting 
newspaper worth its salt wants to be part of a state-sponsored regulator 
because you are then on the road to giving MPs power and the whip hand over the 
press,” he said. “A newspaper could report the conduct of a terrible MP, that 
MP could then bring a case for libel against a newspaper.


Max Mosley-funded press regulator recognised as state-backed watchdog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/25/impress-press-regulator-newspaper-publishers-max-moseley>
“He or she could lose that libel case and yet, because we are not members of 
the state-sponsored regulator, we would then be liable for the MP’s costs. That 
offends all principles of natural justice. It’s insane.”

Mosley, who won a court battle against the now-defunct News of the World in 
2008, funds Impress to the tune of £3.8m through two charities.


He defended accusations that the regulator is not independent.


“[Impress] is completely independent of me,” he said. “If it were not it would 
not have been recognised by the Press Recognition Panel (PRP). The situation is 
I’ve given, rather my family charity has given, money to a charity that exists 
to promote a Leveson-compliant regulator. That has given money to Impress.”


Mosley said the funds would allow Impress to carry on working for about five 
years. He indicated that he would potentially continue to fund it beyond that 
point for a “very long time”.


Local newspapers including the Birmingham Mail have said that if section 40 
were enacted it would encourage complainants to sidestep arbitration and 
incentivise immediate litigation.


Mosley argued that through Impress, or any officially recognised regulator, 
there were protections to stop such practices.


“There is a very strong filter to stop anything frivolous or vexatious claims 
getting through [to arbitration],” he said. “If it gets through, the same 
principle applies as in court. If the case is weak, it will get struck out.”


However, Sun stablemate the Sunday Times has warned that big exposés, such as 
revealing that Lance Armstrong was a drugs cheat,would not have been possible 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/sunday-times-says-it-never-would-have-published-lance-armstrong-investigation-under-section-40-as-media-ramps-up-campaign/>
 had section 40 of the Crime and Courts Act been enacted.


In October, Impress gained recognition as a state-backed watchdog in a move 
newspaper industry body the News Media Association said amounted to anattack on 
press freedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/25/impress-press-regulator-newspaper-publishers-max-moseley>
.


Most leading newspapers have their complaints handled by Ipso, which has said 
it will not seek recognition from the PRP. Others, such as the Guardian and the 
Financial Times, have their own system of regulation.

In November, Impress was dumped as sponsor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/04/impress-dumped-as-sponsor-of-the-british-journalism-awards>
 of the British journalism awards after judges objected.
 