
There was something hugely touching about the birthday party the St Magnus 
Festival threw forSir Peter Maxwell Davies 
<http://www.maxopus.com/life_career.aspx>. Max – as he's universally known in 
Orkney and throughout the musical world – turns 80 this September, and the 
occasion will be marked byspecial concerts in Glasgow 
<http://www.glasgowconcerthalls.com/events/max-at-80-a-celebration-scottish-chamber-orchestra/>
, atthe Proms <http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/september-08/15132> and 
elsewhere. But up in Orkney, atthe festival he helped set up 
<http://www.stmagnusfestival.com/about.htm> on the islands he has called home 
since the 1970s, the official celebrations didn't involve any high-profile 
artists or high-budget commissions. In a packed auditorium at Kirkwall Grammar 
School, it was local young musicians who gathered to perform a collection of 
the composer's works for children.

Max has been writing educational music for more than half a century. Even 
during his most caustic early period, alongside such screamingly radical works 
asEight Songs for a Mad King <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IdZwHFtq6ns> and 
St Thomas Wake 
<http://www.boosey.com/cr/music/Peter-Maxwell-Davies-St-Thomas-Wake/3477>, he 
was penning these semi-sweet, sort-of singsong tunes for local primary schools. 
I say "sort-of" singsong, because with Max there is always a twist. What first 
sounds like a simple nursery rhyme turns out to be laced with weirdly roaming 
intervals; what starts out a steady 4/4 ostinato soon begins to hiccup with 
tricksy cross-rhythms.


This isn't simply a case of a clever composer keeping himself entertained. 
There is real pedagogical intent behind such works as Kirkwall Shopping Songs, 
Seven Songs Home or the thrillingly-named Dinosaur at Large; even the simplest 
lines keeps their young performers on their toes. Speaking before the Kirkwall 
concert, Max described children as his “most appreciative and harshest 
critics”. With a mischievous smile and wag of his finger, he explained that 
“you can't get away with anything phoney; when you write for children, you have 
to write up. It has to sound good in their terms. You almost have to think as 
if you are their age.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F08%2Fpeter-maxwell-davies-80th-birthday-concert-st-magnus-festival-music-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F3%2F1404407217100%2F2f8aba24-e1b2-4488-b55c-677aeb2e42bc-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Maxwell%20Davies%2080th%20birthday%20concert%20St%20magnus%20festival%20music%20education&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F08%2Fpeter-maxwell-davies-80th-birthday-concert-st-magnus-festival-music-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Maxwell%20Davies%2080th%20birthday%20concert%20St%20magnus%20festival%20music%20education&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F08%2Fpeter-maxwell-davies-80th-birthday-concert-st-magnus-festival-music-education%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F3%2F1404407217100%2F2f8aba24-e1b2-4488-b55c-677aeb2e42bc-1020x612.jpeg>
 'When you write for children, you have to write up. It has to sound good in 
their terms.' Orkney children perform at Sir Peter Maxwell Davies's 80th 
birthday concert. Photograph: Bob Jones 
During the early days of the St Magnus Festival, Max wrote pieces for the 
schools of Orkney every single year. Back then he was living in a remote croft 
on the craggy west coast of Hoy – the tiny Bunertoon, perched high above the 
sea cliffs at Rackwick Bay, accessible only by foot and frequently battered by 
storms blasting across the Pentland Firth. To survive in a place like that 
required the support of his neighbours, and underpinning Max's music for 
children is a desire to be useful, to square up what it means to be a 
composer-member of a small island community.

Involving the schools was also, he acknowledged, an important gesture as an 
incomer to the islands. When he co-founded the St Magnus Festival in 1977, Max 
was perfectly aware that some locals might mutter a word or several about an 
elite classical music series crash-landing on their doorsteps. “I thought it 
was a constructive idea to write words and music about the place where the 
festival was happening,” he said. “And the best way to get people to come to 
the festival was to involve their children.”

And so many of his songs are packed with images of Orcadian life. Here's a 
verse from Songs of Hoy:“Rackwick Valley/ Is no place to dally/ When rains lash 
down from the sky/ In two minutes flat/ Your clothes stick to your back,/ And 
there's nowhere to get dry.” In Kirkwall Shopping Songs there's a spooky 
instrumental interlude, The Big Tree, in which sparse recorder and drum lines 
depict a town landmark. At the Bakery is a spoken-word number that features a 
boy soloist earnestly intoning a shopping list –“two bridies at 12p each, a 
cream cookie at 10p, and a block of chocolate for 28p”– against a smattering of 
percussion that mimics the sound of change being sorted on the shop counter. 
It's strangely riveting stuff.

There was a sombre note, too. Before the concert Max spoke about the future of 
state-funded music education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/jun/05/music-education-england-michael-gove>
, describing his feelings as "despairing". “We're seeing the demise of school 
orchestras, and school choirs barely exist. When I wrote these pieces, I took 
it for granted that they'd still be part of the culture. But successive 
governments have cut and cut and cut.” Asked what can be done, he replied: 
“apart from the fuss I've made about it all my life, I don't know what to do. I 
will continue to write educational music of the highest quality I can. And 
despite being Master of Queen's Music, I will continue to rail against the 
establishment.” The remark was met with an enormous cheer.

The concert itself was a fond affair, full of appreciation for what Max and 
the festival have contributed to these islands over the past four decades. The 
composer watched on with a broad smile. He hasn't been well the past couple of 
years – this is the first time he has attended the St Magnus Festivalsince he 
was diagnosed with leukaemia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/jan/31/peter-maxwell-davies-10th-symphony-lso-pappano-borromini>
 and underwent chemotherapy. But at the end of the concert he trotted on stage 
to receive a homemade cake and an ammassed round of Happy Birthday. I got the 
sense there was nowhere he would rather be.
 