 Many of the measures announced by Tony Blair to tackle terrorism in the wake 
of the London suicide bombings could and should have been taken long ago. Some 
were recommended by the Newton Committee of Privy Councillors and by the Joint 
Committee on Human Rights (on which I serve), but had been peremptorily ruled 
out by David Blunkett. His successor, Charles Clarke, is a much wiser Home 
Secretary.
It is good news that Clarke is considering adapting pre-trial procedures used 
in France and Germany, including the use of evidence obtained by covert 
surveillance. It is good news that the government is at last using its wide 
powers to deport and exclude extremists whose presence here is not conducive to 
the public good because they foster hatred and advocate or justify terrorism 
and violence. And (pace Amnesty International), it is good news that the 
government is seeking binding assurances from Jordan, Lebanon and elsewhere 
that people returned to those countries will not be exposed to the risk of 
torture or the death penalty.

Announcing the plan, the Prime Minister twice said 'the rules of the game' are 
changing. By this, he seemed to mean the 'rules' within international human 
rights law and the Human Rights Act needed changing. That impression was 
strengthened when the Lord Chancellor, Lord Falconer, warned that British 
judges might have to be instructed by Act of Parliament on how to interpret and 
apply article three of the European Convention on Human Rights more 
restrictively than the European Court of Human Rights.

The European Court has repeatedly observed that 'article three enshrines one 
of the fundamental values of democratic society. Even in the most difficult of 
circumstances, such as the fight against organised terrorism and crime, the 
convention prohibits in absolute terms torture or inhuman or degrading 
treatment or punishment'. It has noted that the convention makes no provisions 
for article three exception or derogation.

According to the PM, 'the origin of the problem under article three' is the 
European Court's decision in Chahal v UK, that even if someone is a threat to 
national security, if there is a substantial risk of his being subject to 
torture in the receiving state, he must not be deported to that country. But if 
Mr Blair believes the European Court might be persuaded to overturn Chahal, he 
has been badly advised. The decision of the Grand Chamber in Chahal reflects 
article three of the UN Torture Convention (ratified by the Thatcher government 
in 1988) preventing the UK from expelling, returning or extraditing a person to 
another state where there are substantial grounds for believing that he would 
be in danger of being subjected to torture.

It is inconceivable that the European Court would now interpret article three 
more narrowly. He has also been badly advised if he thinks British courts could 
lawfully be prevented from giving an effective remedy to someone facing a 
serious risk of being tortured in the receiving state.

Our courts need no instruction from government or parliament about how to 
interpret and apply the Human Rights Act. Contrary to the intemperate and 
ignorant attacks on the judiciary by Michael Howard, they have not been guilty 
of 'aggressive judicial activism', 'thwarting the will of parliament'. Our 
courts are in a weaker position than those of the rest of Europe and the 
common-law world. In deference to parliamentary sovereignty, they cannot strike 
down Acts of Parliament, but can only give declarations of incompatibility, 
leaving it to ministers and parliament to decide what to do. British courts 
have interpreted and applied the Human Rights Act wisely, without encroaching 
on the executive and legislative branches of government.

The Prime Minister and his dark shadow should not undermine but should uphold 
the constitutional legitimacy of the Human Rights Act and the convention, and 
the independence of British courts.

Â· Lord Lester QC is a barrister and Liberal Democrat peer.
 