
Volkswagen scandal tarnishes hard-won US reputation as green company
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/25/volkswagen-scandal-us-reputation-emissions>
John German has barely had time to catch his breath all week between 
appearances on TV news channel and radio phone-in shows. He’s an unlikely media 
star, not a pop singer or reality TV contestant, but a grey-haired automotive 
engineer thrust into the global spotlight after he and his colleagues were 
credited with helping uncover one of the biggest ever corporate scandals.


“We really didn’t expect to find anything,” German said of his research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/21/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-sends-shares-in-global-carmakers-reeling>
 that found Volkswagen had installed sophisticated software designed to cheat 
strict emission tests across the world. His simple test – checking the car’s 
emissions on real roads rather than in lab test conditions – led to the 
resignation of VW’s chief executive after the German company was forced to 
admit it installed “defeat devices” in 11m cars. The scandal has wiped more 
than €24bn ($26.8bn) off VW’s market value.


Many questions remain but one thing is clear to German: “It was not an 
accident,” he said. “A lot of work has gone into this.”

When German finally found a moment of peace this week he called his wife in 
Ann Arbor, Michigan. “She said: ‘You know you’ve made it now, you can retire 
and be very happy’,” German told the Guardian as he prepared to board a plane 
back to Michigan after a week in the spotlight in Washington DC. “No, no, no, I 
can’t afford to yet,” German told his disappointed wife.

He may have helped uncover one of the world’s biggest corporate scandals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/22/volkswagen-scandal-q-and-a-emissions-scandal>
, but German earns a modest salary as US co-lead of the International Council 
on Clean Transportation (ICCT) a small nonprofit organisation dedicated to 
helping to reduce vehicle emissions and has an annual budget of just $12m.

“It has been totally overwhelming,” German <http://www.theicct.org/john-german>
 said of the global interest in his research this week. “I’ve been doing 
nothing else [but responding to the media and politicians] for 12 hours a day 
since Friday,” when US regulators announced theirfindings against VW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/18/epa-california-investigate-volkswagen-clean-air-violations>
 based on German’s research] “We’re a small organisation that primarily deals 
with information on diesel filters, so this is unprecedented and overwhelming.

“As an organisation that is trying to reduce emissions and improve efficiency 
it is always gratifying to see results from our work, but we never dreamed we 
would have this kind of impact.”

German explained that the idea to carry out the test, which he described as 
“very ordinary”, came fromPeter Mock <http://www.theicct.org/peter-mock>, a 
colleague in Europe, who noticed discrepancies in the emissions of the diesel 
VW Passat and VW Jetta. He said they decided to carry out on-the-road tests in 
the US as the emissions regulations are much stricter than in the EU. They 
expected the cars to pass and they could use this as proof to show Europeans 
that it was possible to run diesels with cleaner emissions.

German, who has a degree in physics from the University of Michigan and said 
he “got over halfway through an MBA before he came to his senses”, sought out 
the assistance of the West Virginia University’sCenter for Alternative Fuels, 
Engines and Emissions 
<http://www.ewg.org/enviroblog/2015/09/West%2520Virginia%2520University%25E2%2580%2599s%2520Center%2520for%2520Alternative%2520Fuels,%2520Engines%2520and%2520Emissions>
. The WVU provided a portable emission measurement system that could be put in 
the car’s boot (trunk) with an attached probe placed in the exhaust pipe.

Then German sourced a Passat, Jetta and a BMW X5 (which also showed emissions 
discrepancies in Europe) and “had a drive around”. “The VWs were massively 
exceeding their official emissions readings in normal driving conditions, which 
was completely inexplicable and totally surprised us,” German said.

The Volkswagen emissions scandal explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/sep/23/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-explained-diesel-cars>
Thinking it must be a technical error, the tests were expanded and the cars 
were driven more than 1,200 miles from San Diego to Seattle – almost the entire 
length of the west coast of the US.

The VWs nitrogen oxide emissions – which creates smog and has been linked to 
increased asthma attacks and other respiratory illnesses – still exceeded the 
US standards by up to 35 times. The BMW X5 was within the regulated range.

Arvind Thiruvengadam, a research assistant professor at WVU, who conducted the 
tests said: “We were doubting ourselves and our procedures and making sure to 
double check that we were not doing anything wrong. We did so much testing we 
couldn’t possibly doing the same mistake again and again.

“We were like ‘OK, we’re going to write a lot of journal papers, and we’ll be 
happy if three people read these journal papers,’” hetold National Public Radio 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/09/24/443053672/how-a-little-lab-in-west-virginia-caught-volkswagens-big-cheat>
 last week. “That’s our happiness at that point.”

German published the research 
<http://www.theicct.org/sites/default/files/publications/WVU_LDDV_in-use_ICCT_Report_Final_may2014.pdf>
 in May 2014 and handed it over to theEnvironment Protection Agency (EPA) 
<http://yosemite.epa.gov/opa/admpress.nsf/21b8983ffa5d0e4685257dd4006b85e2/dfc8e33b5ab162b985257ec40057813b!OpenDocument>
. “There was an expectation that they would find out what was causing the 
higher-than-expected emissions,” he said. “We did send a courtesy copy to VW to 
say ‘vehicles B and C are your vehicles and you might like to know’, we had no 
response.”

There was no response from the EPA either, but keen-eyed German noticed an EPA 
press release in which VW agreed to recall almost 500,000 vehicles in December 
2014 to reinstall software, which it said would solve the higher-than-expected 
emissions.

However, a couple of months later the California Air Resources Board (Carb) 
carried out spot checks and discovered that the “defeat device” software – used 
to dramatically reduces nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions only when the cars are 
undergoing strict emission tests – was still present.

“That is actually the single most inexplicable thing about this whole 
business,” German said. “VW had a chance to fix the problem, and they continued 
to try and cheat and do what they had done. That’s just amazing.”

“Only then did VW admit it had designed and installed a defeat device in these 
vehicles in the form of a sophisticated software algorithm that detected when a 
vehicle was undergoing emissions testing,” the EPA said in a statement last 
week.

German said it was unclear how the defeat device software worked, but the 
software could work by detecting periods when the steering column wasn’t 
turning but the wheels were which would indicate the car was on dynamo-meters 
for testing, or could also test for the precise uniform temperature that the 
tests are carried out at.

“The kind of software it takes to first detect when you’re driving on the 
official test would be very hard to develop. And then you would need duplicate 
software to tell the car to have two different emission controls.”

UK, France and Germany lobbied for flawed car emissions tests, documents reveal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/24/uk-france-and-germany-lobbied-for-flawed-car-emissions-tests-documents-reveal>
He said it was impossible to know how far up the food chain at VW the 
fraudulent activity went, but said: “It would have had to be quite a few people 
involved. It certainly won’t have just been one individual.”

German said VW could have continued in the deceit for the foreseeable future 
if no one had thought to test the cars emissions on real roads. He said there 
is no way to know if other car companies may also have been using similar 
methods to trick official emission tests, but welcomed UK, German and US 
regulators moves to retest cars emissions on real roads.

German, who drives a 1997 Honda Accord station wagon that he says has pretty 
good emissions for a manual transmission, said he hopes his work will act as a 
wake-up call and scare the whole industry into making certain that their 
vehicles comply with all emissions regulations. “Companies should realise they 
might get away with stuff for a little while, but it will catch up with them.”

He refused to enter into discussion about what sort of action should be taken 
against VW, which is facing a fine of up to $16bn in the US alone and a 
possible criminal investigation. “That’s really up to others, I’m just an 
engineer from Michigan it’s really beyond my field of reach.”
 