
The extreme weather experienced by much of Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/australia> during the Christmas break 
really did bring the tropics to Melbourne, the Bureau of Meteorology has said.

In a report released on Monday 
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/current/statements/scs59.pdf?cid=017tw24>, the 
bureau said the December 2016 weather event was largely unprecedented, breaking 
numerous records and bringing conditions to Melbourne which were “more 
characteristic of Darwin at the peak of the wet season than of southern 
Australia”.

In its report, the bureau said the precipitable water levels – the amount of 
water in the atmosphere – broke multiple records in all states and territories 
except New South Wales.

Flash-flooding and flight delays as Melbourne hit with drenching rain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2016/dec/29/flash-flooding-and-flight-delays-as-melbourne-hit-with-drenching-rain>
Dewpoints, which are an indication of humidity, were similarly extraordinary, 
with South Australia’s Marree (27.6°) and Geelong inVictoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> (26°) seeing levels which 
the bureau said would be “very high values even for tropical locations”.

Blair Trewin, senior climatologist with the bureau said a dewpoint over 20° 
was “pretty humid byMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> standards”. “To put it 
into context, 20° is a fairly typical dewpoint for Brisbane in mid summer,” he 
told Guardian Australia. Levels of 26 to 27 were more typical for Darwin, he 
said.

The wild weather began a few days before Christmas as a tropical low formed 
off the coast of the Northern Territory, causing a monsoon event before moving 
towards the Kimberley.

On Christmas day it combined with the remnants of tropical cyclone Yvette and 
made its way slowly through the centre of Australia, causingfloods in the 
Kimberley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/26/kimberley-residents-braced-for-flooding-and-possible-evacuation>
 and central Australia, including at Uluru,which was closed by Parks Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/26/uluru-closed-due-to-record-rain-and-flash-flooding>
. A tourist was found alive afterhis car was swept away by flood waters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/27/tourist-trapped-car-floods-alice-springs>
 in Alice Springs, anda group of people were rescued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/tourists-who-went-missing-on-desert-hike-found-58km-from-group>
 after they went missing while attempting to travel between two outback 
communities.

Heavy thunderstorms also caused flash flooding in South Australia and 
Victoria, withMelbourne among the areas most affected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2016/dec/29/flash-flooding-and-flight-delays-as-melbourne-hit-with-drenching-rain>
.

There were few recorded precedents for the tropical weather event to reach so 
far southeast, the bureau said. “Probably the most directly comparable event 
was one we had in January 2011, the same time as the floods in Brisbane which 
got all the attention,” said Trewin. “That 2011 event also saw major flooding 
in northernVictoria <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/victoria>.”

Uluru closed due to record rain and flash flooding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/26/uluru-closed-due-to-record-rain-and-flash-flooding>
The highest December rainfalls remained in the north, with totals of more than 
400mm in some places, but south-eastern areas also received extensive rains and 
South Australia saw its wettest December on record.

The heaviest fall occurred in the remote community of Kintore, with 231.6mm on 
Boxing Day, surpassing its highest December rainfall record, set in 1975. 
Almost 100 people were evacuated, with a number of houses damaged and roads 
made impassable by the rains.

Broome also broke its December record, with 225.6mm on 23 December, and 
Adelaide had its third wettest December day on record, with 61.2mm.

Overnight minimum temperatures were significantly high during the period, with 
the most extreme warmth in eastern NSW, where several places saw highest 
December minimum temperatures on record.

Adelaide also had its hottest Christmas Day in 71 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/24/australias-capital-cities-hot-on-christmas-day-but-kimberley-faces-storms>
, reaching 40.7C – hotter than any capital city in the country that day.

The weather event bookended a year of climate extremes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/05/record-breaking-extreme-weather-in-australia-in-2016-devastates-ecosystems>
. The bureau’s annual climate statement pointed to a strong El Niño and 
civilisation’s penchant for burning fossil fuels as explanation for a year of 
extraordinary weather, devastating ecosystems around the world.

 