
Forget tequila and mezcal, Mexico’s oldest alcoholic drink is pulque, made 
from the fermented sap of an agave plant. The Aztecs dubbed it “drink of the 
gods” and reserved it for priests and nobles. Ancient murals depict the milky 
liquid fuelling grisly ritual sacrifice. After the Spanish arrived in the 
1500s, pulque became widely available and the firstpulquerías opened. It was 
the working man’s tipple and in the early 20th century there were more than 
1,000 pulquerías in Mexico City.

In its natural state, pulque can be slimy and sour-tasting, but it is rich in 
probiotics, vitamins and minerals. Devotees believe it can cure everything from 
digestive disorders to diabetes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmexican-heritage-in-a-glass-tasting-pulque-in-mexico-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02ecd65fdfda969109efeff5f605bfa937120ca3%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mexican%20heritage%20in%20a%20glass%3A%20tasting%20pulque%20in%20Mexico%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmexican-heritage-in-a-glass-tasting-pulque-in-mexico-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mexican%20heritage%20in%20a%20glass%3A%20tasting%20pulque%20in%20Mexico%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmexican-heritage-in-a-glass-tasting-pulque-in-mexico-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02ecd65fdfda969109efeff5f605bfa937120ca3%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Customers at the bar at Las Duelistas pulqueria in Mexico City Photograph: 
Getty Images 
By the 1950s, its popularity had plummeted, thanks in part to campaigns from 
beer and soft drinks companies. Now it’s in vogue once more, with old-school 
establishments being reinvented and neo-pulquerías popping up in the capital. 
One such venue isPulquería Insurgentes 
<https://www.facebook.com/pulqueriainsurgentes/> in the city’s Roma district, a 
four-storey bar-cum-cultural centre that pulses to an eclectic mix of music, 
fromranchera to heavy metal and jazz.

Another bar in the Centro Histórico – Las Duelistas 
<https://www.facebook.com/PulqueriaLasDuelistas/> , founded in 1912 – has been 
transformed. Pulque is still scooped out of wooden barrels, but psychedelic 
murals adorn the walls, and hipsters outnumber old-timers. The drink is made in 
the age-old way: sap from the heart of the plant fermented for a week or two, 
then mixed and muddled with all manner of fruits, vegetables and grains – 
perhaps guava, celery or oatmeal – in acurado.

It’s Mexican heritage in a glass, and last night pulquerías were celebrating 
New Year’s Eve once more.
 