
Far from the gaudy clamour of South Beach and the pastel-hued elegance of the 
art deco district, Little Havana is home to Miami's thriving Latino community. 
Cubans began migrating to Florida in the 1950s but their numbers swelled after 
Castro came to power in 1959, and in the 1960s the area was named Little 
Havana. Miami now has a majority Latino community, with Spanish the predominant 
language in some parts of the city. Today, the stretch along SW 8th Street, or 
Calle Ocho, attracts tourists, but to savour this rich and vibrant part of the 
city, it's better to slow your pace, stick around a while, and watch the 
neighbourhood unfold.

1. There are few sweeter places to begin your day in Miami than Versailles 
Cuban Bakery <http://www.versailles-bakery.com/> (3501 SW 8th), which serves up 
hearty scrambled eggs and croquettes (as well as more Americanised pancake 
stacks with syrup). The real action happens around La Ventanita: the little 
takeaway window and bakery shop. Here, regulars linger around the counter 
enjoyingcafé cubano and cortadito con leche evaporada (espresso served with 
condensed milk), morningempanadas, guava pastries and sugar cane juice with a 
little lime. If your Spanish is up to scratch, you'll be able to eavesdrop on 
first-generation exiles' fiery discussions of Cuban politics, local goings-on 
and the contents of the latest edition of the official Cuban Communist Party 
newspaper,Granma <http://www.granma.cu/idiomas/ingles/>. It's a bit of a hike 
from the heart of the district, but worth it.
 Versailles Cuban Bakery. Photograph: Alamy 
2. The Cuban Quarter begins in earnest a few blocks east, on Calle Ocho 
between 17th and 13th, with huge brightly painted roosters, a smattering of art 
galleries and the Walk of Fame, honouring famous Cubans such asCelia Cruz 
<http://www.celiacruz.com/> and Gloria Estefan. The surrounding area features 
murals, monuments and a statue of the Madonna (said to be illuminated by a 
shaft of holy light each afternoon), many of which stand around the Cuban 
Memorial Plaza – a short stroll from the main drag, and a focal point for this 
community in exile. You'll find an eternal torch dedicated to those killed in 
theBay of Pigs invasion <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bay_of_Pigs_Invasion>, 
and the Plaza de la Cubanidad, which commemorates those who drowned fleeing 
Cuba in 1994 aboard the13 de Marzo tugboat 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/13_de_Marzo_Incident>. There is also a 
magnificent ceiba tree on Memorial Boulevard, at the roots of which are 
offerings left by followers of the Afro-Cuban religion Santería, for whom the 
ceiba is sacred.

3. There are now organised tours of the quarter's famous culinary highlights, 
from fruit stalls to ice-cream vendors, but it's wise to determine the 
mom-and-pop restaurants from the tourist spots. A decent choice isEl Pub 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/El-Pub-Restaurant/258237670909029>, at no 1548. 
It is an unassuming diner from the street, though inside it's welcoming, 
pleasingly old-fashioned, and with excellentbacalao (codfish), Cuban chorizo 
hamburger,chilindrón de cordero (lamb stew) and plantain chips. Sit at the 
counter to shoot the breeze with the locals, or nab one of the booths if you 
prefer a view of the restaurant, with its lazy ceiling fans and glass cabinets 
stacked with sandwiches.

4. After lunch, you can while away a contented hour watching the domino games 
atMáximo Gómez park. Here, older men and women sit neatly dressed, pressed and 
perfumed in the shade, playing ferociously competitive rounds of dominos. Chat 
to one of your fellow spectators (many of whom are eager to tell you just how, 
exactly, they ended up in Florida), or simply sit and listen to the rattle and 
shout of their play.

5. There are plenty of cigar shops along Calle Ocho but chief among them is 
the one at no 1528:Cuba Tobacco Cigar Company 
<http://www.cubatobaccocigarco.com/>, its reputation well-set by five 
generations of the Bello Family; Don Pedro Bello may well be sitting in the 
doorway when you visit, smoking a cigar, of course, like a laid-back, 
leathery-skinned advertisement.
 Azucar Ice Cream Company 
6. Take a cooling pitstop at the Azucar Ice Cream Company 
<http://www.azucaricecream.com/> at no 1503 (and if you do, try the mantecado, 
a Cuban favourite of vanilla, nutmeg and cinnamon). If you're still hungry, 
Los Pinarenos Fruteria at 1334 (famed for its healthy and not-so-healthy 
delicacies), you'll be ready for dinner atEl Cristo 
<http://www.elcristorestaurant.com/>. This local favourite, at no 1543, 
specialises in seafood, serving mixed platters and deep-fried snapper. Sit 
outside if you want to take in Calle Ocho at night.

7. Music is everywhere in Little Havana: spilling out of car windows and cafe 
radios; a mingling ofson cubano <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Son_%28music%29>, 
salsa, merengue and more.Lily's Records, at no 1419, offers the best in Latin 
music and has passionate, knowledgeable staff.

8. It would be foolish to leave this part of town without taking in a live 
show (and perhaps a little dancing). While plenty of venues have live bands, 
the last Friday of the month isViernes Culturales 
<http://www.viernesculturales.org/> or Cultural Friday, an open-air festival of 
art, food and live music. You'll find the hub of events at no 1637.

9. Local's tip: 
"Visit the studio of one of the most celebrated Cuban artists in the world: 
the Agustín Gaínza arts gallery (agustingainza.com) is at 1652 SW 8th Street. 
Agustín is always at his studio and you get a chance to look around, chat to 
him and even see him in action painting."
Grace Della, founder, Miami Culinary Tours <http://www.miamiculinarytours.com/>
 Miami Historic House. Photograph: Airbnb 
10. Where to stay
Apart from the sketchy-looking run of love motels with their hourly rates and 
heart-shaped Jacuzzis, Calle Ocho is still a little skimpy on places to stay. 
Your best bet at the moment isAirbnb <https://www.airbnb.co.uk/>; among its 
Little Havana properties is abrightly coloured house sleeping six 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/rooms/278577?checkin=10-10-2014&checkout=13-10-2014&guests=6&s=D-pR>
 (pictured above), from £61 a night, just a block away from the action. Inside 
it's clean and bright; outside, it has a hammock and garden. For something more 
salubrious, theViceroy <http://www.viceroyhotelsandresorts.com/en/miami>, 
doubles from $285) is a short bus ride away at the other end of 8th Street.

• The trip was provided by the Greater Miami Convention and Visitors Bureau (
miamiandbeaches.com <http://www.miamiandbeaches.com/>). Flights were provided 
by American Airlines (aa.com 
<http://www.aa.com/international/internationalSplashAccess.do?countryCodeForIP=GB>
), which flies direct to Miami from London £603 return including taxes
 