
As the weather turns towards swim and tan season, a new exhibition is opening 
up in Miami to highlight a centerpiece of the summertime experience: the 
swimming pool.

Miami-based artist Nicolas Lobo <http://www.nicolaslobo.com/>’s The Leisure 
Pit opens in Miami this week and is an attempt to force the audience to think 
more deeply about a mundane object.

Lobo is an artist with a habit of taking strange materials, obsessing over 
them, then using them to build gallery quality work. Past installations include 
the use of napalm, Play-Doh, andoff-brand energy drinks billed as having 
aphrodisiac properties. <http://gallerydiet.com/2014/02/28/bad-soda-soft-drunk/>
 This time around, the material is a swimming pool – its chemicals, water and 
associated paraphernalia like flip-flops.

These items were brought together to form the center of his exhibition, a 
collection of concrete ring sculptures that were cast in a swimming pool, using 
the chemicals and water that traditionally fill it. The gallery walls are 
covered with carbon fiber wall hangings and etched with hydrochloric acid.

With these atypical art supplies, Lobo’s day-to-day process was one of 
experimentation: he would introduce different concentrations and combinations 
of chemicals to form the rings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmiami-artist-nicholas-lobo-installation-swimming-pool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429284318439%2F416411f1-ef66-4dda-8e22-73a26eebe348-2060x1345.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Miami%20artist's%20installation%20dips%20into%20the%20darker%20side%20of%20swimming%20pool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmiami-artist-nicholas-lobo-installation-swimming-pool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Miami%20artist%27s%20installation%20dips%20into%20the%20darker%20side%20of%20swimming%20pool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmiami-artist-nicholas-lobo-installation-swimming-pool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429284318439%2F416411f1-ef66-4dda-8e22-73a26eebe348-2060x1345.jpeg>
 A bigger splash … a flip-flop embedded in the concrete. Photograph: Supplied 
“I think I had failures every single day,” Lobo told the Guardian. “Honestly, 
if I was trying to make a profitable concrete factory, I would have failed. I 
guess that’s part of the luxury of art … that failure is kind of successful a 
lot of the time.”

He said The Leisure Pit is about spinning the concept of luxury on its head to 
show the more grimy and utilitarian side of a seemingly mundane object. This is 
done with the concrete rings, which are inspired by storm drains, a 
less-glamorous element of the suburban water transport process.

“The main theme that I am interested in with this project is this kind of 
hyper-dichotomy between labour and leisure that we have here in Miami,” Lobo 
said. “There’s no labour that’s not in service of leisure, and vice versa – 
leisure is kind of like a job here.”

To move unusual art products to a grand gallery scale, Lobo immerses himself 
in research, which accounts for the myriad sources of inspiration he identified 
for the project – from ancient Greek and Roman culture to how skateboarders use 
emptied swimming pools as ramps.

“This idea of a pool as a ruin, as a machine,” Lobo said. “I guess I wanted to 
throw my hat in the ring with that.”

He noted that swimming pools have been a symbol for luxury in past art as 
well. Lobo said Edward Ruscha’s photo seriesNine Swimming Pools and a Broken 
Glass <http://www.christies.com/LotFinder/lot_details.aspx?intObjectID=4277124> 
andJG Ballard’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/sep/09/fiction.jgballard> Super-Cannes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/sep/09/fiction.jgballard> are part of 
the “ultra-elite iconography” that portrays swimming pools and inspired his 
work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmiami-artist-nicholas-lobo-installation-swimming-pool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429284426857%2F1cf2e12d-9034-4a69-972b-91aa1518048a-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Miami%20artist's%20installation%20dips%20into%20the%20darker%20side%20of%20swimming%20pool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmiami-artist-nicholas-lobo-installation-swimming-pool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Miami%20artist%27s%20installation%20dips%20into%20the%20darker%20side%20of%20swimming%20pool&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fapr%2F17%2Fmiami-artist-nicholas-lobo-installation-swimming-pool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F17%2F1429284426857%2F1cf2e12d-9034-4a69-972b-91aa1518048a-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Removing the luxurious associations … acid markings in the concrete. 
Photograph: Supplied 
He also drew inspiration from a childhood visit to Thomas Edison’s estate in 
Florida, where the gleamingswimming pool 
<https://www.floridamemory.com/items/show/268855> is on display. To him, this 
leisure item is more associated with eye irritants and dangerous chemicals. “I 
never saw it as the beautiful oasis that it’s supposed to be,” he said.

The site for his mixing and moulding was a friend’s swimming pool, which was 
due for refurbishment – so any damage from the art-making process would not be 
a serious problem.

While these moulds were created in the depths of a friend’s pool, they will be 
displayed inside a gallery, which Lobo has transformed for the project. The 
museum gave him permission to etch the walls with hydrochloric acid, which is 
unlikely ever to be completely removed from the walls.

But Perez Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Museum was 
designed to incorporate past exhibitions, whether it’s the shadow of a vinyl 
exhibit name or the remnants of potentially noxious pool chemicals. “The vision 
was that you’d have ghosts of past exhibitions, but this is the first time the 
exhibition kind of takes that into account,” said Lobo.

The Leisure Pit is open at the Perez art museum <http://www.pamm.org/>, Miami
 