
It’s about midday on a Thursday and Mica Levi is lusting after a Wetherspoon’s 
breakfast – and maybe a pint. The 28-year-old leftfield singer-songwriter, film 
soundtrack composer, electronic experimentalist and Micachu And The Shapes 
frontwoman is talking about what we’ve loosely dubbed “pub smell”: the 
comforting, musty scent that hangs in boozers, a full eight years into the 
smoking ban. Mica and her bandmates Raisa Khan and Marc Pell are due to play a 
one-off show in New York in mid-September to promote their latest album, and 
Mica is remembering how Manhattan bars don’t quite compare to the fuggy 
familiarity of a good old English pub.

“Yeah, they just have bars don’t they?” she asks, pulling a face, “and there’s 
no light in there.” It feels as though they’ve got to let more beer soak into a 
wood-panelled bar-top surface for a few years before it gets up to pub-smell 
standard, I offer.

“Sort of makes you think: why don’t you just stop cleaning the floors?” quiet 
keyboardist Khan jokingly, while chatty drummer Pell – who often chips in to 
fill the gaps left by Levi’s reticence – laughs.

“To be honest, when you’re on tour,” Levi says, “that sort of smell tends to 
just happen without the pubs. Among yourselves, you can create your own pub 
smell. With enough spilled beers … that’s not hard to recreate.” All three 
laugh. A band who’ve shared a tourbus for near-on a decade probably know this 
all too well.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da7EzjJvMLKo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da7EzjJvMLKo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da7EzjJvMLKo&media=>
Micachu and the Shapes review – renaissance woman goes back to basics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/02/micachu-shapes-review-renaissance-woman-mica-levi>
We’re perched on a couple of benches on the top floor of a disused multistorey 
car park in Peckham, at the start of a busy press day of interviews and photo 
shoots that caps off with a sold-out gig. In the background, several empty 
parking spaces over, a cluster of children giggle and dash about during a 
summer holiday workshop. Mica, Raisa and Marc, on the other hand, are leaning 
towards me, hunching away from the wind whipping over the car park’s makeshift 
garden – complete with roughly hewn seats, a smattering of flowering plants and 
a few rustic-looking pebble pits.

The Shapes are here to talk about how they made their shambolic-sounding, 
wildly energetic third album, Good Sad Happy Bad. Unlike their previous 
releases it didn’t arise from rehearsals, or even a sense that it was time to 
knuckle down and write new material. Funnily enough, in what’s clearly becoming 
a bit of a trend, it all started over a couple of beers.

“We didn’t go into the studio thinking: ‘Yeah, we’re going to make an album 
over the next three weeks,’” says Levi. “It just happened that way. We all met 
up at the pub and thought: ‘Why don’t we have a play?’ So we did.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fmica-levi-of-michachu-and-the-shapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441814352498%2Fd5137e71-2224-4e07-84b3-59d5fdf2c17a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mica%20Levi%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20make%20something%2C%20you%20should%20try%20and%20be%20wild%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fmica-levi-of-michachu-and-the-shapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mica%20Levi%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20make%20something%2C%20you%20should%20try%20and%20be%20wild%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fmica-levi-of-michachu-and-the-shapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441814352498%2Fd5137e71-2224-4e07-84b3-59d5fdf2c17a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Micachu And The Shapes: Levi with bandmates Raisa Khan and Marc Pell. 
Photograph: Stephanie Sian Smith/The Guide 
Micachu shapes up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jul/21/micachu-and-the-shapes-interview>
Levi talks about turning the usual recording process on its head with the 
casual ease of someone who’s used to doing things her own way, regardless of 
what convention may dictate. As a result, Good Sad… holds on to the rough edges 
that have always defined both Mica’s voice and the band’s playfully 
genre-bending music, even if they’ve swapped the glitchy-pop production of 
2009’s debut Jewellery and its 2012 follow-up Never for the scuzzier grit of 
DIY rock.

It wasn’t a deep yearning to revamp the 21st-century skiffle scene, that drove 
Levi though; she’s just restless. The daughter of musicians, she started 
playing the violin at an age when most of us hadn’t yet learned to write our 
full names. From there, she attended Watford’s Purcell music school before 
launching into an electronic music and composition course at London’s Guildhall.

Somewhere between dropping out of music college, teaming up with experimental 
producer Matthew Herbert and collaborating with the London Sinfonietta, Levi 
also found time to gain a reputation as a quirky singer who played vacuum 
cleaners onstage and fiddled with a curious collection of homemade instruments. 
It was then that she received an unexpected phone call from Jonathan Glazer, 
the director of Sexy Beast as well as numerous music promos for bands such as 
Massive Attack and Radiohead.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7S1yhSp5jaI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7S1yhSp5jaI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7S1yhSp5jaI&media=>
Making music for Scarlett: how an indie composer hit the big time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/27/mica-levi-under-the-skin-scarlett-johansson>
Glazer wanted her to craft the score for his first film in nine years, the 
creepily erotic Scarlett Johansson alien flick Under the Skin. What she 
produced was eerie at points, terrifying at others, reminiscent of the works of 
Krzysztof Penderecki, whose music scored both The Shining and The Exorcist. 
Levi’s work won her the European film award for best composer in December 2014, 
and a Bafta nomination a month later. Not bad for a first attempt.

Mica Levi has good claim to be one of the most original artists working in the 
UK today. She’s gentle, reserved, and I get the feeling she’s making music not 
for fame or recognition, but because it’s what she loves. Most recently, for 
example, she could be seen operating the decks for her friend Tirzah’s club 
PAs, or as an artist-in-residence at Doug Aitken’s sprawling Station To Station 
project at the Barbican Centre.

“I seem to just get myself into this stuff by chance,” Levi says when we next 
meet in the very rehearsal studio where the band careened through Good Bad… “I 
guess, for me to do Under the Skin, they were taking a risk and they chanced 
it. If you just work hard, then stuff seems to…” she falters. “I don’t know… 
people have called me up on the phone a lot more since that’s happened. But 
hopefully that will peter out,” she adds, drily.

For all her self-deprecation, Levi is actually extremely self-assured. You’d 
have to be to go from a classical background to making skewed art-pop, fusing 
elements of ambient electronic music with heavily treated guitars and unhinged 
drum patterns that sound like they were pounded out when Pell was high on 
adrenaline. How does Levi reconcile all those influences tussling to be heard 
in the band’s songs? “People are adaptable,” she says. “You don’t have to do 
just one thing. That’s the same reason why you probably rate a couple of 
country songs, a couple of punk songs, and might like something from a split 
genre: because they all have something in them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fmica-levi-of-michachu-and-the-shapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441814709257%2F34e54fd9-7418-4a84-b2ed-08c9b8856722-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mica%20Levi%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20make%20something%2C%20you%20should%20try%20and%20be%20wild%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fmica-levi-of-michachu-and-the-shapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mica%20Levi%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20make%20something%2C%20you%20should%20try%20and%20be%20wild%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fmica-levi-of-michachu-and-the-shapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441814709257%2F34e54fd9-7418-4a84-b2ed-08c9b8856722-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mica Levi. Photograph: Stephanie Sian Smith/The Guide 
How Mica Levi got Under The Skin of her first film soundtrack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/mar/15/mica-levi-under-the-skin-soundtrack>
Sure, people can enjoy lots of musical styles. And Micachu And The Shapes 
definitely seem to keep one frayed trouser leg in the world of pop – hooks, 
earworm choruses – with the other buried knee-deep in the mess of deconstructed 
noise and clashing, discordant melodies. But there’s the sense that she’s 
making music that won’t ever cross over into the mainstream, often deemed as 
bewildering and avant garde by music critics.

She’s exasperated when I ask what she thinks about the way her band are 
consistently presented as a confounding anomaly. “We’re just trying to kick out 
a bit,” she says, pausing. “But to me, none of the things that we do are really 
that different. That’s like saying: ‘I can’t believe someone can get drunk in 
the night, and dance on a table, then in the day work in customer services,’” 
and she laughs, before turning serious again. “Maybe it’s just down to people’s 
artistic integrity. That there’s integrity in committing to a style. I respect 
that in other people, but that’s not how I am.”

Levi only opens up about authenticity when I prod, offering up the notion that 
“people smell a fake if you put something out there that you don’t rate”, 
before letting her voice trail off. Though she’s polite and wry, you can tell 
she’d rather be making music than talking about it.

Later, standing guitar in hand in a Peckham car park on the same level as her 
crowd, Levi is almost unrecognisable. Gone are the sentences that collapse in 
mumbles, or her reluctance to hold my eye. She’s roaring and squawking into the 
microphone, strumming her guitar furiously during the jerky, angular song 
Relaxing. Her crooked half-smile’s been replaced with a snarl. She looks 
relaxed. “Could you not just come a bit closer?” she asks at one point. “It’s 
nicer like that.” The audience – made up of a mixture of fans, friends and 
fellow musicians – shuffles forward diligently. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fmica-levi-of-michachu-and-the-shapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441814624877%2F7d220b58-756f-40fa-b78e-c5a243829c18-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mica%20Levi%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20make%20something%2C%20you%20should%20try%20and%20be%20wild%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fmica-levi-of-michachu-and-the-shapes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mica%20Levi%3A%20%E2%80%98If%20you%E2%80%99re%20going%20to%20make%20something%2C%20you%20should%20try%20and%20be%20wild%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F12%2Fmica-levi-of-michachu-and-the-shapes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441814624877%2F7d220b58-756f-40fa-b78e-c5a243829c18-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Shapeshifter: Levi onstage in London. Photograph: Rob Ball/Redferns 
Poetry prize-winning spoken-word artist Kate Tempest is here, swigging red 
wine and dancing near the front. So is Sam Potter, formerly of mid-2000s indie 
act Late Of The Pier. We crane our necks to catch sight of Levi as she croaks 
through a set of songs that are evidently unlikely to top the charts. But that 
isn’t the point. Levi is an artist in the simplest meaning of the word. That 
means she makes music because it feels right or fulfilling, as naive as that 
may sound. And she doesn’t answer to anyone but herself. Given all that she’s 
accomplished in the past few years, why did she want to return to the Shapes? 
Why not strike out as Mica Levi, award-winning, high-brow composer and 
orchestral arranger for good?

“I just needed to make a fortune again,” she deadpans. “No, we just… I dunno … 
it just happened. There wasn’t much of a plan to it, to be honest. I don’t like 
things that are too safe or careful. If people are too self-aware, if they’re 
covering their tracks too much, then there’s no sacrifice being made. If you’re 
going to have the audacity to make something and give it to people, you want to 
be generous. Otherwise, why should people care?”

Some combination of deep musical knowledge, technical skill and the freedom to 
constantly mangle pop into new shapes seems to account for Levi’s generosity. 
For those who enjoy it, her music isn’t wilfully leftfield, it’s truly 
exciting. As ever, she downplays her abilities. “I just go with something that 
sounds decent. It might be a bit distorted or raw sometimes, but to me that’s 
just how it’s dressed up,” she says, pausing for so long I wonder if she’s ever 
going to start again. “Everyone does stuff, everyone makes stuff. If you’re 
going to make something, you should try and be wild.” Another pause: “But, I 
don’t know, everyone’s different, aren’t they?”

Good Sad Happy Bad is out now on Rough Trade
 