
One of the City’s most influential and highest-paid bankers, Michael Sherwood, 
is leavingGoldman Sachs <https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> 
after a 30-year career, including becoming embroiled in controversy over the 
collapsed retailer BHS.

Sherwood, a Londoner who joined Goldman after graduating from Manchester 
University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/apr/06/goldmansachs.banking>, plans 
to focus on charitable activities when he leaves the US bank in about six 
months.

A former bond trader who was paid $21m (£16.8m) last year, Sherwood usually 
keeps a low public profile. Butthis year he appeared before MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/29/bhs-committee-goldman-sachs-michael-sherwood-apologises-not-disclosing-talks>
 investigating the collapse of BHS, which put 11,000 jobs at risk and left a 
£571m pension deficit. It was a public appearance that Goldman bankers would 
usually prefer to avoid. The bank is proud of its work behind the scenes in 
securing deals and offering advice to governments and big businesses.

But Goldman was forced to talk about its relationship with Sir Philip Green 
when he was selling BHS. Green said he was “1,000,000%”would not have sold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/15/mps-sir-philip-greens-reputation-and-knighthood-depend-on-pension-offer>
 the department store chain to Dominic Chappell had the buyer not passed an 
informal vetting by the bank.

Sherwood denied there had been “sniff test” but also had to apologise to MPs 
for not disclosing that Goldman been approached by Green about a £40m loan to 
BHS when it was bought by Chappell, a serial bankrupt.

The MPs concluded: “Goldman Sachs should have been either ‘in’ or ‘out’ of the 
deal, and demonstrably so. As it was, they had authority without 
accountability.”

Sherwood – known as “Woody” – told the Financial Times that his unexpected 
departure was not connected to BHS. He was regarded as candidate to replace 
Lloyd Blankfein, the chief executive of Goldman, whom Sherwood said had spent 
“most of his time trying to persuade me to stay”. The discussions to leave had 
started before the BHS blow-up, he added.

“I didn’t want to have anything out there before I left. On Philip Green, I 
wish we hadn’t been involved and I certainly don’t think we did anything 
wrong,” Sherwood told the FT. “It is one blip in a 30-year career and it really 
played no part in my decision.”

The 51-year-old was co-head of Goldman’s European business, which employs 
6,000 people and is grappling with the uncertainty caused by the vote for 
Brexit. Construction of a new head office in London – a stone’s throw from its 
existing headquarters on the edge of the financial district – is already 
underway. His co-head, Richard Gnodde, will become chief executive of the 
European operations.

Sherwood told the FT: “As you know, we were very much in the remain camp … We 
will readjust, we will have to do what we want. I hope it will be favourable to 
the UK and we are able to keep a lot of people here.”

He achieved the coveted status of partner while he was still in 20s and he 
told the FT: “I stopped working for money a long time ago … when we went 
public.” Goldmanfloated in 1999 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/1999/may/04/7>, putting value on its 
partners’ stakes in the business for the first time. His stake is worth more 
than $70m.

 “I’ve been a Goldman Sachs addict and it’s very hard to come off an 
addiction,” he added.

In a statement to the bank’s 36,800 staff, the two most senior executives at 
Goldmn paid tribute to Sherwood.

Blankfeinand Gary Cohn, president and chief operating officer, said: “Please 
join us in thanking Michael, or Woody, as everyone calls him, for his 
commitment and extraordinary service to the firm, our clients and our people. 
We wish him, his wife Melanie and their family all the best in the years ahead.”

His immediate plan is said to be to focus on charities, including Greenhouse 
Sports, which helps children in cities access sport.

Goldman has a long history of filling government and policy roles. Notable 
alumni include Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England; Hank Paulson, the 
former US treasury secretary; Lord O’Neill, who drove the Conservative 
government’s northern powerhouse policy; and Lord Paul Deighton, who was a 
Treasury minister for George Osborne.

Politicians are also attracted to Goldman. Theresa May warned a private 
meeting of Goldman bankers about the dangers of Brexit a month before the 
referendum and before she became prime minister. An audio recording of the 
warning by May – who was then home secretary –was leaked to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/25/exclusive-leaked-recording-shows-what-theresa-may-really-thinks-about-brexit?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
.

 