
Microsoft is investigating a racist incident involving black freshmen at the 
University ofPennsylvania <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania>, 
which took place on the company’s GroupMe chat app.

A number of black students from UPenn were added to GroupMe accounts on Friday 
with titles such as “Mud Men” and “N****r lynching”,the students reported 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/nbcblk/black-upenn-students-added-racist-text-messaging-group-school-n682986>
. Pictures of lynchings were posted and racist messages were sent using the 
accounts.

Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> said it was 
investigating Friday’s incident and would suspend accounts accordingly.

“As soon as we became aware of the chats taking place on GroupMe, which 
violated our terms of service, we took action and removed the chats,” a 
Microsoft spokesperson told the Guardian in a statement. “We’re investigating 
to determine which user accounts will be suspended.”

Claims of hate crimes possibly linked to Trump's election reported across the 
US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/hate-crime-spike-us-donald-trump-president>
The incident led to UPenn partnering with the FBI to launch an investigation 
into the incident. Investigators yesterday reported that three individuals from 
Oklahoma may have been responsible for the messages. One was a student at the 
University of Oklahoma and was suspended.

“The University of Oklahoma has made it clear that we will not tolerate racism 
or hate speech that constitutes a threat to our campus or others,” said the 
University of Oklahoma president, David L Boren, in a statement. “We have a 
record of taking swift action once all of the facts are known.”

Students at UPenn were rattled by the news of the GroupMe account targeting 
black students. It remains unclear how the message group’s creators were able 
to identify and target black freshman students.

After the incident came light, several black students gathered at the 
vice-provost’s office to discuss the racist messages. Ngozi Olojede, a junior 
at UPenn with a double major in international relations and African studies, 
was present.

“At first I was angry, but then I think people were really upset and rattled,” 
Olojede said. “There were many tears.”

Black student groups organized a town hall for students to discuss the 
incident. Olojede said it lasted four hours as students recounted how they felt 
following the election results. The UPenn president, Amy Gutmann, also attended 
the town hall briefly.

“We call on everyone to recognize that the events of the past few days are a 
tragic reminder of the overt and reprehensible racism that continues to exist 
within some segments of our society,” Gutmann said in a statement on Sunday, 
“and that we all need to unite together as a community and a society to oppose.”

According to Philly.com 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/news/20161112_Racist_messages_target_black_freshmen_at_UPenn_with__lynching_.html>
, the messages originated from people using the handle “Daddy Trump”. Somebody 
separately sent the message “Heil Trump” to one of the GroupMe message groups. 
The incident comes as a rapidly growing list of alleged hate crimes have been 
reported throughout the country sinceDonald Trump’s victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/hate-crime-spike-us-donald-trump-president>
 last week.

Several groups began monitoring hate incidents widely reported online since 
election night. The Southern Poverty Law Centercounted 
<https://www.splcenter.org/hatewatch/2016/11/11/over-200-incidents-hateful-harassment-and-intimidation-election-day>
 more than 200 incidents of hate in the three days following the election.

Trump graduated from UPenn’s Wharton School of Finance and his daughter 
Tiffany graduated from the university in May. In a post onMedium 
<https://medium.com/@upennalumniresponse/upenn-alumni-response-11-11-16-4cafe572b239#.oaj337n2o>
, UPenn alums called on Trump “to break his disturbing silence on this issue, 
and to follow through on his declaration that the nation must come together”.

Trump did so during a 60 Minutes interview on Sunday in which he told his 
supporters 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/11/13/politics/donald-trump-60-minutes-first-interview/index.html>
 to “stop it” when asked about the allegations of harassment of minorities 
following his victory.
 