
Fish are being killed, and prevented from reaching maturity, by the litter of 
plastic particles finding their way into the world’s oceans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/10/full-scale-plastic-worlds-oceans-revealed-first-time-pollution>
, new research has proved.

Some young fish have been found to prefer tiny particles of plastic to their 
natural food sources, effectively starving them before they can reproduce.

The growing problem of microplastics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/29/un-scientists-call-for-action-on-marine-microplastics>
 – tiny particles of polymer-type materials from modern industry – has been 
thought for several years to be a peril for fish, but the study published on 
Thursday is the first to prove the damage in trials.

Microplastics are near-indestructible in natural environments. They enter the 
oceans through litter, when waste such asplastic bags 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/04/plastic-bag-charge-ban-europe>
, packaging and other convenience materials are discarded. Vast amounts of 
these end up in the sea, through inadequate waste disposal systems and sewage 
outfall.

Another growing source is microbeads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/13/two-thirds-of-british-public-back-microbead-ban-greenpeace-poll>
, tiny particles of hard plastics that are used in cosmetics, for instance as 
an abrasive inmodern skin cleaners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/19/microplastics-which-beauty-brands-are-safe-to-use>
. These easily enter waterways as they are washed off as they are used, flushed 
down drains and forgotten, but can last for decades in our oceans.

The impact of these materials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/18/billions-of-bits-of-plastic-waste-threaten-humans-and-wildlife-senators-told>
 has been hard to measure, despite being a growing source of concern. Small 
particles of plastics have been found in seabirds, fish and whales, which 
swallow the materials but cannot digest them,leading to a build-up in their 
digestive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/30/plastic-debris-killing-sperm-whales>
tracts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicroplastics-killing-fish-before-they-reach-reproductive-age-study-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e6e242a80f3dda04b58c6f878a2ddcd45c5cbfb%2F0_0_1692_1692%2F1692.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Microplastics%20killing%20fish%20before%20they%20reach%20reproductive%20age%2C%20study%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicroplastics-killing-fish-before-they-reach-reproductive-age-study-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Microplastics%20killing%20fish%20before%20they%20reach%20reproductive%20age%2C%20study%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicroplastics-killing-fish-before-they-reach-reproductive-age-study-finds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e6e242a80f3dda04b58c6f878a2ddcd45c5cbfb%2F0_0_1692_1692%2F1692.jpg>
 A perch with ingested microplastic polystyrene particles. Photograph: Oona 
Lönnstedt/Science 
For the first time, scientists have demonstrated that fish exposed to such 
materials during their development show stunted growth and increased mortality 
rates, as well as changed behaviour that could endanger their survival.

Samples of perch, still in their larval state, were shown not only to take in 
the plastics, but to prefer them to their real food. Larval perch with access 
to microplastic particles ate only the plastics, ignoring their natural food 
source of plankton.

The study, published in Science on Thursday, found that the fish born into an 
environment rich in microplastics – defined as tiny pieces of less than 5mm in 
size – had reduced rates of hatching and development to maturity.

The perch studied also ignored the chemical signals that would normally warn 
them of the presence of predators, the researchers found.

These particles are now found in abundance across the world’s oceans, and are 
often common in shallow coastal areas, where they wash in from waste dumps and 
sewerage systems.

“This is the first time an animal has been found to preferentially feed on 
plastic particles, and is cause for concern,” said Peter Eklöv, co-author of 
the study. “Larvae exposed to microplastic particles during development also 
displayed changed behaviours and were much less active than fish that had been 
reared in water that contained no microplastic particles.”

Environmental campaigners have been calling for a reduction in the waste 
allowed to drift from rivers into seas and oceans, and for an end to the use of 
artificialmicroplastics in cosmetics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/08/petition-urges-uk-government-to-ban-plastic-microbeads>
. Greenpeacelaunched a campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/13/two-thirds-of-british-public-back-microbead-ban-greenpeace-poll>
 against microbeads early this year, andseveral companies have committed to 
phasing them out <http://www.beatthemicrobead.org/en/industry>.

However, the study suggests that damage has already been done, and preventing 
the leakage of more microplastics into the oceans should be a matter of 
urgency, as once they are in our seas they are almost impossible to get rid of.

Perch exposed to microplastics in the study were eaten by pike four times more 
quickly than their naturally-reared relatives, when the predators were 
introduced into their environment. All of the plastic-exposed fish in the study 
were dead within 48 hours.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicroplastics-killing-fish-before-they-reach-reproductive-age-study-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F001a87258f2a0932326359a381e270b49d7b8ae0%2F2_0_2556_1533%2F2556.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Microplastics%20killing%20fish%20before%20they%20reach%20reproductive%20age%2C%20study%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicroplastics-killing-fish-before-they-reach-reproductive-age-study-finds%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Microplastics%20killing%20fish%20before%20they%20reach%20reproductive%20age%2C%20study%20finds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fmicroplastics-killing-fish-before-they-reach-reproductive-age-study-finds%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F001a87258f2a0932326359a381e270b49d7b8ae0%2F2_0_2556_1533%2F2556.jpg>
 Microplastics visible in a pike. Photograph: Oona Lönnstedt/Science 
This suggests that the impacts of microplastics are likely to be far-reaching 
and long-lasting, beyond the immediate effects on the fish’s digestive systems, 
which was previously the main cause of concern.Plastics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/plastic> may be causing differing 
behaviour in the fish, and inhibiting their evolved responses to danger, 
through mechanisms not yet fully understood.

The study adds to research that has found coastal fish species suffering 
marked declines in recent years, while the amount of plastic litter in the 
oceans has increased.

“If early life-history stages of other species are similarly affected by 
microplastics, and this translates to increased mortality rates, the effects on 
aquatic ecosystems could be profound,” warned Oona Lönnstedt, another of the 
report’s authors.
 