
1. What is the Mid Staffs scandal? <>
2. Why is it in the news again now?  <>
3. How did the poor care come to light?  <>
4. The public inquiry <>
5. The first Francis inquiry: what was care like? <>
6. What did the Healthcare Commission find? <>
7. Why was care so bad? <>
8. So who failed to spot problems at Stafford and/or do enough to stop them?  
<>
9. How will the Mid Staffs scandal affect the NHS? <>



1. What is the Mid Staffs scandal?

A disputed estimate [see footnote] suggested that between 400 and 1,200 
patients died as a result of poor care over the 50 months between January 2005 
and March 2009 at Stafford hospital, a small district general hospital in 
Staffordshire. Thereport being published 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/video/2013/feb/06/mid-staffs-hospital-nhs-video?mobile-redirect=false>
 on 6 February 2013 of the public inquirychaired by Robert Francis QC  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2013/jan/30/robert-francis-man-behind-nhs-mid-staffs>
will be the fifth official report into the scandal since 2009, and Francis's 
second into the hospital's failings.

The often horrifying evidence that has emerged means "Mid Staffs" has become a 
byword for NHS care at its most negligent. It is often described as the worst 
hospital care scandal of recent times. In 2009 Sir Ian Kennedy, the chairman of 
the Healthcare Commission, the regulator ofNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> care standards at the time, said it 
was the most shocking scandal he had investigated.

It is commonly known as the Mid Staffs scandal because Stafford hospital was 
and is run by the Mid Staffordshire NHS hospital trust, which in 2008 acquired 
foundation trust status, making it semi-independent of Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> (DH) control. Decision-making and 
especially cost-cutting as part of its pursuit of that status was later cited 
as a key reason why poor care took hold and was allowed to persist for so long.

• Back to the top <>



2. Why is it in the news again now? 

On Wednesday 6 February Francis will publish the report of his 31-month-long 
public inquiry <http://www.midstaffspublicinquiry.com/> into the scandal. His 
first report <http://www.midstaffsinquiry.com>, published in February 2010, was 
an independent report under the NHS Act rather than a full-blown public 
inquiry. It examined the quality of care at Stafford hospital in 2005-09 and 
the many reasons why it was so bad, such as inadequate staffing, and produced 
devastating conclusions.

The public inquiry began in July 2010. Its remit was to investigate what a 
wide range of commissioning, supervisory and regulatory bodies and systems in 
the NHS had done to detect poor care at Stafford and to intervene. As such it 
probed the role of the bodies and individuals all the way from the hospital 
itself – including the trust's board and its patient liaison group – up to the 
most senior figures at the Department of Health in Whitehall, including 
ministers, senior civil servants and key figures in the NHS.

Its brief included its duty "to examine why problems at the trust were not 
identified sooner; and appropriate action taken. This includes, but is not 
limited to, examining the actions of the Department of Health, the local 
Strategic Health Authority, the local primary care trust(s), the Independent 
Regulator of NHS Foundation trusts (Monitor), the Care Quality Commission, the 
Health and Safety Executive, local scrutiny and public engagement bodies and 
the local coroner."

• Back to the top <>



3. How did the poor care come to light?

Although care was poor from at least the start of 2006, concerns about that 
only began emerging in mid-2007. At that time the Healthcare Commission (HCC), 
the then NHS care regulator, became anxious that Stafford seemed to have 
unusually high death rates, drawing on information from Professor Brian Jarman, 
an expert in patient safety and hospital death rates at Imperial College London.

By January 2008 the watchdog had identified seven different patient safety 
alerts at Stafford: warning signs that there were problems. Dissatisfied with 
the hospital's explanation for the apparently high mortality rate – that it was 
down to "coding errors" – the HCC told a team of its investigators under 
Heather Wood, renowned as its "hard cases woman", to get to the bottom of what 
was happening at the hospital. That was the first of the five inquiries.

Julie Bailey, whose 86-year-old mother Bella died in the hospital as a result 
of poor care in late 2007, also played a key role in exposing the Mid Staffs 
scandal. She quickly came across other families who had lost a loved one, 
realised there was a problem and, with other bereaved relatives, formed the 
campaign groupCure The NHS  <http://www.curethenhs.co.uk/>to demand a public 
inquiry and hold those reponsible to account.

• Back to the top <>



4. The public inquiry

Andrew Lansley, the then health secretary, commissioned the full public inquiry
 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2010/jun/09/andrew-lansley-inquiry-mid-staffs-hospital>
in June 2010, soon after the coalition took power. It was held under the Public 
Inquiries Act 2005. Labour in 2009 and 2010 hadrefused to accede to persistent 
requests 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/2009/mar/19/alan-johnson-nhs-stafford-nhs>
from relatives of victims of the Mid Staffs scandal to hold such an inquiry. 
Instead ministers commissioned the first Francis report as well as two other, 
separate inquiries into specific aspects of how the hospital and local 
healthcare system operated. They wereled by Professor George Alberti 
<http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/documents/digitalasset/dh_098662.pdf>
, the DH's national clinical director for emergency care, andDr David 
Colin-Thome 
<http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalassets/documents/digitalasset/dh_098661.pdf>
, his counterpart at the DH for primary care. They reported in April 2009.

Francis began gathering evidence in July 2010. He initially hoped to deliver a 
report to ministers by early 2011. Instead it became a particularly in-depth 
and long-running inquiry. The inquiry took oral evidence from 164 witnesses 
over the 139 days it sat between November 2010 and December 2011, and also 
received 87 witness statements and 39 provisional statements, and over a 
million pages of evidence in total.

Tom Kark QC, counsel to the inquiry, and Francis himself questioned witnesses.

• Back to the top <>



5. The first Francis inquiry: what was care like?

Francis's report into care at Stafford hospital in February 2010, based on 
evidence from over 900 patients and families, was scathing. "I heard so many 
stories of shocking care," he said. "They were people who entered Stafford 
hospital and rightly expected to be well cared for and treated. Instead, many 
suffered horrific experiences that will haunt them and their loved ones for the 
rest of their lives."

Francis cited a litany of failings in the care of patients. "For many patients 
the most basic elements of care were neglected," he said. Some patients needing 
pain relief either got it late or not at all. Others were left unwashed for up 
to a month. "Food and drinks were left out of the reach of patients and many 
were forced to rely on family members for help with feeding." Too many patients 
were sent home before they were ready to go, and ended up back in hospital soon 
afterwards. "The standards of hygiene were at times awful, with families forced 
to remove used bandages and dressings from public areas and clean toilets 
themselves for fear of catching infections." Patients' calls for help to use 
the toilet were ignored, with the result that they were left in soiled sheeting 
or sitting on commodes for hours "often feeling ashamed and afraid". 
Misdiagnosis was common.

• Back to the top <>



6. What did the Healthcare Commission find? 

Care at Stafford was "appalling", the watchdog's report said. The Guardian 
reported at the time 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2009/mar/17/mid-staffordshire-nhs-trust> 
that it found "inadequately trained staff who were too few in number, junior 
doctors left alone at night and patients left without food, drink or medication 
as their operations were repeatedly cancelled. Receptionists with no medical 
training were expected to assess patients coming in to A&E, some of whom needed 
urgent care."

The then health secretary Alan Johnson said there had been "a complete failure 
of management to address serious problems and monitor performance, [which] led 
to a totally unacceptable failure to treat emergency patients safely and with 
dignity". Bruce Keogh, the NHS's medical director, condemned the trust's 
"complete failure of leadership". HCC chairman Sir Ian Kennedy said its report 
was "a shocking story … of appalling standards and chaotic systems for looking 
after patients. These are words I have not previously used in any report."

• Back to the top <>



7. Why was care so bad? 

"A chronic shortage of staff, particularly nursing staff, was largely 
responsible for the substandard care," Francis found in his first report.

In addition, morale was low and "while many staff did their best in difficult 
circumstances, others showed a disturbing lack of compassion towards their 
patients", he added. "Staff who spoke out felt ignored and there is strong 
evidence that many were deterred from doing so through fear and bullying."

He laid much of the blame on the trust's ruling board. The action they took to 
investigate and resolve concerns "was inadequate and lacked an appropriate 
sense of urgency". Its members also "chose to rely on apparently favourable 
performance reports by outside bodies, such as the Healthcare Commission, 
rather than effective internal assessment and feedback from staff and 
patients". He was particularly critical of the trust's failure to take 
patients' complaints seriously enough.

Crucially, Francis also highlighted the key impact of the trust board's 
decision to try to save £10m in 2006-07, as part of its desire to gain 
foundation trust status. "The board decided this saving could only be achieved 
through cutting staffing levels, which were already insufficient." It also 
ignored staff's concerns, he added.

He also mentioned that "many people expressed alarm at the apparent failure of 
external organisations to detect any problems with the trust's performance" and 
recommended a separate inquiry look into that.

That led directly to the latest Francis inquiry, which reports on Wednesday 6 
February.

• Back to the top <>



8. So who failed to spot problems at Stafford and/or do enough to stop them? 

The report of the public inquiry is likely to find that almost every link in 
what should have been the NHS's chain of monitoring and scrutinising hospital 
care, and intervening if necessary, did not do its job properly. He has 
investigated the actions of scores of bodies and individuals, both locally and 
nationally. The record, performance and reputation of many of them are likely 
to face detailed criticism, including the management and board of the hospital 
itself, the various regulators involved (Healthcare Commission, its successor 
the Care Quality Commisision and Monitor) and senior figures at the Department 
of Health.

As Francis's first report said, that inquiry heard evidence "that none of them 
[external organisations charged with overseeing the trust], from the PCT to the 
Healthcare Commission, or the local oversight and scrutiny committee, detected 
anything wrong with the trust's performance until the HCC investigation." The 
landmark report will, over many hundreds of pages, detail what he then also 
called "the actions and inactions of the various organisations to search for an 
explanation of whay the appalling standards of care were not picked up."

His task is to explain why so many people failed so badly, and to make sure it 
does not happen again.

• Back to the top <>



9. How will the Mid Staffs scandal affect the NHS? 

Francis's new report will prompt much soul-searching about why some NHS 
organisations end up providing inadequate, inhumane and dangerously substandard 
care to some or many patients. Many people will say in effect "Mid Staffs must 
never happen again", and Francis will set out how to ensure this is the case. 
It comes amid rising concern about care, and the behaviour of some of the NHS's 
huge workforce, which was encapsulated by health secretary Jeremy Hunt that 
"the crisis in standards of care" - not coping with rising demand at a time of 
tight budgets or making £20bn of efficiency savings by 2015 or reconfiguring 
hospital services so more patients can be treated in or near their homes - was 
the service's biggest challenge.

David Cameron and Jeremy Hunt will doubtless point to initiatives they have 
taken - such as bringing in a "friends and family" test of hospital care and 
exploring tough "Ofsted-style" ratings for hospitals - as having at least 
started to tackle the problems Francis has spent so long pursuing.

But his recommendations are likely to go further than this. Ministers, NHS 
regulators and the new NHS Commissioning Board are already debating the merits 
of changes that have been proposed from various quarters such as regulation of 
healthcare assistants, legal minimum staffing levels on NHS wards, a 
legally-binding "duty of candour" on all NHS staff to admit to mistakes, a 
blacklist of failed NHS managers and many others. However, if Francis decides 
that in effect NHS regulation at the time failed - he can hardly conclude 
otherwise - then ministers may come under pressure to introduce much more 
robust regulation. That, though, is opposed by bodies such as the NHS 
Confederation, which represents hospitals, and National Voices, an alliance of 
130 charities.

• Back to the top <>

• This article was amended on 4 November 2015 to make clear that subsequent 
investigations into the poor care at Stafford hospital, including the two 
reports by Sir Robert Francis​ QC​, said that this disputed estimate​​, which 
appeared only in a draft report from 2009 by the Healthcare commission​ and was 
based on mortality statistics​, was ​an ​unreliable​ measure of avoidable 
deaths​.​ ​The Francis report of February 2013 concluded that it would be 
unsafe to infer from ​these​ statistics that there was any particular number of 
avoidable or unnecessary deaths at the trust.​
 