
When Colorado’s Amendment 64 
<http://www.leg.state.co.us/clics/clics2013a/csl.nsf/fsbillcont/4B75534D3719DBD687257B490074E195?Open&file=283_01.pdf>
 took effect in January 2014, effectively legalising marijuana, hordes of 
tourists flocked to the state to try the barely legal drug – only to find there 
was nowhere to smoke it.

Though adults aged 21 or over can legally possess up to an ounce of retail 
marijuana, strict regulations make it difficult to consume without breaking the 
law. As with theopen container laws 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_open_container_laws> covering 
alcohol, marijuana cannot be smoked in public. While some cigar shops enjoy 
immunity from theColorado Clean Indoor Air Act 
<https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/sites/default/files/Indoor%20air%20LE%20Key%20Points_0.pdf>
, which prevents smoking in public establishments, those rules do not extend to 
pot shops. Ganga-preneurs are forbidden from opening “bud bars” and smoking in 
dispensaries is likewise illegal. National parks adhere to federal law, which 
makes cannabis camping tricky, too. Breaking marijuana laws can result in 
thousands of dollars in fines and jail time. In short, Denver is hardly an 
all-American Amsterdam. This poses problems for hash-hungry travellers without 
a friend’s couch to crash on.

Enter Joel and Lisa Schneider, owners of the Mary Jane Group 
<http://themaryjanegrp.com/>, which is leading the way in “the canna-lifestyle 
hospitality sector”. They runThe Adagio Bud + Breakfast 
<http://www.budandbfast.com/home/> in downtown Denver. Unlike a hotel with a 
public lobby, a privately owned bed and breakfast can allow customers to 
legally consume marijuana products on their private premises. The Adagio opened 
in 2014, effectively cornering the market.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdenver-colorado-cannabis-adagio-bud-breakfast-weed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdad6984b162047452a13d159bfad8e69497d652%2F0_107_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mile-high%20city%20just%20got%20higher%3A%20Denver%E2%80%99s%20first%20cannabis-friendly%20B%26B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdenver-colorado-cannabis-adagio-bud-breakfast-weed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mile-high%20city%20just%20got%20higher%3A%20Denver%E2%80%99s%20first%20cannabis-friendly%20B%26B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdenver-colorado-cannabis-adagio-bud-breakfast-weed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdad6984b162047452a13d159bfad8e69497d652%2F0_107_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Adagio Bud + Breakfast 
Entering the Adagio feels almost disappointingly normal. Complete with crown 
moulding, chandeliers and a grand piano, the gorgeous Victorian home (built in 
1892) is hardly a drug den. In fact, apart from the enshrinedJerry Garcia 
<http://jerrygarcia.com/> memorabilia and blown-glass bong roughly the size of 
an adult blue whale, you might never know its secret. No one’s breaking bad in 
here.

Upper-echelon customers travel from all over the world to spend $179-$399 a 
night on the handsome rooms. Guests enjoy decidedly decadentWake + Bake 
breakfasts <http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=wake+n+bake>: eggs 
and coffee, or peanut butter and banana-stuffed French toast with candied 
bacon. And at4.20pm each day 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2010/04/20/420-meaning-the-true-stor_n_543854.html>
, there are happy-hour munchies. Smoking is not allowed in the rooms, so 
everyone smokes in the common area. This creates an unusual bond between 
guests, like a glorified adult youth hostel. Rather than feeling forced 
together for an awkward breakfast, guests sit for hours, waxing poetic together 
– an immaculate house party. It also allows for the owners to keep an eye on 
folks. “It feels like mom’s house … except you can get high on the couch,” 
noted one glassy-eyed businessman.

Due to complicated laws, the Adagio cannot sell marijuana, so guests bring 
their own. There’s a station of bongs, pipes and other paraphernalia complete 
with an empty plate for people to share their bud – it’s rarely empty. Because 
it’s illegal to travel out of state with marijuana, guests often leave their 
leftovers upon departure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdenver-colorado-cannabis-adagio-bud-breakfast-weed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc444f79ba9c5349fc92cda8192b1f2d49eb7b26e%2F0_56_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mile-high%20city%20just%20got%20higher%3A%20Denver%E2%80%99s%20first%20cannabis-friendly%20B%26B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdenver-colorado-cannabis-adagio-bud-breakfast-weed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mile-high%20city%20just%20got%20higher%3A%20Denver%E2%80%99s%20first%20cannabis-friendly%20B%26B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdenver-colorado-cannabis-adagio-bud-breakfast-weed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc444f79ba9c5349fc92cda8192b1f2d49eb7b26e%2F0_56_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
 Lounging around … ‘Smoking is not allowed in the rooms, so everyone smokes in 
the common area.’ 
The Adagio looks pretty squeaky clean behind the scenes, too. Though you might 
imagine the owners to be pungent trustafarians in rumpled clothes, the 
Schneiders are anything but. Joel is a former corporate lawyer, and Lisa 
finalised property transactions. “We’re the goody two-shoes of the industry,” 
says Lisa, who personally doesn’t touch marijuana. They’re here for the 
so-called “Green Rush”, the expected tourist boom created by the new pot laws. 
The Mary Jane Group has two more locations: a small,Grateful Dead-themed 
location in Silverthorne <http://www.budandbfast.com/bbsilverthorne/>, and an 
11-room lodge in Colorado Springs <http://www.budandbfast.com/san-ayre/> that 
functions more like a hotel. Due to county regulations Silverthorne can offer a 
bud bar, and both locations have a smoking common area. Schneider is hunting 
for more Colorado properties, and considering going into partnership with a 
casino in Washington state. He envisions a network of resorts and 
“canna-camps”: playgrounds for adults to explore their affected senses. There 
will be painting classes; cannabis golf tournaments; a spa whereTHC 
<http://www.livescience.com/24553-what-is-thc.html> enhances massage and takes 
the edge off your bikini wax. “I want to be the Walt Disney of cannabis,” he 
states proudly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdenver-colorado-cannabis-adagio-bud-breakfast-weed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5324a64c721b1c288807fa20f79f59befabf8a7%2F0_31_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mile-high%20city%20just%20got%20higher%3A%20Denver%E2%80%99s%20first%20cannabis-friendly%20B%26B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdenver-colorado-cannabis-adagio-bud-breakfast-weed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mile-high%20city%20just%20got%20higher%3A%20Denver%E2%80%99s%20first%20cannabis-friendly%20B%26B&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fdenver-colorado-cannabis-adagio-bud-breakfast-weed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5324a64c721b1c288807fa20f79f59befabf8a7%2F0_31_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
 And so to bed … one of the Adagio’s bedrooms 
The Dopiest Place on Earth? A noble dream, some might say. But it’s a rocky 
road to the top of that mountain – the Schneiders can’t even get a bank loan. 
National banks won’t touch cannabis-affiliated companies, and advertising 
proves difficult, as platforms such as Google and Facebook refuse their 
business. They’ve even had a visit from an undercover cop, which resulted in a 
small fine. “Pot is legal here, but not everyone likes that, and they’re going 
to make it as difficult as possible,” says Lisa.

The Colorado Tourism Office has no interest in self-identifying as “The Green 
State”, despite the projected$1bn the marijuana market will generate in Colorado
 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2015/02/12/colorados-legal-weed-market-700-million-in-sales-last-year-1-billion-by-2016/>
 next year. Nevertheless, this is a, erm, budding industry, with new businesses 
popping up like, well, weeds. Denver-basedMy 420 Tours <https://my420tours.com/>
 offers four-hour dispensary and grow tours, with smoke-friendly limousines and 
buses from $129pp, and a three-day “cannabis vacation” with stays in Denver 
hotels that allow marijuana vaping in the rooms, from $1,295.Colorado Green 
Tours <http://www.coloradogreentours.com/> offers marijuana-friendly ski 
packages.

Companies assume existing business models, add pot, and voila! The 
Airbnb-inspiredTravelTHC <http://travelthc.com/> offers holiday rentals where 
guests can smoke in strangers’ houses and retire to a marijuana-infused 
chocolate on their pillow.

“This is just the beginning,” says Joel Schneider. He’s right – with allies 
like the Mary Jane Group and petitions for the legalisation of bud bars being 
passed around like joints at aSnoop Dogg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2015/nov/11/snoop-dog-launches-line-of-cannabis-products-video>
 concert, stoners have hope that one day, in this great nation, they can smoke 
the weed they legally bought.

• This article was amended on 2 December 2015 to update the description of 
painting classes to be offered.

 