
The crowds gather at 10am – a sea of saffron flags held by millions of 
marchers dressed in white cotton, the colour of mourning. Amid the chaos of the 
traffic, there is that rare thing: silence.

Over the past two months, at least a dozen cities in the western state of 
Maharashtra have exploded in an unprecedented outburst of popular uprising from 
the Maratha community, made up of the landowning farmer castes. The Marathas 
comprise a third of Maharashtra’s 114 million population.Their marches 
<http://www.hindustantimes.com/mumbai-news/maratha-reservation-hc-gives-state-six-weeks-to-compile-data-supporting-its-case/story-LlKYFOwDzCBjjkig7R6WAJ.html>
, which started with a few hundred thousand protesters, now gather millions in 
a different city almost every other weekend.

How pink sweets are challenging gender prejudice in south Asian communities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/pink-ladoo-project-handing-out-sweets-challenging-gender-prejudice-india>
The marches are silent until the end, when the crowd stands to sing the 
national anthem before dispersing. During the demonstrations, young women 
approach politicians with a list of demands. Organisers say the biggest march 
will be held in Mumbai, the state’s capital and the country’s financial heart, 
in December.

The silent protests began in July after the gang rape and murder of a 
15-year-old Maratha girl in the village of Kopardi, allegedly by “untouchable” 
Dalit men. The incident stirred up anger in the Maratha community, who argued 
that the police and media were neglecting the case in the interests of 
political correctness.

In India, for generations, low-caste Dalit people were considered “dirty” in 
the Hindu caste system and were not allowed to eat, marry or mix with higher 
castes. Lower castes were forced into menial or unholy jobs such as cleaning 
the sewers or working with leather. High-caste people would have to undergo a 
cleansing ritual if they accidentally touched a Dalit. After independence in 
1947,caste was formally abolished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/15/india-caste-system-70-anniversary-independence-day-untouchables>
, but continued to be one of the most important identity markers, especially in 
rural India.

Maratha activists argue that if the girl had been Dalit, and her alleged 
rapists and killers had been high-caste men, the narrative would be far more 
appealing to politicians and journalists, who want to be seen as champions of 
the underdog Dalit community. Discrimination, they say, has now swung in the 
opposite direction: Dalits enjoy the benefits of affirmative action in jobs and 
universities, while farmers face neglect from successive governments.

“The media show that the victims are always Dalit, and the perpetrators are 
all Maratha,” says Dyanesh Maharao, a Maratha activist. “But it’s not really 
like that. When that poor girl died, the police didn’t even bother to file a 
report until this week, almost three months after the attack.”

The Marathas are so neglected that when the first march happened, in the city 
of Aurangabad, none of the major local newspaper or television outlets bothered 
to turn up, says Bhaiya Patil, a 28-year-old activist who has become the social 
media manager of the movement. “There were 500,000 people in the street and no 
one was interested. There was no footage, no cameras, no coverage. That’s why 
we turned to social media. We started posting our own pictures and video and 
suddenly everyone started listening. It gave us our voice.”

People come from all over Maharashtra for the marches. Some drive, others take 
buses and travel hundreds of miles to show solidarity. “People come with 
whatever they have. Some donate money, others bring bottles of water to 
distribute to the crowds. Some of the farmers, who are very poor, can’t give 
anything, so they bring rice, because it’s the only thing they have to 
contribute,” says Patil.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Ffarmers-march-in-silence-india-maharashtra-maratha-dalit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41fb3024ee13250a7cbea01d7bbb919560a2970b%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Millions%20march%20in%20a%20sea%20of%20saffron%20-%20the%20silent%20rage%20of%20India%E2%80%99s%20ignored%20farmer%20caste&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Ffarmers-march-in-silence-india-maharashtra-maratha-dalit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Millions%20march%20in%20a%20sea%20of%20saffron%20-%20the%20silent%20rage%20of%20India%E2%80%99s%20ignored%20farmer%20caste&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F16%2Ffarmers-march-in-silence-india-maharashtra-maratha-dalit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41fb3024ee13250a7cbea01d7bbb919560a2970b%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Baramati protesters speak out at the end of the march. Photograph: Bhaiya Patil
The silent marches have quickly turned a centuries-old caste issue into a 
social media sensation 
<http://www.firstpost.com/india/maratha-kranti-morcha-owes-its-success-to-social-media-not-mainstream-media-3022242.html>
. Live feeds from the marches quickly populate Facebook and Twitter. A drone is 
sent up to capture images of the crowds from the sky. For Patil and his army of 
2,000 Twitter users, who each have multiple accounts, it’s easy to turn a tweet 
into a trend. “Social media has really made these marches what they are. It has 
brought the Maratha people together,” he says. Their demands go far beyond 
wanting the hangman’s noose for the alleged killers of the girl from Kopardi. 
“The Marathas’ voice has been suppressed for a long time. It was a divided 
community, but what happened in the village united us,” says Patil.

Marathas are traditionally landowning farmers. Their status would have meant 
they were much richer and more powerful than the Dalit castes. But the rapid 
increase of India’s population since independence means that, over generations, 
large farmlands have been divided into smaller plots to share between brothers, 
leaving each Maratha son with less land to farm than his father had.

Four consecutive years of drought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/27/india-drought-migrants-head-to-cities-in-desperate-search-for-water>
 have ruined harvests and left farmers without water even to drink or wash. 
Marathwada, a Maratha-dominated region of Maharashtra, was one of the worst hit 
places in India. Doctors delayed surgeries and schools had to close down; in 
many villages water was available only once in nine days.

Without banks to borrow from, farmers had to turn to loan sharks and borrow at 
high interest rates, which increased financial instability. Maratha farmers 
were severely hit, and the effects rippled through the entire community, even 
those who had moved away from their villages to the cities. Some farmers took 
their lives.

The marches are silent, but their demands are loud and clear. The movement 
brings together the economic and social grievances of millions of people across 
Maharashtra. They want reforms in the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, which they argue is unfairly used against 
higher-caste communities.

They want to be included in the list of “other backward castes”, which gives 
welfare benefits to listed castes and which politicians change every election 
season to win votes. The Marathas also want loan repayments cancelled and a 
fund for drought-hit farmers.

“At one of the first marches, we saw that many women had come, too, and we 
didn’t want any violence,” says Patil. “So we decided the marches would be 
silent. That way they would be peaceful. We don’t want to disturb the peace of 
the cities, but we want our demands to be heard. We even have a team of 
volunteers at the back of the procession, who sweep up the streets after the 
crowds pass through. We want people to say, look, five million people came and 
went, but not one stone is out of place.”

The marches bring together various Maratha factions. Pravin Gaikwad, the chief 
of the Sambhaji brigade, a Maratha activist group, calls the protests “the 
Maratha Arab spring”.

“There is an awakening in the Maratha community,” he says. “And one of the 
main reasons is that our own leaders have failed us. Politicians such as Sharad 
Pawar [chief minister of Maharashtra], for example, are known as strong Maratha 
leaders. But in reality they do little for the Marathas. They go to all the big 
functions and festivals of the other communities so they can win their votes, 
but they never come to our events, they never ask us what we want. We have been 
overlooked. Nobody, no politician, has done anything for us.”

Desertion by the political class is part of the problem. Even worse for the 
Maratha farmer, Gaikwad says, are the effects of globalisation and 
environmentalism. “It is very simple. Say I need to build a dam to irrigate my 
fields. To build that dam, I need to cut down a forest. I understand that 
global warming is a problem, but without that dam, my children won’t have food 
to eat. This is a big problem for farmers.

“The rich countries – America, Europe and Australia – they have already 
developed. After developing they figured out that global warming was a big 
problem. So now, they are blocking our development. The rich countries are 
making laws through international green tribunals, and putting pressure on us 
to reduce our carbon emissions.

“There are trees literally in the middle of our highways that we can’t cut 
down just because they are so old. It means there are dozens of deaths on that 
road every year, just to save that old tree. Our country is an agricultural 
country. But nobody cares about the farmers. We have put up our demands, and we 
will march until they are met. The politicians are not helping. Now they’ve 
started paying attention, asking to meet with us. But what is the use of having 
tea with the chief minister? We want our farmers to be looked after and we will 
keep marching until they are.”
 