
Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> has permanently 
banned a rightwing writer and notorious troll for his role in the online abuse 
of Leslie Jones over her role in the Ghostbusters reboot.

Milo Yiannopoulos, the technology editor for Breitbart.com, tweeted as @Nero. 
Before he was banned, he had more than 338,000 followers and called himself 
“the most fabulous supervillain on the internet” for his provocations online.

A known contrarian who likened rape culture to Harry Potter (“both fantasy”) 
and affectionately referred to Donald Trump as “daddy”, he emerged as a 
spokesman for the “alt-right” in the wake of theGamergate movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/11/gamergate-a-brief-history-of-a-computer-age-war>
.

Leslie Jones's Twitter abuse is a deliberate campaign of hate | Ijeoma Oluo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/leslie-jones-twitter-abuse-deliberate-campaign-hate>
Yiannopoulos has been suspended from Twitter several times in the past for 
violating its terms of service, andhad his verified status revoked 
<http://fusion.net/story/254067/milo-yiannopoulos-twitter-deverification/> 
earlier this year, prompting the hashtag #JeSuisMilo among his supporters.

But claims that he had fanned the flames of the harassment of Ghostbusters 
actor Leslie Jones 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/culture/2016/jul/18/leslie-jones-racist-tweets-ghostbusters>
 on Twitter led to a “permanent suspension” from Twitter on Wednesday.

Yiannopolous told Breitbart.com 
<http://www.breitbart.com/milo/2016/07/19/breaking-milo-suspended-twitter-20-minutes-party/>
 his suspension was “cowardly”, and evidence that Twitter was a “no-go zone for 
conservatives”.


“Like all acts of the totalitarian regressive left, this will blow up in their 
faces, netting me more adoring fans. We’re winning the culture war, and Twitter 
just shot themselves in the foot.


“This is the end for Twitter. Anyone who cares about free speech has been sent 
a clear message: you’re not welcome on Twitter.”

His supporters echoed his criticisms, prompting #FreeMilo to trend on the 
platform.
Kassy Dillon (@KassyDillon) 
You've got to be kidding me. Fascist Twitter silences conservatives again. Sad!
#FreeMilo <https://twitter.com/hashtag/FreeMilo?src=hash> #FreeNero 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FreeNero?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/4shlhDgUtU 
<https://t.co/4shlhDgUtU>
 <https://twitter.com/KassyDillon/status/755587646475407360> July 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/KassyDillon/status/755587646475407360> Steven Crowder 
(@scrowder) 
Good lord, Twitter will never get it. An anti-free speech communication 
platform will lose its value. Again. Happy trading.#FreeMilo 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FreeMilo?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/scrowder/status/755604167545221121> July 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/scrowder/status/755604167545221121> Baked Alaska™ 
(@bakedalaska) 
Suspending the top gay conservative voice of the world?? 

Great move @jack <https://twitter.com/jack>, Very tolerant of you!!#FreeMilo 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FreeMilo?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/bakedalaska/status/755607539262361600> July 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bakedalaska/status/755607539262361600> 
On Monday, Jones had started publicising some of the abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/18/leslie-jones-racist-tweets-ghostbusters>
 she had received on the platform, much of it singling her out for being black 
and a woman.

After she made public pleas for Twitter to intervene, its chief executive, 
Jack Dorsey,asked her to make contact 
<https://twitter.com/jack/status/755235268056092672> late on Monday night.


But she later appeared 
<https://twitter.com/Lesdoggg/status/755271004520349698?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> to 
quit the platform “with tears and a very sad heart”.


Yiannopoulos, who had written a scathing review of the Ghostbusters reboot 
<http://www.breitbart.com/tech/2016/07/18/milo-reviews-ghostbusters/>, had been 
dismissive. “If at first you don’t succeed (because your work is terrible), 
play the victim,” he tweeted. “EVERYONE GETS HATE MAIL FFS.”

Before he was banned, he told Heat Street that 
<https://heatst.com/culture-wars/milo-yiannopoulos-i-have-no-regrets-about-twitter-fight-with-ghostbusters-star-leslie-jones/>
 “of course” he had no regrets about his behaviour towards Jones. “But 
feminists, on the other hand, should have regrets that they have taught strong 
women that they are victims and attacked people for having different opinions 
to them on Twitter.”

A spokesman for Twitter said in a statement 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/charliewarzel/twitter-just-permanently-suspended-conservative-writer-milo>
 that “permanent suspension” was one of a number of steps that had been taken 
to address the uptick in offending accounts since Jones began rallying against 
her abusers.


“People should be able to express diverse opinions and beliefs on Twitter. But 
no one deserves to be subjected to targeted abuse online, and our rules 
prohibit inciting or engaging in the targeted abuse or harassment of others.”

The statement also addressed criticisms that the platform does not go far 
enough to protect its users, particularly women and people of colour.

“We know many people believe we have not done enough to curb this type of 
behavior on Twitter. We agree. We are continuing to invest heavily in improving 
our tools and enforcement systems to better allow us to identify and take 
faster action on abuse as it’s happening and prevent repeat offenders.”

A review of Twitter’s “hateful conduct policy” was under way and would 
prohibit more types of abusive behaviour as well as allow more forms of 
reporting, “with the goal of reducing the burden on the person being targeted”.

More details on those changes were due in the coming weeks, said the spokesman.
 