
Everyone in the players’ area was cheering on Roger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> when the king of Centre Court 
mounted hisregal comeback from two sets down against Marin Cilic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/06/roger-federer-marin-cilic-wimbledon-semi-final-raonic>
 on Wednesday. Everyone, that is, apart from Milos Raonic. He refused to be 
swept away by the romance of Federer’s victory and it was not out of support 
for Cilic, even though he has a closer relationship with the Croat.

Instead Raonic watched the television in a transfixed state, studying the 
match, the trends, searching for any potential signs of weakness that he can 
exploit when he meets Federer in a repeat of their2014 semi-final, which the 
Swiss won in three routine sets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/04/roger-federer-wimbledon-milos-raonic>
.

Wimbledon 2016: Milos Raonic beats Sam Querrey to secure semi-final spot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/06/wimbledon-2016-milos-raonic-beats-sam-querrey>
“I was just seeing where guys are going on the important moments, what 
patterns to pick up, so you can try to cover up some things in those moments,” 
said the No6 seed. As the man with one of the biggest serves in the game, he 
presumably would have noted how Federer slowly took control of the contest.

Federer struggled to read Cilic’s serve at first, making 20 out of 36 returns 
in the first set and 11 out of 26 in the second. In the fifth set, however, his 
return stats were up to 72% and Federer went from losing the majority of the 
rallies between zero and four shots in the first two sets to dominating them in 
the final three.

Raonic, who hit his 114th ace of the tournament in his quarter-final win over 
Sam Querrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/06/wimbledon-2016-milos-raonic-beats-sam-querrey>
, loves to kill off a point quickly. Serve and volley is a tricky tactic to 
pull off against Federer, though. Raonic will need variety and durability, 
while the quality of his returns will be crucial. Federer has been broken three 
times in five matches.

Federer has beaten Raonic twice on grass, the last time at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> in 2014 in what was the 
Canadian’s first appearance in the last four. “Two years have passed since I 
played him here in the semi-finals. I’m happy that I have another shot at him,” 
said the Canadian.

The 25-year-old has matured since surrendering to Federer two years ago and 
though he has lost nine of their 11 matches,he won their Brisbane final in 
January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/10/milos-raonic-takes-revenge-on-roger-federer-to-claim-title-in-brisbane>
.

Raonic impressed in his defeat to Andy Murray in their Australian Open 
semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/29/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-australian-open-semi-final>
 later that month. He rarely betrays any emotion on the court, either positive 
or negative.

Yet Raonic is a deep thinker whose willingness to analyse his game can 
sometimes be detrimental. His coach, Carlos Moyá, has encouraged him to loosen 
up a little, along with helping him to hone his skills at the net. There was a 
glimpse of his calm when he recovered from two sets down against David Goffin 
in the fourth round.

The other high-profile member in Raonic’s team is John McEnroe, who was 
brought in at the start of the grass season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/john-mcenroe-milos-raonic-wimbledon>
. It has been an encouraging start, withRaonic close to beating Murray in their 
Queen’s final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/19/andy-murray-beats-milos-raonic-wins-queens-club>
.

It escaped no one’s attention that McEnroe commentated on Federer’s match 
against Cilic for ESPN. “You read statistics quite a bit,” Raonic said. “I’ll 
look through it a little bit. Carlos will look through it a lot. John called 
the entire match. I’m sure he’s going to have plenty of things to say.”
 