
Elfin, fast-moving, with a wide mouth, noisy laugh and clear, piercing blue 
eyes, Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla manages to exude calm while crackling with energy. 
You see immediately how the 29-year-old Lithuanian music director-elect of the
City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra <https://cbso.co.uk/> might command some 
80 orchestral players – not all easy to please, some even recalcitrant – to do 
her bidding.

“You feel the pride of the musicians,” she says. “Every orchestra which has, 
maybe, great musicians and not the best hall – you feel it in their spirit. 
Whereas with the CBSO you sense they are shining in Symphony Hall, not just at 
rehearsals and concerts but the whole time, and in the community. They are 
incredibly open and democratic. It feels like a big family. Everyone is aware 
of what’s going on and carries responsibility. All the things a conductor can 
dream of.”

Finding a new chief conductor for the CBSO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/04/cbso-appoints-mirga-grazinyte-tyla-music-director-birmingham-symphony>
 had begun to look onerous. After itwaved an emotional farewell to Andris 
Nelsons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/18/parsifal-city-birmingham-symphony-orchestra-chorus-andris-nelsons-review>
 last summer, the idea was to keep the current season flexible with several 
conductorial one-night stands. Speed dating, the musicians called it. If the 
chemistry was right, it could turn serious.Past success weighed heavily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/04/mirga-grazinyte-tyla-conductor-cbso-have-got-it-right-again>
: before Nelsons, the CBSO had been led bySakari Oramo 
<http://www.sakarioramo.com/component/content/article/11-content/bio/7cbso-cbso.html?Itemid=101>
 andSimon Rattle <https://www.theguardian.com/music/simon-rattle>. Could it 
sustain its winning streak?

CBSO appoints 29-year-old Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla as music director
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/04/cbso-appoints-mirga-grazinyte-tyla-music-director-birmingham-symphony>
Then along came Mirga, which is how everyone refers to her. She had pedigree, 
of course. She came to international attention when she won the Salzburg 
festival young conductors’ award, and the intervening four years have seen her 
rise and rise: until she officially takes over in Birmingham in September, she 
continues as music director of theSalzburger Landestheater 
<http://www.salzburger-landestheater.at/en/start/index.html> and associate 
conductor of theLos Angeles Philharmonic <http://www.laphil.com/>, having 
previously been an assistant conductor and Gustavo Dudamel fellow at the same 
orchestra.

In February, after just two dates with the orchestra during which she disarmed 
all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/12/cbso-grazinyte-tyla-review-symphony-hall-birmingham>
, she was appointed the 12th music director of the CBSO for three years. 
Whereas the self-governingBerlin Phil locked themselves in a church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/11/berlin-philharmonic-imon-rattle-orchestra-vote-chief-conductor>
 to appoint a new conductor, the CBSO took a more sanguine route. Consultation 
and feedback forms were part of the process. Marks were awarded for conducting 
and rehearsal technique, ability to communicate and musical interpretation. 
“The job is a great blend of the human and the technical. Being organised is 
vital,” says Stephen Maddock, the orchestra’s chief executive. “And, during a 
long discussion with members of the orchestra about Mirga, the question of 
gender did not arise once.”

Perhaps because English is not her first language, Gražinytė-Tyla speaks with 
care, punctuating seriousness with laughter. She was born into generations of 
musicians: her great-uncle is an organist in Vilnius, her great-aunt a 
composer, her father a choral conductor, her mother a pianist.

CBSO/Gražinyte-Tyla review – attention to every morsel of detail
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/12/cbso-grazinyte-tyla-review-symphony-hall-birmingham>
Until she was 10, when a younger brother and sister arrived, Gražinytė-Tyla 
was an only child. “And perhaps that time on my own made a difference,” she 
says. “I was sociable, but also glad to be alone. As a tiny child, I was always 
singing. I’m not sure if there was such a point when I suddenly wanted to 
conduct. It’s just that I was spending so much time inside music it seemed 
natural. At the same time, I wasn’t learning any instrument or studying theory. 
Only when I was 11 and my parents were thinking to lead me towards a secure 
profession, I said: ‘But I can imagine only music.’”

She hardly knows Britain, but she is keen to immerse herself in the extensive 
music-making – educational, outreach, community – that is a feature of the 
CBSO, its outstanding choirs and its sister ensemble, theBirmingham 
Contemporary Music Group <http://www.bcmg.org.uk/>. She will make her London 
debut with the CBSO atthe Proms on 27 August 
<http://www.royalalberthall.com/tickets/proms/proms-2016/prom-55-city-of-birmingham-symphony-orchestra-and-mirga-grazinyte-tyla/>
 – likely to be a hot ticket – with a programme of Tchaikovsky, Mozart andHans 
Abrahamsen’s Ophelia song cycle, Le Me Tell You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/19/cbso-nelsons-review-barbara-hannigan-abrahamsen>
. And the Birmingham season? Expect big romantic works of the kind Nelsons 
excelled at, but also more Haydn and Mozart, and more contemporary music. 
“I’m excited to see how much Britain really cares about new music – which is 
not always the case with some of the other European countries I’ve worked in.”

Given her own background, as well as the long tradition of openness toward 
female composers and conductors in the Baltic nations, Gražinytė-Tyla cannot 
quite grasp the fuss being made about her sex. “But I accept I must still be a 
cheerleader,” she says. “Mothers come up to me and thank me for setting an 
example to their daughters. And I am happy to take that responsibility. I grew 
up without imagining any problems. I hope those who come after me will think it 
quite normal.”

Mirga Gražinytė-Tyla conducts the CBSO at the Proms, Royal Albert Hall, London 
SW7, on 27 August 
<http://www.royalalberthall.com/tickets/proms/proms-2016/prom-55-city-of-birmingham-symphony-orchestra-and-mirga-grazinyte-tyla/>
.
 