
Mitie <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mitiegroup> has published its 
second profit warning in two months after the outsourcing company’s customers 
continued to reduce spending due to rising costs and economic uncertainty.

The company also said it would withdraw from its healthcare business, which 
provides home care for the elderly. The £128m cost of writing off the business 
drove Mitie to a £100m pre-tax loss for the first half of the year.

Lady McGregor-Smith, Mitie’s departing chief executive, said spending cuts had 
made the healthcare business unviable. The Conservative peer said vulnerable 
people would suffer unless the government resolved to fund care properly.

Mitie has expanded to employ 63,000 people across businesses including office 
cleaning, immigration centres and pest control as organisations have sought to 
cut costs by contracting out services.


The company hit the buffers in September as it said annual profit would be 
lower than expected because customers, from banks to local authorities, were 
delaying projects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/mitie-profit-warning-brexit-vote-spending-eu-referendum>
 amid uncertainty caused by the Brexit vote and rising employment costs.

Underlying annual earnings are expected to be up to 15% lower than analysts 
had pencilled in after the first profit warning.

Mitie’s shares fell as much as 18% in early trading and were down 7% at 194p 
after lunch.

McGregor-Smith, who has run Mitie for almost 10 years, announced soon after 
the first profit warning that she would step down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/mitie-outsourcing-chief-executive-ruby-mcgregor-smith-steps-down>
. McGregor-Smith, who was the first Asian woman to run aFTSE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 250 company when she took the job, 
will leave on 12 December and be replaced by Phil Bentley, the former boss of 
Cable & Wireless.

McGregor-Smith said: “I made the decision [to leave] over a year ago and the 
board has been looking at succession. I have to do the job based on current 
market conditions.” She said cost cuts and new business in the pipeline had put 
Bentley in a good position to restore profitability.

Mitie put its healthcare division under review in September and will now look 
for a company to take over the business or allow its contracts to wind down. 
Cash-strapped local councils have been seeking price cuts from the loss-making 
business, McGregor-Smith said.

McGregor-Smith said councils and the health service were not to blame for the 
care crisis because employment costs, including introducing the “national 
living wage”, had gone up by a third in the past three years as government 
funding had fallen sharply. The prices requested by local authorities for care 
made it impossible for Mitie to carry on, she said.

“When I talked this through with the Care Quality Commission last week I said 
there is nothing else we can do. We are watching the standard of care fall when 
other players take the work on.

“Care workers should be paid significantly more but someone has got to pay for 
it. If we are serious about social care in the UK it needs significantly more 
than the funding that has been suggested. We don’t believe additional funding 
will be made available to those who need it the most.”

A report by the King’s Fund in September said old people’s level of care 
depended on where they lived and how rich they were rather than their level of 
need 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/15/elderly-people-social-care-cuts-kings-fund-nuffield-trust-report>
. It saidlocal authority spending on care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/13/vulnerable-adult-social-care-risk-england-councils-face-1bn-shortfall>
 for older and disabled people had fallen 11% in real terms in the past five 
years.

McGregor-Smith said she had not thought about resigning the Tory whip in the 
House of Lords to protest against the lack of funding. She said no government 
in the past 10 years had done enough to support the sector.

Mitie swung to a pre-tax loss of £100.4m in the six months to the end of 
September from a £45.1m profit a year earlier. The £128m write-off connected to 
the healthcare business included £117m of goodwill and intangible assets.
 