
Alistair Brownlee <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alistair-brownlee> has 
admitted his surprise that Mo Farah yet again failed to make the top three of 
the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year on Sunday night and suggested it might 
be because “some people don’t see him as British”.

Brownlee said he would have voted for Farah, who came fourth in the awards 
despiteretaining his Olympic 5,000m and 10,000m titles in style in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/21/mo-farah-wins-the-double-double-gold-medals-video-highlights>
, and felt it was “really sad” that he did not get the respect his success 
deserved.

Andy Murray wins BBC Sports Personality of the Year 2016 award
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/andy-murray-wins-bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-2016>
“For me Mo’s achievements are incredible and what stands out about them is 
that no one from this country has ever done them before,” Brownlee said. “There 
is a good chance that no one will again. It’s not like someone does it every 
year – it is a complete one-off in what are two very competitive, blue riband 
athletic events.”

Brownlee, who finished in second place behind Andy Murray on Sunday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/andy-murray-wins-bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-2016>
, said he was flabbergasted that Farah had finished in the top three of Spoty 
only once, in 2011. “I’m not sure why he’s not in the top three,” he said. “It 
doesn’t necessarily help if you’re not there on the night; maybe some people 
don’t see him as British. He trains abroad, too.

“It’s really sad, because for me he is the perfect British story. It’s what we 
should be about: a person who comes to Britain as a young man, as a refugee, 
and an ex‑schoolteacher identifies something that he’s brilliant at and he 
represents Britain as the best in the world. I think that’s a fantastic British 
story.”

Farah’s case was also supported by the 58-year-old showjumper Nick Skelton, 
another gold medallist in Rio, who finished third on Sunday night. “I think I 
would have voted for Mo,” he said. “What he’s done is amazing, hard work and 
flogging his body. To win all those double golds he’s a worthy winner of it.”

BBC Sports Personality of the Year 2016 – behind the scenes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2016/dec/19/bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-2016-behind-the-scenes>
Meanwhile Murray has conceded it will be hard to maintain his level of tennis 
after a brilliant 2016, during whichhe won Wimbledon, Olympic gold and reached 
the world No1 spot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/16/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-world-no1-2016>
 for the first time. “It’s possible that everything doesn’t go perfectly next 
year,” he said.

“I need to be able to deal with that. I know that to stay at the top and keep 
winning big titles, it’s a really difficult thing to do. I’m trying to prepare 
myself for that mentally a little bit just now.

“Between my last grand slam and now must be nearly four years or something so 
I’m not taking anything for granted. I’m expecting it to be really hard and 
that’s why I need to keep improving, working hard and finding ways to make my 
game better.”

Murray said he would have voted for Brownlee, adding that the Yorkshireman 
deserved the award for winning gold in Rio andthen helping his brother Jonny 
cross the line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/19/alistair-brownlee-gives-chance-win-helps-brother-jonny-video>
 in a world triathlon series race in Mexico while he was suffering from 
heatstroke. “What he did early in the year was an amazing achievement anyway,” 
the Scot said. “But what he did with his brother gave a really important 
message. It showed that sport is not only about winning. I think sometimes that 
gets lost.

“Everyone has to win all of the time but there’s always losers as well. 
Especially at the end of such a difficult and physically challenging, brutal 
competition that they are in, for him to slow down and help his brother over 
the line was a really important thing to do. It was great to see.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fandy-murray-wins-bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-for-third-time-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Murray%20wins%20BBC%20Sports%20Personality%20of%20the%20Year%20for%20third%20time%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fandy-murray-wins-bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-for-third-time-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Murray%20wins%20BBC%20Sports%20Personality%20of%20the%20Year%20for%20third%20time%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fandy-murray-wins-bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-for-third-time-video&media=>
Andy Murray wins BBC Sports Personality of the Year for third time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/dec/18/andy-murray-wins-bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-for-third-time-video>
. 
Michael Phelps, who won the Sport Personality lifetime achievement award on 
Sunday, said he had been impressed by Britain’s 100m breaststroke Olympic 
champion Adam Peaty – and particularlyhis world-record performance in Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/adam-peaty-breaks-world-record-again-on-memorable-eveningfor-britain>
.

“I am really happy I was not racing against him, given he had such a dominant 
performance as he had,” Phelps said. “I said to Ian Thorpe that Peaty swam a 
56.4 or 56.5 whatever it was – that is one of the grossest swims I have ever 
seen.

“When you go 56 in breaststroke – are you kidding me? I am excited to watch 
him going forward. And I would love to see him swim a 200m. I don’t know if he 
will but it will be kind of fun to watch him do that.”
 