
A controversial Momentum recruitment drive to get supporters to join Unite in 
order to back the re-election ofLen McCluskey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/len-mccluskey> as the union’s leader 
failed to make any significant impact on the membership, according to figures 
leaked to the Guardian.

An extra 659 people joined as community members in December compared with the 
previous month, part or all of which may be the result of the campaign group 
asking its supporters to joinUnite <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite> 
to vote to keep McCluskey, a key ally of Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn.

 In total the union has 1.4 million members, though only about 15% voted in 
the last election of its general secretary in 2013. Were all the new members to 
vote, the turnout could be expected to increase by around 0.3%.

The battle to become leader of Unite is being seen as a proxy war for control 
of the Labour movement between Corbyn’s supporters and opponents. McCluskey, 
standing for a third term in office, is facing criticisms from his main rival 
Gerard Coyne for spending too much time on Labour’s internal politics.

Unite is the party’s biggest donor and has steadfastly maintained support for 
Corbyn in the face of poor polling and byelection results.

In an email to its members sent in December, Momentum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/momentum> said: “During the summer, Unite 
the Union – led by Len McCluskey – threw its support behind Jeremy Corbyn’s 
leadership campaign … Now, Len McCluskey needs our support.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmomentum-unite-len-mccluskey-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f0302935e04b2886a80b207e3c81adccb27e6ca%2F0_89_4799_2879%2F4799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Momentum's%20appeal%20for%20members%20to%20join%20Unite%20falls%20flat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmomentum-unite-len-mccluskey-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Momentum%27s%20appeal%20for%20members%20to%20join%20Unite%20falls%20flat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmomentum-unite-len-mccluskey-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f0302935e04b2886a80b207e3c81adccb27e6ca%2F0_89_4799_2879%2F4799.jpg>
 Len McCluskey Photograph: Rick Findler/PA 
Some Momentum activists had expressed discomfort on social media about the 
emailand in comments under the Facebook video 
<https://www.facebook.com/PeoplesMomentum/posts/378712329140827> that urged its 
members to join Unite. Simon Hannah, a prominent activist from Wansdworth 
Momentum, said the movement should not view trade unions as political clubs.


“Momentum is urging people to vote in an internal election in a trade union 
without any consultation with the membership,” he wrote. “Moreover, asking 
everyone to join Unite is ridiculous and undermines the very basis of what 
trade unionism is. Unite is not some playground that people should join on a 
whim just to take part in an election.”

Hannah said the email made it appear as if members of the movement “were 
simply given their marching orders.”

A Momentum spokesperson said: “Under Len McCluskey’s leadership, Unite has 
taken on unscrupulous employers such as Argos and Sports Direct and won a 
better deal for workers, which is why Momentum has encouraged our members, many 
of whom are also Unite members, to support his re-election.”

McCluskey triggered a leadership contest last month by giving notice of his 
resignation, then immediately announced he would be standing for a third term. 
The election will take place in the spring, with the result announced on 28 
April.

Coyne hopes to win the support of members concerned by Corbyn’s anti-Trident 
stance, given that thousands of Unite members work in the defence industry.

A spokeswoman for the Unite4Len campaign said: “Unite does not comment on who 
is joining our union. The only accurate figures for membership are those given 
to our EC, which will not be until March. Any other figures are not accurate.”

• This article was amended on 11 January 2017. We said the turnout could be 
expected to increase by around 4% were all new members to vote. This figure 
should have been 0.3%. This has been corrected.
 