
It is still less than a year since Gianni Infantino stood dazzled by destiny 
at the Fifa congress, tapping his heart in disbeliefat really being the 
president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/26/gianni-infantino-elected-fifa-president-election>
, and already he has swept in the historic, bulky changeof a 48-country World 
Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/fifa-vote-expand-world-cup-48-teams-from-2026>
. It comes as no surprise, really, that having made it his pitch for votes to 
expand the World Cup, as he stepped over the fallen careers of his banned 
former boss at Uefa, Michel Platini, and Fifa’s Sepp Blatter, Infantino has 
quickly steered through that promise.

With this crowding of 16 more countries into the flagship summer tournament, 
Europe’s favoured candidate, the promised clean-up successor to the disgraced 
Blatter era at Fifa, has done what the European football establishment largely 
opposes. For those who see this asWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> excellence running to 
fat, piling one more layer of girth on the current 32-country competition, with 
a first round in which two countries out of three in 16 groups will qualify, 
the criticism is obvious.
Explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=3d69dcc8-d1de-41a4-b9ec-4d791dd23be1>
Rooted as ever in the hall of mirrors which is Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> electoral politics, Infantino will 
now involve more countries, which vote for the president, in football’s most 
prized spotlight. Fifa’s own projections are that spreading the participants 
further around the globe and embracing 16 more domestic markets will add almost 
$1bn to its takings, and $640m profit, from TV companies and the branding 
sponsors.

These dollar signs will have been clear in the eyes of all those in Fifa’s 
expanded 36-person council as they chewed solemnly over the issues before 
voting through this landmark football change. Infantino himself claimed his 
majority of votes from Fifa’s 209 voting countries last February after he 
changed the mood in the assembly by promising the delegates from the podium: 
“The money of Fifa is your money.” He pledged that every country would receive 
$5m a year for development from Fifa, has maintained in office that it will 
happen, and everybody in the room knew the money had to come from somewhere.

Hence the wearied observation that Infantino, a Swiss career football 
politician, has perpetuated the pork barrel tactics of his predecessors: João 
Havelange, who was elected in 1974 on a promise to widen the World Cup format, 
and Blatter, whose 17-year presidency from 1998 was maintained by ensuring 
development money flowed to the voting football associations.

Fifa approves Infantino’s plan to expand World Cup to 48 teams from 2026
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/fifa-vote-expand-world-cup-48-teams-from-2026>
Hence too, the outspoken objection of the European Club Association in advance 
of this change <http://www.ecaeurope.com/news/eca-opposes-world-cup-expansion-/>
, with its chairman, Karl-Heinz Rummenigge, himself a former World Cup star, 
saying: “We have to focus on the sport again. Politics and commerce should not 
be the exclusive priority in football.”

But European football should take care not to deride this expansion too 
vehemently. For the ECA, which lobbies for the interests of the world’s very 
richest clubs, and Rummenigge, chairman of the fifth richest, Bayern Munich, 
which made €627m in 2015-16, criticising a decision for prioritising “commerce” 
is not a great look. At Fifa, the suspicion in football associations elsewhere 
around the world will be that European objections are themselves based on 
commerce, the imperative to maintain clubs’ endless TV and sponsorship 
colonisation, and protect their multinational rosters of players from too much 
football in the summer.

The World Cup has played its way into being football’s greatest, 
history-making spectacle, but the number of teams in it has always been a 
crucible of politics. For years after African countries gained their 
independence from colonial powers and sought to develop their football, 
resentment grew at the preservation of the tournament largely for European 
nations. Qualification for the World Cup of England’s triumph, our endless 
summer of 1966, was boycotted by African countries because only one place, out 
of the tournament’s 16 was offered to their continent and Asia’s, which were 
supposed to play off for it.

Havelange’s promise of expansion, fulfilled when the tournament increased to 
24 in 1982, and to share more of Fifa’s money in development programmes, was 
responding to a groundswell of ambition and a hunger worldwide for more 
inclusion. It was expanded again in 1998 to 32 countries, motivated by the same 
pressures, electoral dynamics and financial promises, and to supporters 
captivated before that, this current format can still seem bloated, with too 
many stodgy, half-hearted group matches.

How will a 48-team World Cup work? Fifa’s plan for 2026 explained
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/48-team-world-cup-fifa-plan-2026>
Expansion to 48, with the numbers from each global region yet to be decided – 
Europe will still retain the most places – continues the process and has been 
keenly embraced around the football world. Rummenigge’s party-pooping, echoed 
by the English FA’s chief executive, Martin Glenn, who said he would prefer “to 
keep the tournament smaller”, contrasted with the glee of Amaju Pinnick, the 
president of the Nigerian FA, who said in advance that African football people 
were excited about it and: “The more the merrier.”

Glenn did temper his objections by acknowledging smaller countries’ desire to 
be part of the World Cup, and if the FA’s emissary on Fifa’s council, David 
Gill, had been at the meeting rather than at a prior assignment in Australia, 
he is expected to have voted with all the others, for the change.

So football’s World Cup, already a $4bn globally-televised behemoth of 
football sponsoredby Coca-Cola, Adidas and the other partners 
<http://www.fifa.com/about-fifa/marketing/sponsorship/partners/index.html>, 
crams in 16 more countries, and adds another round. In modern times, it has 
always been a product of commerce and politics, as well as glory, and this 
newly ascended president knows that to his bones.
 