
Executives at Monte dei Paschi di Siena (MPS) are fighting to salvage a 
multibillion-euro rescue by private investors in a frantic attempt to prop up 
the bank.

In a statement released after a board meeting on Sunday, the world’s oldest 
bank said it would forge ahead with a debt-for-equity swap offer for tens of 
thousands of retail investors. The offer still requires regulatory approval. If 
MPS manages to convince investors to go along with the plan, it would help it 
avoid a government bailout byItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>, 
which would have far-reaching economic and political consequences.

A deal to prop up MPS was thrown into doubt last week after the European 
Central Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> (ECB) 
reportedly said it could not have more time to secure the private investment. 
MPS had sought an extension until 20 January.


Markets are now waiting to hear the future of a planned €5bn (£4.2bn) cash 
injection by private investors to rescue the bank by 31 December.

Reports of the ECB’s decision, which were released on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/crisis-hit-monte-dei-paschi-bank-refused-ecb-help>
 and not publicly confirmed, have raised fears that MPS would not be able to 
secure the private funds in time and that it would therefore require a 
“precautionary recapitalisation” – or rescue – by Italy.

The fate of MPS is critical for a number of reasons. It is Italy’s third 
largest bank and a failure to secure the private funds would immediately raise 
doubts about the stability of a number of other Italian banks, such as 
UniCredit, which also need to raise private capital.

Monte Dei Paschi bailout: what you need to know – the Guardian briefing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/monte-dei-paschi-bailout-worlds-oldest-bank-eu>
Any rescue of the institution by Italy under EU rules could lead to billions 
of euros in losses for retail investors, which in turn would damage the ruling 
Democratic party at a time when it has already been diminished by Matteo 
Renzi’s resignation as prime minister last week following his defeat in a 
referendum on constitutional reforms.

Under new EU rules, taxpayer funds cannot be used to rescue a bank unless 
bondholders take losses first.

Italy could probably get the green light from Brussels to compensate certain 
junior bondholders, lessening the damage to investors and the political 
fallout, but the details of any such agreement are far from clear.

Analysts said any such arrangement would involve refunding investors who fall 
below certain thresholds in terms of income and wealth.

Shares in MPS closed down 10% on Friday following reports of the ECB’s 
decision.The ECB refused to comment and gave no formal confirmation to MPS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/crisis-hit-monte-dei-paschi-bank-refused-ecb-help>
, but its decision may have closed the door to a private-sector solution under 
which major investors, including the sovereign wealth fund of Qatar, would 
invest €5bn in cash.


Federico Santi, an analyst at Eurasia Group, said that state support would 
likely be forthcoming if the private-sector solution failed to materialise.


Santi said any amount of “burden sharing” or losses inflicted on junior 
bondholders would be hugely unpopular and a serious blow to the government. He 
said that it might nevertheless be easier for an incoming government led by the 
prime minister-designate, Paolo Gentiloni, to take unpopular measures, since 
Renzi would still want to lead his party into elections. A new poll is expected 
to be called early next year.

Lorenzo Codogno, chief economist at LC Macro Advisors, said: “Now that the 
political situation is about to stabilise and a government will be in office on 
Tuesday, the solution for MPS could equally be in sight, but it is still not 
clear whether a private solution is still feasible or, more likely, some public 
money would be necessary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmonte-dei-paschi-siena-emergency-cash-injection-european-central-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb91c38104d87a2b8d597aab65b082761d43c3d76%2F0_56_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Monte%20dei%20Paschi%20di%20Siena%20tries%20to%20keep%20%E2%82%AC5bn%20rescue%20plan%20alive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmonte-dei-paschi-siena-emergency-cash-injection-european-central-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Monte%20dei%20Paschi%20di%20Siena%20tries%20to%20keep%20%E2%82%AC5bn%20rescue%20plan%20alive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fmonte-dei-paschi-siena-emergency-cash-injection-european-central-bank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb91c38104d87a2b8d597aab65b082761d43c3d76%2F0_56_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Monte dei Paschi di Siena has already been bailed out twice in modern Italian 
history. Photograph: Mattia Sedda/EPA 
“The problems of Italian banks will continue to drag on for months, if not 
years, but at least a framework would be in place to address the most pressing 
issues. It is now the final countdown.”


The country’s third-largest lender has already been bailed out twice in modern 
Italian history, but it became clear after Britain’s vote to exit the EU, which 
sent shockwaves across financial markets, that the Siena bank would require a 
third bailout.


The bank’s financial problems are nothing new. Italian banks have been weighed 
down by €360bn of non-performing loans that were mostly taken out by small 
Italian businesses which have been battered by years of recession.Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> returned to growth in 2015, but the 
improvements are only modest and the International Monetary Fund predicted that 
GDP would not likely return to pre-crisis levels until the mid-2020s.

MPS’s issues were exacerbated by other mistakes – principally a poorly judged 
€9bn acquisition – but its primary issue is that billions of euros in loans 
were extended by the bank at a time when the scale of the impending recession 
was being underestimated.
 