Orion starchart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/starwatch_orion_hour_1212_web/giv-15726nXfswUeg7s2B/>
 Graphic: Finbarr Sheehy 
The Moon stands low in the E at nightfall on 12 December, to the right of 
Aldebaran in Taurus and below the Pleiades.

As it creeps closer to Aldebaran, a telescope shows it hide several stars in 
the V-shaped Hyades star cluster on the way. The first is Gamma Tauri, at the 
point of the V, which winks out at the Moon’s E limb at 21:39 as seen from 
London and a minute earlier for Edinburgh. Other fainter Hyades stars, all near 
153 light years distant, are also occulted before Aldebaran itself slips behind 
the Moon’s upper limb later in the night.

Aldebaran, the brightest star to be occulted this year, is hidden from 05:24 
until 05:53 on the 13th for watchers in London and from 05:26 to 05:41 for 
Edinburgh. Along a line from Stornoway to Aberdeen, it experiences a grazing 
occultation, perhaps winking on and off as it slips behind successive mountains 
at the lunar limb. From N of that line it misses the Moon completely.

Our chart, a variant of one that has appeared here before, depicts the S sky 
from horizon to overhead at 00:30 at present, but is equally valid for 22:30 in 
mid-January and 20:30 by mid-February. At its heart is the glorious form of 
Orion but also present are Canis Major and Sirius, the brightest star in our 
night sky. Capella in Auriga is conspicuous almost overhead while Aldebaran and 
the Hyades and Pleiades stand above and right of Orion.

Towards the upper left are Castor and Pollux, the Twins in Gemini, and the 
radiant for the Geminids meteor shower, due to peak at about 20:00 on the 13th 
before petering out on the 17th. At its height, in excess of 100 medium-slow 
meteors per hour might be seen under the best conditions. It is just as well 
that a good number are bright, for the maximum coincides with the full moon 
which will swamp the event this year.

It is best to wait a few days for the moonlight to subside before seeking out 
some of the so-called deep sky objects that are also plotted on the chart

Foremost is the Orion Nebula, also known as Messier 42 
<https://www.noao.edu/image_gallery/html/im0349.html>, or M42. This cloud of 
gas and dust in which new stars and planets are coalescing glows as a misty 
patch in Orion’s Sword, hanging below Orion’s Belt. Some 1,350 light years 
away, it is visible to the naked eye in a good sky and easy through binoculars.

Both the fifth-magnitude M35 
<https://www.noao.edu/image_gallery/html/im0794.html> in Gemini and the 
slightly brighterM41 <https://www.noao.edu/image_gallery/html/im0727.html>, 4° 
S of Sirius, are clusters of stars at distances of 2,800 light years and 2,300 
light years respectively.

If M42 represents star birth then M1 
<https://www.noao.edu/image_gallery/html/im0345.html>, more than 6,000 light 
years away and near Zeta Tauri, the star at the tip of Taurus’ S horn, marks a 
star’s death. Known also as the Crab Nebula and dimly visible as a small oval 
smudge near the ninth magnitude, it is the expanding dusty debris from the 
disintegration of a massive star in a supernova explosion observed byChinese 
astronomers in 1054 
<https://www.wired.com/2012/07/july-4-1054-crab-nebula-makes-a-spectacular-debut-in-the-heavens/>
.
 