
BREAKING NEWS

Around 350 victims have come forward to report child sexual abuse within 
football clubs, according to the National Police Chiefs’ Council. “We will 
listen and treat all reports sensitively and seriously,”said chief constable 
Simon Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/fa-punish-clubs-cover-up-martin-glenn>
. Meanwhile, the former Newcastle United footballer Derek Bell, who was 
subjected to years of sexual abuse by a boys club coach who subsequently worked 
at Newcastle, has accused the clubof a cover-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/newcastle-accused-cover-up-1990s-abuse>
 for their limited response after Bell raised the alarm in 1998.

KANE’S FABLE

The rumours started in September. “Show me the money!” screamed the Sunday 
People on the 4th. “Harry Kane is chasing a bumper new contract at Spurs.” Over 
the next few weeks a string of Tottenham’s best players scrawled their 
signature upon bumper new contracts, and it seemed but a matter of time. In 
October, as a trickle of tittle-tattle became a stream of stories, Lahn’s Lahn 
E’nan Stannah claimed that “Tottenham would like to double Kane’s weekly wage”. 
As we entered November the rivulet of reports became a deluge of dispatches, 
one that showed no sign of abating even when, on the 10th day of the month, the 
Telegraph declared that “Tottenham claim there are currently no contract talks 
ongoing with Kane”, presumably on the basis that it was quite obviously a fib. 
A week later Mauricio Pochettino told fans to “be calm and happy” because 
“Harry Kane is very happy to be here, to commit to the future of the club”, and 
a couple of days after that the striker himself revealed that “we are in talks 
and I’m sure we will get something sorted”. Finally on 1 December – this 
glorious morn, this day of days –they got something sorted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/tottenham-harry-kane-2022-contract>
.

“Everyone knows how much I love this team and how I feel about this club. I 
had no hesitation in signing,” gushed Kane, puzzlingly. No hesitation is what 
the English goal-grabber shows when he sniffs a chance in the opposition 
penalty area. When contract talks began Kane didn’t so much hesitate as lapse 
into a full-blown stupor.

Harry Kane signs new Tottenham contract until 2022
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/tottenham-harry-kane-2022-contract>
It’s a couple of weeks since Kane announced his approach to the negotiations 
consisted of “not panicking and not demanding anything”. The Fiver would 
imagine that the road from “Tottenham would like to double Kane’s weekly wage” 
via “I’m not demanding anything” to “I had no hesitation in signing” would be 
more penalty run-up than Ironman triathlon. We would certainly like to reassure 
The Man that, if he harbours a Tottenhamly desire regarding the salary of his 
star semi-humorous email-scribe, he should go ahead and speak up, safe in the 
knowledge that our enthusiastic agreement will be genuinely hesitation-free.

Kane’s negotiations were rumoured to have started back in the days when 
Tottenham were looking forward to discovering Wembley’s morale-boosting 
properties and the world knew nothing of Sam Allardyce’s predilection for pints 
of wine and regrettable accompanying chit-chat. Still, the effort was all 
worthwhile. After scoring twice in a 3-2 victory over West Ham last month Kane 
announced that “there aren’t many better feelings than being at White Hart Lane 
and scoring in a London derby”. A newly-secured guarantee of earnings running 
to at least £32m over the next five-and-a-half years would appear to be one of 
them. “It’s amazing,” he cheered on Thursday. “To sign another contract is a 
special feeling.”


Still, the important thing is that the deal is done. What a boon for Spurs, 
who now have all the key members of the team that wasn’t quite good enough to 
win a particularly weak league last season signed up on generous long-term 
deals except for Hugo Lloris. And there’s news on that front too, with 
Pochettino revealing today that “Hugo is very happy and he wants success here 
and to stay here at Tottenham”, and adding that “maybe in the next few days you 
will receive some news”. Watch this space, reader! And then keep watching. And 
a bit more. Might as well make yourself comfortable, this might take a while.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“The club might put on a pre-match meal for us. It’s not normally a given 
because of money so we only have it on big occasions. We had one before 
Gateshead because we’d travelled a few hours. But normally we take our own 
packed lunch. The lads cook their own stuff and heat it up - the microwave on 
the bus gets a lot of action” – Macclesfield defender David Fitzpatrick looks 
ahead to Friday night’s televised FA Cup second-round match with Oxford United.

RECOMMENDED VIEWING

Just Baroka FC keeper Oscarine Masuluke scoring a 96th-minute equaliser 
against Orlando Pirates in South Africa’s top flight.With an overhead kick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/01/goalkeeper-scores-spectacular-96th-minute-overhead-kick-in-south-africa-video>
. And then celebrating duly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgoalkeeper-scores-spectacular-96th-minute-overhead-kick-in-south-africa-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Goalkeeper%20scores%20spectacular%2096th-minute%20overhead%20kick%20in%20South%20Africa%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgoalkeeper-scores-spectacular-96th-minute-overhead-kick-in-south-africa-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Goalkeeper%20scores%20spectacular%2096th-minute%20overhead%20kick%20in%20South%20Africa%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fgoalkeeper-scores-spectacular-96th-minute-overhead-kick-in-south-africa-video&media=>
Woof! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/01/goalkeeper-scores-spectacular-96th-minute-overhead-kick-in-south-africa-video>
FIVER LETTERS

“The ageless Tim Cahill wins the FFA Cup for Melbourne (yesterday’s Bits and 
Bobs). Surely your report should give it its full title of the flamin’ FFA 
Cup?” – Ross McEwan [apologies – Fiver Ed].

“Re: Paul Fowler’s comparison of his coffee make to Theo Walcott (yesterday’s 
Fiver letters). Judging by his letter I can only assume that Paul writes 
Hollywood films: I was intrigued by the start, kept interested through the 
build-up, but completely let down by the ending” – Craig Hills.


• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
prizeless letter o’the day is … Rollover.


SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING

Join  AC Jimbo  Max Rushden and co for the latest thrilling instalment of 
Football Weekly Extra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/audio/2016/nov/28/alan-pardew-on-precipice-as-crystal-palace-lose-again-football-weekly>
.

BITS AND BOBS

Players, staff and 45,000 supporters of Atlético Nacional paid an emotional 
tribute to the victims of the Colombian plane crashat a mass wake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/atletico-nacional-pay-emotional-tribute-to-victims-of-colombian-plane-crashn>
. Doves were released into the air as fans holding white candles chanted: 
“Please remember across the continent, we will never forget the champions 
Chapecoense.”

Manchester United will face Hull in the Milk Cup semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/efl-cup-semifinals-manchester-united-liverpool-hull-southampton>
, while Liverpool take on their south-coast feeder club.

Contrite Melbourne City captain Bruno Fornaroli has explained that it was 
fatigue-knack that caused him to drop a spectacular –and very public 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=63CegX9yYts&t=6m8s> – F-bomb after his club’s 
flamin’ FFA Cup final victory over Sydney FC. “You win, you run a lot … it’s 
not my fault … this moment I’m very tired ... but I say sorry for what I say,” 
he sniffed.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-fiver-harry-kane-tottenham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dffd7a69f675ef4920568ab5c7186f191e0017d%2F0_1040_1308_784%2F1308.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20More%20penalty%20run-up%20than%20Ironman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-fiver-harry-kane-tottenham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20More%20penalty%20run-up%20than%20Ironman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-fiver-harry-kane-tottenham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5dffd7a69f675ef4920568ab5c7186f191e0017d%2F0_1040_1308_784%2F1308.jpg>
 Incoming … Photograph: Julian Smith/AAP 
Joe Hart reckons his future at Manchester City looks about as rosy as a piece 
of scorched earth. “I’ve not been sent [to Torino] to see how I do or see if I 
improve. I’ve been sent out because I wasn’t wanted,” he sobbed.

Barnet manager Martin Allen, whose chairman Tony Kleanthous declared last year 
that he’s “like a girlfriend you can never get rid of”, has upped anddone one 
down to non-league Eastleigh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/01/martin-allen-barnet-eastleigh>
. “The approach came out of the blue yesterday but it was quite clear that 
Martin had decided that he wanted to take the opportunity they were offering to 
him,” sniffed Kleanthous.

And top, top pocket-watch swinger John Milton has been getting his third 
person on to explain how he helped Tigres’ André-Pierre Gignac recover from a 
two-month bout of goal-scoring-knack and score a hat-trick against Pumas. “What 
John Milton does is not magic, they aren’t powers,” he cooed. “It is a 
psychological treatment, an alternative treatment to traditional clinical 
therapy. Through hypnotherapy you carry out a mental treatment, trying to 
access conflicting thoughts. With a professional-level goalscorer of his 
stature, we forget that he is also a human being who has certain conflicts that 
don’t allow him to give his best. With therapy, you focus and mentalise to 
perform as you should.”

STILL WANT MORE?

Inside Italy’s ultras: Tobias Jones investigates the power and reach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/nside-talys-ultras-the-dangerous-fans-who-control-the-game>
 of some of the country’s most notorious supporters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-fiver-harry-kane-tottenham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F071ca1092a8fca01cfd1c3391681d95cffeaf0b6%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20More%20penalty%20run-up%20than%20Ironman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-fiver-harry-kane-tottenham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20More%20penalty%20run-up%20than%20Ironman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fthe-fiver-harry-kane-tottenham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F071ca1092a8fca01cfd1c3391681d95cffeaf0b6%2F0_365_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 With an in-depth look at Juve’s. Photograph: Andrea Spinelli/Corbis via Getty 
Images 
Pep Guardiola and Antonio Conte are two men obsessed by tactics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/01/pep-guardiola-antonio-conte-manchester-city-chelsea-tactics>
, writes Jonathan Wilson – and he should know. It’ll be brooder v extrovert 
when Manchester City meet Chelsea this weekend in an intriguing contest, he 
adds.

When free-kick routines go wrong, a Roma rabona and managers going down too 
easily after being struck by paper planes are among theClassic YouTube clips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/01/del-potros-tweener-rabona-of-the-week-and-managers-making-it-up>
 presented for your enjoyment this week.

The latest chapter of the Wayne Rooney Revival didn’t quite go to script, 
writes Paul Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/30/manchester-united-wayne-rooney-old-trafford-everton>
, what with a yellow card ruling him out of the meeting with former club 
Everton. D’oh!

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


STANDING BY IT, OBVIOUSLY
 