
Bosses at Morgan Stanley <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morganstanley> 
made more than $10m (£8m) selling shares in the investment bank as its stock 
surged on the back of Donald Trump’s presidential victory.

James Gorman, Morgan Stanley’s chief executive, made a $2.9m profit on Friday 
by exercising share options granted to him at $22.98 and then selling the 
shares at $37.70. A slew of other executives followed suit.

Morgan Stanley shares surged by nearly a fifth – to their highest in more than 
a year – following Trump’s victory last week. Overall US bank shares are 
enjoying their sharpest recovery rally since the 2008 to 2009 financial crisis 
as investors buy up bank stocks hoping that Trump’s promise of tearing up 
regulation will help banks make bigger profits. Traders also expect Trump’s 
plans for huge infrastructure investment to raise inflation and the Federal 
Reserve to lift interest rates, which would also help banks make more money.

Rudy Giuliani reportedly favorite to be Trump's secretary of state – politics 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/15/donald-trump-administration-obama-steve-bannon-live>
The S&P 500 banks index, which tracks the biggest US banks, rose by 10.2% in 
the three days afterTrump’s victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/uncertainty-over-trump-policies-rattles-markets>
 – the best three-day performance since August 2009. In those three days, Wells 
Fargo shares rose 13.6%, JPMorgan Chase shares rose 9.5% and Bank of America 
shares climbed 11.9%.

Analyst say US banks’ shares could still be a bargain at today’s prices as 
Trump’s exact stance on regulations such as the Dodd-Frank act become clear. 
Trump has criticized Obama’s centrepiece 2010 regulatory reform of the banking 
sector, designed to try and help prevent a fresh financial crisis, as a “very 
negative force”.

Trump’s transition website, greatagain.gov <https://www.greatagain.gov/>, 
describes Dodd-Frank as “a sprawling and complex piece of legislation that has 
unleashed hundreds of new rules and several new bureaucratic agencies” and 
pledges to repeal it and replace it with “new policies to encourage economic 
growth and job creation”.

A slew of other Morgan Stanley executives also made big profits by buying and 
selling their share options on Friday, according toregulatory filings with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
<https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/895421/000120919116149925/0001209191-16-149925-index.htm>
. Colm Kelleher, the bank’s president, made $3.3m; Dan Simkowtiz, the head of 
investment management, made $2.3m; and Eric Gross, the chief legal officer, 
made $475,000.


Jonathan Pruzan, the bank’s chief financial officer, sold 44,625 of his share 
options on 8 November – before the result of the election – for $33.90 a share. 
He would have made $174,000 more if he had, like his colleagues, waited until 
Trump was declared the victor.

Gorman was paid $21m last year. 
 