
Roy Keane was not spouting hooey. Not completely. His denunciation of Everton 
in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/roy-keane-hits-out-ronald-koeman-everton-republic-of-ireland-james-mccarthy>
, when he blithely chucked scorn at the club’s complaints about the strain 
being placed on their Republic of Ireland internationals, was more than a touch 
garbled and wholly undiplomatic but it happened to allude to a home truth about 
Everton. “Maybe their players need to toughen up a bit,” he said.

Everton v Manchester City: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/everton-manchester-city-match-preview>
Ronald Koeman has been saying something similar, albeit with greater 
precision, since hetook over at Goodison Park in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/ronald-koeman-everton-manager-confirmed-southampton>
. After every defeat he has lamented his side’s lack of aggression, their 
inability to unsettle opponents, but hissigning of Morgan Schneiderlin for £20m 
from Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/morgan-schneiderlin-joins-everton-manchester-united>
 said it best: his Everton team must not be so easy to play against; Roberto 
Martínez’s cuddly toys are going in a skip.

Schneiderlin is no clogger. When he was starting out at his nearest big club, 
Strasbourg, he was a rather delicate creature who doubted whether he could ever 
be seen as a forceful midfield presence. “Technically, I’ve nothing to quibble 
with you about,” he was told by his manager at the time, Jean-Marc Furlan. “But 
if you want to make the step up you need to be more aggressive and start 
winning duels.” Schneiderlin admitted his first thought was: “Bloody hell, I 
don’t have that in me.”

However, he learned quickly to go and win possession rather than just come to 
life when given the ball, which was just as well, because when Strasbourg were 
relegated before he had played half a dozen games for them, he was, at 18, 
bought by Southampton, who were trying to battle their way out of League One. 
The third tier of English football is not the place for luxury French imports.

Schneiderlin helped drive Southampton all the way to the top flight, where he 
quickly emerged as a disruptive influence in the most positive sense. During 
his first season in the Premier League, in 2012-13, he demonstrated exceptional 
reading of the game and dynamism, making more interceptions and tackles than 
any other midfielder.

After Mauricio Pochettino replaced Nigel Adkins as manager halfway through 
that season he encouraged Schneiderlin not only to press even more vigorously 
but also to maraud forward more when his team had the ball, turning him from a 
sentinel in front of the back four to something a little closer to a box-to-box 
player. He never became a prolific scorer but, under Pochettino and then under 
Koeman, he was one of the Premier League’s most progressive defensive 
midfielders. Manchester United had to outbid plenty of other admirersto get him 
for £25m in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/12/morgan-schneiderlin-manchester-united-southampton>
.

That Everton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> paid almost the 
same price for him shows that Koeman does not define him by his limitations, 
unlike José Mourinho, apparently. Louis van Gaal appreciated Schneiderlin’s 
zesty diligence but the reason that the midfielder has played 11 minutes in the 
Premier League this season is that Mourinho seems to have been struck most by 
what he cannot do: Schneiderlin does not have the passing repertoire of Michael 
Carrick or Paul Pogba, nor quite the subtlety and goal threat of Ander Herrera, 
nor the jumbo menace of Marouane Fellaini. Surplus to requirements at Old 
Trafford, he will nonetheless be what Koeman needs if he resumes doing what he 
did for the Dutchman at Southampton.

That is damning on some of the players whom Koeman inherited at Goodison Park. 
Gareth Barry, now 35, is above criticism because the waning of his 
effectiveness is solely down to his age, but others, such as James McCarthy and 
Ross Barkley, have failed to rise to expectations. Koeman has singled out Tom 
Davies for praise, partially, one suspects, because the 18-year-old’s vibrant 
performances exposed the paltry yield from his more senior midfielders.

McCarthy is 26 and Koeman seems to have declared an end to Everton’s wait for 
him to realise his presumed potential. The manager seems prepared to give 
Barkley more time but has already warned the 23-year-old that he must achieve 
consistency soon.

While Koeman considers whether Schneiderlin is ready to slot straight into 
Everton’s lineup for Sunday’smeeting with Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/everton-manchester-city-match-preview>
, he will also have an eye on Senegal’s opening match at the Africa Cup of 
Nations against Tunisia. The sooner Senegal exit that tournament, the sooner 
Everton will regain Idrissa Gana Gueye.

When he and Schneiderlin are together, Everton will have a central midfield 
with real mobility, muscle and guile. Their team will still require substantial 
renovation before they can fulfil Koeman’s ambitions – but that is a good 
platform on which to build.
 