
The insurance billionaire Hank Greenberg has emerged as a possible buyer for 
theNew York Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/new-york-times> which is 
facing pressure on Wall Street because of its declining circulation and weak 
advertising income.

It emerged yesterday that Mr Greenberg, 81, a former boss of the insurer AIG, 
recently approached the head of the investment bankMorgan Stanley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morganstanley> for help in pursuing a 
takeover.

But in an unusual development, Morgan Stanley's chief executive, John Mack, 
rebuffed the approach citing conflicts of interest - including the publication 
of a series of negative personal stories about him in the broadsheet.

The paper is the main asset of the New York Times Co, which has a market 
capitalisation of $3.5bn (Â£1.8bn). Although the firm is listed on the 
stockmarket, a dual share structure concentrates votes in the hands of the 
descendants of Adolph Ochs, who began publishing the paper in 1896.

Reports about Mr Greenberg's interest sent the company's shares up 7.6% 
yesterday. His spokesman confirmed he owned shares but played down the prospect 
of an immediate move.

"Mr Greenberg owns less than 100,000 shares of NY Times stock out of a total 
of over 143m shares outstanding," spokesman Mark Corallo told the Guardian. "He 
has no present intention of significantly increasing his holding."

Nicknamed the "grey lady", the NY Times's readership in the US is exceeded 
only by USA Today and the Wall Street Journal. But its circulation dropped by 
3.5% to 1.08m over the six months to September and the company recently warned 
that a "very challenging" advertising market was eating into its profits.

Morgan Stanley owns 7.6% of the NY Times Co and recently demanded changes to 
the firm's structure to give all shareholders equal voting rights.

But the bank's boss has insisted he wants nothing to do with a bid for the 
paper. Mr Mack is known to be angry about the NY Times's coverage of Pequot 
Capital - a hedge fund he used to chair.

In June, the paper disclosed that the Securities and Exchange Commission was 
investigating insider trading allegations at Pequot. It quoted a former SEC 
lawyer who claimed he had been prevented from interviewing Mr Mack because of 
his powerful political connections.

The NY Times is one of several papers out of favour on the stockmarket to 
attract the eyes of wealthy individuals - the former General Electric boss Jack 
Welch is stalking the Boston Globe and Hollywood mogul David Geffen has 
expressed interest in the Los Angeles Times.

Mr Greenberg has an estimated fortune of $3.5bn.
 