
Morgan Schneiderlin has described a reunion with Ronald Koeman and Everton’s 
ambition as the decisive factors in his move fromManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> to Goodison Park.

The France international ended his difficult Old Trafford career on Thursday 
when he signed a four-and-a half-year contract with Everton. United, who paid
£25m for the midfielder in July 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/12/morgan-schneiderlin-manchester-united-southampton>
, will recoup an initial £20m and £24m with add-ons.

Schneiderlin is Everton’s second signing this month following the arrival of 
the 19-year-oldAdemola Lookman in an £11m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/everton-announce-signing-of-ademola-lookman-charlton-athletic>
 deal from Charlton Athletic and his addition enabled Tom Cleverley to join 
Watford on loan. The former United and England midfielder, who had a productive 
loan spell at Vicarage Road in 2009‑10, may sign for Watford permanently in the 
summer for a fee of around £8m, giving Everton a healthy profit on a player 
signed on a free transfer in 2015.

Koeman said he was “very pleased” to have signed the 27-year-old, having 
criticised Everton’s transfer business following theFA Cup defeat against 
Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/07/ranieri-compares-pleased-musa-to-vardy-after-leicester-beat-everton-video>
 on Saturday and seen an initial £19m bid rejected by United. West Bromwich 
Albion also had an £18m offer for Schneiderlin dismissed by United and the 
midfielder admitted that Koeman, with whom he worked for a season at 
Southampton, influenced his decision to move to Merseyside.

Schneiderlin said: “There is a manager in place here that I know, I know he 
can get the best out of me, I know his style and how he likes to play football. 
He was very good for me and, obviously, he was a massive player in his playing 
days and you can only learn from the best. At Southampton he gave me some great 
advice to keep improving every day and it was a pleasure to work with him.

“We spoke since the time I knew Everton would be interested. I know his 
ambition and why he came here. He believes in this project and I do too. We are 
trying to achieve something here and this is what I am here for. When I spoke 
with the manager and the people in place at Everton I understood immediately 
that they have a very good project for the future of the football club. I just 
want to play football. I want to put my print on this club and do everything to 
getEverton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> where it belongs.”
Transfers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/atoms/2016/12/transfer-window/transfers/embed/index.html?limit=6&league=all&currency=pounds>
Schneiderlin could make his Everton debut against Manchester City on Sunday 
although he has made only three brief substitute appearances in the Premier 
League this term. Signed on the same day as Bastian Schweinsteiger by United, 
the midfielder started 25 league games in his debut season under Louis van Gaal 
but fell out of favour under José Mourinho.

Koeman said: “I’m very pleased because I know the player, I know the qualities 
of the player, I know him as a person and he’s really desperate to come to 
Everton – and that’s what we need. He’s a strong character. He can play in 
different positions in the midfield. He’s also a fast player, he’s a clever 
player and he’s a personality. Normally, he’s part of the French national team 
and at 27 years old he’s part of the future at Everton.

“Morgan is really hungry to show his qualities and to play because that is the 
best thing for a football player. You are born as a football player to play 
games, not to sit on the bench or not be part of the team. But this is a new 
step, it’s a new future and he will show his qualities. I am convinced of that.”

Manchester United still making up for Louis van Gaal’s expensive lost time | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/12/manchester-united-morgan-schneiderlin-jose-mourinho> 