
The head of a parliamentary committee is to demand ministers introduce tougher 
safeguards to ensure the Green Investment Bank continueswith its low-carbon 
mandate following a controversial privatisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/02/green-investment-bank-foreign-buyers-energy>
.

Mary Creagh MP, who chairs the environmental audit committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/environmental-audit-committee/>
 (EAC), also expressed concern that the bank could in future put more effort 
into overseas projects than in supporting the domestic sector for which it was 
set up.

The Green Investment Bank must be allowed to stay green | Letter from Mary 
Creagh MP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/06/the-green-investment-bank-must-be-allowed-to-stay-green>
The government has said it will retain a special share in the lending 
institution. It insists this will prevent new owners deviating from the core 
task of funding renewable energy projects that are deemed at risk by 
traditional lenders.


But in a letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/06/the-green-investment-bank-must-be-allowed-to-stay-green>
 before the debate on the sale of the bank in the House of Commons, Creagh 
writes: “I welcome the secretary of state’s pledge to protect the bank’s green 
status with a special share, as my committee recommended, but I am concerned 
that without locking this in legislation it may not be secure.

“I will be supporting amendments to that effect when the sale is debated in 
the Commons this week. If the government cannot guarantee that theGreen 
Investment Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-investment-bank> 
will continue to invest in smart, energy-efficient, low-carbon projects, then 
the sale should not go ahead.”


The Labour MP added that she would also be demanding that the government write 
in a requirement to the sale document that the senior executives continue to 
give details of their pay and conditions to parliament.

“Too often in the past we have seen privatised companies bumping up executive 
bonuses and incentives on the back of better financial results produced by 
stripping out the head count,” she writes.

Concern has been raised by the green lender admitting it has already been 
approached by potential buyers from the private equity, sovereign wealth and 
private investment bank sectors.

Creagh also said she was alarmed that Shaun Kingsbury, the chief executive of 
the bank, had already indicated he wanted to expand into places such as 
Germany, the Netherlands and India. This would take the bank away from its 
original purpose, to accelerate a move towards a low carbon economy, she added.

The bank has so far put £2.6bn of public money into British low-carbon 
projects, although it is involved in £200m international joint venture with the 
Department ofEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> & Climate 
Change.

Lord Smith of Kelvin, who chairs the bank, has argued that privatising the 
group would allow it to raise money from other investors and widen the scope of 
its investments in the UK.
 