
Air pollution in the UK is a “public health emergency”, according to a 
cross-party committee of MPs, who say the government needs to do much more 
including introducing a scrappage scheme for old, dirty diesel vehicles.

The government’s own data shows air pollution causes 40,000-50,000 early 
deaths a year and ministers wereforced to produce a new action plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/17/illegal-air-pollution-will-blight-many-uk-cities-for-at-least-five-years>
 after losing a supreme court case in 2015.

But the MPs’ heavily critical report, published on Wednesday, says even more 
action is required to tackle the crisis, such as giving dozens of cities which 
currently suffer illegal levels of air pollution stronger powers to deter 
polluting vehicles with charges.

Vehicle exhausts are a major cause of air pollution and the Guardian revealed 
on Saturday that97% of all modern diesel cars emit more toxic NOx pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/23/diesel-cars-pollution-limits-nox-emissions>
 than the official limit when driven on the road. A less comprehensive
government investigation came to a similar conclusions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/21/all-top-selling-cars-break-emissions-limits-in-real-world-tests>
.

In February, UK ministers backed more realistic EU regulations but these still 
allow new vehicles toemit double the official limit until 2021 
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2016/02/12-vehicle-emissions-in-real-driving-conditions-2nd-package/>
 and 50% more afterwards. The MPs report says ministers must instead “argue 
robustly” for lower limits in future.

Revealed: nearly all new diesel cars exceed official pollution limits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/23/diesel-cars-pollution-limits-nox-emissions>
“The government must act now to tackle this public health emergency,” says the 
report from theenvironment, food and rural affairs (Efra) select committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/environment-food-and-rural-affairs-committee/>
, which is chaired by Conservative MP Neil Parish. “Poor air quality is 
damaging the UK’s environment and harming the nation’s health: emissions have 
declined significantly over many decades, but not far enough to prevent the 
early deaths of 40-50,000 people each year.”

Alan Andrews, a lawyer at ClientEarth which defeated the government in the 
supreme court in 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/29/supreme-court-orders-uk-to-draw-up-air-pollution-cleanup-plan>
, said: “We’ve been telling the government it needs to act on air pollution for 
five years. Due to our legal case, the government was ordered to act. Now, 
almost a year on, a cross-party group of MPs has told the government it must 
get a grip. It seems there is near unanimous agreement on the need for urgent 
action from everyone other than the ministers responsible for dealing with our 
toxic air.”

“It’s time for the government to act in the interests of our health,” said 
Andrews. “Instead, ministers are championing weak emissions standards for cars 
and trying to get major air pollutants from agriculture dropped from European 
laws.”

A spokeswoman for the Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
(Defra), which is responsible for air quality, said: “Tackling air quality is a 
priority for this government and our plans set out how we will achieve this 
through continued investment in clean technologies and by encouraging the 
uptake of low emission vehicles.”

She said councils already have the power to charge polluting vehicles though 
the government was only requiring its use in five cities. The MPs said these 
powers are neither strong enough nor easy enough for local authorities to use 
effectively.

ClientEarth previously called the government’s latest plan “an insult to those 
being made sick and dying from air pollution” and ismounting a new legal 
challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/18/uk-faces-fresh-legal-challenge-over-weak-plans-to-tackle-air-pollution>
.

The MPs’ report adds to mounting pressure for a diesel scrappage scheme to 
help clean up the roads. It has already beenbacked by air quality experts at 
Kings College London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/23/air-pollution-experts-call-for-scrappage-scheme-for-diesel-cars-and-boilers>
,London mayor, Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/10/boris-johnsons-diesel-car-scrappage-scheme-could-cost-300m>
, andanother committee of MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/20/mps-call-for-diesel-cars-scrappage-scheme-to-tackle-air-pollution>
.

The Efra committee says the financial incentives to trade in vehicles should 
target those older than 10 years old. The government ran a£300m car scrappage 
scheme in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/apr/22/budget-scappage-scheme-welcomed>, 
in order to boost the recession-hit motor industry.

Parish said existing subsidies for clean vehicles were welcome but added: 
“More action is needed if we are to get older, more polluting diesel vehicles 
off the road quickly. People need more of an incentive.”

However, the RAC Foundation said taking 400,000 diesel cars of the road with 
£2,000 incentive could cost £800m butonly cut diesel emissions by 3% 
<http://www.racfoundation.org/media-centre/diesel-scrappage-scheme-press-release>
. Steve Gooding, RAC Foundation director, said: “The big problem is that not 
only have the oldest diesel cars failed to live up to official environmental 
standards, so too have many more recent ones.”

The most recent Defra air quality plan includes Clean Air Zones for five 
cities - Birmingham, Derby, Leeds, Nottingham and Southampton - where councils 
will impose charges on polluting vehicles to discourage them from coming into 
city centres. London already has plans for anUltra Low Emissions Zone 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/modes/driving/ultra-low-emission-zone> to take effect in 
2020.

But, referring to other polluted cities, the MPs cited evidence from the 
Institute for Air Quality Management, which said “if councils were able to 
solve air quality problems using [existing] powers.... they would have done so 
already”.

Air pollution involves not only Defra but also transport, health and other 
departments. However, the MPs report is deeply critical of overall government 
efforts: “Despite mounting evidence of the costly health and environmental 
impacts of air pollution, we see little evidence of a cohesive cross-government 
plan.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fuk-air-pollution-public-health-emergency-crisis-diesel-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71fd5ad53c9c34f820d048538792be8fdef852f9%2F0_187_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MPs%3A%20UK%20air%20pollution%20is%20a%20'public%20health%20emergency'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fuk-air-pollution-public-health-emergency-crisis-diesel-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MPs%3A%20UK%20air%20pollution%20is%20a%20%27public%20health%20emergency%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fuk-air-pollution-public-health-emergency-crisis-diesel-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71fd5ad53c9c34f820d048538792be8fdef852f9%2F0_187_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
 London’s smoggy skyline seen from Richmond park, January 2016. Photograph: 
Gill Allen/REX/Shutterstock 
It says the group tasked with co-ordinating efforts, led by Cabinet Office 
minister Oliver Letwin, is seen as “secretive” and “does not publish 
information on its meetings, outcomes or action plans.”

The MPs’ report also says farmers must step up action to cut pollution. A 
study in September indicated that the air pollution from farms, which reacts 
with traffic fumes in cities to produce tiny particles, was theultimate cause 
of half the premature deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/16/more-people-die-from-air-pollution-than-malaria-and-hivaids-new-study-shows>
.

The MPs said Volkswagen, the company which used cheat devices to fool 
emissions tests on its vehicles, should pay out to people who bought the cars: 
“Where proven to have misled customers, the company should pay appropriate 
compensation.”

Richard Howard, from thinktank Policy Exchange, welcomed the new report, but 
said: “It could go even further by making the case for wider fiscal reforms – 
for example changes to road tax and company car tax to dis-incentivise diesels.”

Jenny Bates, Friends of the Earth air pollution campaigner, said: “Dirty air 
is already the nation’s biggest killer after smoking. The solutions are out 
there but we need the government to listen to MPs and campaign groups and take 
more urgent action now.”
 