
Shares in Premier Foods <https://www.theguardian.com/business/premierfoods>, 
the maker of Mr Kipling cakes, Ambrosia rice pudding and Oxo stock cubes, have 
fallen sharply after it warned profits would be hit by rising costs linked to 
the fall in the pound since the Brexit vote.

After a tough quarter in the run-up to Christmas, Premier said annual trading 
profits would be 10% lower than previously expected. City analysts had 
pencilled in trading profits of £130m and adjusted pre-tax profits of £86m.

The food producer blamed rises in commodity prices in the past 12 months. This 
was exacerbated by the slide in sterling since the June referendum, which had 
further driven up the cost of key ingredients such as sugar, cocoa, butter, 
wheat and palm oil, many of which are imported from abroad. Sugar is mainly 
priced in euros and much of the butter made in the UK is exported, which has 
also driven up prices.

Premier shares ended the day down 11% at 42.75p (last April it rejected a 
£1.5bn takeover offer from US food group McCormick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/30/mccormick-increases-takeover-bid-premier-foods>
 worth 65p a share).

Premier reiterated it would have to pass on some of the cost increases to 
retailers by pushing through “limited price increases where these cannot be 
avoided”. For months ithas been haggling with big supermarket groups such as 
Tesco and Sainsbury’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/prices-oxo-bisto-mr-kipling-pound-brexit-premier-foods>
 about price hikes of 5-6% on some ranges. Those discussions could carry on 
into the spring.

Its sales have been hit by shoppers switching to cheaper, non-branded products 
and by supermarkets running fewer multi-buy offers. Premier’s overall sales 
dipped 1% to £251m, with branded sales down 3.8% while non-branded sales rose 
11.6% in the 13 weeks to 31 December. The company unveiled a cost cutting plan, 
which aims to save £10m in each of the next two years.
 Phil Bentley, CEO of Mitie, is holding crisis meetings over Brexit-related 
issues. Photograph: Mint Photography/Alamy 
Outsourcing firm Mitie also blamed Brexit-related issues on Wednesday as it 
issued its third profit warning since September. Mitie shares were the 
second-biggest loser on the FTSE-250, falling 4.7% to 195.8p.

The company now expects to make an underlying profit of £60m to £70m in the 
year to 31 March, a 30% downgrade. It said clients were continuing to defer 
decisions on new contracts and delaying investment plans in the wake of the 
Brexit vote, in particular in its property management and technical facilities 
management divisions. Mitie’s cleaning division is also struggling.

Related: Pound soars but FTSE falls after Theresa May's Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/17/pound-ftse-theresa-may-brexit-speech-sterling-dollar>

The firm brought in a new chief executive, Phil Bentley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/mitie-outsourcing-chief-executive-ruby-mcgregor-smith-steps-down>
, who used to run British Gas and Cable & Wireless Communications and started 
at Mitie in early December. He has held crisis meetings over the last two days 
to discuss strategy and reshuffle of senior management.

In November, Mitie said it would pull out of its healthcare business, which 
provides home care for elderly people. The £128m cost of writing off the 
businessplunged Mitie into a £100m pre-tax loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/mitie-withdraws-healthcare-second-profit-warning-shares>
 for the first half of the year.

Brexit has been partly blamed for the threat to 280 jobs out of a workforce of 
781 at the Pizza Factory in Nottingham, owned by food giant 2 Sisters. The 
Unite union held crunch talks with the company on Wednesday, before planned 
industrial action next week.

The union said the company’s new year message to employees was: “As [I] am 
sure you all know, we are in an extremely challenging economic environment 
following Brexit. We are facing very significant commodity and utility 
inflation on top of the national living wage increases. At the same time, 
retailer competition is intensifying, with growth harder to come by and value a 
key theme.”
 