
On page 88 of the findings on the death in custody of Indigenous woman Ms Dhu, 
coroner Ros Fogliani explains that it is not possible to “gently” drag a 
prisoner across the floor.

“The act of dragging a person across a floor has no gentle aspect whatsoever,” 
she wrote. “Detainees who are incapacitated, or who appear to be incapacitated, 
such as Ms Dhu, are not to be dragged along the floor. It is particularly 
inappropriate to do so where medical assistance is being sought.”

It’s an extraordinary statement – not for its message, which is surely 
uncontroversial, but because it needed saying at all.

Yet at 12.33pm on 4 August 2014, having slipped into septic shock some hours 
earlier and being unable to stand, 22-year-old Dhu was dragged and then carried 
from her cell to the police van for what would transpire to be her last visit 
to hospital. One of the police officers responsible, who had also handcuffed 
her under the “inexplicable” belief that the incapacitated, dying woman was a 
flight risk, had offered in his defence that he had tried to drag her “gently”.

Ms Dhu endured 'inhumane treatment' by police before death in custody – coroner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/ms-dhu-endured-inhumane-treatment-by-police-before-death-in-custody-coroner>
Dhu’s heart stopped some 10 minutes later, before she had even reached the 
emergency room window.

It was one of many examples of police showing “unprofessional and inhumane” 
conduct toward the Yamatji woman, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/16/ms-dhu-endured-inhumane-treatment-by-police-before-death-in-custody-coroner>
 Fogliani wrote.

But while her lengthy findings 
<http://www.coronerscourt.wa.gov.au/I/inquest_into_the_death_of_ms_dhu.aspx?uid=1644-2151-2753-9965>
 handed down on Friday chastise the actions and attitudes of several police 
officers, and the failures of key medical staff, they stop short of 
apportioning blame for the individual or systemic disregard shown to Dhu in her 
final 45 hours of life.

They also dismiss systemic racism as a factor in her death, despite finding 
that she was dismissed as a “junkie” who was “faking it” by most police 
officers, and despite finding that doctors succumbed to premature diagnostic 
closure and assumed her complaints to be “behavioural issues” caused by an 
unwillingness to be in custody.

It was a devastating outcome for Dhu’s family, mitigated only by Fogliani’s 
decision to release “profoundly disturbing” CCTV footage of her treatment in 
custody.

“I came here hoping hoping for justice,” Dhu’s mother, Della Roe, said outside 
thePerth <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/perth-news> court where 
the findings were handed down. “And I still haven’t got it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fms-dhus-inquest-shines-spotlight-on-failures-but-will-it-prompt-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ca66a9f0e9ece365a7c54b66624775a0d06477%2F0_0_625_703%2F625.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ms%20Dhu's%20inquest%20shines%20spotlight%20on%20failures%20but%20will%20it%20prompt%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fms-dhus-inquest-shines-spotlight-on-failures-but-will-it-prompt-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ms%20Dhu%27s%20inquest%20shines%20spotlight%20on%20failures%20but%20will%20it%20prompt%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fms-dhus-inquest-shines-spotlight-on-failures-but-will-it-prompt-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ca66a9f0e9ece365a7c54b66624775a0d06477%2F0_0_625_703%2F625.jpg>
 Ms Dhu, who died in police custody in Port Hedland in Western Australia, in 
August 2014. Photograph: Supplied by Ms Dhu's family 
“Missed opportunities”

Dhu was arrested in Port Hedland, 1,500km north of Perth on a warrant of 
commitment for $3,622 in unpaid fines on 2 August, 2014.

She was ordered to serve four days in custody to “cut out” the debt and taken 
to hospital twice, on the 2 August and 3 August, before her final collapse on 4 
August.

At the time of her arrest, pathologist Dr Jodi White said the infection that 
had begun as osteomyelitis in a rib broken in a domestic violence incident by 
her partner three months earlier, had already spread to the surrounding soft 
tissue, causing septicaemia and pneumonia. The autopsy revealed an abscess that 
was between five and seven centimetres in diameter nested beneath her broken 
10th rib.

‘We’ve got to put our story out there’: Ms Dhu's family prepare for verdict on 
death in custody
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/15/weve-got-to-put-our-story-out-there-ms-dhus-family-prepare-for-verdict-on-death-in-custody>
Had it been discovered and antibiotics administered on 2 August, White said 
they would have had a reasonable prospect of saving her life. Antibiotics 
administered on 3 August would have a reduced success rate, because the 
infection had advanced by then, but they still could potentially be lifesaving.

Both White and emergency medicine specialist Dr Stephen Dunjey said there were 
“no clues to her life-threatening illness” on the first hospital visit. Despite 
being in significant pain, the outward signs of infection were not recorded, 
and emergency department doctor Annie Lang – influenced, Fogliani said, by the 
word of police that Dhu had only become distressed after being told she would 
have to stay in custody overnight – declared her “agitated” and noted the 
diagnosis “behavioural gain”.

Lang, Fogliani wrote, was dismissive of Dhu’s pain in a way that fell short of 
the standards expected of public hospital doctors, and in her conclusion of 
“behavioural gain” contributed to the premature diagnostic closure of Dr Vafa 
Naderi, who treated Dhu on 3 August.

The act of dragging a person across a floor has no gentle aspect whatsoever
Coroner Ros Fogliani 
Dhu waited almost two hours to see Naderi, as a result of being under-triaged 
by nurse Alyce Heatherington. Heatherington recorded Dhu’s pulse rate of 126 
and noted her skin temperature as “warm,” but did not take her temperature. At 
the inquest, she argued that “warm” meant “normal,” despite “unremarkable” 
being an option on the triage form immediately above “warm”.

Gitte Hall, the ward nurse, also didn’t take Dhu’s temperature because she 
didn’t feel “hot”.

“I know that it’s an antiquated practice but generally, if you feel somebody, 
you can actually tell whether they feel like they’re febrile or not and the 
thermometer will just confirm, basically, the numbers that you need to make it 
accurate,” Hall told the inquest.

Naderi also didn’t take Dhu’s temperature and did not note that no temperature 
had been recorded. That was “unsatisfactory” and a “significant failure,” 
Fogliani said: it is likely that Dhu would have had an elevated temperature at 
that stage, and that may have prompted Naderi to abandon the diagnosis of 
“behavioural issues” and discover the infection.

Fogliani described the steps taken by Naderi, including deciding not to order 
a chest x-ray and performing an ultrasound instead, as a series of “missed 
opportunities.”

Medical staff didn’t contribute to Dhu’s death, she said, but nor did they do 
anything to prevent it.

Aboriginal deaths in custody: 25 years on, the vicious cycle remains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/15/aboriginal-deaths-in-custody-25-years-on-the-vicious-cycle-remains>
No urgency, no empathy

The only police officer to show any empathy or urgency towards the health 
concerns of Dhu was constable Carrie Sharples, the most junior officer at the 
station.

In CCTV footage of Dhu being dragged out of her cell on 4 August, Sharples is 
the only one running.

The police officers carrying Dhu, constable Christopher Matier and senior 
constable Shelly Burgess, are unhurried. Matier goes back into the station 
after lifting Dhu into the back of the police van to dispose of the gloves he 
wore to carry her. Burgess, who can be seen on the CCTV folding up Dhu’s legs 
so they can close the door of the van, is equally unhurried.

Fogliani found both Matier and Burgess, and sergeant Rick Bond, who was shift 
supervisor that day, were “unprofessional and inhumane”.

Matier, she said, adopted Bond’s suggestion that Dhu was “faking” her illness 
in spite of all evidence to the contrary, and “inexplicably” believed she was 
feigning her injuries up to the point that hospital staff told him she was in 
cardiac arrest.

“His behaviour toward Ms Dhu was of one who appeared not to be consciously 
aware that he was dealing with another human being,” Fogliani wrote.

Burgess, who is seen on footage yanking Dhu into a sitting position and then 
dropping her hand, causing her to fall and smack her head on the concrete, was 
senior to Matier and should have known not to carry her from her cell, Fogliani 
wrote.

Fogliani said Burgess’s failure in that regard, and her failure to show any 
concern for having dropped Dhu, was “incomprehensible.”

Bond, who has retired from the police force, accepted that he influenced his 
staff <http:// 
http://www.coronerscourt.wa.gov.au/I/inquest_into_the_death_of_ms_dhu.aspx?uid=1644-2151-2753-9965>
and was responsible for the running of the south Headland police station. His 
final entry into the custody log book, made just 15 minutes before she had a 
heart attack, was: “Detainee appears to be suffering withdrawals from drug use 
and is not coping well with being in custody.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fms-dhus-inquest-shines-spotlight-on-failures-but-will-it-prompt-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F308a40a38a9aa5089d35d5a285b84e82c2014387%2F0_0_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ms%20Dhu's%20inquest%20shines%20spotlight%20on%20failures%20but%20will%20it%20prompt%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fms-dhus-inquest-shines-spotlight-on-failures-but-will-it-prompt-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ms%20Dhu%27s%20inquest%20shines%20spotlight%20on%20failures%20but%20will%20it%20prompt%20change%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fms-dhus-inquest-shines-spotlight-on-failures-but-will-it-prompt-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F308a40a38a9aa5089d35d5a285b84e82c2014387%2F0_0_3900_2340%2F3900.jpg>
 Ms Dhu’s mother Della Roe says she is still waiting for justice for her 
daughter. Photograph: Richard Wainwright/EPA 
Police commissioner Karl O’Callaghan conceded police had failed Dhu.

“We are the guardians of their safety, their welfare and of course, their 
dignity, and I accept that we failed Ms Dhu in this regard,” he told reporters 
on Friday,according to PerthNow. 
<http://www.perthnow.com.au/news/breaking-news/wa-police-make-changes-after-ms-dhu-death/news-story/1062cf47d9ca8b4ed63cb3af0bfb0f1b>

“She was not treated with the right level of human compassion or dignity.”

Asked if police should face criminal charges over their treatment of Dhu, 
O’Callaghan said: “Police breached procedures but there’s been no criminality 
identified.”


The penalty for the 11 officers found to have breached police procedures was a 
letter, of varying sternness. At the inquest, several police who received the 
disciplinary letter said they did not understand what it meant.

Dhu’s family has instructed the Aboriginal Legal Service of WA to write to the 
director of public prosecutions to seek criminal charges.

His behaviour toward Ms Dhu was of one who appeared not to be consciously 
aware that he was dealing with another human being
Coroner Ros Fogliani 
The recommendations

Addressing a crowd of reporters outside court on Friday, Aboriginal Legal 
Service’s chief executive, Dennis Eggington, said the 11 recommendations made 
by Fogliani were “fine”.

They were no more than changes that had been recommended by the royal 
commission into Aboriginal deaths in custody 25 years ago, and never enacted. 
ALSWA and the Dhu family supported them, he said, but Fogliani could hardly do 
anything less.

The most significant recommendation was that the WA government should 
legislate to end the practice of jailing people for fines, a practice that 
disproportionately affects Aboriginal women.

Fogliani said that if the government would not accept an outright ban it 
should require the decision to send someone to jail for unpaid fines be made by 
a magistrate, rather than by police.

She also recommended the Aboriginal Visitors Scheme, a government-run phone 
service intended to provide support to Indigenous detainees, be made mandatory, 
but importantly found it did not fulfil the role played by an independent 
mandatory custody notification service.

Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia> should 
investigate implementing such a system, following the New South Wales model, 
alongside the expanded Aboriginal visitors scheme, she said.

Other recommendations included improved training on the duties of police 
charged with the care of detainees; improved cultural competency training; and 
localised, on-country training for officers in regional stations to be carried 
out by local Aboriginal people.
 