
A new and additional music venue is planned for London (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/16/278m-concert-hall-musuem-of-london-site>
, 17 December), possibly at the awkwardly sited London Museum. At the same time 
the ENO struggles to fill seats and,as Ian Jack reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/05/if-beatles-could-match-schubert-can-adele-too>
 (5 December), classical lieder are only heard at one or two centres, such as 
the Wigmore Hall. Classical music simply does not attract large audiences, 
apart from those for the Proms, which dominates the summer months. Even so, the 
Barbican and South Bank are not good enough for Simon Rattle, despite the major 
refurbishment of the Royal Festival Hall carried out just 10 years ago at 
considerable public cost. For smaller concerts, there is also Kings Place, 
added to London’s classical music facilities in 2008. Rattle is a renowned 
conductor, but there are many more on the international circuit. Are we sure 
that this new proposal is anything more than a vanity project?
Professor Mike Bury
Wrotham, Kent

• It seems a study has suggested £34m is required to convert the Barbican Hall 
from classical concerts to jazz concerts. On what planet are the study authors 
living?
Dennis Hawkins
Leominster, Herefordshire

• Adult life is busy. The prospect of investing time and effort in a new skill 
or interest is one few of us consider, let alone realise. This makes school 
years even more valuable, as they are the time we discover, pursue and develop 
lifelong skills that define us.

I wholeheartedly agreed with Michele Hanson’s article about giving children 
ambitious opportunities in music (A certain age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/14/music-school-system-government-orchestra-education>
, 15 December). Musicians have campaigned tirelessly for years against the 
gradual erosion of its status in schools and fought to promote its ability to 
develop higher-order thinking skills. But let us be bolder. If a core principle 
of education concerns the exposure of children to opportunities, then we should 
instead strive to look beyond the increasingly unbalanced hierarchy of subjects 
– and acknowledge that all of them have the potential to influence a child’s 
future.
Charles Janz
Head of music, Ibstock Place school, London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 