
Sixty million Americans voted for Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, each for their own reasons. 
Some were simply angry or afraid. Others were bored, indifferent to all the 
outrage directed at their candidate, eager for change above all else. Many, 
undoubtedly, welcomed permission to vent dark feelings of resentment towards 
people not like them. All were alien to a coastal cognoscenti which decided 
long ago that this election was a foregone conclusion.

Under the commonly agreed rules by which presidential races are decided, it 
wasn’t even close. Democrats clung to a consolation prize that although they 
lost almost all the key electoral battleground states on Tuesday, Hillary 
Clinton received600,000 more votes overall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-results-live-clinton-trump>
 because her supporters were concentrated in more populous cities. A less 
reassuring way of thinking about this is that Trump’s supporters were more 
evenly distributed in the places that most closely reflected the nation’s 
diverse political reality while Clinton’s were huddled together in like-minded 
bubbles.

Latino leader attacks Clinton campaign for taking Hispanic vote for granted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/latino-leader-attacks-clinton-campaign-hispanic-vote>
The new American swing states became more familiar to me over the course of 
two years, at least 100 rallies and tens of thousands of miles on the campaign 
trail. The primary and general elections took me to 24 states, including a year 
embedded with Bernie Sanders’ campaign, and then, once he lost, non-stop travel 
with Clinton and Trump. It meant I lived and worked for much of this time in 10 
states that determined the eventual result: Iowa, Ohio, Florida, Wisconsin,
North Carolina <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/northcarolina>, New 
Hampshire, Colorado, Michigan, Virginia and Pennsylvania.

Airports in Des Moines, Cleveland, Miami, Milwaukee, Charlotte, Manchester, 
Denver and Detroit, the roads to Richmond or Pittsburgh: all became almost as 
familiar as Reagan National Airport and the Beltway were back home. In 
Washington and New York, I rarely met anyone who thought Clinton could possibly 
lose. Out on the trail, I rarely met anyone beyond the campaign’s often 
sparsely attended official events who was enthusiastic about her.

I gave up looking for explanation among DC’s identikit army of pundits and 
academics. At first it was embarrassing to be constantly told I was naive to 
question the Clinton coronation; eventually it was just annoying that they 
seemed incapable of understanding what voters saw in Sanders or Trump when I 
had just come back from rallies packed to the rafters with adoring fans.

Talking to reporters on other newspapers was sometimes difficult too, if you 
wanted to conform to the required “savvy” nonchalance of the modern profession. 
On the Clinton plane, where we helped take turns as pool reporters, it was 
heresy to contemplate her loss out loud. Even at the back of the Bernie bus, 
there was open contempt for his quixotic tilt at the Democratic nomination.

Incredulous editors and columnists were more easily persuaded something was up 
when the primary results for both parties started coming in: 22 wins in total 
for a 74-year-old Jewish democratic socialist from Vermont, a near clean sweep 
for a reality TV host who hadn’t met a demographic he couldn’t insult.

In the end, there was no new surge of Hispanic or women voters coming out for 
Clinton in disgust of Trump, just a shortfall of several million white (and 
black) working class voters who had turned out for Obama but chose to stay at 
home this time; lots ofRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> who proved far less appalled 
by their candidate than they were willing to tell the pollsters.

This supposedly hidden minority proved impervious to sophisticated sampling 
techniques and poll modeling. Yet finding Trump supporters outside the Beltway 
was never difficult. One reporting trick was to go to the car park of a home 
improvement chainstore on a midweek morning: a guaranteed place to find 
underemployed white men with time on their hands to talk and nothing to lose.

The loudmouth minority

In a Lowes at Steubenville, a depressed former steel town near the border 
betweenOhio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio> and Pennsylvania, one 
retired carpenter summed up the cavalier mood as he stacked lumber into the 
back of his pick-up truck, for a deck his wife had requested.

"I think Trump is nuts, but I'd love to have him as president to see what 
happens," says Edward Tucker, an Ohio carpenter who previously voted for Obama. 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BFVbfGsARXw/>

A photo posted by Dan Roberts (@danroberts73) on May 12, 2016 at 9:57pm PDT

“I think Trump is nuts, but I’d love to have him as a president to see what 
happens,” said 68-year-oldEdward Tucker 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BFVbfGsARXw/> earlier this year. “I wouldn’t want 
to end up in some kind of war or anything,” he added hastily, pointing out he 
had no regrets about twice voting for Barack Obama. “But something is going to 
change if [Trump] is president. We just don’t know what.”

Going it alone not an option, Nato chief warns Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/going-alone-not-option-nato-chief-jens-stoltenberg-donald-trump>
For men of a certain age, who had watched the certainties of small town 
prosperity vanish in a generation, it was hard to conceive that things could 
get any worse, short of nuclear armageddon. Even then, little that Trump had to 
say would shock them. But plenty of women felt the same way too.

Christy Cranston, a young professional I met with her husband outside a Trump 
rally in Charlotte, was mainly frustrated that the Republican candidate chose 
not to defend his aggressive, loud-mouthed outbursts more aggressively.

“I would like him to say, ‘Yes, I’m a smartass’ and ‘Yes, I say what’s on my 
mind but I hope what comes out of my mouth doesn’t take away what I’m really 
fighting for,’” she said. “I have never heard him say anything that was 
directly racist or against women. They were like comebacks for someone 
attacking him first.”

Whether Trump intended to be as racist and sexist as he sounded is a separate 
question that deserves more scrutiny, but many are nowreassessing 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/11/09/peter-thiel-perfectly-summed-up-donald-trump-in-one-paragraph.html>
 the recent remarks on the subject of another controversial supporter, Facebook 
investor Peter Thiel.

“I think one thing that should be distinguished here is that the media is 
always taking Trump literally,” Thiel told the National Press Club shortly 
before the election. “It never takes him seriously, but it always takes him 
literally.

“I think a lot of voters who vote for Trump take Trump seriously but not 
literally, so when they hear things like the Muslim comment or the wall 
comment, their question is not, ‘Are you going to build a wall like the Great 
Wall of China?’ or, you know, ‘How exactly are you going to enforce these 
tests?’ What they hear is we’re going to have a saner, more sensible 
immigration policy.”

There is little doubt that Trump can be both crudely inarticulate and a 
consummate communicator at the same time. During his awkward first meeting with 
Obama on Thursday, he provided a textbook display for watching journalists.

If you followed the remarks as they are written in the official transcript, 
the president elect was talking gibberish. “We discussed a lot of different 
situations, some wonderful and some difficulties,” he said of his meeting with 
Obama. “I very much look forward to dealing with the president in the future, 
including counsel. He explained some of the difficulties, some of the 
high-flying assets and some of the really great things that have been achieved.”

If you watch and listen to the event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-obama-have-excellent-conversation-white-house-video>
, Trump seems much more in control. Like George W Bush before him, his syntax 
is all over the place, but the meaning is clear. In contrast to the cerebral 
Obama or the mannered Hillary Clinton, middle America can perhaps see a 
reflection of itself – loud and inarticulate perhaps, but not stupid.

It would also be naive to pretend there is not a deeply cynical intent behind 
the gaffes too. Where other politicians might be accused of dog-whistle 
politics, Trump was broadcasting at a frequency accessible to all, exploiting 
the nation’s three biggest weaknesses: rust, race and ignorance.

Rust 

Putting aside a handful of fickle Floridians, Trump won on Tuesday almost 
entirely because he changed the political landscape of the industrial midwest, 
aka the Rust Belt.

The 70 electoral votes accumulated in Wisconsin, Ohio, Michigan, Iowa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/iowa> and Pennsylvania were a bigger 
electoral prize than Texas and New York combined. Throw in New Hampshire and 
Minnesota – where only 50,000 similar voters kept Clinton from even worse 
defeat – and most of these states were ones she also lost in the Democratic 
primary election.

Not all of these places are struggling with globalisation, by any means. 
Minneapolis has a thriving medical industry. Cleveland showed the world what 
urban renewal can look like during the Republican convention. Every time I went 
to Des Moines I was told it had come on a long way.

There is strong local pride too, often manifested in regional junk food that 
delights in its rejection of the Whole Foods aesthetic:chili 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BJyUIW_gvd_/?taken-by=danroberts73> in Cincinnati, 
cheese <https://www.instagram.com/p/BDvo4A4ARf-/?taken-by=danroberts73> curds 
in Wisconsin, “loose meat 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/234YWhgRUS/?taken-by=danroberts73>” burgers in 
Iowa and,everywhere 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/nqgc8sgRej/?taken-by=danroberts73>, BBQ 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BGXOLwhgRQF/?taken-by=danroberts73>.

But the combination of closed factories, stagnant disposable incomes and a 
wealthy country’s remarkable resistance to infrastructure investment leaves an 
indelible feeling of decay too. Even downtown Philadelphia, a vibrant 
Democratic stronghold,boasts an impressive display of rust 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BIVGBTbgRPe/?taken-by=danroberts73>. Empty 
downtown streets in mid-size cities in eastern Iowa or the Mahoning Valley of 
Ohio provided an awkward backdrop to a Clinton machine determined to accentuate 
the positive but fertile territory for Trump’s unshackled warnings on trade and 
the “rigged economy”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54673741959715bad2e539080781e2dd57c0f138%2F0_205_4062_2437%2F4062.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20journeys%20in%20Trumpland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20journeys%20in%20Trumpland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54673741959715bad2e539080781e2dd57c0f138%2F0_205_4062_2437%2F4062.jpg>
 Latonia Best, at work at Edgewood Community Developmental School in Goldsboro, 
North Carolina. Photograph: Christopher Fowler for the Guardian 
The mood was by no means confined to the midwest, or to Trump supporters. 
Goldsboro, North Carolina, has, according to a recent Pew Research study, seen 
the sharpest national decline in the share of its citizens who earn enough to 
qualify as “middle class”: a phrase that implies the glass is half-full in 
class-conscious Britain, but became shorthand for everyone who is hard-working 
yet struggling during the 2016 US election.

It was here that I met Latonia Best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/middle-class-squeeze-money-household>
, who has three bachelor’s degrees, is raising three children on her own and 
has been working for three years as a special needs teacher. Unfortunately that 
was not the only trio in her life: she also had to hold down three jobs to make 
ends meet, leaving full-time employment in school to do home visits four 
evenings a week for two peripatetic teaching contracts, as well as weekend 
babysitting

“My children don’t understand,” she said. “They only live in the now. I have 
to tell my son that I don’t really have the money to do such and such. ‘But 
Mama why, that doesn’t make sense, you work every day?’ he says.”

For teachers like Best, for whom a basic take-home salary of $3,333 left just 
$50 spare each month, politicians did not talk enough this year about America’s 
struggling middle class.

“Listening to both the main candidates right now, in the early stages of the 
campaign at least, there is a lack of talk about what makes the middle class 
what it is – how they will improve our lives,” Best’s colleague Lashaundon 
Perkins told me. “The United States? We’re in bad shape.”

In case this seems hyperbolic, that Pew 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2016/05/11/americas-shrinking-middle-class-a-close-look-at-changes-within-metropolitan-areas/>
 study found that 203 of the 229 metropolitan areas in the US saw a fall in the 
share of adults living in middle-income households between 2000 and 2014.

It defines middle as earning somewhere between two-thirds and twice the 
national median income, which means some of those who left the bracket became 
richer, some poorer. But soaring inequality came with signs of shrinking social 
mobility too, as a college education became ever more unaffordable for many 
families and employment prospects spiralled downward for those who chose to 
stay in Rust Belt America.

Somehow, a billionaire property developer living in a gold tower in Manhattan 
convinced them that he could be their champion. To do so, he needed to push 
other buttons too.

Race

No American election would be complete without Florida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/florida>. It was here that explaining away 
Trump’s appeal with reference to simple economic hardships was hardest.

Nigel Farage discusses 'freedom and winning' in meeting with Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/12/nigel-farage-arrives-in-new-york-to-meet-president-elect>
There are plenty of clouds in the sunshine state, of course: plenty of 
low-wage jobs with poor employment protection, plenty of homeowners still 
struggling to dig themselves out from under a particularly dramatic version of 
the national housing crash.

But here too were gleaming symbols of the American dream, marinas full of 
yachts <https://www.instagram.com/p/BMT3cYQg4VR/?taken-by=danroberts73> in Fort 
Lauderdale, just down the road from rallies where Clinton was trying to rouse 
the state’s more diverse population. Trump signs scattered all over immaculate 
lawns in prosperous cities like Tampa. In The Villages, the world’s largest 
retirement community, whose population of more than 100,000 is growing faster 
than any town in the US, Trump’s many supportersreportedly 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/florida-retirees-trick-out-golf-carts-for-trump/> 
declared their enthusiasm by riding around on golf carts decked out in his logo.

Both candidates spent more time here than anywhere else. Clinton spent five 
days in the state in the last week alone, before returning north, seemingly 
satisfied that a sleeping giant of Latino voters was emerging from the early 
voting data to deprive Trump of a must-win state.

It was true that unlike many other diverse states such as California, Florida 
didbuck the national trend 
<https://twitter.com/leedrutman/status/796831726911848449> and see a small rise 
in turnout, but the new voters were nowhere near enough to compensate for the 
wave of white support that Trump received. In the end, it was nowhere near time 
to count hanging chads again, with Trump ahead in the state by 130,000. There 
were more latino voters for Trump than Mitt Romney, perhaps a sign that those 
who have successfully navigated through enough byzantine immigration rules to 
reach the electoral roll may actually be less sympathetic to the plight of 
their undocumented brethren.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58c9fe798dbb2df299987de7f767ef27f850feee%2F0_0_3000_2171%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20journeys%20in%20Trumpland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20journeys%20in%20Trumpland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F58c9fe798dbb2df299987de7f767ef27f850feee%2F0_0_3000_2171%2F3000.jpg>
 A supporter of Trump waits to hear the Republican nominee speak in Henderson, 
Nevada in October. Photograph: Ethan Miller/Getty Images 
Across the country, Trump won the white vote by a record margin for any 
president. To dismiss all these voters as racist would itself be as bigoted as 
it is simplistic, but it is hard to deny that few of them can have been unaware 
of his attitudes toward muslims and Mexicans, his support from the Ku Klux Klan 
or the dismissive tone he adopted toward the Black Lives Matter movement.

The strand of white nationalism inherent in the Trump campaign became more 
explicit with the arrival of Steve Bannon as his new campaign chief executive, 
a man whose alt-right website Breitbart.com makes no bones about its belief 
that America is beset with political correctness.

At a party hosted in Breitbart’s Washington headquarters to launch a new book 
on Trump by fellow-traveller Ann Coulter, I met a group of supporters eager to 
discuss their theories on race with someone whose English accent must have 
marked me out as sympathetic.

“Everyone says we’re a nation of immigrants but we’re not,” said one man, 
proudly sporting a Trump T-shirt. “We’re a nation of northern European 
immigrants. We shouldn’t have to pay more just to live among our own 
demographic.”

“Absolutely,” agreed the woman next him. “My family go back to the 1680s.”

Coulter’s new book, In Trump We Trust: E Pluribus Awesome! 
<http://www.breitbart.com/2016-presidential-race/2016/07/11/trump-trust-pluribus-awesome-ann-coulter-book-cover/>
, echoed the racially triumphant mood. “The same way virtually any immigrant to 
Finland makes it less white, almost any immigrant to America makes it less 
honest,” she wrote. “There’s nothing Trump can do that won’t be forgiven. 
Except change his immigration policies.”

Even in the supposedly cosmopolitan US capital, there is sometimes shockingly 
little tolerance. A block from the White House, I stood behind a man in 
McDonalds who was berating the Spanish-speaking, minimum wage staff at 
midnight. He was angry at them not having the linguistic skills to describe to 
him the exact contents of a salad he was trying to order. “Speak American,” is 
a phrase, baffling to Brits, often seen and heard in Trumpland.

Many Americans regard their country’s overt displays of nationalism as 
relatively benign. Ohio in particular is bedecked with the stars and stripes. 
Four years of a Trump administration may change the nation’s view of its flag 
and those chants of “USA, USA” which became a sound track to his rallies. Or 
perhaps not.

Ignorance

On my last flight out of Reagan, a week before the election, I had breakfast 
next to a couple who were flying back to Atlanta after he had come to 
Washington to run in the Marine Corps marathon. Looking up at the constantly 
scrolling CNN chyrons on the television above us, she remarked: “I’d forgotten 
it was the election soon. Is it next week, or next month?”

It was only then that I realised just how much of a bubble I had lived in too 
for the last two years, convinced that the most important thing in the country 
was its election, living on campaign jets where the hours, minutes and seconds 
where counted down on electronic clocks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a76cd95c5c4d22a00fa7f4d78f2f8e005b3d4a1%2F0_0_2992_1996%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20journeys%20in%20Trumpland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20journeys%20in%20Trumpland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a76cd95c5c4d22a00fa7f4d78f2f8e005b3d4a1%2F0_0_2992_1996%2F2992.jpg>
 A protester against Trump, left, argues with a Trump supporter in Miami – 
while the media looks on. Photograph: Ian Witlen/RMV/REX/Shutterstock 
Much has already been written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/facebook-fake-news-election-conspiracy-theories>
 about the impact of modern media consumption habits in contributing to a 
post-truth election where Trump’s repeated untruths went unchallenged on social 
media and in fawning television interviews.

Trump's conflicts of interest take White House into uncharted territory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest-business>
Yet both halves of America live in splendid isolation. After the election, 
liberal friends drew solace in a shared Facebookstory 
<http://www.konbini.com/en/lifestyle/obama-protection-planned-parenthood-rule/?utm_campaign=Echobox&utm_medium=Social&utm_source=Facebook#link_time=1478777566>
 claiming that Barack Obama had somehow saved them from the worst of a Trump 
administration by permanently protecting the right to an abortion – sadly 
glossing over the all-important role of the supreme court in such matters.

Ironically, one of the most widely shared quotes attributed to Trump’s 
mendacity turns out to beprobably fake too 
<http://www.snopes.com/1998-trump-people-quote/>. He was alleged to have told 
People magazine in 1998: “If I were to run, I’d run as a Republican. They are 
the dumbest group of voters in the country. They believe anything on Fox News. 
I could lie and they’d still eat it up. I bet my numbers would be terrific.”

Unfortunately, Fox was barely up and running at that point.

Few of these misleading liberal memes come close however to the avalanche of 
inaccurate claims <http://www.politifact.com/personalities/donald-trump/> made 
by Trump over the course of the election: from trivial boasts about thesize of 
his crowds 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/nov/07/donald-trump/closing-argument-donald-trump-wrongly-says-he-outd/>
 through to whoppers like claiming Mexico will pay to build his wall.

Whether the shift back toward a more questioning media environment that he has 
already encouraged will continue remains to be seen, but it would be wrong to 
assume that voters would believe it if they saw it. My journeys through 
Trumpland suggest a country already living in parallel universes: anxious, 
bored and ready to believe what they want to hear.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video> 