
My father, who lives in India, loathes travel. He will tell you this himself. 
When he hears about other people’s road trips, he shakes his head, wishing they 
had more common sense. The greatest pleasure, for him, is to be at home, 
reading the news and eating rice and coconutchammanthi. Ideally, the coconut 
should be from his own villagein southern Kerala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/oct/02/kerala-top-10-budget-beach-hotels-guesthouses>
.

Alas, all his children live abroad. My siblings live in the United Arab 
Emirates and I’m in New York. Every few months, my brother will send my parents 
a non-refundable round-trip ticket and my father’s reluctance to travel will 
battle with his parsimony. Eventually, he will climb on the flight, bundled up 
thoroughly against air-conditioning, which he hates almost as much as travel. 
Once he arrives at my brother’s house in Sharjah, he ventures out as little as 
possible. He knows what he likes: reading news. Why bother doing anything else?

Outside of these Sharjah exiles, my father has made two epic trips. As soon as 
my parents could afford it, they went on theHajj pilgrimage to Mecca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/14/mecca-worshippers-stream-live-snapchat-twitter>
. The other journey wasa visit to New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/28/10-best-ways-to-enjoy-new-york-on-a-budget>
. When my daughter was a few months old my parents and sister arrived to take 
over my household, cook four multi-course south Indian meals every day, and 
sing endless lullabies. “You must be exhausted,” I said when they arrived at 
the apartment after 20 hours of flying. “Of course not,” my father said and 
fell asleep on the couch.

I knew that between my adventure-averse father and my infant, we would be home 
a lot. But I also wanted to show off my city. I surprised my parents with a 
helicopter tour over Manhattan. My mother got off the chopper with windswept 
hair and shining eyes. “Just wonderful. Everyone should do this,” she declared. 
My father shook his head and said, “eminently avoidable.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fnew-attitude-to-travel-skip-the-iconic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439906445806%2Fda8b2fc0-558b-41c7-9215-6a705eaf300f-2060x1269.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20new%20attitude%20to%20travel%20is%20to%20skip%20the%20iconic%20%E2%80%93%20and%20I%20thank%20my%20father%20for%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fnew-attitude-to-travel-skip-the-iconic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20new%20attitude%20to%20travel%20is%20to%20skip%20the%20iconic%20%E2%80%93%20and%20I%20thank%20my%20father%20for%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fnew-attitude-to-travel-skip-the-iconic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439906445806%2Fda8b2fc0-558b-41c7-9215-6a705eaf300f-2060x1269.jpeg>
 Shahnaz Habib’s father visiting her in New York. Photograph: Rollo Romig 
While my parents were in New York, I started freelancing as a writer for the 
United Nations. I had to attend various General Assembly committee meetings, 
listen to the delegates and write coherent summaries. I was working full-time 
after a long time out and catching up on world news after months of scouring 
parenting blogs. So I would wake up early in the morning to study the day’s 
topics. My jet-lagged father would be wide awake. He would make us coffee. 
While the rest of the household slept, I would ask: “Tell me everything about 
the Western Sahara problem.” And without batting an eyelid, he would give me 
the whole story – many decades of reading international news, mainstream and 
alternative versions, condensed into his elegant and precise English. “What is 
happening in Gibraltar?” “What is all the drama about the Falkland Islands?” He 
had nuanced answers. Every single time.

During those early-morning conversations, I started realising that there are 
many ways to travel. For years, my father had been travelling exactly how he 
wanted. He had been scanning the world, its politics and geographies. In this, 
he is very much a product of Kerala, a place where barber shops and bus 
stations ring out with intense conversations about international politics. But 
he is also unique in that no one I know has his hunger for getting to the root 
of an issue, for forming informed opinions not for the sake of impressing 
friends and employers, but for the sake of informed opinion.

I also noticed how my father took in New York. He wriggled out of expeditions 
to the Statue of Liberty, Times Square, and the Empire State Building. “It’s 
not the Grand Canyon,” he would joke whenever I suggested sightseeing. 
According to him,the Grand Canyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/grandcanyon> was the only thing worth 
seeing in America.

But he loved grocery shopping. Everyday he would go to the Caribbean stores on 
Flatbush Avenue, near my home in Brooklyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2015/feb/02/new-york-kings-theatre-brooklyn-reopening-in-pictures>
. My father didn’t so much buy vegetables as investigate them. He was intrigued 
by the bananas, which are not indigenous to the US. He looked up Caribbean 
banana plantations and the history of the trade between the islands and the US.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fnew-attitude-to-travel-skip-the-iconic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439906358207%2F8b916c62-297d-4e6c-9ce5-c49b33800bb6-1020x765.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20new%20attitude%20to%20travel%20is%20to%20skip%20the%20iconic%20%E2%80%93%20and%20I%20thank%20my%20father%20for%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fnew-attitude-to-travel-skip-the-iconic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20new%20attitude%20to%20travel%20is%20to%20skip%20the%20iconic%20%E2%80%93%20and%20I%20thank%20my%20father%20for%20that&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fnew-attitude-to-travel-skip-the-iconic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F18%2F1439906358207%2F8b916c62-297d-4e6c-9ce5-c49b33800bb6-1020x765.jpeg>
 Shahnaz Habib’s father at home in India. Photograph: Rollo Romig 
It was autumn which meant that, week after week, our Community Supported 
Agriculture (CSA) <http://www.justfood.org/csa> fruit share consisted almost 
solely of apples, an expensive fruit in Kerala. I was tired of apples every 
Saturday, which mystified my father. How can you be bored of good fruit? He ate 
all our apples and then started reading about different apple varieties.

It occurred to me that my father has a wonderful sense of what the French call 
terroir. In Kerala, he will stop the car at roadside stands when he sees good
kappa (cassava) <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tapioca>. He can tell by sight 
the kind of soil they grew in. He will eat that kappa for breakfast, lunch and 
dinner. When my mother’s mango tree blooms in April, my father eats mangos for 
dinner. This is how I get my vitamin C, he says when we laugh at him.

In my family, we think of my father as someone with limited tastes in food 
because he refuses to eat sliced bread, biscuits, candy, noodles, frozen 
mishmash, anything from a can. He took one bite of a cake I made from a boxed 
mix and said guardedly: “It’s very good. Please don’t make it again.” While we 
prided ourselves on being adventurous in trying out various processed crap, my 
father has always stuck to kappa and mangos and coconutchammanthi. Watching him 
enjoy the apples, I realised that what he lacked was not curiosity; it was the 
ability to pretend that bad food tastes good.

A lot of travel can be about pretending. I should know – for years, I have 
been pretending to enjoy monuments in various countries. I have spent perfectly 
sunny mornings in museums that I did not care for and I have sat in cute 
trolley cars and I have thrown coins into wishing wells. I have tried hard to 
enjoy walking tours. There are good arguments for doing new things, but having 
made them all to myself, I am now beginning to see the case for doing only the 
things you are curious about. As I grow older, I hope to become more like my 
father, who caused much amusement by firmly declining a ride by the White House 
when we went toWashington DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/13/walking-down-main-street-usa>
 to visit my in-laws. “It’s the White House,” my mother-in-law said to me. 
“Anyone would want to go.”

Anyone except my father. Over the years of saying no to other people’s 
adventures, he has retained his triangularity in a world of round pegs with 
well-rounded to-do lists. He loved what he loved – the bridges of New York, the 
Halal street food vendors, theferry to Staten Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jun/21/top-10-family-friendly-new-york-activities>
 – not because they were iconic but because they pierced his indifference. One 
of his favourite New York days was spent at Zuccotti Park, visiting Occupy Wall 
Street.

Lately, I have been testing out my father’s attitude to travel. When we arrive 
in a new place, I skip the iconic. When I hear of fun walking tours, I murmur, 
“eminently avoidable”. Instead, I visit bookstores and shop for groceries and 
daydream in urban parks – activities that I can enjoy without leaving Brooklyn. 
I have a fetish for small urban places of worship and now I sidestep the major 
monuments in favour of these. The truth, frightening and liberating, is that 
nothing in the world is a must-do.

It’s been years since that month my father grudgingly spent in New York City. 
Whenever I suggest another visit, he shudders. But I want to take him 
apple-picking upstate. If he comes again, we will definitely go to the Grand 
Canyon, I assure him. “Even the Grand Canyon is not the Grand Canyon,” he told 
me recently, laughing heartily at his own joke. While I waited for his laughter 
across the oceans to subside, I remembered my favouriteCP Cavafy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/31/cp-cavafy-complete-mendelsohn-review>
 poem. A poem, called The Place, that struck terror into me when I was younger 
but is beginning to make sense now.

You shall not find new places; other seas 

you shall not find. This place shall follow you. 

And you shall walk the same familiar streets,

and you shall age in the same neighbourhood,

and whiten in these same houses.

The winter months are too cold, the summer months are too hot, fall is when my 
parents go to the UAE. “Come to New York in spring,” I tell my father. “The 
weather is perfect. Flowers everywhere.” But April is when the mango tree in my 
mother’s garden blooms and sends ripe fruit pelting down on my parents’ 
perennially bruised car. If he comes in April, how will my father stock up on 
vitamin C? “No,” he has a better idea. “You come.”
 