
I live in Holmfirth, West Yorkshire; the Team GB cyclist Ed Clancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ed-clancy> lives just down the road. Before 
London 2012 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympics-2012> I’d see him out 
on the roads when I was riding. A few weeks later, he was winning an Olympic 
gold medal. I remember watching it on TV and thinking, “I want to do that.” My 
dad was a keen track cyclist already and took me along tothe Manchester 
velodrome <http://www.nationalcyclingcentre.com/> with him. Three years later 
we were racing against each other.

There are lots of different events on the track 
<https://www.britishcycling.org.uk/knowledge/skills/track/article/izn20131126-Track-Track-Cycling-Race-Guide-0>
, from the scratch race to the Madison. I specialise in the points race: 
there’s a sprint every five laps and you accrue points by either placing in the 
top four in a sprint or lapping the entire field. There’s a lot to think about 
– not easy when the adrenaline is flowing and you’re going at 45mph.

Riding inside a velodrome is very different from cycling on the road. The 
tracks have incredibly steep sides, known as the banking. When you’re at the 
top, you’re almost horizontal – I found it a bit scary at first. In theory, 
you’re just riding in a straight line, but it never gets boring. You’re always 
at the limit of how hard you can go, always planning your next move. You have 
to concentrate; there’s a lot that can go wrong, especially as the bikes don’t 
have brakes – you can only slow down by pushing back against the pedals or 
swinging up the banking.

People often think of cyclists as being skinny, but you’ve got to be quite 
muscly to be a track rider. My thighs are pretty big compared with most of my 
friends’. In a points race, you’ve got to be able to sprint as hard as you can, 
rest for five laps, then sprint, over and over again. Towards the end, your 
legs are on fire.

I love riding on the track, and my dad loves that I’ve got into it. We compete 
in the same league every Friday. I usually do better – I’m first overall and 
he’s third – but sometimes he’ll still beat me. It’s just nice to be able to 
race alongside him.

My workout: Stephanie Roberts, 23, flat water kayaker – ‘The water is a 
special place to be’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/29/my-workout-stephanie-roberts-flat-water-kayaker>
My weekend workout


How often do you ride? Six times a week, between the road, the track and the 
stationary indoor turbo trainer.
How many races have you won? I’ve lost count.
Favourite pre-race meal? I’m a big fan of my mum’s pasta with tomato sauce and 
mozzarella.

Five ways to get started

1 Track cycling is more accessible than ever. There are six indoor velodromes 
in the UK (Glasgow <http://www.emiratesarena.co.uk/cycling/Pages/default.aspx>, 
Manchester <http://www.nationalcyclingcentre.com/>, Derby 
<http://www.derbyarena.co.uk/cycling/>, London 
<http://www.queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/the-park/venues/lee-valley-velopark>
,Newport <http://newportlive.co.uk/venues/velodrome> and Calshot 
<http://www.velodrome.co.uk/calshot-velodrome>) and outdoor tracks, too. Find 
your nearest atbritishcycling.org.uk <https://www.britishcycling.org.uk/>.

2 You can’t ride your regular road or commuter bicycle on a track, but most 
velodromes will have bikes for hire. Outdoor tracks often have a club attached 
which will lend bikes to beginners, provide a support network and help 
structure your training.

3 Track bikes have a single, fixed gear (you can turn the pedals in both 
directions, but can’t freewheel) and no brakes. To stop, you simply pedal more 
slowly until you come to a standstill.

4 Track etiquette is similar to driving on the roads. The convention is to 
pass on the right, always taking care before changing direction. Look over your 
shoulder, then signal which way you want to move by flicking your elbow.

5 Don’t be intimidated by the power and speed of athletes at the Olympics. 
Every velodrome has a track league, so you compete against people of a similar 
level.

• Phil West, technical director at Revolution Series 
<http://www.cyclingrevolution.com>

Essential kit

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmy-workout-track-cycling-jim-brown-ed-clancy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bf239e74372cf1a42c791a5216baa9d2cbe26cd%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20workout%3A%20%E2%80%98Towards%20the%20end%20of%20a%20race%2C%20your%20legs%20are%20on%20fire%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmy-workout-track-cycling-jim-brown-ed-clancy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20workout%3A%20%E2%80%98Towards%20the%20end%20of%20a%20race%2C%20your%20legs%20are%20on%20fire%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fmy-workout-track-cycling-jim-brown-ed-clancy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bf239e74372cf1a42c791a5216baa9d2cbe26cd%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Lavoro track bike <https://www.condorcycles.com/products/condor-lavoro-frameset>
, £649.99, condorcycles.com.Hoy Senko jersey 
<http://www.vulpine.cc/uk/men-s-long-sleeve-senko-jersey>, £110, vulpine.cc. 
Keirin mitts <http://madison.cc/p/keirin-women-s-mitts/ak12302>, £17.99, 
madison.cc. 
• Do you have a passion for exercise? Send your story to 
fitness@theguardian.com <>
 