
In the beginning, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> simply wouldn’t allow the 
press to eat cold meats from the buffet.


Trump was holding a house party in suburban New Hampshire in late June 2015. 
The main event was around a backyard swimming pool under a fickle summer sky.

A-Z of Trump: 26 illustrators imagine a 'ghastly' future – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2016/nov/02/a-z-of-trump-26-illustrators-picture-a-ghastly-future-in-pictures>
The family hosting the presidential candidate had a 22-year-old son who was a 
Trump superfan. He had somehow coaxed the candidate to appear at the backyard 
event. Before the speech, there would be a reception for invited guests with 
hors d’oeuvres stacked on the family’s dining room table. But this was for 
invited guests only. Reporters, let alone more plebeian Trump supporters, were 
not permitted to partake.

Otherwise, there were no press pens as reporters stood intermingled in the 
crowd with ardent Tea Partiers and curious onlookers there to see a television 
celebrity who had somehow ended up in Bedford, New Hampshire, for the evening.

Trump delivered a long, winding monologue of the sort that would later become 
his trademark as he veered from dire warnings about illegal immigrants to 
praise for executives at Comcast and an extended and impassioned anecdote about 
how professional politicians couldn’t recognize low-quality highway guardrails.

The event, with more than 200 people was one of the rare times that Trump 
attempted anything approaching traditional retail politics. As he soared in the 
polls, Trump became a phenomenon who packed arenas and stadiums across much of 
the south. By September 2015, even the gesture of a retail stop at a tailgate 
outside an Iowa v Iowa State football game turned into a mob scene. The 
candidate was swarmed by people chanting his name and reaching out to somehow 
touch him as a pack of bodyguards protected Trump from getting too close to the 
masses outside the stadium.

It was during this period that the Guardian interviewed Trump in a New 
Hampshire hotel conference room after he had addressed a non-partisan event 
designed to focus on “problem solving”. He was gracious and soft-spoken if 
vague on policy detail. He broadly endorsed several progressive priorities like
federal funding for police body cameras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/oct/13/donald-trump-police-body-cameras-video>
 and rail transit while striking his typical isolationist notes on foreign 
policy. The interview was filmed and it was noteworthy how keenly aware he was 
of the camera and how carefully he positioned himself for it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-putin-assad-humanitarian-foreign-policy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20talks%20to%20the%20Guardian%20about%20Syria%20and%20his%20worldview%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-putin-assad-humanitarian-foreign-policy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20talks%20to%20the%20Guardian%20about%20Syria%20and%20his%20worldview%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-putin-assad-humanitarian-foreign-policy-video&media=>
Ben Jacobs interviews Donald Trump in October 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/oct/13/donald-trump-putin-assad-humanitarian-foreign-policy-video>
Instead, Trump became a candidate of big venues and big speeches. Once or 
twice a day in high school gyms or a convention center in Iowa or New 
Hampshire, the Republican nominee would put on his show. By the autumn of 2015, 
Trump had acquired secret service protection and all the other accoutrements of 
a general election candidate, despite the fact that he was a political novice 
who had never appeared on a ballot. Reporters were caged in a press pen, unable 
to freely roam and mingle with voters once the nominee was in the vicinity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4770e9233e6284dba23b775f979df83acbaace39%2F0_57_2500_1501%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20year%20with%20Trump%3A%20covering%20a%20curiosity%20that%20became%20a%20dark%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20year%20with%20Trump%3A%20covering%20a%20curiosity%20that%20became%20a%20dark%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4770e9233e6284dba23b775f979df83acbaace39%2F0_57_2500_1501%2F2500.jpg>
 Trump supporters jeer at protesters during a campaign rally in Burlington, 
Vermont, on 7 January. Photograph: Erin Siegal/Reuters 
His campaign stops became must-see events, especially in states where visits 
from presidential candidates were rarities. Trump rallies seemed to resemble 
rock concerts more than anything previously seen in presidential politics. In a 
January 2016 rally in theBernie Sanders heartland of Burlington, Vermont, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/08/donald-trump-burlington-vermont-bernie-sanders-home-turf>
 lines stretched for blocks in the bitter cold as thousands of people 
congregated to see Trump in a downtown theater. Many were taking their minds 
off the weather by drinking steadily as they waited and the street was soon 
littered with empty beer cans.

The atmosphere was just as unusual inside the Trump rallies. The Republican 
candidate’s events became ground zero for protests over a variety of issues, 
ranging from his vehement anti-immigrant rhetoric to his advocacy of a ban on 
Muslims entering the United States. In Burlington, a liberal college town, 
Trump staffers were eagle-eyed at the door, requiring attendees to take loyalty 
pledges to enter. That wasn’t enough to stop the event from being repeatedly 
interrupted, with the candidate urging: “Take him out. Get him out of here. 
Don’t give him his coat!” as one heckler was ejected.

Repeated disruptions became routine, along with actual outbreaks of violence. 
The disturbing trend culminated in a cancelled rally in Chicago, which 
descended into chaos. The candidate didn’t take the stage as the venue in the 
heart of deep Democratic blue, ethnically diverse Chicago was filled with 
protesters. When the announcement came that Trump was not taking the stage, 
fights quickly broke out throughout the arena. Such scenes of political 
violence had not been seen in decades in the United States.

The next day, Trump’s rally in Cleveland had about a dozen interruptions from 
protesters, something which would have been astonishing had it happened in any 
other year to any other candidate. Instead, there was no violence and no 
attempt by Trump to encourage violence and it just seemed like the new normal 
as he sneered at those who were escorted out, claiming that they were sent by 
“our communist friend”, Bernie Sanders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74deab6dfdee962f34212028ceb834ba8ec4863f%2F0_233_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20year%20with%20Trump%3A%20covering%20a%20curiosity%20that%20became%20a%20dark%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20year%20with%20Trump%3A%20covering%20a%20curiosity%20that%20became%20a%20dark%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74deab6dfdee962f34212028ceb834ba8ec4863f%2F0_233_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Donald Trump holds forth in Miami. Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
But it wasn’t just the crowds at Trump’s events, which were unusual. It was 
the candidate’s rhetoric. On a daily basis, Trump made statements that were 
just astonishing by any traditional standard, comparing a rival to a child 
molester, or linking another’s father to a plot to kill President Kennedy. In 
the course of a single day on the campaign trail in South Carolina, Trump both
attacked the pope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/18/donald-trump-pope-francis-christian-wall-mexico-border>
 andaccused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/19/trump-appears-to-endorse-executing-terrorists-citing-questionable-history>
 one of the most decorated American soldiers in history of committing war 
crimes. The statements had no effect on his standing in the polls and he won a 
commanding victory only a few days later in the South Carolina primary.

Trump finally clinched the Republican nomination in early May when Ted Cruz 
dropped out after the Indiana primary. His next event was a raucous rally in a 
grim brutalist arena in Charleston, West Virginia. It had been scheduled in 
advance of the state’s primary. Hours before it started, the crowd outside 
formed a disorderly horde in red and white Make America Great Again hats. Once 
Trump finally took the stage in the dank 60s-era construction in the 
dilapidated downtown, he strutted about the stage triumphantly, suggesting to 
attendees that they didn’t need to bother to vote in the primary any more as he 
boasted about his abiding love and affection for coal and coalminers.

In the weeks that followed, there was no pivot to a general election. Instead, 
Trump seemed nostalgic for the intra-Republican contest as he travelled the 
length of California in advance of the state’s June primary, as well as taking 
a bizarre trip to Scotland to see his golf course in the aftermath of the 
Brexit referendum.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38a80d8bb302532b77a4f7c25bdc0b5fb18b29cb%2F17_0_3884_2331%2F3884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20year%20with%20Trump%3A%20covering%20a%20curiosity%20that%20became%20a%20dark%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20year%20with%20Trump%3A%20covering%20a%20curiosity%20that%20became%20a%20dark%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38a80d8bb302532b77a4f7c25bdc0b5fb18b29cb%2F17_0_3884_2331%2F3884.jpg>
 Donald Trump at the Republican national convention in Cleveland: a grim, 
depressing slog. Photograph: Patrick Semansky/AP 
When Trump officially became the nominee in July, it was at a convention in 
Cleveland that was more banal than anyone could have imagined. Although Trump 
had promised star-studded festivities and there were fears that protests in the 
surrounding streets would rival the dramatic scenes outside the 1968 Democratic 
convention in Chicago, it was instead a grim, depressing slog.

In lieu of celebrities, there was former Happy Days actor Scott Baio and, 
instead of graceful concession speeches, former rival Ted Cruz urgedRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> to “vote their conscience” in 
what was widely viewed as a snub to Trump. Much of the effort seemed to be 
focused on stopping anti-Trump rebels from forcing any vote or coming close to 
any open display of dissatisfaction. No one had any illusions that Trump could 
somehow be thwarted.

The nomination was secured after more than a week of grinding procedural 
warfare replete with the type of tactical chicanery that one would have 
expected from smoke- not iPhone-filled rooms. Anti-Trump petitions mysteriously 
disappeared, wavering delegates were subjected to intense pressure and every 
available scrap of procedure was put to good use. For a moment, he was just 
like any other candidate overseeing a political organization.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cade843148294df123422a9b0da647847a1ccf1%2F0_0_2203_1322%2F2203.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20year%20with%20Trump%3A%20covering%20a%20curiosity%20that%20became%20a%20dark%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20year%20with%20Trump%3A%20covering%20a%20curiosity%20that%20became%20a%20dark%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cade843148294df123422a9b0da647847a1ccf1%2F0_0_2203_1322%2F2203.jpg>
 Steve Bannon, Trump’s campaign CEO and Breitbart editor, attends a rally in 
Eau Claire, Wisconsin. Photograph: Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images 
Paul Manafort, the shadowy veteran campaign aide who had finally elbowed out 
Trump’s longtime campaign manager, Corey Lewandowski, after an intense turf 
war, oversaw all of these efforts. For his reward, he was unceremoniously fired 
less than a month later after growing reports of his ties to Russia and 
acrimony within the highest ranks of the Trump campaign.

At that point, the campaign came under the control of Steve Bannon, the editor 
of the rightwing site Breitbart. Working in concert with veteran GOP pollster 
Kellyanne Conway, Trump abandoned his unscripted rallies and began using a 
teleprompter exclusively. He also hunkered down, avoiding the media outside of 
deeply conservative talk radio and Fox News.

In personal unguarded interactions, Trump was genial with the press. When the 
Guardian accompanied him on his personal plane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/donald-trump-campaign-ohio-fair-plane-media>
 in September as a pool reporter, he chatted freely with handful of journalists 
who accompanied him and went out of his way to be gracious. But these were few 
and far between as the Republican nominee became increasingly distant outside 
of his rallies and his omnipresent Twitter account.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F219f063f3342891f35dbf0b2ec5e8b0817e87e5e%2F0_132_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20year%20with%20Trump%3A%20covering%20a%20curiosity%20that%20became%20a%20dark%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20year%20with%20Trump%3A%20covering%20a%20curiosity%20that%20became%20a%20dark%20phenomenon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fmy-year-with-donald-trump-campaign-2016-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F219f063f3342891f35dbf0b2ec5e8b0817e87e5e%2F0_132_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Ben Jacobs (left) with Mike Pence and Donald Trump aboard Trump’s plane as 
they travel between campaign stops in Ohio in September. Photograph: Mike 
Segar/Reuters 
The rallies began to take on darker tones. There was no more open violence or 
unruliness. Protesters had become rare. Instead, they became venues for Trump 
to share his rage over the “rigged system” and stir up an angry crowd – against 
the media, against Hillary Clinton, against “globalists” and a host of other 
villains.

Attendees showed up in bitter T-shirts proclaiming that they were “deplorable” 
and took up Trump’s invitation to deride reporters.

At one rally in Cincinnati in October, the traveling press was booed by a 
crowd of roughly 15,000 as it entered the arena.

Trump had stopped trying to be a normal candidate but he was no longer being 
Trump. It was a dark hybrid. He had lost much of the freewheeling joie de vivre 
that had taken him to strange, albeit controversial places. Instead, he had 
become a relatively coherent figure, articulating a clear world view – but one 
that was deeply paranoid and out of the mainstream, where the press was no 
longer a stalking horse but simply the enemy.

 