
After Dickens's 200th birthday in 2012, next year sees the bicentenaries of 
the two great figures of opera, the other great art-as-entertainment of 
19th-century bourgeois Europe.Richard Wagner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/richard-wagner> and Giuseppe Verdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/giuseppe-verdi> between them dominated the 
second half of a century that Verdi, though not Wagner, would outlive: Verdi 
died in Milan aged 87 in 1901 (five days after Queen Victoria, as it happened), 
Wagner had died in Venice in 1883 aged 69.

Not only were they conscious rivals who disliked each other from afar, they 
arouse strong passions to this day. You could say that they gave intense 
expression to what Europe then meant, the good and the bad: the good was 
musical, the bad was political.

How contentious they still are we have just seen in Italy. La Scala in Milan 
<http://translate.google.co.uk/translate?hl=en&sl=it&u=http://www.teatroallascala.org/&prev=/search%3Fq%3DLa%2BScala%2Bin%2BMilan%26hl%3Den%26tbo%3Dd&sa=X&ei=IZfUUIbdMcrQ0QXOwIDYCQ&ved=0CE0Q7gEwAQ>
, a city with which Verdi was closely associated, and where his funeral drew 
the greatest throng ever known there, opened its season on the traditional 
feast of Sant'Ambrogio – 7 December, St Ambrose's Day – not with an opera by 
the local boy but with a new production of Wagner'sLohengrin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/dec/09/lohengrin-review>.

This was the opera whose first performance at La Scala in Milan in 1873 led to 
such cacophonous whistling that Wagner, conducting his own work, decided to 
make a run for it. It was almost as provocative for La Scala to stage it now, 
at a time when the eurozone crisis has meant very fraught relations between 
Italy and Germany.The president, Giorgio Napolitano 
<http://www.utsandiego.com/news/2012/dec/07/la-scala-inaugurates-season-with-lohengrin/>
, chose not to attend, and the Corriere della Sera called the choice "a smack 
for Italian art, a blow for national pride in a moment of crisis".

The pair have always divided opinion. Verdi is, on the face of it, the more 
accessible composer and the more likeable person. No one would ever say of him, 
as EJ Hobsbawm said of Wagner, that he was "a towering genius, though a very 
nasty man and cultural phenomenon 
<https://web1.caryacademy.org/facultywebs/joe_staggers/Europe_Lectures/11_12_EURO/sources/Tri_2/Wagner_Ring.htm>
". Isaiah Berlin borrowed Schiller's distinction betweennaive und 
sentimentalische artists to call Verdi the supreme "naive" composer: 
instinctive rather than reflective, "not conscious of any rift between 
themselves and their milieu, and within themselves", as opposed to those who 
are acutely conscious of such rifts. Wagner conspicuously belonged to the 
latter group.

For whatever reason, Verdi is easier to take. However much one may love La 
Traviata <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/sep/21/la-traviata-review> or 
Un Ballo in Maschera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jun/29/un-ballo-in-maschera>, no one is 
ever overwhelmed or pummelled into submission by them, as listeners toTristan 
und Isolde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/dec/20/tristan-und-isolde-wagner-love> 
orParsifal  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/01/parsifal-review>are. 
Or repelled, either: that's the effect Wagner has often enough. He can seem 
utterly sublime or quite unendurable, almost at the same time.

Although they might seem disparate, creative personalities, they had something 
in common about which we can have mixed feelings only now: each was closely 
linked with a nationalist movement. Some of Verdi's earlier operas had overt 
patriotic overtones, in an "Italy", that is, that didn't exist politically at 
the time. "Va pensiero <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7K68tdN3fYw>", the great 
chorus in Nabucco, has become so hackneyed that British Airways used it in a TV 
commercial. But yearning for a "lost country" by the Jews in Babylonian 
captivity applied also to "Italians" without an Italy.

Rarely seen nowadays, La Battaglia di Legnano is a fairly ripe piece of 
medieval hokum, in which the tenor expires at the end with the words "Italy is 
saved!". In the revolutionary Rome of 1849, it drove the audience into frenzy. 
And the sloganViva Verdi famously became a double-meaning acrostic, for Viva 
Vittorio Emmanuele Re d'Italia, or Long Live Victor Emmanuele, King of Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>.

As to Wagner, his antisemitism and boastful nationalism are more repellent now 
than ever. It may be foolish philistinism to trace a direct path from his 
operas to the death camps, but then what he said, in his essay on "Jewry on 
Music", and in private, is bad enough. There has been an exhausting academic 
debate as to whether any antisemitic subtext can be found in the operas 
themselves – areMime 
<http://classicalmusic.about.com/od/opera/a/aatheringcycle_3.htm> in the Ring or
Beckmesser 
<http://glyndebourne.com/discover/die-meistersinger-von-n%C3%BCrnberg-0> in The 
Mastersingers meant to be Jewish caricatures? – but there's no doubting his 
views.

Those are all the more repugnant in the light of history. We can now read only 
with a shudder a conversation his horrible wife Cosima recorded. They were 
talking about Lessing's famous play Nathan the Wise, at a time when a fire at a 
Viennese theatre had killed several hundred people, many of them Jewish. This 
prompted Richard to make "a vehement quip that all Jews should burn in a 
performance of Nathan".

A splendid recent Mastersingers given by the Welsh National Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jun/20/die-meistersinger-von-nurnberg> 
tried, not for the first time, to stress the better – the "good German" – side 
of Wagner. But he gloated, musically and verbally, over the French humiliation 
in the Franco-Prussian War, while Hans Sachs's last great oration in 
Mastersingers seems unambiguous: "Evil tricks threaten us: if the German people 
and kingdom should one day decay under a false, foreign rule ... what is German 
and true none would know" ("false, foreign rule" translatesfalscher wälscher 
Majestät, where wälscher suggests not just foreign but specifically "French").

We find that rebarbative, but then we also still have the music. Whatever 
reservations one has about some of their prentice work (and no one who has sat 
through Wagner'sDas Liebesverbot <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Das_Liebesverbot>
 orRienzi <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rienzi> will wish to repeat the 
experience), both men, so utterly different, gave us great and noble 
masterpieces in later life. Allowing for those implications, The Mastersingers 
is still a wonderful, humane work, and so is Verdi's Falstaff in its different 
way. Between them, could they be the real "European idea"?


 