

The National Crime Agency has confirmed that six people are under criminal 
investigation over the controversial sale of a £1bn property portfolio in
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> “owned” by 
the Irish state’s so-called bad bank.

The properties belonging to the National Assets Management Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/dec/20/ireland-nama-banks-property-loans>
 (Nama) – the state body in the Irish Republic that bought homes, business 
premises and flat complexes when their owners became bankrupt after the 2008 
global financial crash – were in Northern Ireland.

Allegations have been made in the Irish parliament, the Dáil, that the sale of 
the Nama properties, which were mainly in Belfast, was aided by a series of 
bribes.

The NCA said on Thursday that 40 witnesses have been interviewed, with six 
people now under investigation. Two men have been arrested, according to the 
NCA.

Northern Ireland police launch inquiry into £1.1bn property sale of Nama assets
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/08/northern-ireland-police-launch-inquiry-into-11bn-property-sale-of-nama-assets>
Lynne Owens, the NCA’s director general, told the BBC on Thursday evening: “If 
we think a law has been broken, we will provide that information to the 
prosecutors.

“We are investigating laws under bribery legislation, under corruption 
legislation and under fraud legislation; those are the sort of offences we are 
currently considering.”


Owens said she could not rule out further arrests in connection with the Nama 
sale, which was also known as Operation Eagle.

The Irish parliamentarian Mick Wallace alleged last year that “fixers’ fees” 
were paid to help the sale of the debt-ridden properties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/23/nama-inquiry-dup-first-minister-peter-robinson-beneficiary-1bn-deal>
.

Wallace originally claimed in the Dáil that £7m was set aside in an Isle of 
Man bank account for a Northern Irish politician to help smooth the passage of 
the sale.

This prompted the Police Service of Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> and the NCA to open an inquiry into 
claims of corruption surrounding Project Eagle.

 