
AFC Wimbledon, formed in the lower non-leagues 14 years ago by supporters who 
rejected the transplanting of their club to Milton Keynes, have reached 
Wembley: one play-off final victory from an astonishing promotion to League 
One. Following late-night delirium at Accrington Stanley, where Lyle Taylor’s
extra-time goal won the 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/afc-wimbledon-accrington-stanley-league-two-play-off-semi-final-match-report>
 semi-final 3-2 on aggregate, the whole club is euphoric, trying to knuckle 
down to the tough business of facing Plymouth Argyle in the final on Monday.

The manager, Neal Ardley, his status as a former Wimbledon player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/nov/30/neal-ardley-afc-wimbledon-mk-dons>
 meaningful to supporters who fought so hard for their club’s identity, 
describes the Accrington celebrations as “emotional, a bit surreal”. Speaking 
at the club’s south London training base on Tuesday, Ardley did not even 
attempt to be matter-of-fact about leading his side out at Wembley.

“I don’t buy into that idea that it’s only another game, that you don’t play 
the occasion, you play the game,” he said. “Nobody can replicate Wembley. When 
we walk out, I’ll be proud, my emotions will be all over the shop. I’m going to 
be feeling the butterflies and the players will feel the same. But once we’ve 
walked out, put our shoulders back, smiled, gone ‘wow’, we’ve got a job to do. 
We’ve got to take all of that in, embrace it, accept it and then go and play 
the game.”

AFC Wimbledon: their manager, fans and staff on their rise through the leagues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2016/may/18/afc-wimbledon-players-fans-manager-league-two-play-off>
Argyle, Ardley accepts, are marginally favourites, having finished fifth in 
League Two, six points ahead of Wimbledon in seventh place, although Ardley’s 
side beat them 2-1 away in April during an excellent run into the play-off 
places. Taylor, only 26 but at his ninth club, has scored 21 league goals, his 
partnership with Tom Elliott keeping theirstriking talisman, Adebayo Akinfenwa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/mar/22/ade-akinfenwa-northampton-town>
, as a substitute.

Akinfenwa, whose abundant talents can be overlooked in the focus on his huge 
size and strength, said there is a unity at the club which has eased his 
disappointment and he came off the bench at Accrington to score the first goal 
in the 2-2 away draw.

“Praise has to go to the gaffer,” Akinfenwa said. “He has assembled a team, a 
mix of young players and more experienced players like myself and [the captain] 
Barry Fuller, and there is an ethos of togetherness. I haven’t played as much 
as I’ve wanted but I never felt disrespected. To walk out at Wembley, for this 
club which the fans started from nothing – it’s the stuff of dreams.”

At a club to whom history means so much, following the perceived theft of 
theirs when a panel appointed by the Football Association voted in 2002 to 
allow a groundlessWimbledon to move to Milton Keynes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2002/aug/12/match.sport3>, the 
significance of the final is monumental. Ardley said he “absolutely” agrees 
with supporters who feel their club, not MK Dons, is the continuation of the 
old Wimbledon and this is their first competitive trip to Wembley since the 
landmark “crazy gang”FA Cup victory over Liverpool in 1988 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/may/15/dave-beasant-wimbledon-liverpool>
.

If they win, it will be Wimbledon’s sixth promotion since they began as a 
newly formed, supporter-owned club in the Combined Counties League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/copa90/2016/may/18/afc-wimbledon-players-fans-manager-league-two-play-off>
 following a trial of players on Wimbledon Common. And promotion would put 
them, after so short a time, in the same division as the Milton Keynes club 
they still revile as “the franchise”.

Revulsion is felt deeply for MK Dons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mkdons> themselves and for the FA panel 
which, by a 2-1 majority, allowed the unprecedented relocation. Ardley needs no 
encouragement to quote and scoff at the opinion of the panel, that if the 
supporters were to reject the Milton Keynes move, and form their own club, it 
would not be “in the wider interests of football”.

Ivor Heller, commercial director since the 2002 beginnings, said of that: 
“Everybody still talks about it; it was a great catalyst for everything we’ve 
done. How anyone could suggest a club like ours is not in the wider interests 
of football: you’d have to be stark raving bonkers.”

The mix of idealism and knowhow required to negotiate the play-off final has 
characterised the Wimbledon way since they began again. Their ambitious plan to
build a new 11,000-seat stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/10/afc-wimbledon-new-stadium-plough-lane>
, capable of expansion to 20,000, back in their home borough of Merton hit an 
obstacle in March when Boris Johnson, then still the London mayor, “called in” 
the project.

Johnson’s own planning officials had recommended the stadium be approved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/10/afc-wimbledon-new-stadium-plough-lane>
, as it was unanimously by Merton council, but his reference to “the future of 
cultural and sporting venues” appeared to express concern about the loss of the 
Wimbledon greyhound stadium if the development goes ahead. The new mayor, Sadiq 
Khan, must be persuaded.

Erik Samuelson, the club’s chief executive, explained that the “mid-20s 
millions of pounds” cost will be met partly from a developer, Galliard Homes, 
which is proposing to build 602 residential units, some borrowings andthe sale 
of the club’s current Kingsmeadow stadium to Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/17/chelsea-afc-wimbledon-kingsmeadow>
.

Samuelson defended the position relating to Kingstonian, the Ryman League 
Premier Division club which previously owned Kingsmeadow. By 2002 Kingstonian 
had fallen into administration and the ground was bought by a family of 
investors, the Khoslas, from whom the new supporter-owned Wimbledon purchased 
it. Kingstonian have remained as tenants on good terms and Samuelson said 
Wimbledon will pay a substantial sum, so far not disclosed, from the Chelsea 
money to enable Kingstonian to become established elsewhere.

“This is a windfall opportunity for them to get at least an equity share of 
their own stadium or many years rental money, so actually this is really 
positive,” Samuelson said.

If Wimbledon achieve another dream at Wembley, Samuelson said he believes they 
can be sustainable in League One, even before the new stadium is built. 
Ardley’s target is to keep Wimbledon four places above where they would be in a 
table of the wages each club pays.

“A manager has to add value,” Samuelson said. “Neal is such an impressive guy. 
He will go a long way but we desperately hope he will go a long way with us.”

If Ardley’s achievements do earn him an offer from another club too good to 
turn down, Samuelson said, his contract has a buy-out clause which means 
Wimbledon would be well compensated.

The AFC Wimbledon film seems like a curveball – actually it's an open goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/apr/01/the-afc-wimbledon-film-might-seem-like-a-curveball-actually-its-an-open-goal>
Asked about Wimbledon’s rise, under the ownership of supporters, in 14 years 
from that FA panel decision, Ardley said: “This is the most unique story in 
football,AFC Wimbledon <https://www.theguardian.com/football/afc-wimbledon>. 
The story is football, it’s for the greater good of football. Every time I talk 
about this story I go wow; no wonder they want to make a film about it.”

Indeed, last month the club announced that 20th Century Fox, with the author 
and Wimbledon patron John Green,has bought the rights to turn their story into 
a movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/apr/01/the-afc-wimbledon-film-might-seem-like-a-curveball-actually-its-an-open-goal>
. It has been proposed that it ends with the club’s 2011 victory on penalties 
which took them deliriously into the Football League. If they win at Wembley, 
the Hollywood script might have to be extended.
 