
Nearly 9,500 people die early each year in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> due to long-term exposure to air 
pollution, more than twice as many as previously thought, according to new 
research.

The premature deaths are due to two key pollutants, fine particulates known as 
PM2.5s and the toxic gas nitrogen dioxide (NO2), according toa study 
<https://www.scribd.com/doc/271641490/King-s-College-London-report-on-mortality-burden-of-NO2-and-PM2-5-in-London>
 carried out by researchers at King’s College London.


The study – which was commissioned by the Greater London Authority and 
Transport for London – is believed to be the first by any city in the world to 
attempt to quantify how many people are being harmed by NO2. The gas is largely 
created by diesel cars, lorries and buses, andaffects lung capacity and growth 
<http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0017/123083/AQG2ndEd_7_1nitrogendioxide.pdf>
.

All choked up: did Britain's dirty air make me dangerously ill?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/jun/20/britain-london-pollution-air-quality-health>
London, Birmingham, and Leeds are among the UK cities that have been in breach 
of EU safety limits on NO2 for five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/10/uk-cities-breach-eu-pollution-limits-2030>
, prompting legal action that led to asupreme court ruling in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/29/supreme-court-orders-uk-to-draw-up-air-pollution-cleanup-plan>
 that the government must publish a clean-up plan by the end of the year.


Previous research attributed 4,267 annual premature deaths to PM2.5s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/jun/30/london-air-quality-premature-deaths>
 in 2008, based on 2006 levels of the particulates. Subsequent falls in those 
particulates and a change in methodology that excludes natural sources of the 
pollutant sees that figure fall to 3,537 for 2010 levels of PM2.5s in the new 
study.


However that fall is more than cancelled out by the addition of an estimated 
5,879 deaths from NO2 each year, bringing the total early deaths from both 
pollutants in 2010 to 9,416.


Matthew Pencharz, the deputy mayor for environment and energy, said that local 
authorities could only do so much and the government needed to step in. “It’s 
[the new research] an important message for government, where the supreme court 
judgment has already focused minds.”


Although the report found that a larger proportion of deaths caused by PM2.5 
were from particulates that originated outside the city than within it, it 
found that most of the deaths linked to NO2 were because of NO2 emissions from 
diesel vehicles and other sources within the capital.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Flondon-air-pollution-public-transport-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F11%2F1407767645808%2FLondon-Air-Pollution-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%20London%20air%20pollution%3A%20which%20mode%20of%20transport%20has%20the%20highest%20exposure%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Flondon-air-pollution-public-transport-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%20London%20air%20pollution%3A%20which%20mode%20of%20transport%20has%20the%20highest%20exposure%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Flondon-air-pollution-public-transport-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F11%2F1407767645808%2FLondon-Air-Pollution-017.jpg>
 London air pollution: which mode of transport has the highest exposure? 
Last year, mayor Boris Johnson came in for criticism after a King’s researcher 
publishedfigures showing Oxford Street had the worst NO2 levels in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/10/london-worst-no2-pollution-earth>
, largely because of its high concentration of diesel buses. The mayor later
called for a diesel scrappage scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/10/boris-johnsons-diesel-car-scrappage-scheme-could-cost-300m>
 to tackle pollution in the capital.


But Pencharz said London was a pioneer when it came to tackling air pollution, 
with the mayor due to introduce an Ultra Low Emissions Zone (ULEZ) in 2020that 
will see the most polluting HGVs and coaches charged £100 to enter 
<https://consultations.tfl.gov.uk/environment/ultra-low-emission-zone>.


“No other city is doing half what we’re doing, when it comes to the ULEZ which 
is a world first, zero emissions taxis which is a world first, the regulations 
on construction equipment due in September,” he said.

But campaigners said the evidence showed the need for more action. Alan 
Andrews, a lawyer at the NGO ClientEarth, which brough the case which lead to 
the supreme court ruling, said: “This new research piles more pressure on the 
government to come up with a clear and credible plan to cut pollution from 
diesel vehicles.”

He added: “As shocking as they are, these deaths are really only the tip of 
the iceberg. For every person who dies early from air pollution, many more are 
made seriously ill, have to visit hospital or take time off work.”

Dr Penny Woods, chief executive of the British Lung Foundation, said: 
“Exposure to air pollution increases the risk of lung cancer, impairs child 
lung development and increases the risk of hospitalisation among people with a 
pre-existing lung condition. It is time we stop talking and take immediate 
action to prevent more people being needlessly killed by the air that they 
breathe.”

Clean-air zones could protect the vulnerable from pollution | Letter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/20/clean-air-zones-could-protect-the-vulnerable-from-pollution>
Jenny Bates, air pollution campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said: “People 
have no choice with the air they breathe. This means we have to redouble our 
efforts, stop tinkering around the edges, and take really bold immediate action 
with a mix of cleaner vehicles and cutting traffic levels, massive investment 
in safe cycling and walking, and London-wide road charging.”


On Tuesday, the London Assembly’s environment committee published a report 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0CCIQFjAAahUKEwjgoZXj9NzGAhXK1hQKHTgyA1k&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.london.gov.uk%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2FDriving%2520away%2520from%2520diesel%2520report_0.pdf&ei=1TOmVaDjAcqtU7jkjMgF&usg=AFQjCNGbDSiHYh-ljA-eAfHcGUfWt1pPHQ&sig2=FG8LPWKkYQX42euVS8P09g&bvm=bv.97653015,d.d24>
 blaming diesel vehicles for the capital’s NO2 problem. Assembly member Stephen 
Knight, who is on the committee, said: “As petrol engines become cleaner with 
time it’s becoming clear that diesel emissions are a large part of the problem.”

The study also looked at the impact of short-term exposure to PM2.5s and NO2 
during high pollution episodes,such as the one that affected much of England in 
April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/08/warm-weather-brings-high-air-pollution-warnings-for-much-of-england>
, and found that 2,411 hospital admissions for respiratory problems a year 
could be blamed on the pollutants.


The government’s scientific advisers on the issue, the committee on the 
medical effects of air pollutants, are expected to conclude later this year 
that across Britain up to 60,000 early deaths annually can be attributed to the 
two pollutants, because NO2 will be factored in for the first time. The figure 
would represent a doubling on thecurrent 29,000 from PM2.5s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/10/kesington-chelsea-most-polluted-air-uk-public-health-england-report>
, and would put air pollution much closer to smoking,which kills around 100,000 
people a year 
<http://bma.org.uk/working-for-change/improving-and-protecting-health/tobacco/smoking-statistics>
.


UK cities will exceed EU pollution limits until 2030, figures show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/10/uk-cities-breach-eu-pollution-limits-2030>
A King’s study due to be published in the autumn is expected to put the figure 
for deaths annually in the UK for the two pollutants at 80,000 compared to 
London’s 9,416, Pencharz told the Guardian.

The mayor launched a consultation today on measures for boroughs to tackle 
pollution hotspots. All but two boroughs, Bromley and Sutton,failed to meet EU 
limits on NO2 in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/07/almost-all-london-boroughs-failed-eu-air-pollution-limit-for-toxic-no2-gas>
, the latest year for which data is available.

TfL announced on Wednesday that two bus routes, the 507 and 521, will be run 
by 51 100% electric buses from next year, which do not have any tailpipe 
emissions. The first fully electric double decker bus will enter service in 
October,Johnson said last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/29/first-fully-electric-double-decker-bus-london-route-16>
.
 