
South-east Asian nations have ducked direct criticism of China over its claims 
in theSouth China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>, in a 
diluted statement produced after days of disagreement that gives the superpower 
a diplomatic victory.

The 10-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations (Asean) avoided mention of
a ruling by a UN-backed tribunal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/jul/12/south-china-sea-dispute-what-you-need-to-know-about-the-hague-court-ruling>
 that had rejected China’s claims and infuriated Beijing.

Instead, Asean repeated that it was seriously concerned by “land reclamations 
and escalation of activities” and called for “self-restraint” in the strategic 
waterway.

The contested sea, through which $5tn in shipping passes annually, has been a 
source of increasing tension betweenChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and its south-east Asian neighbours 
as well as the US.
Map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/07/china/giv-12515qHy1vJJNRel4/>
Regional diplomats are gathered in the Laos capital, Vientiane, for an Asean 
summit that has been dogged by the issue of territorial claims.

It is the first time key players – including the US secretary of state, John 
Kerry, and the Chinese foreign minister, Wang Yi – have met en masse since a 
UN-backed tribunal a fortnight ago rejected Beijing’s claims to vast stretches 
of the sea.

Asean’s leading envoys have spent days wrangling over how to respond to the 
ruling amid splits, acrimony and fears that the bloc is faltering in its 
response to the major security challenge of the day.

Cambodia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia>, a staunch ally of 
Beijing, has been accused of scuppering efforts by the bloc to unite and call 
for China to abide by the tribunal’s verdict.

Four Asean members – Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia and Brunei – have 
competing claims with Beijing over parts of the South China Sea. Most members 
want to keep up the pressure on China over its campaign of island building.

How China's artificial islands led to tension in the South China Sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/tensions-and-territorial-claims-in-the-south-china-sea-the-guardian-briefing>
But Asean operates on a tradition of consensus diplomacy, meaning a single 
nation can have an effective veto if it disagrees.

A statement was finally released on Monday after hours of last-minute talks 
cut through the impasse – but it avoided criticism of Beijing.


“We just averted another potential debacle,” one south-east Asian diplomat 
told AFP, referring to a 2012 summit in Cambodia at which the bloc for the 
first time failed to issue a joint statement because of disagreements on the 
South China Sea.

Another diplomat, when asked if Monday’s statement had been watered down, 
said: “It’s a compromise statement. And in a compromise someone has to give 
way.”

The decision will be a boon to China, which has angrily rejected the 
international tribunal.

Earlier Wang praised Cambodia – the recipient of Chinese aid and loans – for 
holding out against fellow members. State-run Xinhua news agency said Wang 
“highly appreciates Cambodia’s efforts to uphold justice over the South China 
Sea issue”.

Wang, in a clear reference to Washington, said: “We will not allow external 
forces to cause turbulence in the region by hyping up the so-called South China 
Sea arbitration.”

Kerry arrived in Laos on Monday and is expected to hold talks with Wang later 
in the day. The US says it takes no position on the territorial disputes but 
argues for free sea and air passage through what it considers international 
waters. It has also called on Beijing to accept the tribunal ruling.

Tensions on the Korean peninsula are also likely to be high on the agenda for 
both China and the US.Pyongyang carried out its fourth nuclear test in January, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/sanctions-considered-after-condemnation-of-north-korea-nuclear-test>
 followed by a series of ballistic missile tests including one last Tuesday.

In response, South Korea announced plans to host a US missile defence system 
on its territory, sparking fury in Pyongyang and concern in Beijing.

North Korea’s new foreign minister, Ri Yong-Ho, is attending the Laos 
gathering, a rare moment at which senior officials from Washington, Beijing and 
Pyongyang will be in the same room. Earlier in the day he met Wang for talks at 
the sidelines of the meeting.

Ri, a former nuclear negotiator and party princeling, is making his debut at a 
major international gathering.

Washington has played down the likelihood of talks between the US and North 
Korea during the summit. But the gathering will give Kerry an opportunity to 
confront North Korea on its weapons programme, a US official told reporters.
 