
The Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has denounced this Sunday’s 
Middle East peace conference in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/obama-and-allies-seek-to-isolate-netanyahu-before-trump-takes-office>
 as a “rigged” move against Israel.

The increasingly embattled Netanyahu, who is the subject of two police 
corruption investigations, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/benjamin-netanyahu-under-pressure-as-investigation-details-leak>
 described the conference – at which about 70 countries will take part – as “a 
relic of the past … before the future sets in” in an apparent reference to 
Donald Trump’s inauguration as president of the US next week.

The prime minister’s comments are the latest in a series of interventions on 
the diplomatic front in recent weeks that have become ever more explosive since 
theUN security council a motion before Christmas that called the Jewish 
settlement of the occupied Palestinian territories a “flagrant violation” of 
international law. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>

The Guardian view on Trump and Israel: stick to the script | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/the-guardian-view-on-trump-and-israel-stick-to-the-script>
“This conference is a fraud, a Palestinian scam under French auspices, whose 
goal is to lead to the adoption of additional anti-Israeli positions,” said 
Netanyahu at the beginning of a meeting with the Norwegian foreign minister, 
Børg Brende, on Thursday.

“This pushes peace backwards. It’s not going to obligate us. It’s a relic of 
the past. It’s a last gasp of the past before the future sets in.”

The conference on Sunday will take place five days before the US presidential 
inauguration and is seen as part of recent diplomatic moves to “Trump-proof”the 
ailing Oslo peace process – and its two-state solution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/on-the-middle-east/2013/may/03/israel-palestinians-eu-obama>
– against a new and unpredictable era in Washington.

While Israelis and Palestinians will not take part in the main gathering, the 
Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, is scheduled to meet the French 
president, François Hollande, on Monday to be briefed on the proceedings.

Hollande said on Wednesday the conference was aimed at ensuring the support of 
the international community for the survival of the two-state solution as a 
reference for future direct negotiations.

“I can see that this [the peace process] has been weakened on the ground and 
in the minds. If we let it wither away then it would be a risk for Israeli’s 
security to which we are resolutely attached,” he said

“However, I am realistic on what this conference can achieve. Peace will only 
be done by the Israelis and Palestinians and by nobody else. Only bilateral 
negotiations can succeed.”

Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> is fearful that any 
statement adopted there could be quickly adopted by the UN security council in 
second resolution before Trump’s inauguration.

Netanyahu comments – which echo previous remarks his made on the matter – 
suggests he plans to bet his country’s future diplomacy almost exclusively on 
his relationship with an incoming US administration he anticipates will be 
fiercely pro-Israel.

Netanyahu has increasingly appeared to borrow heavily both from Trump’s own 
rhetorical palette – and confrontational approach – not least during the US 
election campaign when the then Republican nominee suggested repeatedly the 
election was in danger of being “rigged” by Democrats. 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/donald-trump-rigged-election-guide-230302>

The Palestinians have welcomed the multilateral approach, saying years of 
negotiations have not ended Israel’s occupation of the West Bank which will 
mark its 50th anniversary later this year.

The Paris conference comes amid widespread international frustration over an 
Israeli-Palestinian peace process that has been at a standstill since the last 
US-led initiative collapsed in April 2014.

It also follows hard on the heels of the landmark UN security council 
resolution, passed on 23 December, that calls for a halt to Israeli settlement 
building in Palestinian territory. In a rare move then, the US declined to use 
its veto and abstained, allowing the resolution to pass 14-0.

Palestinians have also made clear their hopes from the conference, including 
possible moves by countries towards formal recognition of a Palestinian state.

Briefing journaists about the conference earlier this week Mohammad Shtayyeh, 
a senior Palestinian official said he hoped it would prove that Israel could 
not “continue to be above the law. Israel has to be punished for not accepting 
the international resolutions and for not accepting the UN security council.”
 