
Once again Tottenham Hotspur were in the last chance saloon against Chelsea. 
Lose on Wednesday and the damage to their Premier League title hopes would most 
likely have been fatal. This time, however, it did not descend into the 
equivalent of one of those scenes in which bodies are hurled across the tables 
and gunfire shatters the whisky bottles. Tottenham kept their cool and the2-0 
home win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 was notable for its comfort in the closing stages.

“It was not the first time we have played well against Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>,” Mousa Dembélé said. “But this 
time when we went in front, we did not panic. That was very important and it 
was the difference to the previous times we had played them. When we went in 
front in those games, we tried to change the way we were playing – we wanted to 
battle. But this time, we kept to our game and we played like adults. We were 
very relaxed.”

Tottenham’s Dele Alli scores two to end Chelsea’s winning run short of record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
Dembélé is one of the more laid-back characters in English football but it is 
stating the obvious to say that he was anything but in the now notorious 
fixture at Stamford Bridge last May. Tottenham needed to win in order to keep 
their title hopes alive yet they threw away a 2-0 leadto draw 2-2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/chelsea-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 and confirm Leicester City as champions. Spurs lost their composure completely 
that night and one of the symbols of the meltdown was provided by Dembélé, when 
he poked Chelsea’s Diego Costa in the eye just before half-time. Dembéléwould 
be banned for six matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/06/tottenham-mousa-dembele-six-game-ban-diego-costa>
. Tottenham were 2-0 up at the time.

They were also 1-0 up at Stamford Bridge in the league fixture earlier this 
season, in November, only to concede in first-half stoppage time and bereeled 
in during the second half 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/chelsea-tottenham-premier-league-match-report>
. Chelsea won 2-1 and a positive opening 45 minutes for Tottenham counted for 
nothing in terms of points.

The reference for the game on Wednesday was the Battle of the Bridge, whether 
Mauricio Pochettino <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> 
liked it or not. The Tottenham manager had tried to play down its significance 
in the buildup to the fixture but even he found himself referring to it 
afterwards. The Argentinian talked about how it had been “tough at the end of 
last season – in different games, we missed how to be more competitive, to 
compete in a better way”. The Chelsea game was one of them and, by competing in 
a better way, Pochettino meant remaining focused and disciplined; hanging in 
during the moments when high-quality opponents have the upper hand.

It is known as game management or, simply, maturity. Tottenham showed they had 
it; that they had learned lessons from last May, after Dele Alli’s second goal 
of the evening in the 54th minute. There was still time for a Chelsea comeback, 
similar to last season, and there were frayed nerves and simmering tensions.

Nothing boiled over. Tottenham did not go looking for fights, nor did they 
allow themselves to be sucked in to anything. Cesc Fàbregas, theagent 
provocateur in Tottenham’s eyes from last May, came on as a 79th‑minute 
substitute to boos but he was no red rag. At 2-0, Chelsea barely threatened. 
Pochettino’s team have now won five matches in succession to climb to third 
place in the table.

Mauricio Pochettino shows how it is possible to beat Chelsea’s 3-4-3 formation 
| Michael Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/05/mauricio-pochettino-tottenham-chelsea-antonio-conte>
“We have matured,” Dembélé said. “We are now another year together. Dele is in 
his second season with us and is growing all the time. All the team now know 
each other more, and the manager, as well. This was a very important win for 
us. If we hadn’t won, Chelsea would have been very difficult to catch.”

Alli is on fire. He has scored seven goals in his last four appearances and 
his licence to roam against Chelsea from his position off the striker, Harry 
Kane, in Pochettino’s 3-4-2-1 formation was particularly noticeable. At times 
Alli played like a second striker and the way that he timed his runs into the 
six-yard box to score twice with his head was extremely encouraging.

Alli is merely one example of Tottenham’s burgeoning confidence. Christian 
Eriksen looks reborn after the low point of theChampions League exit at Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/monaco-tottenham-hotspur-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 on 22 November and what Victor Wanyama, the summer signing from Southampton, 
might lack in refinement on the ball he makes up for in midfield enforcement.

Goals from behind the striker are an essential ingredient to any title-winning 
team and Alli now has 10 in the league – which equals his return from last 
season. Son Heung‑min has contributed six; Eriksen five.

Tottenham deliver statement of intent against Chelsea but revenge tastes sweet 
| David Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/04/mauricio-pochettino-dele-alli-tottenham-chelsea>
Pochettino’s philosophy, as he likes to call it, has long been clear and the 
squad that he has assembled are on board with it. Moreover, he has shown this 
season that he has a tactical plan B, with his three at the back, and even a 
plan C, if his 4-1-4-1 formation is taken into account. The 4-2-3-1 had 
previously been his default system.

He has started with three at the back on five occasions – once last season; 
four this time out – and has won on four of them, with the other beingthe 1-1 
draw at Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/arsenal-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 in November. The approach gives him a balance between security at the back and 
options going forward, where the wing-backs Kyle Walker and Danny Rose can 
press even higher up the pitch.

Pochettino seems to be getting more confident and decisive and the overall 
impression is one of optimism and a club moving in the right direction. Two of 
Tottenham’s next five league games are at Manchester City and Liverpool. They 
scent opportunity.

“With the quality we have, we can achieve whatever we want,” Dembélé said. 
“Last year we showed we are moving towards doing something and this year, who 
knows? We are playing very well and we are confident we can go on a good run. 
Anything is possible. I was ready to win silverware last season – we are even 
more ready now.”
 