
Kasha-Katuwe Tent Rocks national monument

Tent Rocks, less than an hour south of Santa Fe, has everything you could want 
in a desert trek, including slot canyons, bizarrely beautiful rock formations 
and incredible views. The first half of the three-mile trail winds through a 
slot canyon so narrow you can touch the walls on both sides, then the canyon 
opens up beneath the 100ft conical hoodoos that give this national monument its 
name, before switchbacking up to the top of the mesa for a sweeping overlook of 
the Jemez mountains and the Rio Grande River Valley.

Kasha-Katuwe means "white cliffs" in the Keresan language, spoken by residents 
of Cochiti Pueblo, which co-manages the monument. The white cliffs, hoodoos and 
slot canyon are all made of of volcanic tuff that erupted around a million 
years ago. The trail is only open during daylight hours, with no camping at 
Tent Rocks, but the nearbyCochiti Lake recreation area  
<http://www.recreation.gov/recAreaDetails.do?contractCode=NRSO&recAreaId=485>
offers developed sites. It's is an easy drive from historic Santa Fe, making 
for a fantastic day trip.

Top tip: After completing the three-mile hike through the slot canyon to the 
overlook, continue on the trail anti-clockwise to visit a cave dwelling similar 
to the famous cliff cavates at Bandelier national monument.

Ghost Ranch
 Chimney Rock, Ghost Ranch, New Mexico. Photograph: Alamy 
The haunt, at various points over the millennia, of dinosaurs, cattle 
rustlers, horse thieves and the painter Georgia O'Keefe,Ghost Ranch 
<http://ghostranch.org/>, an hour north of Santa Fe, is a draw for 
palaeontology buffs, hikers and artists. A privately-owned education and 
retreat centre, it welcomes the public to its dinosaur and archaeology museum, 
plus year-round photography and painting workshops, and four stunning hiking 
trails.

Ghost Ranch also offers a number of options to visitors interested in 
O'Keefe's 50-odd years in the area, including a Jeep tour of the landscapes 
that inspired her and a hiking tour of the areas where she lived and worked. 
Camping is available seasonally at Ghost Ranch and year-round up the road at 
Echo Amphitheater.

Top tip: A three-mile round trip, the Chimney Rock trail is the shortest 
hiking option at Ghost Ranch. The relatively easy path starts behind the 
cluster of museums and ascends through geologic time on a gradually rising 
ridge to reach an overlook of Chimney Rock. If you're visiting Ghost Ranch in 
winter, consider hiking to Box Canyon, a dead-end canyon surrounded by 200ft 
cliffs covered with impressive columns of ice.

White Sands national monument
 Sunset at White Sands national monument, New Mexico. Photograph: Alamy 
Awash with sunshine all year round, the south-western desert is known for 
luminous light and out-of-this-world sunsets. With its stark white backdrop, 
New Mexico's White Sands boasts its own enchanting glow. Tucked in a 
mountain-ringed basin at the very northern end of the Chihuahuan desert in 
south-central New Mexico, White Sands is famous for the Trinity Site, where the 
world's first atomic bomb test took place, in 1945. The southern half of the 
dune field was designated a national monument in 1933 and remains a remote 
outpost, 50 miles east of Las Cruces. Walk-in primitive camping is available 
with a free permit from the Heart of the Sands visitor centre, and developed 
sites can be found nearby at Aguirre Spring recreation area and Oliver Lee 
Memorial state park.

Hiking in the ever-shifting White Sands can be exhausting and disorientating, 
but the exotic landscape is well worth the effort. And unlike beach sand, the 
sands here, made up of eroded gypsum crystals, do not get scorching hot in the 
sun and can usually be walked on in bare feet, even on the hottest days.

Top tip: Sunset, starlight and sunrise are particularly magical against the 
white dunes. Plan to camp in the park or join a ranger-led sunset hike.Sledding 
<http://www.nps.gov/whsa/planyourvisit/sledding.htm> is also a popular activity 
in the dunes. Round, saucer-type sleds work best on the powdery sand.

Chaco Culture national historical park
 Casa Rinconada, Chaco Culture national historical park, New Mexico. 
Photograph: Richard Susanto/Getty Images/Flickr RF 
For hundreds of years, until well into the 19th century, New Mexico boasted 
the largest building in North America: a 650-room edifice covering more than 
two acres in Chaco Canyon, within the pueblo-rich, north-west corner of the 
state. Pueblo Bonita, constructed from artfully stacked sandstone blocks 
between AD900 and 1100, was once the centre of culture and commerce for the 
ancientPuebloan people <http://www.nps.gov/azru/index.htm>. Starkly beautiful 
Chaco Canyon is dotted with the ruins of dozens of "great houses" and smaller 
buildings, many aligned with beams of light and shadows cast by solar and lunar 
cycles. The houses were abandoned after a prolonged drought, which started 
around 1130.

Chaco Culture national historical park  <http://www.nps.gov/chcu/index.htm>
sits at the centre of dozens of once-thriving desert communities, connected by 
a series of ancient pathways known as the Chacoan Roads. After visiting Chaco, 
which offers a first-come-first-served campsite at the end of a 21-mile, 
dead-end dirt road, drive north 75 miles to see another spectacular great 
house, as well as a reconstructed underground ceremonial room, called akiva, at 
Aztec Ruins national monument.

Top tip: The scale and the crescent layout of Pueblo Bonita are best 
appreciated from above. Be sure to head northwest to the Kin Kletso ruins and 
pick up the Alto Mesa Trail, which runs through a cleft in the cliff to an 
overlook above Pueblo Bonita.

Bandelier national monument
 Wooden ladder leading to the Talus Houses, Native American cliff dwellings at 
Bandelier national monument in New Mexico. Photograph: Alamy 
Around a million years ago, the Valles Caldera supervolcano in the Jemez 
mountains exploded, blanketing the region with ash more than 1,000ft thick. 
Over time, this ash layer solidified into a soft, easily eroded, whitish rock 
called tuff. AtBandelier national monument <http://www.nps.gov/band/index.htm>, 
tucked deep inside Frijoles Canyon, ancient Puebloan people used hand tools to 
shape natural caves in the tuff into shelters known as cavates. Here they lived 
for hundreds of years, raising corn, squash and turkeys, and eventually 
dispersing throughout the south-west after a prolonged drought.

Visitors to Bandelier can get a feel for life in Frijoles Canyon by hiking the 
1.2-mile paved loop trail, which rises along the cliff face with wooden ladders 
giving limber visitors the option of entering some of the cavates. The visitor 
centre offers a comprehensive overview of the canyon's history and displays 
many artefacts recovered from the cavates, including pottery and tools. Camping 
is available at two developed sites, and backcountry camping is permitted on 
the park's 70 miles of trails.

Top tip: After walking the main looped trail, stretch your legs another half a 
mile down to the Alcove House. You'll need to ascend four wooden ladders to 
reach the reconstructed kiva, built into the floor of a huge, 
petroglyph-covered cave.

Carlsbad Caverns national park
 A woman raises her arms to give a sense of scale at Carlsbad Caverns. 
Photograph: Mike Theiss/Getty Images/National Geographic Creative 
New Mexico is spectacular on the surface, but at least one of the state's 
natural treasures lies underground atCarlsbad Caverns national park 
<http://www.nps.gov/cave/index.htm>. Located on the southern border with Texas, 
Carlsbad is far from everything else in New Mexico, but well worth the drive. 
Underlain by limestone deposited by an ancient coral reef, Carlsbad boasts 119 
mapped caves, including the Big Room, a natural chamber 4,000ft long, 625ft 
wide and 255ft high, which makes it the third-largest cave chamber in North 
America and the seventh-largest in the world.

Carlsbad isn't just big â€“ it's also strikingly intricate, featuring thousands 
upon thousands of unique cave formations, including stalagmites, stalactites, 
cave pearls, flowstones, cave crystals and underground lakes. Visitors can 
explore the well-lit caves on their own, or sign up for a ranger-led excursion 
into one of the less-visited caves. The King's Palace and Left Hand Cave tours 
are suitable for children and beginners, while the half-day Hall of the White 
Giant and Spider Cave tours are not for the claustrophobic. Camping is allowed 
in the park's backcountry, but the closest developed campsite is over the Texas 
state line atGuadalupe national park <http://www.nps.gov/gumo/index.htm>.

Top tip: Half a million Brazilian free-tailed bats call Carlsbad Caverns home 
in the summer. Visitors can go to the amphitheatre to watch them head for the 
skies each evening, just before sunset. There are also pre-dawn programs where 
you can watch the bats return to the caves en masse.

Cerrillos Hills state park
 Cerillos Hills state park, New Mexico. Photograph: Alamy 
New Mexico is famous for its turquoise gemstones, and nowhere more so than the 
Cerrillos Hills <http://www.cerrillosnewmexico.com/cerrillos-state-park>, just 
south of Santa Fe. Featuring not so much hills as medium-sized mountains, New 
Mexico's newest state park is home to some of the oldest and most productive 
turquoise mines in North America. With so many prospectors on the lookout for 
so long, you're unlikely to find gem-quality shards of the blue-green stone 
just lying around, but the hills are a worthy destination on their own for the 
spectacular high-desert hiking and wild west lore.

With their long history of mining, for turquoise, iron, silver and other 
metals, the hills are riddled with holes, but most have been fenced off or 
wholly reclaimed. The trails are well-marked, with signs offering information 
about the productivity of the mines and tales of the miners who carved a rugged 
living from these mountains between Santa Fe and Albuquerque. At the base of 
the hills, the tiny, dusty town of Cerrillos is a photographer's dream. Several 
movies have been filmed along the town's dirt streets, includingYoung Guns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/apr/29/young-guns-kiefer-sutherland-emilio-estevez>
. Just down the road, the artist community of Madrid offers an assortment of 
shops and galleries, as well as one of the state's oldest saloons, the 
Mineshaft Tavern.

Top tip: Check out the best views from the Mirador Overlook. After a hike, 
head to theCasa Grande Trading Post <http://www.cerrillosturquoise.com/> in 
Cerrillos to peruse an impressive selection of Cerrillos turquoise â€“ famous for 
its uniquely greenish hue â€“ set into silver onsite by the owner, who works a 
claim in the hills.

Bosque del Apache Wildlife Refuge
 Snow geese, Bosque del Apache national wildlife refuge, New Mexico. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Drenched by an average of 300 days of sunshine a year, New Mexico is a winter 
paradise, especially for migrating birds, tens of thousands of which flock to 
theBosque del Apache Wildlife Refuge 
<http://www.fws.gov/refuge/bosque_del_apache/>, just south of Socorro, between 
November and May. More than 370 species of birds have been spotted since the 
refuge was established in 1939, making this one of the most diverse 
birdwatching spots in North America. No camping is allowed within the refuge â€“ 
truly a place for the birds â€“ but you can find sites in the nearby Cibola 
national forest, as well as further south atElephant Butte Lake state park 
<http://www.emnrd.state.nm.us/SPD/elephantbuttelakestatepark.html>.

Top tip: Every November, just before Thanksgiving, Bosque del Apache hosts the 
Festival of the Cranes <http://www.festivalofthecranes.com>, a five-day event 
celebrating the return of the statuesque sandhill cranes. The festival is a 
draw for birdwatchers and wildlife photographers, with workshops, lectures and 
guided tours of the 57,000-acre reserve.

City of Rocks state park
 City of Rocks state park, Chihuahuan desert, New Mexico. Photograph: Alamy 
New Mexico has no shortage of interesting rock formations, and this cluster of 
boulders, near Silver City in the southwestern corner of the state, lives up to 
its odd name. The house-sized rocks are lined up on a grid, like buildings 
arranged on city blocks. City of Rocks 
<http://www.emnrd.state.nm.us/SPD/cityofrocksstatepark.html> was created by a 
volcanic eruption around 35m years ago. Over time, the rocks have been shaped 
by weathering, creating a paradise for hikers and climbers. Some of the rocks 
are pitted with Indian Wells â€“ holes worn into the rock to grind corn and 
collect rainwater, a testament to the long history of human habitation in the 
Chihuahuan desert.

City of Rocks is best visited in late fall, winter or early spring, when 
temperatures are mild and rattlesnakes are more likely to be dormant. The park 
offers 52 campsites, including full RV hookups, and a cactus-rich botanical 
garden, plus hiking and mountain-biking trails.

Top tip: After dark is when City of Rocks really shines, thanks to low light 
pollution. The park boasts its own 14-inch telescope in a solar-powered 
observatory, with retractable roof that's open to visitors for star parties 
several nights a week.

Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument
 Gila Cliff Dwellings national monument, New Mexico. Photograph: Alamy 
The Gila wilderness, in south-west New Mexico, is one of the wildest corners 
of the state. Here, Mexican grey wolves still roam and hiddenhot springs 
<http://www.nps.gov/gicl/naturescience/hotsprings.htm> bubble along the wild 
and scenic Gila river. This area may be all but uninhabited today, but 800 
years ago, the Mogollon tribe made their home here in a series of 
interconnected cliff dwellings in what is now theGila Cliff Dwellings national 
monument <http://www.nps.gov/gicl/index.htm>. Archaeologists have identified 46 
rooms spread throughout five shallow caves, believed to have housed between 10 
and 15 families for several hundred years.

A museum and visitor centre maintains a collection of artefacts recovered from 
the caves, but the most famous find, a mummy of a child nicknamed "Zeke" 
discovered in 1912, has long been lost to the Smithsonian archives in 
Washington DC. Camping is available at the national monument, as well as in the 
surrounding national forest.

Top tip: The Gila Wilderness is famous for its hot springs. Lightfeather hot 
springs is the most accessible, less than a 20-minute walk from the visitor 
centre. Jordan hot springs is reached after a six-mile hike down Little Bear 
Canyon, making for a toasty overnight destination.

Mary Caperton Morton <http://www.theblondecoyote.com> is a freelance writer 
and photographer who makes her home on the back roads of North America, living 
and working out of a tiny solar-powered Teardrop camper
 