
New Orleans is the only place in the world where a sentient being as lazy as 
myself could possibly exist. Not only exist, but be nourished. Po-boys are home 
delivered here. Or you can pick up the phone, talk to a honeyed voice who calls 
you “baby” and pick up a butcher paper-wrapped, French bread-encrusted dose of 
happiness at a takeaway window. If really motivated, you can push yourself and 
walk to the corner bar, put your elbows on the cypress counter and be served 
joy at the source.

But mostly, the Good Stuff is brought to your doorstep.

Like music. There is music everywhere in New Orleans. Human beings walk about 
creating family-sized helpings of disorganized sounds, sometimes dancing down 
the street. There is a soulful buffet of conjoined rhythm and melody, served 
and consumed on a daily basis. No waiting. No gratuity necessary.

It sounds a tad esoteric, all this blissful description, especially coming 
from an old fart like me. But I know it’s true, because it is happening right 
now.

I am trimming banana plants. It’s around noon, and I have been laboring for 
two hours. I am consequently dirty, crusted in fact, layered in soil that 
locals call gumbo mud. Coal black and tenacious, and true to its name – like 
gumbo, it sticks to your ribs, skin and clothes.

It’s a shock when the first blast hits my ears. I look up and see a wedding 
party. I mean, there is a band followed by a bride and groom in a fairly 
traditional white dress and black tux. But the parade is lurching forward at a 
consciously undisciplined pace, zig-zagging down the center of Marigny Street, 
where I live. There’s no one else around. Just me, mired in the messy process 
of pulling up invasive tropical tree roots with a crowbar and sledge hammer.

Disgruntled by the effects of manual labor, and now prompted by sound, I stand 
up. Ten feet to the north comes the 10-piece band in formal dress. They pass by 
mid-segue between a New Orleans-tinged klezmer tune and a frenetically-paced 
cover of Dave Mathews’ Crash Into Me.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk7in-9E3ImQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk7in-9E3ImQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dk7in-9E3ImQ&media=>
The trombonist sings loudly:

Hike up your skirt a little more

 and show the world to me

 Hike up your skirt a little more

 and show your world to me

 In a boy’s dream... In a boy’s dream...

Musicians are followed by the newlyweds and dozens of happy, drunk people 
dancing. The groom repeats the song’s refrain directly to his new spouse.
“Crash... into me!”he yells.  The now legally-sanctioned couple are actively 
engaged in exploring one another in quite physical fashion as they caper side 
by side.

 A bridesmaid approaches my cast-iron front fence where I, the working man, am 
standing, mouth agape. She beckons me closer, puts her arms around my sweaty 
neck and presses her mouth to mine. Her scent is lemon and vanilla; she tastes 
like wine and oranges. I am caught mid-breath. I cannot exhale, and do not want 
to let her go.

She pulls back and pauses. Her green eyes smile. And then – she dances on and 
never looks back.

The soundtrack changes to the Soul Rebels cover of Annie Lennox’s Sweet 
Dreams. Resist this song, I dare you. And then it trails away in the distance.

Who am I to disagree

I travel the world and the seven seas

Everybody’s looking for something

I am left alone, on the quiet street.

I discover that I am crazy in love. I am lost following this experience. I 
must follow the woman, the music.

But, being an adult, I let it go. I am a reasonable fellow. Life continues. I 
go back to the banana plants.

And then I begin to think of loss. This is my story. It has always been my 
story. I have let an opportunity go, yet again. It has been my way for some 
time now. After decades of making mistakes, I ‘grew up’ and designated avoiding 
unlikely individual pursuits of happiness as the correct reaction. This was a 
major turning point for me, some 40 years ago.

The rule remains true to this day. That does not, however, mean that I have 
not changed it or will change it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fnew-orleans-where-memories-float-on-the-summertime-breeze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421855938567%2F14598092787_aefbb28a3a_o-1394x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Orleans%2C%20where%20memories%20%20float%20on%20the%20summertime%20breeze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fnew-orleans-where-memories-float-on-the-summertime-breeze%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Orleans%2C%20where%20memories%20%20float%20on%20the%20summertime%20breeze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fnew-orleans-where-memories-float-on-the-summertime-breeze%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F21%2F1421855938567%2F14598092787_aefbb28a3a_o-1394x2040.jpeg>
 Magnolia grandiflora, the smell of Louisiana.Photograph: Flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/internetarchivebookimages/14598092787/> 
And now, logic fades, and there’s a dawning. The situation has ignited a 
memory. I think it was the perfume. Lemon and vanilla.Magnolia grandiflora. 

Over the course of my life, I have come to dote on the overwhelming summertime 
fragrance generated by the thousands of blooming trees in the city. Brought to 
the fore only hours after they start pushing out those huge waxy and ivoried 
petal shapes that sweat beauty each morning in the summer heat. Perfectly clear 
droplets of dewy moisture form at the flowers’ center every morning, and I 
imagine it is this concentrated essence that holds the city’s population in 
such thrall. Leave this? Never.

Magnolia is a native of warm environs, originally flourishing in the Caribbean 
and Gulf, and now distributed in temperate zones worldwide. It has been around 
for a long, long time. In 1988, the botanist PR Crane cited evidence that 
“fossilized specimens ofMagnolia acuminata have been found dating to 20m years 
ago, and of plants identifiably belonging to theMagnoliaceae dating to 95m 
years ago.”


In fact, the trees were already stabilized on this planet long before even 
honeybees. However, the ever-resourceful magnolia developed flowers to attract 
other, more primitive insects, like beetles, for pollination. But having such 
ravenous and sharp-beaked bugs crawl all over their limbs in search of flower 
nectar, the trees also found it necessary to develop blooms with petals tough 
enough to resist extreme damage.

Thus one of the more delicate natural scents on the planet is attached to one 
of its most calloused and indestructible bits of flora. A lesson I have seen 
affirmed too well in my own life.

Today, my hands are clutching the iron arrow spikes atop the century-old fence 
in my front yard. I find myself losing focus. I have a history of losing such 
moments, of not following through on such fleeting opportunities in life. 
Dwelling, instead, in the bittersweet Proustian dolor of the past.


That hesitation, the dominance of logical decision making over impulse action 
is a cycle I would like to break. Despite this desire being too out of touch 
with reality, I feel that thinking too much about life makes me age quicker 
without the benefits of the added life experience.

So, instead, I think about tough and delicate trees and their pollinators. And 
I think of Annie Lennox’s stern warning in Sweet Dreams:

Some of them want to use you

Some of them want to get used by you

Some of them want to abuse you

Some of them want to be abused

But, I think, Annie, girl, use or abuse, I think I need to make more mistakes. 

A new dispatch from New Orleans will be published regularly.

 