
What spoilsports they are at Burberry. When Christopher Bailey, chief creative 
whizz, also ascended to the chief executive’s throne in 2013, the company 
treated us toan unintentionally hilarious video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NNPrdIvCnJk> that set new standards in 
corporate self-congratulation.

Departing chief Angela Ahrendts gushed that she was handing over to “one of 
this generation’s greatest visionaries”. Bailey explained to Sir John Peace, 
his admiring chairman, that “we’ve done a lot of dreaming”. At no point did any 
of the trio address the questions shareholders wanted to ask. Was it really 
right, governance-wise, for Bailey to be both chief executive and chief 
creative officer? Could two big jobs prove one too many?

Now there are answers of sorts – but no follow-up video provided by the 
company. Bailey is dropping the chief executive’s gig but keeping the creative 
role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/burberrys-christopher-bailey-new-ceo-celine-marco-gobbetti>
. But it’s not quite a reversion to Burberry’s pre-2013 management model. 
Bailey will now also be president, a title normally reserved in a corporate 
context for founders whose days in the frontline are exhausted.

On this occasion, the presidency is intended to denote the opposite. Bailey 
will still have a hand in strategy, alongside new chief executive Marco 
Gobbetti, an import from French firm Céline. The rejig could prove awkward 
since the board will have to arbitrate if Bailey and Gobbetti disagree over 
strategy. But a messy compromise is better than Bailey trying to do the 
company’s two biggest jobs at once.

Burberry's Christopher Bailey took 75% pay cut in 2015
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/06/burberrys-christopher-bailey-took-75-pay-cut-in-2015>
Burberry’s world of luxury fashion has imploded in the past year as Chinese 
tourists have cut their spending. It is unfair to expect one individual to be 
responsible for cost-cutting and renegotiating licences while also dreaming up 
the fashions. If it was Bailey’s idea to hire Gobbetti – which is the official 
line and which Bailey confirmed in an interview with Bloomberg – then good for 
him.

But Peace, as chairman, can hardly expect shareholders to swallow the line 
that the shuffle is merely “the next phase of Burberry’s evolution”.

Come on, Sir John, you made Bailey chief executive in 2013 because you were 
afraid he would follow Ahrendts out of the door. You succeeded in retaining 
Bailey, but his dual role was always likely to prove untenable as soon as the 
weather turned rougher for up-market brands and Burberry’s share price went 
soft.

 More simply, the appointment was a mistake.
 