
The art deco sign stood watch for nearly 80 years over the bar two stories 
above the subway on the corner of 60th and Lexington. Then in an instant last 
fall, it was gone.

Many people had complained about the Subway Inn: it had long attracted the 
wrong types so close to its upscale neighbor, Bloomingdales. It was a glowing 
eyesore on a prime commercial block, and the declining interior long outweighed 
the drink value. But when the neon sign disappeared, the overworked, 
consistently distracted and famously busy city stopped and paid attention.

“In the past few years, we have been able to save three significant signs, and 
we saved them because all the businesses that had these signs also owned their 
buildings,” said Jeff Friedman, a craftsman with Let There Be Neon, the go-to 
rescuer and creator of custom neon inNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york>. “The care and interest of these 
signs is never there when the new owners take over the buildings.

“A lot of people were watching that sign – no one wanted it to go the way of 
the Kentile Floors sign in Brooklyn or the old P&G Bar sign.”

When Earle C Anthony installed his luminous Packard neon sign – the very first 
in the United States – outside his Los Angeles car dealership in 1923, “liquid 
fire”, as neon was then dubbed, had already spread across Europe but not quite 
grabbed New York by the collar. Ten years later, the city of New York 
distributed 3,400 permits for “illuminated signs”, and sign makers from the 
esteemed EG Clark to a Yiddish-speaking sign painter from Russia named Charles 
Karsch set to work on re-creating Manhattan’s cityscape.

Throughout the Great Depression, a second world war and the baby boom years, 
neon signs invited patrons to drink, hawked goods and helped weary travelers 
find their way to the nearest Times Square hotel. In a city with a history of 
bulldozing and building over its past, however, there remain just a few of 
these signs left in the five boroughs – some pristinely preserved over the 
decades, whether by serendipity or the deep, sincere dedication of the owners 
who love them.

“Russ & Daughters is a New York icon and our neon sign is a part of our 
history – not having that sign has never even been a consideration,” said Niki 
Russ Federman, one of the fourth-generation proprietors of the famous specialty 
food shop on the Lower East Side. Although no one knows who built the 1951 sign 
featuring two whitefish in downward-dog pose bookending the store’s vibrant 
name, when Russ & Daughters opened a cafe down the street in 2014 it chose to 
“painstakingly make a new neon sign inspired directly from the original”.
 It costs $25,000 a year to keep Nathan’s neon signs lit. Photograph: Adrian 
Brune 
Most neon preservationists who want to revive a sign turn to Let There Be 
Neon, founded in the early 1970s by New York’s patron saint of neon, Rudi 
Stern. In addition to establishing a shop in which sign designers, tube benders 
and chemists could restore and re-create signs, Stern authored three editions 
of the neon bible which bears the same name as his store, a chronology and a 
tribute to classic signage.

“There was a time when neon was a trade that demanded design expertise and 
precision through many stages of a handcraft process,” Stern wrote. “As 
artistic feats of technical virtuosity, these electric sculptures were 
indelible features of our American landscape.”

New York had several virtuosos in the early days of American neon.

As prohibition ended in 1933, bar owners who had previously kept their 
establishments underground wanted to make a statement. Prominent sign maker EG 
Clarke Inc gave John Carway, the Irish owner of the Dublin House bar on West 
79th Street, a 12-foot green harp whose red name is visible two blocks away.

Meanwhile, downtown, Karsch updated his skill set and started making some of 
New York’s best known neon pieces: the sign for White Horse Tavern in the West 
Village; the former P&G Bar at 73rd and Amsterdam; and one of the most 
technically difficult signs in the city, the Gringer GE Appliances sign on 
First Avenue and Second Street, commissioned by Philip Gringer in 1953.

Although unanimated, experts consider the sign a breakthrough in design due to 
not only the highly unusual band of yellow lettering at the bottom, but also 
the swirly blue GE logos – a feat of technical prowess rarely seen in earlier 
advertisements. “The Gringer sign is so loved by the owner, after we 
refurbished it, he started cleaning the porcelain face with Turtle Wax,” 
Friedman said.

Throughout New York’s boom and bust years, developers have taken down many 
classic signs as buildings change owners and aesthetic. These include some of 
Friedman’s favorites: the animated Fuji film sign in Times Square; the 
Planter’s Peanut sign, also in Times Square; and Monte’s restaurant in the East 
Village.

Outside of Manhattan, animated neon art such as Astoria’s Airline Diner sign – 
a staple of the LaGuardia-area neighborhood for more than 50 years and a 
notable landmark in the Scorsese film Goodfellas – and Nathan’s 70-year-old hot 
dog sign face gradual destruction not from zealous new landlords, but from 
weather and wear. Every time Queens has a hard rain, the neon outline of the 
flying airplane needs replacing, according to Isaac Paschalidis, one of the 
owners of the Airline Diner, and electricity bills can run upward of $1,000 a 
month.

“We have a good name, but the sign helps; people see it from all over and want 
to come in,” Paschalidis said on a particularly blustery June night, before 
gesturing toward the sign’s recently busted tubing.

Nathan’s has continually extinguished any rumors that developers would take 
down the signs that adorn the classic hot dog stand on Coney Island. A company 
spokesperson said the tourists taking photos underneath the signs make the 
$25,000 a year that the company pays in electric bills worth it.

But both Nathan’s and the Airline Diner own their buildings and therefore 
their signs – a rarity in Manhattan. Luckily, however, the owners of the Subway 
Inn paid for its sign and, when forced to relocate to Second Avenue, took it 
with them, installing the new version in March.

The owners of P&G Bar also paid for their Karsch sign in 1947 and removed it 
when forced to vacate in 2009. But P&G floundered for several years in its new 
location and closed for good without ever displaying the sign again.

“The developers in this city, they say they will save the signs – the history 
– if the business moves, but in the end they just don’t care,” Friedman said. 
“It is the New York way to tear it down and start over.

“The sign will take care of them, however, if they just take care of it.”
 