
Seize the day

Lonely Planet has launched a weekly email service to inspire people to make 
the most of their free time. Subscribers will be sent suggestions of things to 
do in their area and upcoming events. To subscribe, visit
lonelyplanet.com/132days <http://www.lonelyplanet.com/132days>. It is also 
offering a desktop countdown service, showing the days, hours and minutes until 
your next trip. Themed around Lonely Planet's Encounter city guides , the 
countdown is available for any of the 26 cities covered (
lonelyplanetencounter.com <http://www.lonelyplanetencounter.com>).

Seattle transfer

Visiting the birthplace of grunge is easy with new direct flights to Seattle 
from London starting on 2 June. KLM, in a joint venture with Northwest 
Airlines, launches the non-stop service from Heathrow, with returns from £412 
(08705 074074;klm.com <http://www.klm.com>). 

Two-wheel lakes

A new mountain bike trail opens at Whinlatter Forest Park near Keswick on 16 
June. The Altura Trail will offer great views of Derwentwater and some 
challenging single-track sections. When complete this will be the longest 
purpose-built mountain bike trail in the Lake District (
forestry.gov.uk/whinlatterforestpark 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/whinlatterforestpark>). Bikes are available to hire 
at the new Cyclewise Whinlatter bike shop (cyclewisetraining.co.uk 
<http://www.cyclewisetraining.co.uk>).

Eco-escape Ireland

Travellers to the Emerald Isle can be that bit greener with the launch of 
Ecoescape: Ireland (£8.99), a guide to responsible escapism. Written by Irish 
travel journalist Catherine Mack, the 192-page, full-colour book suggests 50 
eco-friendly escapes, with full practical details (01945 461452;greenguide.co.uk
 <http://www.greenguide.co.uk>).

Insiders' Ibiza

The party season kicks off in Ibiza next weekend, and to guarantee entry to 
the most exclusive parties, operator Black Tomato has packages including passes 
to the best beach clubs, bars and restaurants, as well as a reserved private 
table at Pacha on one night. A personal shopper will be on hand in daylight 
hours to help you hunt out the most exclusive boutiques. Four nights' bed and 
breakfast costs from £999, including flights from Gatwick and transfers (020 
7610 9008,blacktomato.co.uk <http://www.blacktomato.co.uk>).

Solar eclipse

The most dramatic total eclipse of the sun this century takes place in July 
next year, but the best spot to see it is rather tricky to reach - it lies 12 
miles off the coast of the Japanese island of Yakushima. To get there, take a 
cruise with BBC Sky at Night presenter Dr Chris Lintott and sci-fi writer Terry 
Pratchett, left. Facilities on board the SuperStar Libra include two swimming 
pools, a fitness centre, golf driving range. The tour, leaving on 17 July 2009, 
costs from £1,395 (excluding international flights) for nine days, including 
five nights at sea. Details at 020 7766 5237;eclipseofthecentury.com 
<http://www.eclipseofthecentury.com>.
 