
For the past several centuries, the world has experienced a sequence of 
intellectual revolutions against oppression of one sort or another. These 
rebellions operate in the minds of humans and are spread eventually to most of 
the world, not by war, which tends to involve multiple causes, but by language 
and communications technology. Ultimately, the ideas they advance, unlike the 
causes of war, become noncontroversial.

The next such revolution, likely to occur in the 21st century, will challenge 
the economic implications of the nation state. It will focus on the injustice 
that follows from the fact that, entirely by chance, some are born in poor 
countries and others in rich countries. As more people work for multinational 
firms and get to know more people from other countries, our sense of justice is 
being affected.

This is hardly unprecedented. In his book 1688: the First Modern Revolution 
<http://yalebooks.com/book/9780300171433/1688>, the historian Steven Pincus 
argues convincingly that the so-called Glorious Revolution is best thought of 
not in terms of the overthrow of a Catholic king by parliamentarians in 
England, but as the beginning of a worldwide revolution in justice. Don’t think 
battlefields. Think, instead, of the coffeehouses with free, shared newspapers 
that became popular around then – places for complex communications. Even as it 
happened, the Glorious Revolution clearly marked the beginning of a worldwide 
appreciation of the legitimacy of groups that do not share the “ideological 
unity” demanded by a strong king.

Thomas Paine’s pamphlet Common Sense <http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/3755>, a 
bestseller in the 13 colonies when it was published in January 1776, marked 
another such revolution, which was not identical with the revolutionary war 
against Britain that began later that year (and had multiple causes). The reach 
ofCommon Sense is immeasurable, because it was not just sold but was also read 
aloud at churches and meetings. The idea that hereditary monarchs were somehow 
spiritually superior to the rest of us was decisively rejected. Most of the 
world today, including Britain, agrees.

The same could be said of the gradual abolition of slavery, which was mostly 
achieved not by war, but by an emergingpopular recognition 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=bSITAAAAYAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=slavery+as+it+is&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjYq_viw4XPAhWETCYKHSewDKYQ6AEIHjAA#v=onepage&q=slavery%20as%20it%20is&f=false>
 of its cruelty and injustice. The 1848 uprisings around Europe were 
substantially a protest against voting laws that limited voting to only a 
minority of men: property holders or aristocrats. Women’s suffrage followed 
soon after. In the 20th and 21st centuries, we have seen civil rights extended 
to racial and sexual minorities.

All of the past “justice revolutions” have stemmed from improved 
communications. Oppression thrives on distance, on not actually meeting or 
seeing the oppressed.

The next revolution will not abolish the consequences of place of birth, but 
the privileges of nationhood will be tempered. While the rise in anti-immigrant 
sentiment around the world seems to point in the opposite direction, the sense 
of injustice will be amplified as communications continue to grow. Ultimately, 
recognition of wrong will wreak big changes.

For now, this recognition faces strong competition from patriotic impulses, 
rooted in a social contract among nationals who have paid taxes over the years 
or performed military service to build or defend what they saw as exclusively 
theirs. Allowing unlimited immigration would seem to violate this contract.

But the most important steps to address birthplace injustice probably will not 
target immigration. Instead, they will focus on fostering economic freedom.

A better economic plan for Japan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/a-better-economic-plan-for-japan>
In 1948, Paul A Samuelson’s “factor-price equalisation theorem 
<http://www.jstor.org/stable/2225933?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents>” lucidly 
showed that under conditions of unlimited free trade without transportation 
costs (and with other idealised assumptions), market forces would equalise the 
prices of all factors of production, including the wage rate for any 
standardised kind of labour, around the world. In a perfect world, people don’t 
have to move to another country to get a higher wage. Ultimately, they need 
only be able to participate in producing output that is sold internationally.

As technology reduces the cost of transportation and communications to near 
the vanishing point, achieving this equalisation is increasingly feasible. But 
getting there requires removing old barriers and preventing the erection of new 
ones.

Recent free-trade agreements under discussion, the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/business/tpp-explained-what-is-trans-pacific-partnership.html?_r=0>
 and theTransatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/may/04/ttip-united-nations-human-right-secret-courts-multinationals>
, have suffered setbacks as interest groups attempt to bend them to their own 
aims. But, ultimately, we need – and probably will get – even better such 
agreements.

To achieve factor-price equalisation, people need a stable base for a real 
lifetime career connected to a country in which they do not physically reside. 
We also need toprotect the losers to foreign trade 
<http://www.foreurope.eu/fileadmin/documents/pdf/Workingpapers/WWWforEurope_WPS_no063_MS6.pdf>
 in our existing nation-states.Trade Adjustment Assistance 
<https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/training/tradeact> (TAA) traces its roots in 
the US back to 1974. Canada experimented in 1995 with anEarnings Supplement 
Project 
<http://www.srdc.org/what-we-do/demonstration-projects-impact-evaluation-studies/earnings-supplement-project.aspx>
. TheEuropean Globalisation Adjustment Fund 
<http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=326>, started in 2006, has a tiny 
annual budget of €150m (£128m). US PresidentBarack Obama has proposed 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2016/01/16/new-reforms-strengthen-support-unemployed-workers>
 to expand the TAA programme. But, so far, this has meant little more than 
experiments or proposals.

Ultimately, the next revolution will likely stem from daily interactions on 
computer monitors with foreigners whom we can see are intelligent, decent 
people – people who happen, through no choice of their own, to be living in 
poverty. This should lead to better trade agreements, which presuppose the 
eventual development of orders of magnitude more social insurance to protect 
people within a country during the transition to a more just global economy.

•Robert J. Shiller, a 2013 Nobel laureate in economics, is professor of 
economics at Yale University and the co-creator of the Case-Shiller Index of US 
house prices. He is the author ofIrrational Exuberance 
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10421.html>.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>
 