
The NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is facing a “humanitarian 
crisis” as hospitals and ambulance services struggle to keep up with rising 
demand, the British Red Cross has said, following the deaths of two patients 
after long waits on trolleys in hospital corridors.

Worcestershire Royal hospital launched an investigation on Friday into the 
deaths and did not deny reports that they had occurred afterlong waits on 
trolleys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/three-deaths-worcestershire-royal-hospital-nhs-winter-crisis>
 in corridors over the new year period.

On Friday, doctors’ leaders said more patients could die because of the chaos 
engulfing the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-winter-crisis-increase-patient-numbers-hospital-trusts>
.

I'm a junior doctor in the NHS, and I'm terrified for this winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/nhs-crisis-winter-deaths-worcestershire-private-sector>
The deaths prompted claims that the health service was “broken”, and long 
waits for care, chronic bed shortages and staff shortages were leading towards 
what the head of Britain’s A&E doctors called “untold patient misery”.

Mike Adamson, chief executive of the British Red Cross, said his organisation 
was “on the front line”. He said: [We are] responding to the humanitarian 
crisis in our hospital and ambulance services across the country. We have been 
called in to support the NHS and help get people home from hospital and free up 
much needed beds. This means deploying our team of emergency volunteers and 
even calling on our partner Land Rover to lend vehicles to transport patients 
and get the system moving.”

It is believed that one woman died of a heart attack after waiting for 35 
hours on a trolley in a corridor, and another man suffered an aneurysm while on 
a trolley, and could not be saved.

It is also believed that another patient was found hanged on a ward at the 
Worcestershire Royal hospital, which admitted that it was under serious 
pressure, partly as a result of theextra strain hospitals face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/nhs-could-face-its-worst-january-as-it-struggles-with-festive-backlog-warns-doctor>
 during winter. The deaths are said to have happened between New Year’s Day and 
3 January.

Many other patients who visited Worcestershire Royal hospital this week told 
the Guardian of long waits in A&E, corridors lined with patients, and 
overstretched staff doing their best to cope.

Dr Mark Holland, the president of the Society for Acute Medicine, said: “For a 
long time we have been saying that the NHS is on the edge. But people dying 
after long spells in hospital corridors shows that the NHS is now broken.

“We have got to the point where the efforts of staff to prop up the system are 
no longer enough to keep the system afloat. We are asking NHS staff to provide 
a world-class service, but with third world levels of staffing and third world 
levels of beds.

“That so many other hospitals in England are facing the same pressures as the 
one in Worcester means that other fatalities could occur. I would suggest that 
the same thing could happen in other hospitals, because lots of hospitals are 
under the same pressures.”

It is also possible that mainly frail elderly patients admitted to hospital 
over the festive period may have died because they received inadequate care on 
wards where staff were ill-equipped to deal with their conditions, Holland 
added.

“At the moment, we have lots of patients in the wrong beds in hospitals. That 
is, patients admitted as an emergency, but who do not need an operation, being 
looked after on wards that usually look after patients with surgical care 
needs,” he said.

“They may not have nurses with the right skill mix or the same level of 
dedicated medical cover [as general medical wards], so we know that these 
patients often don’t get the same level of care. Therefore I fear that during 
the Christmas and new year period, people in non-specialist beds may have come 
to harm.” Holland added that he could not estimate how many may have died as a 
result.

Fifty of England’s 152 NHS acute hospital trusts were forced to declare an 
alert last month, and sometimes temporarily scale back the level of care they 
offered to patients, because they could not cope with the number of people 
seeking medical attention, according to analysis by the Nuffield Trust health 
thinktank. Every hospital in Essex has had to go on “black alert” – the NHS’s 
highest level – in recent weeks.

In December, seven trusts had to declare the highest level of emergency 15 
times, meaning they were unable to give patients comprehensive care. Paramedics 
have told the Guardian they have had to wait for up to eight hours at a time 
outside A&E units to discharge a patient into the care of hospital staff, 
because emergency departments cannot accept any more admissions, thereby 
lengthening 999 response times.

Dr Taj Hassan, the president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine, said 
figures it obtained from hospitals across the UK showed some were treating as 
little as 50%-60% of A&E patients within four hours, farbelow the 95% target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/12/nhs-worst-performance-hospital-targets-emergency-patients>
.

“Figures cannot account for untold patient misery,” he said. “Overcrowded 
departments, overflowing with patients, can result in avoidable deaths.” Hassan 
and Holland blamed the government’s underfunding of the NHS and social care 
systems for contributing to hospitals becoming worryingly full.

“The emergency care system is on its knees, despite the huge efforts of staff 
who are struggling to cope with the intense demands being put upon them. The 
situation is intolerable for both staff and patients, who are all too often 
left in the undignified position of waiting on a trolley in a corridor for a 
bed to become free,” said Hassan, who is an A&E consultant at two hospitals in 
Leeds.

Separately, the London Ambulance Service is looking into the possibility that 
problems whenits IT system crashed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/01/london-ambulance-staff-log-calls-with-pen-and-paper-after-it-failure>
 on New Year’s Day contributed to the death of at least one patient. Staff had 
to make paper records of 999 calls in what one ambulance crew member described 
as “a shambles”.

The latest official NHS performance figures, released on Friday, showed that 
A&E units across England were forced to divert patients to nearby hospitals 57 
times over the Christmas period. In addition, 34 hospitals said they had 
experienced major problems coping with demand.
 