
The head of the NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> in England has 
rejected Theresa May’s claim that the health service has been given more 
funding than it requested to meet rising demand for care.


Simon Stevens <https://www.theguardian.com/society/simon-stevens> told MPs 
that the NHS would receive an additional £8bn between now and 2020-21, not the 
“£10bn extra” the prime minister said. Moreover, it would get less money than 
it needed between 2017 and 2020, meaning it would be “more challenging” than 
expected to keep services running.

The chief executive of NHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England 
disagreed with the prime minister’s statement, which she repeated on Monday, 
that “the government has not just given him £8bn extra, we’ve given him £10bn 
extra”. The £8bn was pledged last year by the then chancellor, George Osborne.

Stevens told the Commons health select committee that the NHS had only 
received the money it had asked for in two of the five years covered by the 
£8bn: 2016-17 and 2020-21.

For those two years the budget increases the NHS is due to get are “in the 
zone” of the sums it needs to implement its Five Year Forward View plan to 
transform patient care to keep the service sustainable.

NHS England chief faces his biggest challenge | Denis Campbell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/04/nhs-chief-simon-stevens-biggest-challenge>
“But for the [other] three years we didn’t get the funding we requested,” 
Stevens said pointedly. “As a result we have a bigger hill to climb. It’s going 
to be more of a challenge in 2017-18, 2018-19 and 2019-20 [than NHS chiefs 
expected],” he added.

While the NHS would get only “modest” extra sums in 2017-18 and 2019-20, 
“2018-19 will be the most pressurised year for us ... [because] we will have 
negative per-person NHS funding growth.”

His remarks contrast sharply with what May told the Manchester Evening News 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/theresa-came-manchester-asked-three-12039565>
 during a visit to the city on Monday, in which she repeated the government’s 
longstanding insistence that it had given Stevens all the money he asked for to 
fund the Forward View and then £2bn more. The health select committee, health 
thinktanks and NHS organisations have all disputed both claims.

“Simon Stevens was asked to come forward with a five-year plans for the NHS. 
He did that, so that’s been generated by the NHS itself. He said that it needed 
£8bn extra – the government has not just given him £8bn extra, we’ve given him 
£10bn extra,” she told the MEN.

“As I say, we have given the NHS more than the extra money they said they 
wanted for their five-year plan.”

The health secretary, Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt>, speaking to MPs alongside 
Stevens, refused to comment on the Guardian’s disclosure last weekend that May 
has already told the NHS boss that the service will not receive any funding 
increase in next month’s autumn statement. “It was a private meeting,” he said.

Asked by MPs about May’s belief, which she outlined at the meeting on 8 
September, that theNHS could learn from the Home Office and Ministry of 
Defence’s recent experience of efficiency drives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/14/no-extra-money-for-nhs-theresa-may-tells-health-chief>
, Stevens dismissed any parallels. While crime had fallen in recent years, 
demand for NHS care had risen, was still growing and would continue upward, he 
said. For example, demand for cancer care had risen 55% over the past five 
years.


He also pointed out that the £8bn figure was at the lower end of projections 
of the NHS’s needs. “The original modelling suggested a funding requirement in 
five years’ time of between £8bn and £21bn, depending on the level of 
efficiency which could be produced, the continuing availability of social care 
relative to rising need, the availability of capital investment to lubricate 
new service models – particularly investments in GP services and 
out-of-hospital care – and the availability of preventative services through 
local authorities, but also the role the NHS itself has to play.”


Sally Gainsbury, a senior policy analyst with the Nuffield Trust health 
thinktank, said that while NHS trusts had cut their unit costs by 13% since 
2010, their income had gone down by 18% over the same period.

Hunt dropped hints that the autumn statement might yield extra money to prop 
up theailing social care system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/11/elderly-and-disabled-people-put-at-risk-by-care-homes-closures>
 in England, which the Care Quality Commisison last week warned was 
“approaching a tipping point” and denying growing numbers of elderly people 
vital support they need to keep them healthy.

Areas of NHS will implode this winter, expert warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/13/nhs-areas-will-implode-winter-expert-mark-holland-warns>
“I do accept the broad point that however great the pressures are in the NHS, 
they areeven greater in social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/13/social-care-cuts-take-english-service-to-tipping-point-regulator-warns>
,” said Hunt. He is thought to privately share Stevens’s public view that if 
ministers do find extra cash, it should be put into social care rather than the 
health service.

Hunt also gave the clearest indication yet that the 55,000 EU nationals 
working in the NHS, including 10,000 doctors and 18,000 nurses, would be 
allowed to stay once Britain leaves the EU.

Labour said that Stevens’s comments showed that, contrary to the government’s 
repeated claim, it was underfunding the NHS. “We now know the truth: the Tories 
have failed to give the NHS the money it needs to protect patient care,” said 
Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary.

“Despite all of the government’s spin, the chief executive of the NHS made 
clear that the NHS did not get the funding it asked for over the next four 
years and has a ‘hill to climb’ to maintain current services.

“The dramatic decline in NHS finances over the past few years has left A&E 
departments at breaking point, hospital wards dangerously overcrowded and 
millions of patients having to wait months for essential operations.”
 