
A lot has happened since Nicholas Stern, then a permanent secretary at the 
Treasury, produced hislandmark review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/oct/30/economy.uk> of the impact of 
climate change 10 years ago. His work was quickly recognised as the definitive 
account of the economic dangers posed to the planet by global warming.

Since then, global temperatures have risen to record levels. Arctic summer sea 
ice has continued to shrink, as have many major land-based ice sheets. Carbon 
dioxide is being pumped into the atmosphere in ever-increasing amounts. At the 
same time, low-lying coastal areas,such as south Florida  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/11/miami-drowning-climate-change-deniers-sea-levels-rising>
and parts of Bangladesh, are experiencing more and more flooding as sea levels 
have risen. Scientists have begun to link extreme weather events to the 
planet’s changing climate, while animal and plant species are gradualling 
moving towards the poles. So, a decade on, is Stern plunged in despair over our 
prospects? Not quite. While the picture is certainly grim, the world’s top 
climate economist still believes there are grounds for modest optimism.

Stern report: the key points
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/oct/30/economy.uk> 
“We have been too slow in acting on climate change,” he told the Observer. “In 
particular, we have delayed the curbing of greenhouse gas emissions for far too 
long. When we published our review, emissions were equivalent to the pumping of 
40-41bn tonnes of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere a year. Today there are 
around 50bn tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent. At the same time, science is 
telling us that impacts of global warming – like ice sheet and glacier melting 
– are now happening much more quickly than we anticipated.”

In his report, published in October 2006, Stern warned that the cost of 
inaction would be far greater for future generations than the costs of actions 
taken today. “With hindsight, I now realise that I underestimated the risks. I 
should have been much stronger in what I said in the report about the costs of 
inaction. I underplayed the dangers.”

Miami, the great world city, is drowning while the powers that be look away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/11/miami-drowning-climate-change-deniers-sea-levels-rising>
These are stark remarks. Yet the dramatic success of the Paris climate talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-paris-climate-summit-and-un-talks>
 last year, and their subsequent rapid ratification by more than 90 countries, 
has provided the 70-year-old economist with a sense of hope: “It has taken only 
11 months to get the Paris agreement ratified. It took eight years to get its 
predecessor, theKyoto protocol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/mar/11/kyoto-protocol>, into 
force. So in a sense, the last 12 months have been encouraging.”

In his review, Stern made a cogent case for the need to make drastic 
reductions in fossil fuel burning to curb emissions of carbon dioxide, which 
are heating our atmosphere dangerously. The costs involved – in investing in 
the development of alternative energy sources, for example – would be far 
outweighed by the costs of coping with an overheated world afflicted by 
flooding, soaring temperatures, ruined crops and farmland, lack of food and 
displaced people, he argued. Most experts responded positively to the review.

Yet the world is still burning more and more fossil fuel and pumping more and 
more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. This has both long- and short-term 
consequences. “Apart from raising carbon levels and temperatures, burning 
fossil fuels causes air pollution, as we have learned over the past five 
years,” says Stern. “The consequences are terrible. Air pollution kills more 
than 30,000 people a year in Britain. That is about one in 2,000 of the 
population. It has become one of the very big killers around the world. In 
China, it causes about 4,000 deaths a day.

“We are killing millions every year from air pollution produced by burning 
fossil fuels. Yes, there are other sources of air pollution but burning fossil 
fuels is a large part of the story. That understanding is new and very 
important.”

As a counterbalance, Stern points to the fact that in recent years there has 
been an encouraging increase in the use of sustainable technologies that should 
help us to wean us of our fossil fuel dependency. Cities like Barcelona and 
Bogotá have made themselves cleaner and healthier. Coal burning has peaked in 
China. Hybrid cars and electric vehicles are being sold in increasing numbers 
and the cost of making solar panels has been reduced by a factor of 20. “We 
have reached the point where we can now see that the alternative route is not 
really something that should be regarded as a cost. It is actually a much 
better way of doing things, even if you had never heard of climate change,” 
says Stern.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fnicholas-stern-climate-change-review-10-years-on-interview-decisive-years-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30bd22c4c7167d0e62590bf46332af0d6b3eda51%2F81_0_1263_758%2F1263.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicholas%20Stern%3A%20cost%20of%20global%20warming%20%E2%80%98is%20worse%20than%20I%C2%A0feared%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fnicholas-stern-climate-change-review-10-years-on-interview-decisive-years-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicholas%20Stern%3A%20cost%20of%20global%20warming%20%E2%80%98is%20worse%20than%20I%C2%A0feared%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fnicholas-stern-climate-change-review-10-years-on-interview-decisive-years-humanity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30bd22c4c7167d0e62590bf46332af0d6b3eda51%2F81_0_1263_758%2F1263.jpg>
 Heathrow’s third runway could be incompatible with the Paris climate targets, 
says Stern. Photograph: PA 
But the message has taken too long to sink in, and as result we are 
approaching a crunch point, he argues. In the next 20 years, as economies 
across the globe expand, the planet is likely to build infrastructure – roads, 
buildings, ports and airports – that will more than double what already exists.

The crucial issue is the nature of that infrastructure. “If it is dirty and 
high carbon, it will lock us into that technology for a long time. We will be 
sentenced to live in cities where we cannot breath or move or be productive. If 
we do it using sustainable technology, however, we could have an extremely 
attractive future where you have strong growth, poverty is reduced, cities are 
cleaner and forests are saved. People have not sufficiently understood the 
importance of the next 20 years. They are going to be the most decisive two 
decades in human history.”

Last year’s Paris climate deal suggests there is a will to avoid the worst and 
there is a prospect of further strong agreements being reached at this month’s
talks in Marrakech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/indigenous-rights-forests-climate-change-study>
. India, China and the US have all made positive noises. Hillary Clinton is a 
firm supporter of climate change initiatives – but what if Donald Trump is 
elected president? This is a man who has claimed the concept of global warming 
was created “by and for the Chinese in order to make US manufacturing 
noncompetitive” and who has pledged to tear up the Paris agreement. Stern’s 
response is diplomatic: “It would make things very much more difficult,” he 
says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fnicholas-stern-climate-change-review-10-years-on-interview-decisive-years-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4449f4300daebd53d35c82d6cdf10fea8f195771%2F0_241_3404_2043%2F3404.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicholas%20Stern%3A%20cost%20of%20global%20warming%20%E2%80%98is%20worse%20than%20I%C2%A0feared%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fnicholas-stern-climate-change-review-10-years-on-interview-decisive-years-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicholas%20Stern%3A%20cost%20of%20global%20warming%20%E2%80%98is%20worse%20than%20I%C2%A0feared%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fnicholas-stern-climate-change-review-10-years-on-interview-decisive-years-humanity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4449f4300daebd53d35c82d6cdf10fea8f195771%2F0_241_3404_2043%2F3404.jpg>
 The UK could still cut its carbon emissions from aircraft by 80% by 2050 – if 
there is a major improvement in aviation technology. Photograph: Steve 
Parsons/PA 
Closer to home, Stern says he is confident the government understands the 
importance of adhering to its commitments to reduce UK carbon emissions by at 
least 80% by 2050 – despite the “policy wobbles” of the previous 
administration. David Cameron pledged his would be the greenest government ever 
but ended up cutting support for solar panels on homes, killing theGreen Deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/green-deal> to help people insulate 
old homes, scrapping green building standards for new homes and cutting support 
for industrial solar projects. “To behave in an unpredictable way, as the 
government did last year, is to be really damaging to investment,” says Stern. 
“That is why it was worrying. But I am hopeful, though I cannot be sure, that 
the new administration will take a more balanced and predictable approach. It 
should certainly be at the core of the new government’s industrial strategy and 
I will be looking for hints of that in the chancellor’s autumn statement.”

The proposed new runway for Heathrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/25/heathrow-third-runway-davies-commission>
 is a more complex issue, however. Analysis suggests the country could just 
about deal with the extra emissions produced by the additional planes, and 
still cut its carbon emissions by 80% by 2050 – if there is a major improvement 
in aviation technology. This would involve developing more efficient engines, 
better biofuels and lighter planes. “However, that commitment to reduce 
emissions by 80% was made in order to hold global temperature rises to 2C. The 
Paris climate deal suggested we should be more ambitious and go for a 1.5C 
limit. That means that if the UK’s targets are altered – as I believe they 
should be – to reflect the Paris agreement, there is now a question about 
whether we can have that extra runway and the extra carbon emissions it will 
generate. We need to check again if it is manageable,” adds Stern.

The Paris agreement remains central to Stern’s sense of cautious optimism. “It 
was the honesty of the delegates’ awareness of the nature of the problem and 
the speed of the agreement’s ratification that has given me most hope. We have 
a lot to do to limit carbon emissions to an effective level. I am confident 
that it is possible to achieve that, though I cannot say that I am confident it 
will happen.”
 