
The word going around town prior to Nick Kyrgios’ first-round appearance at the
Australian Open <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> on Monday 
was that a triple whammy of back, hamstring and knee injuries had him in 
serious trouble, and that he’d lacked both the time and physical capacity to 
even consider breaking any of his rackets in a 10-minute practice hit. Such 
dire predictions proved unfounded in his straight sets hammering of Gastão 
Elias, which he won 6-1, 6-2, 6-2 to progress to the second round.

Earlier in the day a press release issued by tournament organisers claimed 
that Kyrgios was a 91% chance of winning, which was all well and good until you 
noted the same probability had been assigned to women’s fourth seed Simona 
Halep before she wastrounced off the court by American Shelby Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/fourth-seed-simona-halep-first-big-name-to-falter-at-australian-open>
. These prognostications, it was said, were based on “Elo ratings”. Jeff Lynne 
was not available for comment after the Halep business, but surely would have 
had fun watching Kyrgios.

Related: Australian Open 2017 day one: Kyrgios, Kerber, Wawrinka and more 
– live! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/16/australian-open-2017-day-one-nick-kyrgios-in-action-live>

Perhaps it’s best to start by humanising Elias, who looked like the member of 
an entirely different sub-species to Kyrgios as he struggled to return the 
local’s thumping first serve. Here goes: the 26-year-old shares with the 
Canberran a love of video games and a geographically unlikely path to big-time 
tennis, in that he’s the statistically the second-best Portuguese player ever 
behind tour veteran Joao Sousa. But that’s a bit like being voted the second 
coolest member of Kasabian behind that one who looks a bit like a cut-price 
version of the bloke from The Mighty Boosh.

The rest: Elias was so thoroughly outclassed that at one point Kyrgios loudly 
encouraged his opponent after he’d held his serve, as though observing some new 
tour protocol aimed at eliminating crowd bullying.

The very first point of this encounter was ominous, Kyrgios scythed an ace 
across court but had it overturned on a challenge from Elias, who didn’t bother 
when the replay went screaming straight down the middle without his 
intervention. With an early break and a second love service game, Kyrgios made 
it 3-0 after seven minutes, amusing the crowd by stopping at the fridge during 
the change of ends and throwing some of its contents into the first row – 
dinner and a show.

It all blew by a little too quickly to be appreciated as a genuine sporting 
contest, but the brutality of one Kyrgios forehand winner across the court drew 
a communal gasp from the crowd, such was its utter unplayability. If this is 
what Kyrgios can do under the cloud of injury he’ll be a sight to behold at 
full fitness in 2017.

The rest is merely detail. Elias finally held serve at the third attempt, 
though it’s a dubious distinction when your opponent lets you off a bagel by 
failing in an attempt to take your second serve on the half-volley. The 
Australian duly held his own serve to take the first set 6-1 in 19 minutes, and 
the pattern continued almost identically in the second.

There will be worse mismatches in this tournament but not many. In his worst 
patches of the first two sets Elias suffered nothing short of humiliation, and 
with one arrogant forehand slap down the middle Kyrgios almost added injury to 
insult, doing everything but decapitate his opponent.

With his fluorescent orange socks and sneakers Kyrgios made his feet look like 
giant traffic cones in this match, and there was one minor accident. On 29 
minutes a hush descended on Hisense Arena as he called for the trainer, and 
from the towel pressed to his face you feared the worst, but a nosebleed was 
the only damage.

At that point Elias slumped into his chair for the five minutes it took to 
deal with the mishap but could never stanch his own bleeding in the match. The 
denouement was swift, and it was appropriate that the Australian served it out 
for one of his least burdensome grand slam wins yet. Not quite defeated are the 
suspicions Kyrgios is far from fit. Today he was so lacking for genuine 
competition it was impossible to tell.
 