
The reputation of Britain's banks will take a fresh battering when the deputy 
prime minister accuses them of discriminating against members of ethnic 
minorities in the way they distribute loans and set interest rates.

Nick Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> will challenge 
them to show they are meeting their responsibility to black people and will set 
up an inquiry into their practices, and what is holding budding black 
entrepreneurs back.

Andrew Stunell, the local government minister, and Lynne Featherstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lynnefeatherstone>, the equalities 
minister, are to bring together the banks, the Equality and Human Rights 
Commission, and the government's ethnic minorities advisory committee.

Delivering the Scarman memorial lecture, Clegg will argue banks are holding 
black people back from breaking "the last frontier" of racial economic equality.

He will say: "Britain's banks, bailed out by the British people, have just as 
much responsibility as everyone else, arguably more responsibility, to help 
Britain build a strong and dynamic economy. Unleashing black and ethnic 
minority talent is their duty too."

His remarks are likely to provoke a terse reaction from the banks, who feel 
they are under constant attack from the coalition over the way in which they 
support industry.

"We know that 35% of individuals from black African origin say they want to 
start a business, but only 6% actually do. Are they having problems accessing 
the loans they need?" he said.

"Past evidence shows that firms owned by individuals of black African origin 
have been four times more likely than so-called 'white firms' to be denied 
loans outright. And that Bangladeshi, Pakistani, black Caribbean and black 
African owned businesses have been subject to higher interest rates than white 
and Indian owned enterprises."

The inquiry "will look at the barriers preventing black and ethnic minority 
groups from accessing loans".

Clegg will say: "Why is it that members of some of our ethnic communities want 
to start their own businesses, but their success doesn't match their ambitions?"

He had heard anecdotally time and again that ethnic minorities found it more 
difficult to secure loans.

Clegg's office denies the deputy prime minister is accusing the banks of 
direct discrimination or institutional racism.

In his speech he will admit a range of factors may be holding black people 
from succeeding in business. He will point to "a mix of poorer education among 
ethnic minority groups, perhaps a lack of the right guidance, a lack of their 
own capital to invest. There may be an element of self-exclusion too.

"But if we are serious about turning the UK into an island of entrepreneurs, 
we need to get to the bottom of this. What are the barriers to finance? Are our 
banks doing enough?"

Clegg will extend his criticisms to sport, saying despite great progress in 
the promotion of black players in English Premier League football, it is 
remarkable how few black football managers or chief executives there are. "If 
you are a white player you have a one in 50 chance of moving into management. 
If you are a black player? One in 500."

He will say progress has been made on political equality since the Scarman 
report in the 1980s, but will say the parallel war on economic equality has 
barely even begun, asserting economic opportunity is "the next frontier for 
race equality".

He will claim: "Real equality is not just the absence of prejudice. It is the 
existence of fairness and opportunity too."

He will praise Labour's record on legal changes and reforms inside the public 
sector, but argue the approach though benign was too narrow since it tried to 
deliver equality solely through the state.

"In the public sector men from ethnic minorities working full time now earn 
slightly more than their white male colleagues, but in the private sector, for 
every pound a white man earns, a man from an ethnic minority earns just 89 
pence.

He will claim: The state has been used to hide the sins of the market â€“ and 
the veil is now being lifted."
 