
Nicky Morgan, the former education secretary, has been dropped from a list of 
moderate Conservative MPs who are set for a private meeting with the prime 
minister next Wednesday, after she criticisedTheresa May for wearing £995 
trousers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-sidesteps-question-about-995-pound-leather-trousers>
.


Theresa May sidesteps question about £995 leather trousers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-sidesteps-question-about-995-pound-leather-trousers>
The group, whose members include advocates of a soft Brexit such as Alistair 
Burt, Nicholas Soames, Nick Herbert and Anna Soubry, had been invited in to No 
10 to discuss the government’s strategy for handling the article 50 
negotiations with the other 27 EU-member states.

Morgan was initially among them; but the invitation was withdrawn after she 
gave an interview in which she criticised May.

“Disinviting Nicky because of a comment on the prime minister’s trousers is 
frankly playground politics,” said one backbencher involved.

Morgan, who has become a trenchant critic of the government since being sacked 
by May, said the prime minister’s choice of the designer leather trousers, 
which she wore for a photoshoot with the Sunday Times, had been “noticed and 
discussed” in local Tory circles.


“I don’t have leather trousers. I don’t think I’ve ever spent that much on 
anything apart from my wedding dress,” Morgan said.

May’s irritation about Morgan’s remarks may have been exacerbated after she 
was questioned about the trousers by reporters on her flight to visit Bahrain 
earlier this week.

Hard Brexit will breed new bigotry, warns former Tory minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/hard-brexit-new-bigotry-warns-nicky-morgan>
Asked if her wardrobe choices showed she was out of touch with ordinary 
voters, May responded: “I stood on the steps of Downing Street and said what I 
did about the importance of a country that works for everyone because that’s 
what I have heard from people as I’ve gone around the country, as I’ve met 
people in a whole variety of circumstances.

“I believe it is important for politicians to get out and about and that’s 
what I continue to do. It is important we have a country that works for 
everyone.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fkeir-starmer-pushes-for-detailed-brexit-plan-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Keir%20Starmer%20pushes%20for%20detailed%20Brexit%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fkeir-starmer-pushes-for-detailed-brexit-plan-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Keir%20Starmer%20pushes%20for%20detailed%20Brexit%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fkeir-starmer-pushes-for-detailed-brexit-plan-video&media=>
Keir Starmer pushes for detailed Brexit plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/07/keir-starmer-pushes-for-detailed-brexit-plan-video>
Some of the MPs in the informal coalition of backbenchers were among potential 
rebels who threatened to back Labour’s motion calling on May to publish more 
detailed plans for her Brexit negotiating stance last Wednesday.

Some hope to use the meeting to express their irritation at the government’s 
last-minute decision to amend Labour’s motion, by committing the Commons to 
May’s self-imposed end of March deadline for invoking article 50, the formal 
process for leaving the EU.

MPs voted overwhelmingly for the amended motion, with only diehard Europhile 
Kenneth Clarke opposing it; but some Conservatives felt bounced into expressing 
support for Brexit without having seen the prime minister’s negotiating stance.

A No 10 spokesman said he would not comment on any specific meeting, adding: 
“The prime minister meets and engages with colleagues all the time.”
 