
Now that the authorities have cracked down on his persistent poor behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/nick-kyrgios-suspended-atp-shanghai-conduct-tennis>
, the question for Nick Kyrgios to answer – and hopefully it is one that he 
will be asking himself during his unexpected sabbatical – is whether he owes it 
to himself to explore the outer reaches of his vast talent. In the end, it is 
not about you, me or the paying punters he so disrespected with hisshameful 
exhibition of indolence against Mischa Zverev in Shanghai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/nick-kyrgios-fined-shanghai-masters-lack-of-best-efforts>
 last week, the sheer egregiousness of which compelled the ATP to slap Kyrgios 
with a suspension that has been a long time coming.

Those of us who enjoy the theatre of Kyrgios at his best, having thrilled at 
the insouciance of his breakthrough victoryover Rafael Nadal at Wimbledon two 
years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/01/nick-kyrgios-rafael-nadal-wimbledon-2014>
, would find it immensely disappointing to watch him fade away, but we would 
soon move on with our lives.

Ultimately it is up to the rebellious Australian to decide whether he is 
willing to make the necessary sacrifices to reach the top, to discover whether 
he truly loves the sport that has turned him into a star with the potential to 
conquer the world and earn millions.

Nick Kyrgios suspended until mid-January by ATP over Shanghai conduct
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/nick-kyrgios-suspended-atp-shanghai-conduct-tennis>
One can have sympathy for a 21-year-old who is struggling to cope with fame 
and responsibility without failing to recognise that he is letting himself 
down, assuming that tennis is what he is supposed to excel at for the next 10 
or 15 years. While Kyrgios is unsure, he has said that he does not know how to 
exist without tennis. It is both a blessing and a curse that he is a flawed 
genius with a racket in his right hand.

It is easy to understand why the ATP, almost acting out of a duty of care, has 
banned and fined Kyrgios until 15 January for his conduct in his 6-3, 6-1 loss 
against Zverev. The lack of effort Kyrgios put into his serve and groundstrokes 
could be seen as a cry for help and given thathe has been accused of tanking in 
the past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/06/nick-kyrgios-fine-wimbledon-umpire-warning>
, the ATP had no choice but to act. The decision was not remotely controversial.

For his part, Kyrgios apologised on Monday and there are indications that he 
will accept professional advice, with the ATP saying that his suspension will 
end on 7 November if he accepts the help of a sports psychologist. That would 
be a step in the right direction.

Some of Kyrgios’s critics see a spoilt brat who has been given too much too 
soon. Some of his antics have been in dismal taste, such as theslur he aimed at 
Stan Wawrinka and the Swiss player’s girlfriend, Donna Vekic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/13/nick-kyrgios-row-stan-wawrinka-montreal-tennis-need-grow-up>
, last year. Others have been those of a young man melting in the spotlight.

Tennis is mentally punishing. All alone on the court, watched by thousands but 
unable to lean on any of them in the toughest moments, many players suffer and 
wilt in the heat of battle. No one is immune, even the very best. Novak 
Djokovic has slumped since completingthe career slam at the French Open in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/french-open-2016-final-novak-djokovic-beats-andy-murray>
, a crucial dip in intensity denting the world No1’s aura in the past few 
months. Who wants it more? It sounds like a cliche but it applies here. 
Sometimes, the top players sneak over the line thanks to their stubbornness.

Kyrgios looks ill-equipped to succeed in such a demanding environment, hopping 
from one country to the next for yet another tournament, and he has often 
sounded racked by self-doubt while discussing whether he likes tennis.

“I don’t have a doubt that if I wanted to win grand slams, I would commit,” he 
told the New York Times before the US Open. “I’d train two times a day, I’d go 
to the gym every day, I’d stretch, I’d do rehab, I’d eat right. But I don’t 
know what I want at the moment.”

What does Kyrgios actually want? This is a professional athlete who warmed up 
for his defeat to Andy Murray at Wimbledon by playing computer games before 
admitting thathis performance was pathetic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jul/04/nick-kyrgios-meltodwn-andy-murray>
. He called himself soft. His words hinted at a contradiction: his preparations 
were slack, but it was possible to detect disgust at the way he rolled over 
against Murray, which at least suggested that he does take pride in his output 
on the court.

The ATP’s tough love could be a turning point for Kyrgios. Only last week, 
however, he was rubbishing the idea that he would ever employ a coach who might 
be able to improve his focus. That, after all, does sound a lot like hard work.

But a steadying influence is what Kyrgios needs and the situation is likely to 
become chronic without one. Maybe it makes no difference. Maybe tennis is not 
for him. Whatever path Kyrgios chooses, all we can do is hope that he does not 
end up with regrets.
 