
Tennis is currently struggling with its latest superbrat, Nick Kyrgios, whose 
half-hearted performance at the Shanghai Masters earned hima suspension and a 
£34,000 fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/nick-kyrgios-suspended-atp-shanghai-conduct-tennis>
. It’s no surprise that he has been sanctioned by the authorities as his 
behaviour is at odds with tennis’s self image as a sport that espouses 
gentility and good manners; think of that white-kit rule at Wimbledon and the 
exclusivity of tennis clubs. Kyrgios’s antics look more extreme when set in the 
context of his sport.

Each sport handles it rebels differently. Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> is considered a “gentle” game but, 
like any sport, it has had its subverters. Tales of sledging are retold through 
the years and a lot of players wait to be dismissed when we all know they 
should be walking to the pavilion.

The Joy of Six: tennis tantrums
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/04/the-joy-of-six-tennis-tantrums-jeff-tarango-serena-williams-andy-roddick-andre-agassi>
Rugby seems to have a good balance for what is an aggressive sport. There’s 
the odd scrape – some ear-biting, eye-gouging and spear tackling – but referees 
come down heavily on dissent and it leaves some very tough athletes being 
respectful to officials, to the point of being almost deferential.

Ice hockey, on the other hand, has fighting as part of the sport. It’s hard to 
imagine what players must have to do to exercise their disciplinary committees. 
Maybe the authorities don’t spring into action unless something really 
outrageous happens – an unleashing of lethal weapons on the rink perhaps. They 
probably think Kyrgios is about as threatening as a village fete.

Footballers can get away with insulting officials, diving and gesticulating 
openly on TV. As far as I’m aware, field hockey players, swimmers, badminton 
players and rowers are not allowed to grab a referee by the shirt collar 
without some form of punishment. It’s laughable to even consider these things 
happening in other sports.

At the World Squash <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/squash> Championships 
recently an Egyptian player, Fares Dessouki, walked off court at matchball 
down. He is likely to face some consequences for that decision – which is 
probably justified given that fans paid money to watch the full match – but we 
all have meltdowns in life; it’s just that athletes suffer them in public. No 
one ever knows what kind of a day an athlete has had.

Despite the talk of “bringing sports into disrepute”, bad behaviour is often 
quite exciting for audiences. The papers certainly love Kyrgios.John McEnroe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/john-mcenroe> was considered a brat at the 
time, a slur on the sport in the eyes of some people, but look at him now. In 
retrospect, who would have advised him to curb that part of his personality?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fwillstrop-s-world%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fnick-kyrgios-sport-tennis-disrepute-bad-behaviour-golf-squash-cricket%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa873896bee18ea5b2768d61ac4e438084e666947%2F0_0_1852_1293%2F1852.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nick%20Kyrgios%20is%20rebuked%20for%20bringing%20sport%20'into%20disrepute'%20but%20fans%20love%20a%20rebel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fwillstrop-s-world%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fnick-kyrgios-sport-tennis-disrepute-bad-behaviour-golf-squash-cricket%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nick%20Kyrgios%20is%20rebuked%20for%20bringing%20sport%20%27into%20disrepute%27%20but%20fans%20love%20a%20rebel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fwillstrop-s-world%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fnick-kyrgios-sport-tennis-disrepute-bad-behaviour-golf-squash-cricket%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa873896bee18ea5b2768d61ac4e438084e666947%2F0_0_1852_1293%2F1852.jpg>
 John McEnroe was never short of an opinion but his career has survived. 
Photograph: PA 
Millions of us sit down in front of televisions every evening to watch our 
favourite stories brought to life and all of them contain what we might deem 
“bad behaviour”. These stories have to be interesting. It’s the same for 
sports. Perhaps rebellion is even more fascinating when it comes in a more well 
mannered sport. It’s akin to the royal family trying so hard to maintain an 
unblemished image even though they are human like the rest of us. Divorce, 
scandal, conflict, saying politically incorrect things and generally “behaving 
badly” is as much a part of their lives as it is for everyone else. The public 
are interested because the gap between what is allowed and what actually 
happens is so pronounced.

Back in the earlier 1990s, Anthony Hill got squash on the back page of a 
tabloid for headbutting an opponent. Squash had behaved well for most of its 
early life and yet this was the sport’s most newsworthy moment. Similarly, the 
Canadian squash player Jonathan Power breathed fresh life into the game. 
Audiences loved his McEnroe-esque oncourt tantrums and humorous putdowns to 
officials.


England has produced its most successful generation of squash players ever in 
the last two decades but the sport’s profile has hardly risen at all.We have 
licked the boots of the International Olympic Committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willstrop-s-world/2015/sep/30/squash-climbing-skateboarding-2020-olympics-tokyo>
 for decades and behaved impeccably, doing everything we thought they wanted us 
to, but it got us nowhere.

The golfers don't care, but the Olympics meant everything to us squash players
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/willstrop-s-world/2016/jul/15/golf-olympics-rory-mcilroy-squash-rio-james-willstrop>
Perhaps when we decide to tell them where to shove their Olympics, as Rory 
Mclroy did, they might actually want to include us. Or maybe we should stop 
being so squeaky clean and get some of our players doped up and banned. It 
seems that cycling has become more revered and popular as stories about drugs 
have become more prominent – when you’d think it would be the other way round. 
And what clearer and more timely indication do we have at the minute than our 
friends over the pond – it’s not just in sport thatbad behaviour attracts 
rather than repels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-sexual-comments-women-leaked-recording>
 the punters.

My father and coach Malcolm has a clear stance on this subject. The first 
lesson he gives his players is not related to the mechanics of squash but is 
that they should conduct themselves with dignity and respect, and not be overly 
demonstrative on the court. I’ve grown up with this influence and so have 
become a relatively calm athlete. I am very grateful I was been taught that way 
and I know how much it has helped me to play better. I will always endorse that 
way of teaching but I have seen a lot of sport and, without condoning Kygrios, 
it’s worth contemplating that a little bit of the right bad behaviour can 
sometimes be a delicious thing in the context of sporting combat.

• This is an article from James Willstrop’s blog 
<http://www.willstrop.co.uk/category/blog/>
• Follow James on Twitter <https://twitter.com/james_willstrop>
 