
The ATP has suspended Nick Kyrgios until 15 January following his behaviour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/nick-kyrgios-fined-shanghai-masters-lack-of-best-efforts>
 during the second-round match defeat by Mischa Zverev at the Shanghai Masters.

The Australian rushed through his 6-3, 6-1 loss to Zverev last Wednesday 
without putting much effort behind his serves or groundstrokes, admitting 
afterwards that he “took the easy way out”. During the match, the 21-year-old 
walked towards his chair after floating a serve across the net without even 
waiting for Zverev to return it. Kyrgios, who also clashed verbally with a 
spectator during the match, was fined $16,500 (£13,500) on Thursday but has now 
been fined a further $25,000 (£20,500) in addition to the suspension.

Why we might resist caning Nick Kyrgios and perhaps just ask if he’s OK | 
Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/why-we-might-resist-caning-nick-kyrgios-and-perhaps-just-ask-if-hes-ok>
“Kyrgios has been found to have committed the player major offense ‘Conduct 
Contrary to the Integrity of the Game’,” read an ATP statement. “The offense 
means that Kyrgios receives an additional fine of $25,000, and is suspended 
from ATP tournaments for eight tournament weeks, effective from today through 
to Sunday 15 January 2017.”

The ATP has confirmed however that Kyrgios can return earlier, should he enter 
a “plan of care”. The statement continued: “The suspension will be reduced to 
three tournament weeks upon agreement that the player enters a plan of care 
under the direction of a sports psychologist, or an equivalent plan approved by 
ATP, meaning Kyrgios could regain eligibility to compete on the ATP World Tour 
or Challenger Tour from Monday 7 November 2016.”

A statement from Tennis Australia 
<http://www.tennis.com.au/news/2016/10/17/tennis-australia-statement-4> seemed 
to confirm that the player was seeking that help. “Nick’s health and wellbeing 
is a priority and the ATP has offered a reduced penalty on the provision that 
he seeks appropriate professional advice, which he has agreed to do.”

Kyrgios has apologised for his behaviour, releasing a statement in 
<http://nickkyrgios.org/statement-on-atp-decision/> the wake of the fine in 
which he cited injuries and exhaustion. “My body finally just gave out in 
Shanghai both physically and mentally,” read the statement. “This is no excuse, 
and I know very well that I need to apologise to the fans – in Shanghai and in 
other parts of the world – as well as the tournament organisers in Shanghai who 
do an amazing job.”

He added: “I do understand and respect the decision by the ATP and I will use 
this time off to improve on and off the court. I am truly sorry and look 
forward to returning in 2017.”

Kyrgios had been unrepentant after the match over his argument with the 
spectator. He said in his post-match press conference: “I don’t owe them [the 
fans] anything. It’s my choice. If you don’t like it, I didn’t ask you to come 
watch. Just leave. You want to buy a ticket? Come watch me. You know I’m 
unpredictable. It’s your choice. I don’t owe you anything. Doesn’t affect how I 
sleep at night.”

He apologised for these views in his statement on Monday. “I of course know 
how important the fans are to the success of our sport and I personally love 
the interaction with fans in the many different cities throughout the world on 
the tennis circuit. I am someone who gives a huge amount of time to my fans 
because I love and value their support. Their energy is what motivates me to 
reach for the top of the game. I regret that my year is ending this way and 
that I will not have a chance to continue chasing the ATP Finals.”

On Friday Kyrgios thanked Andy Murray for his “perspective” after the British 
player called for more protection for the Australian.Kyrgios then posted a 
tweet on Sunday <https://twitter.com/NickKyrgios/status/787476693892026368> 
showing a series of champagne bottle, wine glass, beer mug and cocktail 
emoticons.

The ATP executive chairman and president, Chris Kermode, described Kyrgios as 
a “phenomenal talent” and hoped the Australian would use his time away from the 
game constructively.

“Nick’s conduct in Shanghai was unacceptable, disrespectful to the sport, and 
its fans,” Kermode said. “We take these matters very seriously, and he has 
since apologised for his actions.”
 