
Nick Kyrgios <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> has pulled out 
of the Rotterdam Open in February so he can play in the NBA all-star celebrity 
game instead, tournament director Richard Krajicek confirmed on Wednesday.

Why we might resist caning Nick Kyrgios and perhaps just ask if he’s OK | 
Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/13/why-we-might-resist-caning-nick-kyrgios-and-perhaps-just-ask-if-hes-ok>
Kyrgios was suspended for eight weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/nick-kyrgios-suspended-atp-shanghai-conduct-tennis>
 on Monday for a perceived lack of effort during the Shanghai Masters last 
week. The Australian clashed with fans and the chair umpire, and walked off 
court in the middle of a point.

The 21-year-old had signed up to play in the tournament in Holland next year, 
but Krajicek said Kyrgios had been released from his contract so he can take 
part in the NBA’s mid-season showpiece in New Orleans.

“Kyrgios is a big NBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> fan and the 
chance to be on the court with Michael Jordan is unique for him,” Kraijcek said 
in a statement. “We do not think it makes much sense to have him on our court 
if he is not 100% motivated. With a field which already includes [Stan] 
Wawrinka, [Rafael] Nadal, [Dominic] Thiem and [Robin] Haase, we think we have 
enough quality on show.”

“Kyrgios prefers his passion beyond his profession,” Krajicek added. “We 
wanted to hold him to his contract. You see what can happen when he is tired 
and [tennis] has little meaning, as in China. We do not want that. So we 
decided to terminate his contract. We want a top tennis player seen on the 
court.

“If every week he is focused on tennis, he might be mentally burned out after 
six months. He needs an outlet.”


The ATP said it would consider reducing Kyrgios’s eight-week penalty if he 
agreed to see a sports psychologist. However, if the ATP’s conditions are not 
met, Kyrgios will not be allowed to return to the court until the Australian 
Open in January.Kyrgios took part in a Twitter Q&A on Wednesday morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/19/nick-kyrgios-indicates-u-turn-on-decision-to-see-sports-psychologist>
. When asked if he intended to meet with a psychologist, Kyrgios replied: 
“Probs not.”

The player posted a lengthy apology online after his behaviour in Shanghai, 
which came days after he won the Japan Open, the third and biggest title of his 
career.


He said: “I, of course, know how important the fans are to the success of our 
sport and I personally love the interaction with fans in the many different 
cities throughout the world on the tennis circuit. I am someone who gives a 
huge amount of time to my fans because I love and value their support. Their 
energy is what motivates me to reach for the top of the game. I regret that my 
year is ending this way and that I will not have a chance to continue chasing 
the ATP Finals.”

Krajicek, who won Wimbledon in 1996, has added US Open champion Wawrinka to 
the Rotterdam field in place of Kyrgios.

 