
Suspended tennis star Nick Kyrgios 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> has suggested he is unlikely 
to see a sports psychologist in a bid to have his eight-week ban reduced.

In a Twitter Q&A on Wednesday morning, the controversial Australian appeared 
to be at odds withTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Australia’s 
claim a day earlier that he had agreed to seek professional help.

Nick Kyrgios has time on his side to learn he should not waste his talent | 
Jacob Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/oct/17/nick-kyrgios-atp-ban-learn-talent>
When asked if he intended to meet with a psychologist, he replied: “Probs not.”

Kyrgios was handed an eight-week ban by the ATP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/17/nick-kyrgios-suspended-atp-shanghai-conduct-tennis>
 for his lack of effort during a match at the Shanghai Masters last week.

The governing body of the men’s tour said that ban would be reduced to three 
weeks, meaning a return to action on 7 November, if he sought help.

“Nick’s health and wellbeing is a priority and the ATP has offered a reduced 
penalty on the provision that he seeks appropriate professional advice, which 
he has agreed to do,” Tennis Australia said.

“Nick understands the gravity of his actions, has shown remorse and expressed 
a willingness to improve.”

However, Kyrgios will not be allowed to return to the court until January’s 
Australian Open if the ATP’s conditions are not met.
Nicholas Kyrgios (@NickKyrgios) 
@skiforhim <https://twitter.com/skiforhim> probs not
 <https://twitter.com/NickKyrgios/status/788468770066931712> October 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/NickKyrgios/status/788468770066931712> 
The 21-year-old caused uproar with a lethargic display against Mischa Zverev 
at the Chinese event last week, when he capitulated in straight sets, and at 
one stage of the match was accused of unprofessional behaviour by the umpire.

In addition to his ban, Kyrgios racked up over $40,000 in fines after the ATP 
found him to have committed the major offence of “Conduct Contrary to the 
Integrity of the Game”.

After the match, Kyrgios said he didn’t owe his fans anything, before issuing 
a later statement to apologise, citing injuries and exhaustion as reasons for 
his lack of effort.

In Monday’s Q&A, he also indicated an intention to play less on tour next 
year. When asked what his goals for 2017 were, he replied: “More time off.”


When asked how he felt about playing tennis, he responded with a simple “lol” 
and in response to a question about whether he could honestly say he has given 
100% on the court, he said “nah man”.
 