
See this square? A few years ago this was like The Wire.” It’s Friday evening 
and I’m walking through Intendente, an area north of Lisbon’s city centre 
that’s the latest part of town to experience a transformation from red-light 
district to nightlife hub.

“There are still lots of empty buildings,” says Pedro Coquenão – better known 
as the DJ and producer behindBatida 
<http://www.soundwayrecords.com/artist/batida> – gesturing to a derelict, 
albeit grand, terrace. “Space for someone to build the next big club.”

Beautiful decay seems to characterise the aesthetic of most of Lisbon’s 
nightlife quarters. But despite the faded facades and vacant lots that scatter 
the Portuguese capital, the music emerging from between the cracks is sharp and 
modern, fusing contemporary African and European influences with a playful 
fluency unique to the city. To get an insider’s lowdown on the city’s 
nightlife, I spent a weekend with some of Lisbon’s most creative and 
influential electronic artists, checking out the hottest bars and clubs.

For Coquenão, Intendente, with its combination of “trashy places and new 
designer spots” is “one of the most mixed areas in Lisbon”. We meet for drinks 
atCasa Independente <https://www.facebook.com/CasaIndependente>, a bar and 
venue that opened two years ago in an old mansion overlooking the area’s 
recently renovated square. Standing in its leafy courtyard, surrounded by 
cracked walls, I sip a beer out of a plastic cup as Coquenão – who is of mixed 
Angolan/Portuguese descent – unravels the tangled history of the city’s music 
scene.

Over the past decade the sounds coming from the city have shifted from kuduro 
to Afro-house, which, I’m told, is about to explode. “Lisbon’s relationship 
with Africa is like London’s with Jamaica,” he says. “It’s where music from 
those places gets translated for a European audience.”

The frontier spirit of the music being produced in Lisbon is reflected in the 
city’s attitude towards making music venues from unlikely spaces. Its newest 
club and arts space, for example, isVillage Underground Lisboa 
<http://vulisboa.com/> (a spin-off from the Shoreditch version). In a tram 
depot in the west of the city, it’s a dystopian, Tetris-like construction built 
out of abandoned shipping containers.

Before long we’re joined by Branko and Kalaf, two members of one of the city’s 
best-known groups, the genre-bendingBuraka Som Sistema <http://www.buraka.tv/>. 
Originally an underground dance act, Buraka are now known for their inclusive, 
upbeat interpretation of kuduro (high-speed Angolan dance music), hip-hop and 
techno. Basically, they bring the noise. As we leave Casa Independente, I ask 
Branko to sum up the vibe of a Lisbon night out. “Everyone just wants to hang 
out outside,” he says. “For me, exploring Lisbon is just about walking from 
place to place and going with the flow.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Flisbon-new-clubbing-scene-nightlife-reports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421941671991%2F2b6626d6-1180-4a6b-af2d-1e7fef671959-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20Lisbon%E2%80%99s%20new%20clubbing%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Flisbon-new-clubbing-scene-nightlife-reports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20Lisbon%E2%80%99s%20new%20clubbing%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Flisbon-new-clubbing-scene-nightlife-reports%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421941671991%2F2b6626d6-1180-4a6b-af2d-1e7fef671959-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Casa Independente 
The pair suggest we drop by Cais do Sodré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/may/09/lisbon-city-guide-day-in-cais-do-sodre>
, an area also once dominated by strip bars before getting something of an 
official makeover three years ago. This included painting Rua Nova do Carvalho 
bright pink. “Pink Street” as it’s now known, is also home to one of Lisbon’s 
most important clubs for underground music,Music Box 
<http://www.musicboxlisboa.com/>, a “rough and intense” venue that hosts loud, 
sweaty parties.

We hit Cais do Sodré’s main strip around 2am and elbow through the crowd (it’s 
already jammed) to a taverna-inspired music and arts venue calledPovo, “one of 
the coolest bars on the street,” according to my guides. “Afro-house,” says 
Coquenão, smiling, pointing at the speakers.

10 of the best restaurants and cafes in Lisbon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jun/26/10-of-the-best-restaurants-cafes-in-lisbon>
In characteristic Lisbon style, we take our beers and saunter off to another, 
contrasting, venue that has helped bolster Cais do Sodré’s revival:B.Leza 
<https://sites.google.com/site/blezaacr/contatos>. The legendary, long-running 
African club relocated to a warehouse by the riverside here in 2012 after years 
of closure. “It’s a classic Lisbon joint,” says Kalaf as we wander down to the 
dark industrial strip, behind the railway lines to check it out. “Like Ronnie 
Scott’s but with more dancing.”

Inside, around 30 young couples are swaying cheek to cheek to the sentimental 
rhythms of kizomba, romantic Angolan pop music that’s also seeing a renaissance 
in Lisbon. Even our taxi driver is a massive fan, eagerly suggesting we check 
out ladies’ night at another club on the river.

But instead, we head to another Lisbon institution, Lux 
<http://www.luxfragil.com/>. Branko checks the time: “Yes, 4am – about the time 
people from Lisbon get to a club.” The three-storey superclub manages to retain 
the outdoor vibe Lisbonites crave, boasting a huge roof terrace with views over 
the Tagus. The interior – which is regularly changed – is decked out with 
big-screen visuals, giant hanging globes and huge armchairs for clubbers to 
slump (or sleep) in. In the basement room, techno throbs from the sound system 
and strip lighting, hanging chaotically from the ceiling, flashes in 
synchronised patterns.

Also situated in a former warehouse, the club (part-owned by actor John 
Malkovich) has an exclusive side to it – expect to queue. Inside, it’s still 
busy at 7am when I head home, completely outdone by white-haired 65-year-old 
film director João Botelho – a regular Lisbon nightlife character – who we spot 
frantically grooving in the fray.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Flisbon-new-clubbing-scene-nightlife-reports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421941768115%2Fce60c4b2-3781-4e8f-aef3-44fe69b7ac7a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20Lisbon%E2%80%99s%20new%20clubbing%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Flisbon-new-clubbing-scene-nightlife-reports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20Lisbon%E2%80%99s%20new%20clubbing%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Flisbon-new-clubbing-scene-nightlife-reports%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421941768115%2Fce60c4b2-3781-4e8f-aef3-44fe69b7ac7a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 DJ Branko from Buraka Som Sistema 
On my final (fuzzy-headed) evening in the city, I catch up with another 
important character behind Lisbon’s electronic music scene; Pedro Gomes of
Príncipe Records <https://principediscos.wordpress.com/>. The label, as Gomes 
puts it: “transports music from the ghettoes into worldwide channels, without 
distorting it”, and has a monthly residency at Music Box, where its flagship 
artists, such as DJ Marfox and DJ Nigga Fox, spin their addictively unpolished 
African influenced electronic music. Despite the cutting-edge scene he is 
involved with, Gomes, dressed in loose-fitting vintage clothing and shades, 
wants to show me round some of his favourite “old Lisbon” spots; his resistance 
to the city’s more gentrified addresses draws on the same radical spirit 
fuelling the music he helps produce and promote.

Lisbon city guide: a day in Cais do Sodré
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/may/09/lisbon-city-guide-day-in-cais-do-sodre>
We meet at long-running local restaurant O Fernando 
<https://plus.google.com/108512519640806327017/about?gl=uk&hl=en> on the edge 
of Alfama before walking across town toBaliza 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Baliza/112834828802090?rf=284202064979250>, a 
tiny “archetypal Lisbon” bar just below Barrio Alto, for one of “the best 
whisky sours in the city”. Opposite is another good place to drink,Bicaense 
<https://plus.google.com/102994657764555889382/about?gl=uk&hl=en>, which has 
helped turn Rua da Bica de Duarte into a busy but sophisticated late-night 
drinking strip. “Barrio Alto is losing its bohemian edge,” says Gomes, telling 
me how it’s not unheard-of for residents to tip buckets of water out of their 
windows onto the stag parties below. But one of the core cultural hubs of the 
area is still going strong:Galeria Zé dos Bois <http://www.zedosbois.org/> is a 
non-profit cultural centre which hosts regular concerts and events, and 
celebrates its 20th anniversary this year. “Few European cities have a place 
like it,” says Gomes.

Finishing our cocktails we wander up to an even more discreet - almost 
invisible - bar and restaurant:Snob <http://www.snobarestaurante.com/#/homepage>
. Hidden behind a closed door - you have to buzz for entry - the bar is run by 
two elderly Lisbonites in pressed shirts and braces. The interior is 
wood-panelled, lined with glass cabinets stocked with bottles of spirits and 
books written by some of the historic bar’s regulars. A map of Africa hangs on 
the wall behind the door. “It’s a gorgeous 1970s hangout,” says Gomes, ordering 
a whisky, “mostly inhabited by old-school journalists and politicians. The 
manager has seen 40 years of intellectual activity, adultery and classy 
alcoholism.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Flisbon-new-clubbing-scene-nightlife-reports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421941957477%2Fce628f24-2e15-4746-bc5d-82b8844ba859-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20Lisbon%E2%80%99s%20new%20clubbing%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Flisbon-new-clubbing-scene-nightlife-reports%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20Lisbon%E2%80%99s%20new%20clubbing%20scene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F23%2Flisbon-new-clubbing-scene-nightlife-reports%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F22%2F1421941957477%2Fce628f24-2e15-4746-bc5d-82b8844ba859-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Superclub Lux is a Lisbon institution 
Out in the warm air, I walk back through streets still churning with different 
types of people on different types of nights out. The outdoor drinking culture 
reinforces the idea that this is a city where people can mix freely. It’s 
something you rarely experience in a capital, but fits neatly with the 
collaborative, outward-looking nature of Lisbon’s music scene. As Coquenão puts 
it on my first night: “The street is this democratic space for everyone. And 
this is something I find very cool.”

• Flights were provided by TAP Portugal (flytap.com <http://www.flytap.com>), 
which has daily flights to Lisbon from Manchester, Heathrow and Gatwick from 
£141. Accommodation was provided by Travellers House hostel (travellershouse.com
 <http://www.travellershouse.com/>), which has dorms from €12 and private rooms 
from €25
 