
Somewhere, outside, it must be the morning. Inside the main room of ://about 
blank <http://aboutparty.net/>, a once illegal club located in Berlin’s 
Friedrichshain neighbourhood, reality takes on a different hue.

Lights are flickering on the ceiling while high tempo techno judders through 
the speakers. In front of the DJ booth a woman with a tinsel tail, reminding me 
somehow of a unicorn, is dancing on top of the bass bin, conducting the crowd 
with a glitter coated baton while a completely naked, muscle clad man 
mock-worships her. In front of the dancing duo, the room beats on, unfazed. I’m 
not sure how many people even noticed.

The spirit of Berlin’s nightlife community is captured in moments like these. 
Venues such as ://about blank (don’t worry, you don’t have to say the 
punctuation) – a collectively run club founded on left wing principles – 
epitomise the way the best of the city’s clubbing landscape combines politics, 
sexual openness and progressive social values, creating safe, participatory 
and, ultimately, magical nightlife spaces for clubbers to lose themselves in.

Much of this idealism stems from Berlin’s history as a divided then unified 
place – many of its clubs first occupied the real-estate no-man’s land 
surrounding the area of the old wall, finding new meaning and political purpose 
for these neglected spaces throughout the 1990s. As Nadine Moser, better known 
as Resom, one of ://about blank’s resident DJs, told me: “You can’t see today’s 
situation without looking into that past. A part of Berlin’s nightlife scene 
was always connected to politics.”

Music aside, this is, undoubtedly, what makes the city’s nightlife scene so 
enviable. As any dedicated clubber will tell you, exploring it is as much an 
adventure as it is a privilege; one night could never be enough to do it 
justice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefd9a752933b025b1a2e75705b7a4059ba7366cb%2F0_149_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fefd9a752933b025b1a2e75705b7a4059ba7366cb%2F0_149_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
 Resom on the decks at ://about blank. Photograph: Christian Fladung 
And though clubbing in Berlin rings out dreamy tales of 36-hour techno 
parties, Sunday afternoon packed lunches inBerghain <http://www.berghain.de/> 
(guilty) and sexual permissiveness (we’ll get to that later), the city takes 
its nightlife culture seriously, however big or small the venue.

You can’t see today’s situation without looking at the past. Part of Berlin’s 
nightlife was always connected to politics
Nadine Moser, ://about blank dj 
Rewind to earlier on the same Friday night I ended up in ://about blank and 
I’m having a beer in a far more laid back club in Kottbusser Tor, with Andreas 
Richter, better known asDJ Reznik <https://www.residentadvisor.net/dj/reznik> 
from the Keinemusik crew, who’s showing me around some of his favourite 
underground spots in the city.

We meet at Paloma <https://www.facebook.com/palomaberlin/>, a DJ bar on the 
first floor of an old brutalist-style shopping block, the dystopian vibe 
compounded by the view of the U-bahn vaulting the street outside. The 
Keinemusik crew has been on the scene for some years now, running a DIY label 
and hosting an all-night residency atWatergate <http://water-gate.de/>, one of 
the city’s long-running, slightly slicker clubs, but for Andreas the smaller 
venues are as integral to the city clubbing as its more prominent ones. “Some 
clubs adjust their programming to make more money,” he tells me. “But there are 
loads like this one where you feel there are people just making it because they 
love what they do.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dc21b5ddd1c53c4c24e13c445ec0f82559ac657%2F0_34_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3dc21b5ddd1c53c4c24e13c445ec0f82559ac657%2F0_34_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Reznik from Keinemusik Photograph: Christian Hell 
This is also the case at another nearby club we drop into, popular 
warm-up/mid-week party joint,Farbfernseher 
<http://www.berlin-fever.com/en/clubs/farbfernseher>. The former colour TV 
store – with unusually friendly staff (we have to tell a joke before we’re let 
in) and upbeat crowd – is a small, cube-like, stripped-down space with a 
dancefloor surrounded by raised benches that create a mini-disco arena. “People 
just come and they dance,” says Andreas, which is pretty much my experience of 
the place. The music policy leans toward house and disco and it’s popular with 
the underground scene. The following night I swing by again (I really can’t 
recommend this place highly enough) to catch Hotflush’sJack Haighton 
<https://www.residentadvisor.net/dj/jackhaighton> spinning classic house to a 
packed room. I also spot “Berlin’s oldest hipster”Günther Anton Krabbenhöft 
<http://www.tagesspiegel.de/berlin/guenther-anton-krabbenhoeft-aus-berlin-kreuzberg-der-hipster-rentner-vom-kotti/12294180.html>
 there, trotting around in his dandy attire. It reminds me of when I ran into 
an equivalentLisbon nightlife character 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jan/23/lisbon-new-clubbing-scene-nightlife-reports>
, 65-year-old director João Botelho in Lux; it adds a lot to a scene when you 
can count on seeing familiar faces. In Berlin you encounter a lot of regulars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e617c78a00c1c724d23ed8aa80fd21fd1a0d2ac%2F0_170_3861_2317%2F3861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e617c78a00c1c724d23ed8aa80fd21fd1a0d2ac%2F0_170_3861_2317%2F3861.jpg>
 Farbfernseher, small late night party bar in Kreuzberg. Photograph: Felix Clay 
for the Guardian 
In terms of electronic music, one club that’s made a strong impression since 
opening around two years or so ago isOHM <https://www.facebook.com/shiftberlin/>
, which you’ll find just past the queue of tourists waiting to get intoDimitri 
Hegemann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/08/techno-detroit-return-berlin-tresor>
’s techno institutionTresor <http://tresorberlin.com/>. “What I like is the 
diversity of the programming,” says Andreas, as we head inside through a small 
doorway in the side of the vast Kraftwerk Factory. “One night you can watch a 
noise band play, another a more experimental house/techno night like this one.”

The club, which is a cold, industrial square room with tiled walls and metal 
heaters, glowing red and hanging ominously from the ceiling above, attracts an 
art school chic, avant garde crowd to match the range in sounds that run 
through its incredibly warm, yet punchy sound system. Nights range from a 
sweat-drenched showcases from Lisbon’s ghetto electronic crew and 
label-of-the-momentPrincipe <https://principediscos.bandcamp.com/>, to a 
dismorphic sound sessions from Berlin collectiveFLEISCH 
<https://soundcloud.com/fleisch-berlin>.

At around 4am we head to ://about blank. The club occupies a derelict looking 
building with a big garden featuring a caravan to, you know, chill in, among 
other trippy hideaways scattered around its grounds. It’s a similar set up to 
other indoor/outdoor clubs likeSisyphos <http://sisyphos-berlin.net/> and Salon 
Zur Wilde Renate <https://www.residentadvisor.net/club.aspx?id=8556>. Tonight 
://about blank is taken over by Homopatik, a long-running monthly queer party 
with a passionate following run by DJ Mr Ties.As he says in an interview with
Crack magazine <http://crackmagazine.net/article/fashion/aesthetic-mr-ties/>: 
“Homopatik is over ‘gender’”, and the crowd follows suit – marching hard into 
the next day in a blur of brightly coloured, semi-clothed, beat-matched motion.

Clubbing is just one element to the venue, which challenges the status quo 
through its programming and internal organisation. Nadine says: “Simply the 
fact that it is operated by a collective is a political statement and a big 
motivation for other people to work in this way, instead of the typical 
hierarchic structures of capitalist economy. It also offers space for political 
initiatives which are presented there, like support events for refugees. Also, 
the club itself tries to have a 50/50 rate on female acts.”

This kind of approach, lacing spaces with political thinking and ideas, turns 
partying in Berlin into a particularly mind-stretching and reaffirming 
experience, it’s just a shame that the demographic inside the clubs is not as 
culturally diverse as the neighbourhoods most are found in.

Still, it’s an attitude that pumps through the veins of many highly regarded 
nights in the city, such as high concept techno free-for-allGegen 
<http://gegenberlin.com/>, which draws a huge crowd to legendary Berlin sex 
club KitKat (a labyrinthine venue which features an indoor swimming pool and 
fire-breathing dragon), for a night of drugs, dancing and experimentation. 
While most nights at KitKat require a fetishy dress code, the point of Gegen is 
to be more open, though having seen the more mundanely dressed turned away at 
the door, I can attest that if you’re going to queue for two hours, you may as 
well make an effort – you don’t want to feel awkward handing your jacket over 
to a topless cloakroom attendant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F089733c3d17fca88504d3a2357f0cf52d54383e5%2F0_93_5281_3169%2F5281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nightlife%20reports%3A%20clubbing%20in%20Berlin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fberlin-clubs-nightlife-germany-techno%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F089733c3d17fca88504d3a2357f0cf52d54383e5%2F0_93_5281_3169%2F5281.jpg>
 Queueing for Berghain. Photograph: Image Broker/REX 
It’s impossible to talk about Berlin’s commitment to progressive clubbing 
without mentioningBerghain <http://www.berghain.de/>. This techno cathedral, in 
a beautiful, brutal, concrete power station on the edge of Friedrichshain and 
Kreuzberg, pulls in formidable line ups – and an even more formidable crowd – 
and has a deserved reputation as one of the best clubs in the world. Though it 
caters for a broad crowd, its roots as gay fetish club Ostgut, which ran 
between 1998 and 2003, remain prevalent in its current carnation; the legendary 
Snax party, probably the biggest gay fetish party in Europe, is still hosted 
there each Easter and a second event, FC Snax United, in November.

The club consists of two main spaces; the grand main room, Berghain – a 
breathtaking high-ceilinged space dedicated to techno with impeccably tuned, 
towering Funktion One stacks in each corner; and the comparatively smaller 
Panorama Bar, which mainly programmes house and disco and has a crew of loyal 
followers. The rest of the club – designed to have no dead ends – is an endless 
churn of people dressed in outfits ranging from neo-gothic to nothing, shifting 
throughout corridors, stairs, gloomy, industrial chill-out areas and towering 
concrete pillars, constantly flowing, constantly cruising the venue. The 
physicality can be quite overwhelming at first; the interior architecture 
sporadically prompting you to stop dancing and reabsorb your surroundings.

One long-time regular I run into there is Luis-Manuel Garcia 
<http://theluisgarcia.com/>, an ethnomusicologist and writer who has a focus on 
the social dynamics of Berlin’s techno scene and spends so much time in 
Berghain he justifiably considers Panorama Bar an extension of his living room. 
It’s well worth reading hiscomprehensive Resident Advisor piece 
<https://www.residentadvisor.net/features/1927>: “An alternate history of 
sexuality in club culture”. Wearing a tie-dye T-shirt, lights glinting off his 
pierced ears, Garcia tells me how Berghain has helped set the tone for clubs 
across the city over the last decade, something he calls the “Berghain-era”.

“It’s set a tone where being gay-friendly or pretty explicitly queer oriented 
is the benchmark of what’s desirable, the kind of clubs people want to go to,” 
he says. “This latest generation in Berlin is led by that.”

Garcia points to practices like the club’s no photo policy, which you can now 
expect to find at most clubs in the city, and beyond, such asDe School 
<http://www.deschoolamsterdam.nl/en/> in Amsterdam (and Trouw 
<http://www.trouwamsterdam.nl/> before it). Clubbers don’t need to worry about 
there being a record of their time there, allowing you to explore your identity 
or adopt a different one altogether without fear of anyone taking you up on it 
on the outside. “It allows a lot more fluidity,” says Garcia. “There’s no 
documenting if you end up down in the darkroom, or even if a gay guy gets with 
a girl. This is a space for sexual exploration for people.”

Clubs in Berlin have had to strike a balance between visibility and protecting 
and maintaining their core crowds
Luis-Manuel Garcia, ethnomusicologist 
It’s important to recognise this when considering club door policies. As 
Garcia puts it, Berlin is probably the only city where six foot girls in heels 
and short skirts walk straight to the front and get rejected. “Clubs in Berlin 
have had to strike a balance between visibility and protecting and maintaining 
their core crowds,” he says. “Door policy is the most visible way they do this. 
It’s a blunt instrument, but I think their miss rate is still very low.”

In fact leaving a Berlin club is far harder than getting into one. It’s so 
easy to get immersed in the spaces, the sounds and the crowd, and if ever there 
was a crowd that knows how to roll it’s this one. With parties regularly 
running for days it’s impossible to know when to draw the line, though, as one 
prominent DJ and producer who’s based there points out, while Berlin has become 
a “playground” for middle class visitors, it’s important to note that the long 
running hours are tied into the city’s combination of low living costs and high 
unemployment: “People can stay out until Monday or Tuesday because they don’t 
have a job,” he told me.

Still, the hands-off attitude to partying is undoubtedly rooted in the city’s 
political spirit, and it’s hard to imagine a Berliner tolerating the scrutiny 
clubbers get from security in many clubs elsewhere. I spoke to one Berliner who 
couldn’t understand how clubs in London only stay open till 5 or 6am. As she 
put it, scrunching her face up in the process: “I don’t want to go out and 
party with someone telling me what I can do and when I have to go home.”

Which is definitely something to think about when you’re cycling back to your 
apartment at 9am on a Monday morning, having started your night on Saturday.












 