
Nikolaus Harnoncourt, who has died aged 86, was one of the most innovative and 
influential conductors of the second half of the 20th century, bringing the 
scholarship and sensibility of historical performance to the mainstream 
repertoire with sometimes controversial, but always illuminating results.

With the Concentus Musicus of Vienna <http://www.harnoncourt.info/en/>, an 
ensemble he formed in the early 1950s, he recorded, in collaboration with his 
friendGustav Leonhardt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/17/gustav-leonhardt>, the complete 
sacred cantatas of JS Bach and continued to work with the group in later years. 
But he also began to operate with modern instrumental ensembles, notably the
Chamber Orchestra of Europe <http://www.coeurope.org/>and the Concertgebouw 
<http://www.concertgebouw.nl/en/> Orchestra of Amsterdam and, later, the Berlin 
and Vienna Philharmonics, in classical and Romantic repertoire. Performances of 
Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms and Dvořák, among others, were distinguished by their 
bracingly astringent qualities. While some found such readings mannered and 
idiosyncratic, others relished their freshness and vigour. He made more than 
500 recordings.

Born in Berlin into a noble family and brought up in Graz, Austria, 
Harnoncourt was descended from various Holy Roman emperors and other European 
royalty. His father, Eberhard de la Fontaine Graf d’Harnoncourt-Unverzagt, was 
an engineer and civil servant, and his mother, Ladislaja Gräfin von Meran, 
Freiin von Brandhoven, was the granddaughter of the Habsburg Archduke John 
(1782-1859). Harnoncourt was a cello pupil of Paul Grümmer and of Emanuel 
Brabec at the Vienna Music Academy. He also played the viola da gamba.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBvVvVwkaVHw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBvVvVwkaVHw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBvVvVwkaVHw&media=>
 Nikolaus Harnoncourt conducting Mozart’s Symphony No 39 in E flat 
In 1952 he joined the Vienna Symphony Orchestra as a cellist, and although he 
remained with the orchestra until 1969, he reacted strongly against both the 
military precision of conductors such as George Szell and the undifferentiated 
approach to early music then prevalent. Handel was played much like Brahms, he 
later said, and the result was “an unsorted blend of geniality, 19th-century 
tradition and ignorance”.

Within a year of joining the orchestra he formed a group of like-minded 
players, among them the violinist Alice Hoffelner, who led the ensemble and 
whom he married in 1953, to explore the use of original instruments and 
historically informed techniques in baroque music.

The Concentus Musicus of Vienna gave no concerts for the first five years, but 
following a series of 12 public concerts in Vienna, record companies such as 
Telefunken, Vanguard and Deutsche Grammophon began to take notice. The first 
recording, in 1962, was of Purcell’s Fantasias for viols, after which came 
well-received recordings of Bach’s Brandenburg Concertos and Orchestral Suites 
(directed by Harnoncourt from the principal cello desk) and then the major 
choral works of Bach – the St Matthew and St John Passions, Christmas Oratorio 
and B Minor Mass.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVr5cKdC3v3E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVr5cKdC3v3E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVr5cKdC3v3E&media=>
 Nikolaus Harnoncourt conducting JS Bach’s Magnificat in D major 
The Bach cantata project with Leonhardt (1971–1990) was a landmark in the 
recording catalogue, notable for its pioneering historical research – 
Harnoncourt was publishing books and articles at this period and went on to 
hold academic chairs in Salzburg at both the university and the Mozarteum, 
where he was professor of performance practice. It was also exceptional in 
replacing female voices with those of unbroken trebles, even in the solo 
movements.

The other notable achievement with the Concentus Musicus was the recording of 
Monteverdi’s three surviving operas: Orfeo, Il Ritorno d’Ulisse and 
L’Incoronazione di Poppea. To these recordings, as to the highly acclaimed 
stage performances he conducted in Zurich (1975-79), he brought an austere but 
stylish and well-paced approach. Those qualities also characterised also his 
readings of classical and romantic repertoire which he began to undertake with 
leading modern-instrument orchestras in the ensuing decades. A set of Beethoven 
symphonies with the Chamber Orchestra of Europe on modern instruments sold 
spectacularly well and led to further offers, including a lifetime contract 
with Teldec, a belated Salzburg debut (1992) and New Year’s Day concerts with 
the Vienna Philharmonic (2001 and 2003).

The brisk tempi and primitive percussion effects in his 1988 Don Giovanni with 
the Royal Concertgebouw verged on the abrasive: they did not make for 
comfortable listening, but were not intended to. The unsentimental, 
non-reverential Così fan Tutte (1991), also with the Concertgebouw, was equally 
challenging, even alienating to some. The sharply etched phrasing and vigorous, 
sometimes explosive, articulation had their roots in Harnoncourt’s historical 
approach to baroque music, and although the results could be alarming, they 
were clearly the product of meticulous scholarly research and intellectual 
inquiry, and contrary to a criticism often voiced, these readings were by no 
means devoid of sensuality.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLEyBKjo5Fvc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLEyBKjo5Fvc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLEyBKjo5Fvc&media=>
 Nikolaus Harnoncourt conducting part of the finale of Brahms’ Symphony No 1 in 
C minor 
In tackling Brahms too, Harnoncourt returned to the autograph scores and early 
printed editions bearing Brahms’s corrections, the better to understand 
performance practice in the composer’s own era. His recordings of the 
symphonies, overtures and Variations on a Theme by Haydn with the Berlin 
Philharmonic are characterised by lively phrasing and austere textures that are 
nevertheless shot through with light and colour. Ever alert to historical 
continuities, he pointed up traces of Purcell in the Haydn variations, in 
Gabrieli (in the second movement of the 4th Symphony), and in the minuets that 
form the basis of the first and third movements of the Symphony No 2.

A production of Aida (Zurich, 1997), subsequently recorded, was not generally 
considered a success. Casting lighter voices than usual in the principal roles 
and stressing the importance of Verdi’s pianissimos, Harnoncourt raised 
worthwhile issues about Verdi’s performance practice, but good intentions were 
undermined by ponderous tempi and stiff phrasing.

There were ventures into the 20th century too, with Bartók and Berg featuring 
in his repertoire. In an interview in 2012 forRadio 3’s Music Matters 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b01g4sbz>, Harnoncourt revealed not only that 
he would like to have recorded Berg’s Lulu but that had he had more time left 
to him he would have relished the challenge of Wagner, including Die 
Meistersinger von Nürnberg, which he would have approached in the spirit of 
Offenbach-style operetta. The latter was territory he inhabited very 
successfully, the minimal vibrato, measured tempi and taut rhythms of a Belle 
Hélène (Zurich, 1997, subsequently recorded) paying generous dividends in 
capturing the exhilaration of the score.

In 2009 he surprised many with a recording made in Graz in his 80th year of 
Gershwin’s Porgy and Bess.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdX4tmWLxGFM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdX4tmWLxGFM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdX4tmWLxGFM&media=>
 Nikolaus Harnoncourt rehearsing Beethoven’s Symphony No 5 in C minor 
Harnoncourt’s long career coincided with radical developments in the 
performance of music of all eras. During this period, early music became more 
established and the distinction between historical and mainstream gradually 
faded. Harnoncourt was at the centre of this transformation. His career also 
coincided with the demise of the conductor as feared tyrant. To the end of his 
life he remained fundamentally opposed to the cult of the autocratic conductor 
– the only man he acknowledged as “maestro” was his hairdresser, he joked. His 
rehearsal process was collegiate, with musicians as partners.

Appearances on the stage in London in the later years included a serene and 
moving performance of Beethoven’s Missa Solemnis in 2012. On that evening 
Harnoncourt was presented with the Royal Philharmonic Society’s gold medal, a 
fitting tribute to a lifetime devoted to stretching artistic boundaries. He 
retired officially from the stage on 5 December last year, cancelling future 
engagements because of declining health. His new Beethoven Symphonies No 4 and 
5, recorded live in Vienna with the Concentus Musicus, more than 60 years since 
its formation, were released to great acclaim last month.

One son, Eberhard, a violin-maker, died in 1990 in a road accident. He is 
survived by Alice, their sons Philipp and Franz, and daughter, the mezzo-soprano
Elisabeth von Magnus 
<http://www.elisabethvonmagnus.com/include.php?path=contents/english/biography.php>
.

• Nikolaus Harnoncourt (Count Nikolaus de la Fontaine und 
d’Harnoncourt-Unverzagt), cellist and conductor, born 6 December 1929; died 5 
March 2016
 