
The British arm of Japanese car maker Nissan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> increased annual profits last 
year ahead of warnings by senior executives that the Brexit vote could 
undermine its business and put investment plans in jeopardy.

Nissan’s British subsidiary, which is centred around its Sunderland car 
factory, reported a jump in pre-tax profits of 21% to £117m for the 12 months 
to the end of March.

The car maker sought and won assurances from Theresa May that the government 
would seek tariff-free access for the car industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/new-nissan-super-plant-hopes-for-tariff-free-eu-access>
 in talks with the European Union once article 50 talks begin next April.

But Greg Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/greg-clark>, the business 
secretary, has refused to give details of the meetings with Nissan boss Carlos 
Ghosn, sparking criticism that the company secured a “sweetheart deal”.

It is not known whether Nissan revealed “in talks with Clark” that, while its 
profits increased, revenues dropped by 1.4% to £5.19bn and production fell by 
3,000 vehicles to 478,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fnissan-reports-pre-brexit-profits-warns-against-leaving-single-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15201e443e8be8f9fead5eae7bc7954528aa58f5%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nissan's%20British%20arm%20saw%20profits%20rise%2021%25%20before%20EU%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fnissan-reports-pre-brexit-profits-warns-against-leaving-single-market%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nissan%27s%20British%20arm%20saw%20profits%20rise%2021%25%20before%20EU%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fnissan-reports-pre-brexit-profits-warns-against-leaving-single-market%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15201e443e8be8f9fead5eae7bc7954528aa58f5%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Nissan boss Carlos Ghosn secured a promise that the government would seek 
tariff-free access for the car industry. Photograph: Facundo Arrizabalaga/EPA 
Nissan said it had been “another year of very strong production for the 
Sunderland site”, which is due to build the new Qashqai and X-Trail models at 
the plant following the government’s assurances.

Nissan’s Sunderland site, which exports more than 80% of its production, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/29/nissan-uk-car-industry-brexit-lifeline-gm-hit-the-road>
 is Britain’s biggest car factory and the company has about 7,500 UK employees.


Like the rest of Britain’s car industry, Nissan has voiced concerns that 
quitting the EU’s single market will lead to higher tariffs on cars and 
crippling regulations that raise the cost of exporting its vehicles.

The company warned “any substantive change to the trading arrangements between 
the UK and the rest of the world could limit the company’s competitiveness”.

They also expressed concerns over higher employment costs, “which given the 
size of our workforce, could have an adverse effect on the company”.


The concerns come as Nissan, its parent company Renault and Mitsubishi Motors 
prepare to combine their electric vehicle investments in an effort to slash 
prices down to levels comparable to conventional gasoline cars, according to 
the Nikkei newspaper.


Auto giants Volkswagen and Toyota are also aiming to mass-produce battery 
electric vehicles amid tightening emissions and fuel-economy regulations around 
the world.

Renault <https://www.theguardian.com/business/renault> and Nissan have been 
among the most vocal proponents of the zero-emission technology but have 
struggled to lower costs enough as they developed their electric cars 
separately.

The Nikkei said Renault and Mitsubishi, which recently came under Nissan’s 
control, will use the same vehicle platform as Nissan’s remodelled Leaf 
electric car, which is expected to go on sale around 2018.

The three companies will share key components such as the motor, inverter and 
battery, a move that would lower the Leaf’s price by about a fifth, the paper 
said, without citing its sources.
 