
This blog is sometimes criticised for focusing too much on events in London. 
At risk of seeming more parochial still, I’m about to write about my ownLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> street. But stay with me: the failings 
in my part of SE5 contain lessons for the wider lack of safe cycling across the 
whole country.

Champion Hill, close to Camberwell in south-east London, is a classic rat run 
– a narrow and not-very-long residential street which has the misfortune to be 
on a shortcut between major routes, and is thus awash with traffic several 
times a day.


Virtually none of the cars, vans or trucks belong to locals or visitors, and 
virtually all of them ignore the supposed 20mph speed limit, despite regular 
speed bumps and road-narrowing pinch points.

The effect is corrosive. I’m a pretty experienced cyclist, but I hate riding 
there. Almost invariably it involves a driver pressing up close to your back 
wheel before trying to squeeze past before the next traffic island.

As a pedestrian things are little better. Parents taking their children to the 
local primary school generally have to stand in the road to physically block 
the rush-hour flow of vehicles so they can cross.


About 18 months ago it was announced that the street would form part of one of 
London’s planned “quietways” 
<https://consultations.tfl.gov.uk/cycling/lambeth-q7-wd/>, traffic-calmed 
backstreet cycle routes designed in particular for less experienced or less 
speedy riders. Aconsultation about blocking of 
<https://consultations.southwark.gov.uk/environment-leisure/quietway-cycling-route-in-champion-hill/supporting_documents/Champion%20Hill%20survey%20results%2011.pdf>
f one end of Champion Hill to motor traffic – thus reducing the number of 
vehicles by about 95% – showed it was popular with residents.

Then there was more than a year of silence from the local council, Southwark. 
Finally came the news that the plan had been dropped – Champion Hill would 
remain as it currently is, but would still form part of the proposed Quietway 7.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fno-room-for-bikes-how-one-street-shows-the-uk-wide-failure-over-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90fb05ccd2398dd1aa2bc7439e6d2a332b792bee%2F83_0_1693_1016%2F1693.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20room%20for%20bikes%3A%20how%20one%20street%20shows%20the%20UK-wide%20failure%20over%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fno-room-for-bikes-how-one-street-shows-the-uk-wide-failure-over-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20room%20for%20bikes%3A%20how%20one%20street%20shows%20the%20UK-wide%20failure%20over%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fno-room-for-bikes-how-one-street-shows-the-uk-wide-failure-over-cycling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90fb05ccd2398dd1aa2bc7439e6d2a332b792bee%2F83_0_1693_1016%2F1693.jpg>
 A Google Street View image of a pinch point on Champion Hill. Photograph: 
Google Street View 
The stated reason is that Transport for London <https://tfl.gov.uk/> (TfL), in 
charge of main roads in the capital, is worried that the knock-on effect of the 
closure would be to cause excessive delays on one of the adjoining roads (Dog 
Kennel Hill, for those who know the area), which is a busy bus route. This 
could cause queues of up to 250m at one junction at peak times, TfL modelling 
said, part of which adjoins a primary school.

So, case closed then? Many might say yes – more cycling is good, but not at 
the expense of delays for bus passengers and smog clouds outside schools. 
Cyclists can always take another route.

I’d say it’s more complicated than that. I’ve talked to a series of people 
connected to the decision, including Tfl, Matthew Hill, Southwark’s head of 
highways and Ian Smith, Hill’s boss as director of environment, and it seems to 
me that my home street is a fascinating if slightly depressing microcosm of the 
many, interconnected reasons why so little is done to get people cycling across 
the UK, and why this matters.

I should stress here that this isn’t meant as a direct criticism of Hill and 
Smith, who very patiently answered my questions and say that they are still 
trying to find a way to make the road closure work. But here’s my thoughts:

Quietways aren’t working

I’ve written about this before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2016/jun/14/lessons-from-londons-failing-quietways-scheme>
, so won’t re-hash the full argument, except to note that one of the routes,
Quietway 1 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2016/june/london-s-first-quietway-route-now-open>
, pictured at the top of the article, seems to be the exception. But the idea 
that Champion Hill, as it stands, is suitable for less experienced riders is 
ludicrous.

Hill and Smith concede this is an issue – using the road for a quietway 
without curbing traffic is “definitely not be perfect”, Hill said – but they 
argue it’s a necessary compromise. “Of the six or so miles of the quietway, 
most of that is going to be a lot safer,” Smith said.

I sympathise with their predicament, and you can legitimately argue that part 
of a quietway is better than none. But it’s also far from ideal. The only way 
you’ll tempt more than the die-hard enthusiasts on to bikes is by creating 
inter-connected, comprehensive networks of safe routes.

There is also the worry about labelling an unsafe road as part of a quietway. 
If you’re an inexperienced rider tempted on to Champion Hill by the signage it 
could be a nasty shock.

There is no “equal balance” between motor traffic and humans

Both Southwark officials stressed the need to balance the competing interests 
of various forms of traffic. Hill put it thus: “There’s this middle ground that 
we try to tread, that makes it better for cyclists but doesn’t absolutely 
finish it off in terms of motoring, so everybody can use that shared space 
properly.”

In one sense this is perfectly sensible – TfL do need to consider the impact 
of a cycling scheme on, for example, bus passengers. But to me, this misses one 
vital point: it is not an equal interaction.

For motor vehicles, the trade-off for closing a road such as Champion Hill can 
be the inconvenience of longer journeys. But the repercussions for cyclists and 
pedestrians of maintaining the status quo is more fundamental: over-dramatising 
it only slightly, their streets are taken from them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fno-room-for-bikes-how-one-street-shows-the-uk-wide-failure-over-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cadebabe82cfa9332646331c7cbe69976feb498%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20room%20for%20bikes%3A%20how%20one%20street%20shows%20the%20UK-wide%20failure%20over%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fno-room-for-bikes-how-one-street-shows-the-uk-wide-failure-over-cycling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20room%20for%20bikes%3A%20how%20one%20street%20shows%20the%20UK-wide%20failure%20over%20cycling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fno-room-for-bikes-how-one-street-shows-the-uk-wide-failure-over-cycling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cadebabe82cfa9332646331c7cbe69976feb498%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Not an equal interaction. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
The mass of rat-running vehicles means Champion Hill (and many thousands of 
similar streets across the country) are unnecessarily unpleasant and perilous 
for everyone who lives on them, and for all those not in a car. The great 
majority of people feel they simply don’t have the choice to ride a bike, and 
many also prefer to not walk.

Almost 60% of households in Southwark don’t own a car, census statistics show. 
This is a tyranny by a minority, and on streets like mine, a minority who live 
elsewhere. It’s not to say all schemes favouring bikes or pedestrians should 
get an automatic green light, only that it is anomalous to act as if a tonne of 
metal and unprotected flesh and blood can somehow interact on equal terms.

20mph zones are too often a bad joke 

Champion Hill, as with all roads in Southwark 
<http://www.southwark.gov.uk/info/100011/transport_and_streets/3431/borough_wide_20mph_speed_limit>
, has a 20mph speed limit. And as with just about every 20mph zone I’ve 
experienced, the vast majority of drivers go faster when traffic allows. Police 
enforcement does happen, but I cannot recall ever seeing it.

There is some evidence that 20mph zones do slightly reduce average speeds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/may/29/do-20mph-speed-limits-actually-work-london-brighton>
 overall. But I have two worries with them. The first is that if drivers see 
one rule being near-universally flouted without any apparent repercussions then 
they might take more chances elsewhere, for example dashing across just-changed 
red lights.

Also, they are too often used as a cheap, easy way for a council to say it is 
doing something for cyclists and pedestrians.

Smith highlighted Southwark’s borough-wide 20mph policy as a sign of its 
action. I asked him why no one seemed to obey them. He replied: “Speeding is a 
police matter, not a council matter. We’ve implemented the 20mph zone, and the 
police now do the radar checks where they can.”

He did stress that enforcement action is planned on streets with particularly 
bad speeding problems, but I remain unconvinced.

Street-by-street schemes won’t work 

Hill and Smith stressed that one problem with making Champion Hill access-only 
is that it would only shift the problem to adjoining streets. They have a 
point, though one which illustrates a wider and more fundamental malaise for 
cycling.

Among the more basic, if politically difficult, elements to tempting people on 
to bikes is to reduce the flow (and speed) of motor traffic on smaller roads, 
those too minor to require a separated bike lane. But this needs a 
comprehensive, neighbourhood-wide (or better still, city-wide) approach.

It can happen. The so-called “mini Holland” scheme 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/travel-information/improvements-and-projects/cycle-mini-hollands>
 in Walthamstow was introduced to the north-east London suburb amid great 
controversy, but now the programme of street closures and traffic reductionis 
seen as a success 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/mini-holland-scheme-in-walthamstow-hailed-as-major-success-as-traffic-falls-by-half-a3389936.html>
, and has seemingly reduced vehicle traffic across the wider area.

Smith agreed a scheme like this would be ideal to solve the Champion Hill 
conundrum, but added: “We just haven’t got the money to do that at the moment.”

Politicians are very good at providing coherent plans and funding for 
traditionally “big” projects like roads and rail. Too often they assume that 
because the actual engineering solutions associated with boosting bike use are 
generally modest, it can all be done in a piecemeal, half-hearted way. This 
isn’t the case.

This isn’t something that can wait 


Following on from the last point, I’d argue that the political will must go 
higher than borough or even city level. Making Britain’s towns and cities more 
geared towards human beings rather than speeding metal boxes is often billed as 
something of a luxury, to be fitted around the grown-up business of travel and 
freight.

But it’s not. Air pollution, to which vehicles contribute a significant 
amount, leads totens of thousands of early deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/nearly-9500-people-die-each-year-in-london-because-of-air-pollution-study>
 a year. If this toll was exacted by terrorism, I’d be surprised to see the 
government seek toendlessly delay taking any action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/10/action-to-combat-uk-air-pollution-crisis-delayed-again>
.

Ailments connected to sedentary living, meanwhile, kill even more people 
annually 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/health-matters-getting-every-adult-active-every-day/health-matters-getting-every-adult-active-every-day>
, and are threatening tobankrupt the NHS 
<http://www.nationalhealthexecutive.com/Health-Care-News/obesity-will-bankrupt-nhs-if-unchecked--stevens>
. Study after study has shown that just encouraging people to go to the gym 
doesn’t work. Activity needs to be integrated into everyday life, for example 
by cycling or walking.

The list goes on, not least studies which show a shift towards cycling from 
car use couldhelp greatly reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2015/dec/01/how-cycling-could-help-the-paris-climate-talks-change-the-world>
.


This might all be a long way from one London council making a decision about a 
single street, my street. But it’s all connected. And at the moment, it’s just 
not happening.
 