
While Japanese families enjoy the Christmas Eve ritual of tucking into fried 
chicken <http://time.com/3642523/christmas-japan-kfc-iceland-italy/> and sponge 
cake, millions of love-struck, or simply lustful, couples will discreetly 
observe another festive tradition with a visit to a love hotel.


They will enter a dimly lit lobby and, after a brief discussion, select a room 
with the push of a button. Then, for just a few thousand yen ($25-30) – handed 
to an unseen receptionist – they will be free to make the most of their 
fleeting moment of privacy. As soon as they leave, a team of cleaners will 
prepare the room for the next occupants.

For Japan’s ‘stranded singles’, virtual love beats the real thing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/japan-stranded-singles-virtual-love>
But Japan’s love hotels are suffering from a downturn in demand from amorous 
couples. Instead, they are pinning their hopes of long-term survival on a surge 
in the number of Chinese tourists that is stretching the traditional hotel 
industry to breaking point.


The backstreets of Tokyo’s Dogenzaka – nicknamed Love Hotel Hill – are quiet 
early on a weekday evening. But on Saturday, rooms at hotels with names like 
Amore, Elegance and Asian Resort will be at a premium as the industry cashes in 
on its busiest day of the year.

From huge, faux castles strategically located at motorway intersections to 
scruffy ferroconcrete boxes in the suburbs, love hotels offer not just privacy 
and anonymity, but an array of esoteric extras for couples hoping to spice up 
their love life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fno-sex-please-were-japanese-love-hotels-clean-up-their-act-amid-falling-demand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67b7c88f753faeb52cf2afce89a6a06a08f1be24%2F0_0_2446_3261%2F2446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20sex%20please%2C%20we're%20Japanese%3A%20love%20hotels%20clean%20up%20their%20act%20amid%20falling%20demand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fno-sex-please-were-japanese-love-hotels-clean-up-their-act-amid-falling-demand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20sex%20please%2C%20we%27re%20Japanese%3A%20love%20hotels%20clean%20up%20their%20act%20amid%20falling%20demand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fno-sex-please-were-japanese-love-hotels-clean-up-their-act-amid-falling-demand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67b7c88f753faeb52cf2afce89a6a06a08f1be24%2F0_0_2446_3261%2F2446.jpg>
 Love Hotel Hill in Tokyo is geared up for the busiest time of year, but demand 
is falling as more young couples live away from home. Photograph: Justin 
McCurry for the Guardian 
If mirrored ceilings and vending machines selling sex toys are not their 
thing, guests can opt for “concept rooms” that re-create everything from the 
inside of an aircraft to tropical holiday resorts.

An estimated 1.4 million Japanese visit a love hotel every day, with rooms 
used by an average of 2.4 couples daily. Although there are no official data, 
analysts believe the industry is worth between 2-3 trillion yen ($17-25bn) a 
year.

Yet these are uncertain times for love hotels, so named after the first of 
their kind – Hotel Love – opened in Osaka in the late 1960s. The rise of single 
households and adecline in the population of 20-29 year olds 
<http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/jinsui/tsuki/index.htm> – their target 
demographic – means there is less call for the role love hotels once played as 
an escape from extended families living under one roof.

“The love hotel business is going through a difficult time,” said Shigemi 
Sudo, director of the Tokyo Hotel and Ryokan (Inn) Association. “This is 
probably because more young people live away from their family home these days, 
so there’s no need for them to go to a love hotel.”

Helped by government subsidies, more love hotels are renovating their 
facilities to appeal to overseas visitors who may not want a room with a 
revolving bed and fluffy handcuffs.

A record 20 million tourists visited Japan 
<http://www.asahi.com/ajw/articles/AJ201610310055.html> this year, thanks to a 
weaker yen and groups of visitors from China, who make up just under a third of 
the total. Having reached that milestone four years ahead of schedule, the 
government has set an ambitious target of 40 million by the time Tokyo hosts 
the Olympics in 2020.

With international and tourists hotels unable to cope with demand, the 
accommodation gap is being filled by capsule hotels, backpackers’ hostels,Airbnb
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> – and love hotels.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fno-sex-please-were-japanese-love-hotels-clean-up-their-act-amid-falling-demand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbad6920e058d7364cf912fefac6610028e1a1d92%2F0_0_5603_3908%2F5603.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%20sex%20please%2C%20we're%20Japanese%3A%20love%20hotels%20clean%20up%20their%20act%20amid%20falling%20demand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fno-sex-please-were-japanese-love-hotels-clean-up-their-act-amid-falling-demand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%20sex%20please%2C%20we%27re%20Japanese%3A%20love%20hotels%20clean%20up%20their%20act%20amid%20falling%20demand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fno-sex-please-were-japanese-love-hotels-clean-up-their-act-amid-falling-demand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbad6920e058d7364cf912fefac6610028e1a1d92%2F0_0_5603_3908%2F5603.jpg>
 A selection of rooms available at The Rock Kowloon Walled City in Iruma, 
suburban Tokyo where couples can play ‘doctors and nurses’ to grottos where it 
is permanently Christmas. Photograph: Yoshikazu Tsuno/AFP/Getty Images 
Eager to rid themselves of their association with purely carnal desires, some 
advertise themselves as boutique hotels or “urban resorts”. The number of 
hotels with an overtly sexual theme has dwindled to around 6,000 due to falling 
domestic demand and a 1985 law that required the industry to present a more 
wholesome image.

Dimly lit receptions have been replaced with cafeterias; in the rooms, tacky 
décor and vending machines selling sex toys have made way for bright colours 
and designer cosmetics.

Hotel Will in Saitama prefecture, for example, has retained its garish neon 
sign outside, but inside the pink wallpaper has been replaced with plain white, 
and the double beds with singles. A widescreen TV and refrigerator now take up 
space once occupied by huge mirrors. Only the well-appointed bathroom has been 
left untouched.

The hotel is packed with Chinese tourists, thanks to a contract with a Chinese 
travel agency giving it exclusive use for its clients.

“Many tourists don’t think love hotels are seedy at all,” said Mark Schreiber, 
a veteran writer on Japan’s sex industry. “Operators spend a fortune on 
fixtures, which are different in each room. One might be done out art 
deco-style, and the room next store might have a Renaissance theme.”

Hotel operator Manryo has turned three love hotels in Tokyo’s Asakusa district 
hotels into backpackers’ hostels by adding a bar and lounge. “It just so 
happened the love hotels became available to us after they got into financial 
difficulties,” said Manryo spokeswoman Erika Yamato.

Almex, meanwhile, advertises love hotel rooms to tourists via loveinnjapan.com 
<https://loveinnjapan.com/>. The English-language site includes a manga guide 
for first-time guests, and there are plans to launch versions in Korean and 
Chinese.

In pictures: Tokyo love hotels
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2007/nov/01/tokyo.love.hotels> 
“Tourists are starting to use love hotels because regular hotels are fully 
booked, or sometimes just because they’ve heard that they are fun places to 
stay,” an Almex spokesman said.

Rooms that can be rented for a few hours at a time have been around in Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> since the Edo period (1603-1868). The 
first modern love hotels appeared in the 1960s to cater to couples desperate to 
escape their extended families, who traditionally lived under one roof, for a 
few hours of intimacy.

An Osaka-based association of small and medium-sized hotel operators believes 
love hotels can provide accommodation for an additional 28 million overnight 
guests a year, according to the Asahi Shimbun.

“Foreign tourists generally come away from their first stay at a love with a 
positive impression, and guidebooks all describe them as luxurious, clean and 
spacious,” said Schreiber. “And you get all of that for much less than a night 
at the Hilton.”
 