
Five years ago, after the phone-hacking revelations, the House of Commons 
unanimously rejected Rupert Murdoch’s bid for 100% of Sky. A year later, Sky 
was only passed by Ofcom as being fit and proper to hold a communications 
licence on the basis that there was not full Murdoch ownership and control. 
Today, the Murdochs want to turn the view of parliament and the regulator on 
its head.But what’s really changed? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/from-launch-to-takeover-rupert-murdoch-and-sky>

Murdoch’s Sky deal must be blocked, say senior opposition figures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/17/murdochs-sky-deal-blocked-miliband-cable-james-murdoch-media-empire>
The bid by 21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/rupert-murdochs-fox-agrees-deal-to-buy-sky>
 on behalf of the Murdochs to take over the 61% of Sky that they do not own may 
well satisfy the private interests of a majority of shareholders and the top 
managers of Sky (the chief executive could pocket more than £20m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/11/sky-executives-share-bonanza-rupert-murdoch-21st-century-fox-buyout>
), but there is a wider public interest. This bid goes to the heart of who 
wields influence in our media and who is fit to do so. The public interest 
centres on plurality and fitness. These concerns are arguably stronger after 
what emerged from the Leveson inquiry and subsequent action in the courts. The 
Murdochs have the largest circulation share of any newspaper group (just under 
30% weekday and over a third on Sunday); and with full control of Sky, just 
under 20% of the TV news market; and around 45% of radio audience through Sky’s 
supply of news content to commercial radio. And these figures may understate 
the Murdochs’ influence over news because of their sheer purchasing power for 
the best journalistic talent and the way the entire broadcast news agenda is 
influenced by their newspapers.

The other public interest concern has been that the excellence and 
independence of Sky’s news coverage could be compromised by an activist 
majority owner with a strong political agenda, via editorial appointments, if 
not day-to-day interference. The Murdochs may claim that editorial independence 
could be guaranteed by ringfencing Sky News, and impartiality protected by 
Ofcom, but the answer to this and the deeper questions at the heart of this bid 
depend on trust and the conduct of the Murdoch organisation and family does not 
inspire trust.

The Ofcom report in September 2012 was withering about James Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/apr/03/james-murdoch-step-down-bskyb-chairman>
. It said his behaviour was “difficult to comprehend and ill-judged” and that 
it repeatedly “fell short of the exercise of his responsibility to be expected 
of him as CEO and chairman [of News International]”. It goes on to say his 
behaviour “raise questions regarding [his] competence in the handling of these 
matters and his attitude towards wrongdoing in the companies for which he was 
responsible”.

The criticism fell just short of debarring Sky as unfit and improper. But the 
report made it clear that its assessment was based on the Murdochs being a 
minority shareholder, with a counterweight from “other directors or 
shareholders” and thatJames Murdoch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jamesmurdoch> was no longer chairman of Sky. 
The assessment was made pre-Leveson and made it clear that Ofcom’s assessment 
would be influenced by further evidence.

Four years on, the facts are these:

A number of senior employees from News International have been convicted of 
phone hacking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/11/phone-hacking-10-years-resignations-cover-ups-convictions>
 or perverting the course of justice. Police and other public officials have 
been convicted of taking payments from employees of News International. There 
are numerous civil claims pending, including fresh allegations against theSun, 
in which the role of James Murdoch in the alleged deletion of incriminating 
emails has been raised in evidence.

Part 2 of Leveson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/gordon-brown-delay-murdoch-sky-takeover-leveson-part-2>
, probing further the close relationships between media, politicians and 
police, and, specifically, “the extent of corporate governance and management 
failures at News International” in its terms of reference, has not yet 
commenced thanks to government foot-dragging. Is 100% ownership acceptable now 
when it was not four years ago? No. James Murdoch is back as chairman of Sky 
and is chief executive of 21st Century Fox. And there are crucial, and 
unanswered, issues around the culture and competence of what went on at 
Murdoch-owned newspapers which have not been satisfactorily resolved or 
answered. If it was inappropriate for the Murdochs to take 100% control of Sky 
before the multiple convictions of their former employees, it must be 
inappropriate now. Promises that might be made to the regulators that there 
will be a specified proportion of independent non-executive directors cannot 
overcome the reality of total ownership and control.

So what next? The obvious and proper step is for Ofcom to consider the 
plurality issues afresh and repeat an assessment of fitness. It is the 
responsibility of Karen Bradley, the culture secretary, to ensure that this 
happens. Even those who have an altogether more sanguine view of the Murdochs’ 
role in the media than we do will want to ensure that this government 
demonstrates its freedom from influence.

Concentrations of power – and whether we stand up to them – decide the kind of 
country we are. That’s what we said across political parties five years ago. 
That’s what Theresa May said on the steps of Downing Street when she became 
prime minister. Now it is for the government and the regulator to follow the 
logic, evidence and facts, irrespective of the power and desires of the Murdoch 
empire.
 