
"Is it interesting? Does it tell us something about Shakespeare? Does it tell 
us something about us?" These proposed litmus tests for good classical theatre 
appeared in acomment by a reader called Shiv 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/15154022> yesterday 
underneathLyn Gardner's blog calling on the Royal Shakespeare Company to get 
with the times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2012/mar/14/shakespearean-tragedy-rsc-bard-boring>
. In many ways, this forms the central dilemma of classical theatre: fidelity 
versus interpretation, being faithful to the text versus bringing it to life 
for new audiences.

It's a truism to say theatre happens in the here and now. Yet some of its raw 
materials – mostly, but not always, texts – are rooted in the there and then. 
Relating this to the above checklist, the question becomes whether a piece of 
classical theatre needs to tick all of Shiv's three boxes. The first, it's fair 
to say, is pretty much non-negotiable, but what of the other two? While they're 
not mutually exclusive, they're not necessarily conducive to one another, 
either.

Step forward Australian blogger Jana Perkovic, who grapples with these 
questions in her recent long-formreview of Simon Stone's Belvoir production of 
The Wild Duck 
<http://guerrillasemiotics.com/2012/03/the-wild-duck-the-slapified-ibsen-reviewessay/>
. By way of background, Stone "often explains his role as a sort of evangelist, 
a priest of classical prophets", and here he and Chris Ryan have created an 
almost entirely new text "after Ibsen", set in the 21st century and combining 
contemporary Australia with the playwright's Nordic setting.

Alison Croggon 
<http://theatrenotes.blogspot.com.au/2011/03/review-wild-duck.html> has 
previously come out in favour of the production, but Perkovic accuses it of 
merely translating Ibsen's original into a reductive contemporary counterpart. 
"The play has been modernised; specifically, Australianized." The end result, 
she says, is not dissimilar to new writing, but it's not really Ibsen: "No 
theatrical interpretation ever tried to make its text anything other than 
relevant to its time and place: modernization cannot be the sole aim of an 
interpretation. That is very much confusing the bathwater for the baby."

So what is interpretation? Perkovic argues that it involves mixing 
modernisation with preservation. More than brushing off the accumulated dust, 
but less than total reconfiguration. But interpretation is also about personal 
perception, even manipulation. "Every interpretation makes choices of focus," 
she argues, "but each good one broadens or depends or refocuses our view, and 
enriches our experience of the original in some way."

However, to lay down prescriptive laws about what classical theatre needs to 
be is to limit what it might be. That point gets picked up byDerek Kolluri at 
2AM Theatre 
<http://www.2amtheatre.com/2012/03/07/correlation-biodiversity-and-theatre/>. 
Kolluri sets out his stall against those that argue the primacy of one type of 
theatre over others: "The fact is the more kinds of theatre there are the 
better it is for all of us … You don't have to like a form of theatre in order 
for it to be important in a community. If you're writing off a form you are 
writing off the audience members that are moved by that form." Kolluri's 
statement has fairly major implications for theatre criticism, suggesting 
critics should put aside personal tastes and judge a production as if they were 
fans of its particular style, perhaps even particular artistic personnel.

I'm not sure that leads to good criticism, but it might be generous criticism. 
And, on that note, if you want to know which critic is better at doling out 
stars – at least when it comes to a head-to-head between the Guardian's own Lyn 
Gardner and Michael Billington –Mark Cartwright is working out the answer 
<http://markcartwright.co.uk/2012/03/which-guardian-critic-gives-the-higher-star-ratings/>
 with statistics (albeit somewhat unscientifically, because they're seeing 
different shows). So who's nicer? You'll have to click to find out …
 