
The Norwegian government has issued a last-minute reprieve for 32 of the 47 
wolves that had beenearmarked for a cull to protect sheep flocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/16/norway-wolf-cull-government-wwf-friends-earth-environment-protest>
.

The plans to kill two-thirds of the country’s wolves caused outrage among 
conservationists at home and abroad when they were announced by local predator 
management boards in September,with warnings the cull would be disastrous for 
the species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/16/norway-wolf-cull-government-wwf-friends-earth-environment-protest>
.

But on Tuesday Vidar Helgesen, minister of climate and the environment, 
refused to sanction the cull, saying lawyers at the justice ministry had 
concluded it would contravene domestic biodiversity legislation and the 
international Bern convention.

The laws state that culling of endangered predators – there are an estimated 
68 wolves inNorway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> – can only be 
granted if there is a satisfactorily documented risk of damage to livestock. 
This proved not to have been the case with 32 wolves from four packs in the 
county of Hedmark.

Norway plans to cull more than two-thirds of its wolf population
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/16/norway-wolf-cull-government-wwf-friends-earth-environment-protest>
The other 15 animals which will still be hunted are young lone wolves which 
range over greater distances and are more prone to killing livestock, and 
environmental groups have not objected to these being culled.

“This is a great day and the best Christmas present you could wish for,” said 
Nina Jensen of WWF Norway. “At last the government has shown that Norwegian 
wolves also have protection in law. It is a protected species that is 
critically endangered and has a natural place in Norwegian fauna.”

Today’s pardon for the 32 wolves caused surprise among both the conservation 
and hunting lobbies, as the government had been expected to support the cull. 
More than 300 hunters who were cooperating with the police and the county 
governor to prepare for the hunt, due to start on 2 January, now have to put 
away their guns.

“This was a surprising decision based on odd reasoning,” said Arnfinn Nergård, 
director of the predator management board in Hedmark county.

The framework for predator management has been set by parliament, with local 
predator management boards setting hunting and culling quotas when population 
targets have been achieved. The final decision for a cull, however, is given by 
the government.

The rejection of sanctioned culls, coupled with continuing rural community 
concerns over wolves, has raised the prospect of illegal poaching.


Nergård declined to comment on the possibility of poaching, but said the wolf 
population has recovered considerably after six local poachers were imprisoned 
in an unprecedented case two years ago. “This may suggest that extensive 
poaching was taking place,” he conceded.

Norway's wolf cull pits sheep farmers against conservationists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/23/norways-wolf-cull-pits-sheep-farmers-against-conservationists>
Environmental groups attribute their victory not only to the wolf’s iconic 
status, but also to more than 70,000 Norwegians who signed a petition 
protesting against the proposed culling. Helgesen received close to 7,000 
emails in both Norwegian and English, and the story made headlines aroundEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

“It proves that pressure from environmental groups and public opinion 
matters,” said Silje Ask Lundberg of Friends of the Earth Norway. “Predator 
management in Norway has not always been based on sound knowledge. The Berne 
convention clearly states that endangered predators can only be culled if the 
individuals have been proven to cause extensive damage.

“That has not been the case with these wolves who over a period of six years 
have only been documented to kill 10 sheep, and that was due to a hole in a 
fence.”
 