
Stan Wawrinka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka>, the 
French Open champion and owner of his first home title after beating Marin 
Cilic in Geneva on Saturday, should be striding into Roland Garros bursting 
with pride and confidence, but gardeners have made louder entrances here than 
did the Swiss on a rainy Sunday afternoon.

All the talk has again been about the supposedly invincible Novak Djokovic, 
whomWawrinka blew off the court in last year’s final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/french-open-2015-stanislas-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-win>
, the revival of the nine-time king of Paris Rafael Nadal, the quiet Caledonian 
charge of Andy Murray – and the absence of Wawrinka’s compatriot, Roger Federer.

Wawrinka arrived in Paris on Saturday yet, because of the immovable structure 
of the draw, will be rushed into the first round on Monday against Lukas Rosol 
– something the tournament organisers might not have asked Federer or Nadal to 
do. They could have let their champion start on Tuesday, but he would have had 
to back up on Wednesday. And he immediately hit the self-deprecation button. 
“Novak is the main favourite,” he said. “It was the case last year as well. I 
think, to beat him, it’s going to be very difficult, and then there is Murray 
and Nadal on an equal footing, and I’m just after them … just after.”

Murray also starts on Monday , against a familiar foe in Radek Stepanek. In 
only his second match at Wimbledon, in 2005,the 18-year-old Scot won in 
straight sets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/jun/23/wimbledon2005.wimbledon12> 
against the combative Czech, who had been on the Tour for nearly a decade. And 
here is back at 37, a survivor of neck surgery four years ago and three 
qualifying matches to get into the main draw.

Stepanek, who has done more in doubles in recent years, took a set off the 
world No2 in Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/03/andy-murray-radek-stepanek-madrid-open>
 recently but Murray, who has been in blinding form on clay, should have way 
too much for him.

Three British men are in the tournament, but Aljaz Bedene and Kyle Edmund are 
not making much noise. Edmund, who is carrying an ankle strain, was due to 
start against the Georgian Nikoloz Basilashvili on Sunday evening before rain 
washed out the back end of the programme, and Bedene sounds unusually tentative 
going into his third campaign.

Weighed down by psychosomatic baggage from his four-year attempt to play Davis 
Cup tennis for Great Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/23/aljaz-bedene-davis-cup-great-britain>
, he said before Tuesday’s against his friend Gerald Melzer: “The body is great 
but the head not the best. I’m mentally struggling a little.”

It is only two months since Bedene had to quit during a second-round match 
against Roberto Bautista Agut after playing through the pain of an injured 
right wrist. His fitness will be properly tested here – and he looked woefully 
out of sorts during practice with Edmund on Saturday. “I’m not winning much,” 
Bedene said. “I’m playing well but confidence is not there. I’m keeping up the 
hard work just hoping it will come. Hopefully this will be the week.”

His match against the Austrian qualifier might be a welcome distraction, so 
severe is the stress of trying to convince the InternationalTennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Federation that he should be able to 
play for his adopted country. While he says he is fully fit, Bedene said the 
case has preyed so heavily on his mind that his body started to break down.

“It was a mental thing. All the disappointment, I felt it not only in my wrist 
but everywhere. It wasn’t easy. When you can’t sleep, when you’re worried about 
something as important as this, everything comes to the body, especially with 
me. In Miami I had to retire. I don’t like to retire, but it was difficult.”

He also quit in the third set of his match against Sam Querrey in Auckland 
during January, and, whatever his upbeat view of it, the bare words do not 
properly reflect his hangdog demeanour.

“Confidence is the issue now and it has a lot to do with this thing,” he says. 
“I think I will be confident in a few weeks because I am playing well.”

Whatever the rights and wrongs of his case, rarely can someone have tried so 
hard to wrap himself in the flag for so little result. He has the support of 
Andy Murray, the Great Britain captain Leon Smith, and Stephen Farrow, who has 
led his legal appeal with the financial backing of the Lawn Tennis Association. 
Bedene, raised in Slovenia but a British passport holder since March last year 
after living in Welwyn Garden City for nearly nine years, does not want for 
friends.

Nick Kyrgios through in straight sets after umpire altercation at French Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/22/nick-kyrgios-through-in-straight-sets-after-umpire-altercation-at-french-open>
None of them, however, seem to be in the ITF, where redrafted rules appear to 
disbar him from qualifying as a British player because he has played Davis Cup 
for Slovenia.

Bedene, meanwhile, tries to get on with his career and his life. “I stopped 
with my coach, James Davidson, after Miami. Leon has been helping me this week 
and in Rome a little bit. We will see what is going to happen after Wimbledon, 
but until then I have the LTA’s help and Leon is there with me.”
 