
Novak Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> made an 
immense statement in his bid to rule men’s tennis again when he defeated Andy 
Murray, the man who deposed him as world No1, 6-3, 5-7, 6-4, in an epic Qatar 
Open final in Doha.

Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to win the Qatar Open – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/07/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-qatar-open-final-live>
Looking back to near his peerless best at times in a game of searing quality, 
the Serb let three match points slip and had to repel a roaring Murray comeback 
before ending the Briton’s 28-match, five-tournament winning streak.

Murray has still never beaten Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/06/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-final-qatar-open>
 when losing the first set. In their first meeting since Murray won their 
season-ending climax at the ATP World Tour finals in November, the Briton ran 
into a rejuvenated Djokovic who, despite having problems with his racket hand 
and receiving two warnings for his behaviour, prevailed thrillingly in their 
36th contest.

It was a perfect tonic for the world No2 in his buildup to the defence of his 
Australian Open title in Melbourne this month and provided food for thought for 
Murray, who lost for the 25th time against his old rival.

Murray, who lost a competitive match for the first time since September, said: 
“It was a tough one to lose, but a great way to start the year. I think it was 
high-level tennis. Some of the points were physically tough, but a great way to 
start the new year playing like that, and I look forward to the next few weeks. 
I’ve had a fantastic week here, I’ve really enjoyed it.”

Djokovic said: “Definitely one of the best ways to start the year. After 
saving five match points and winning yesterday’s semi-final, I had three or 
four match points in the second set. He turned it around, and I thought: ‘Wow, 
I hope this is not payback time.’

“All the way to the last shot you never know with Andy so it’s no strange 
occurrence for both of us to play three sets for three hours. It’s a very 
physical battle, we’re both going to need a little bit of time to recover from 
that and get ready for Melbourne.”
 