
Whatever Novak Djokovic’s protestations to the contrary, the prevailing 
sentiment around Flushing Meadows, supported by the visual evidence, is the 
defending champion is less than fully fit as he reaches for his third US Open 
title againstStan Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka> on Sunday.

“It’s behind me,” Djokovic said on Friday night of his collection of medical 
woes – left wrist, right elbow, both shoulders – “so I don’t have any concerns.”

If that is not so, if those suspicions are given life on what is expected to 
be another humid and draining afternoon and Djokovic collapsesagainst one of 
the strongest men in tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/stan-wawrinka-to-face-djokovic-in-us-open-final-after-win-over-kei-nishikori>
, it might not only reduce the showpiece event to farce, but will draw into 
sharp focus an important underlying theme of this final slam of the season.

If it goes longer than three sets, there will probably be moments when the 
trainer appears – and more than likely for the right reasons. Modern tennis is 
one of the most demanding sports on the planet. But the rules need tightening. 
If the final is to be both a test of will and talent, each contestant must 
answer the same questions according to the same rules, and there are too many 
grey areas at the moment to be sure that is always the case. In anenvironment 
of suffering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/09/novak-djokovic-gael-monfils-us-open-mens-tennis-live>
, it is natural to give someone the benefit of the doubt.

Novak Djokovic defeats Gaël Monfils to make US Open final – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/sep/09/novak-djokovic-gael-monfils-us-open-mens-tennis-live>
For most of the fortnight, too many players have struggled to stay upright 
long enough to compete on level terms. Djokovic himself has been the 
beneficiary of a veritable train-crash of a walkover and two retirements – Jiri 
Vesely (whose arm injury prevented him playing at all), Mikhail Youzhny 
(hamstring)and Jo-Wilfried Tsonga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/novak-djokovic-into-us-open-semi-finals-after-jo-wilfried-tsonga-retires>
 (knee) – all the while guarding his own frailties in the most unexpectedly 
benign circumstances.

No other player in the Open era has reached the semi-finals of a grand slam 
tournament like this – giving up 40 games in six matches, with two of them 
unfinished. Along the way, Djokovic has had to cope with his own minor hiccups 
and, as is his right, he has used the rules to help him.

He was cruising against Kyle Edmund in the fourth round until broken in the 
third set, and immediately called for the trainer, who massaged his right 
elbow. Djokovic recovered quickly and won in style.

In his weird semi-final against Monfils, again Djokovic was in command, albeit 
struggling briefly to cope with the Frenchman’s eccentricities in the first 
set, until his shoulders gave up on him: first the right, then the left. Each 
time he benefited from the rest and recovered steadily from a break of service 
to complete the win.

Yet he maintained in both incidents that there was no problem, that he was 
physically OK and he would be in good condition for his next match. There was 
nothing underhand about this, but the denials didn’t seem to fit the picture. 
If Djokovic was fit, why call for the trainer?

Medical assistance in a tennis match, either the longer version where a player 
can leave the battle, or on court during changeovers or breaks in play, should 
be for a problem that needs treating, not to help a player “reset”, to use the 
locker-room jargon.

Others have had contrasting experiences at this tournament. When Dan Evans 
asked for a medical time-out at a stressful momenttowards the end of his epic 
struggle with Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/03/dan-evans-stan-wawrinka-us-open-tennis-match-report>
 in the third round, the tournament physio refused because he thought he was 
“cramping”. The rules forbid extended treatment for “loss of condition”. Evans 
insisted he had a problem with foot pain. It was, he conceded later, a 
pre-existing condition but it had become worse during the match. He felt hard 
done by, with some justification.

As the 1987 Wimbledon champion, Pat Cash, pointed out with exquisite timing on 
his ever-interesting blog on Friday, there are ways to finesse these 
situations. Players will complain of a minor injury, real or imagined, while 
actually getting relief from the physical rigour and mental strain of the 
match, often after being broken, as well. Perhaps reputation helps, sometimes.

Stanislas Wawrinka beats Novak Djokovic in men's French Open final – as it 
happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jun/07/novak-djokovic-stanislas-wawrinka-mens-french-open-final-live>
And so to the final: after a tricky semi-final and an otherwise relaxed 
progress through the card, Djokovic looks dangerous. The ball popped pleasingly 
off his racket against Monfils and he was moving again like the jaguar of the 
court he is, ready to pounce on the merest half-chance.

If it comes down to pure tennis, Djokovic starts as a rightful favourite 
against the world No3, whom he has beaten 19 times in 23 matches. However, 
Wawrinka has an ace:that extraordinary win over the Serb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jun/07/novak-djokovic-stanislas-wawrinka-mens-french-open-final-live>
 in four sets in the French Open final last year.

For a set and more his fabled single-handed backhand did not quite click and 
an embarrassing wipeout seemed certain. But Wawrinka felt good in the shot and 
those balls finally began to land, rally after rally, to the point where 
Djokovic had no answers. It all ended in tears.

So the Serb will not lack for motivation against an opponent who has won 10 
finals in a row. For that reason alone, it could be a memorable contest. 
Wawrinka looked powerful and full of running in quelling the challenge of Kei 
Nishikori in their semi-final and there is no reason to believe he is at 
anything less than 100%.

Both finalists will carry the cumulative baggage of a long season, and the 
conditions will ask extra questions of them. It is the answers that will be 
intriguing. It would be encouraging for the integrity of the sport and the 
event if neither of them needed the assistance of the trainer and just put it 
all on the line, without excuses.

I have a feeling Djokovic has enough left to win his third US title but this 
match will be the first genuine test of his inner strength.
 