
Novak Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> was forced 
to retire in the quarter-finals of the Dubai Duty Free Championships after the 
world No1 lost the first set to Feliciano López.

Playing his first tournament since winning a sixth Australian Open title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final>
 at the end of January, Djokovic lost his serve in the opening game of the 
match and had to save three break points to avoid falling 3-0 behind. At that 
point the 28-year-old called for the trainer and appeared to explain that he 
was suffering from a problem with his right eye before continuing the contest.

The next five games went with serve before Djokovic, who in the previous round 
became only the 12th player in the Open era towin 700 singles matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/24/novak-djokovic-malek-jaziri-dubau-700th-win>
 , was broken for a second time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fcat-disrupts-play-at-qatar-tennis-open-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cat%20disrupts%20play%20at%20Qatar%20Tennis%20Open%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fcat-disrupts-play-at-qatar-tennis-open-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cat%20disrupts%20play%20at%20Qatar%20Tennis%20Open%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F25%2Fcat-disrupts-play-at-qatar-tennis-open-video&media=>
Cat disrupts play at Qatar Open. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/feb/25/cat-disrupts-play-at-qatar-tennis-open-video>
That gave López the set 6-3 and Djokovic immediately told the umpire he was 
unable to carry on, leaving López to advance to a semi-final against Marcos 
Baghdatis. The Cypriot had earlier beaten Roberto Bautista-Agut 7-5, 6-0.

Stan Wawrinka <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka> and Nick 
Kyrgios had earlier set up an eagerly anticipated semi-final. Wawrinka, the 
Swiss No2 seed, defeated Germany’s Philipp Kohlschreiber 7-5, 6-1 after Kyrgios 
had beaten the No3 seed, Tomas Berdych, 6-4, 6-4 despite needing on-court 
treatment for an apparent back injury.

Friday’s semi-final will be the first contest between the pair since their 
infamous match in Montreal last August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/13/kokkinakis-banged-your-girlfriend-nick-kyrgios-sledges-stan-wawrinka>
, when on-court microphones recorded the Australian Kyrgios walking to the net 
and saying: “Kokkinakis banged your girlfriend. Sorry to tell you that mate” – 
an apparent reference to Kyrgios’s Davis Cup team-mate Thanasi Kokkinakis.

Kyrgios subsequently apologised for the comments, which he described as 
“unacceptable on many levels” and was given a fine and 28-day ban by the ATP. 
The ban was suspended for six months and Wednesday marked the end of that 
period.
 