
Novak Djokovic’s split with Boris Becker – predictably described by each of 
them on Tuesday night as mutual – was one of the worst kept secrets in tennis, 
and might yet help the Serb in his pursuit ofAndy Murray at the top of the ATP 
rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/andy-murray-becomes-tennis-world-no1-milos-raonic-walkover-paris>
.

Fight over Washington's nickname continues in wake of Standing Rock
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/06/washington-redskins-nickname-protests-nfl>
They are parting because the recently demoted world No2 needs a lift that the 
six-times slam champion, struggling physically to keep up with the hectic pace 
of the Tour, can no longer deliver. It is a relationship that has run its 
course. If December is the season to be jolly for the rest of us, it is the 
traditional clearing month for tennis players as they retreat to their winter 
training camps before the new season.

The Serb had been toweringly unconvincing in dodging questions about rumours 
of a break-up with Becker since the beginning of November, but the inevitable 
divorce gives him at least a momentum shift to chase down Murray as world No1 
after a kaleidoscope of woes, on and off the court, had engulfed him since his
shock early exit in the first week of Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/02/novak-djokovic-knocked-out-wimbledon-sam-querrey>
. Djokovic had appeared edgy when sniping at his perceived British media 
enemies during the season-ending World Tour Finals in Greenwich last month. All 
the while, Becker, brought on board three years ago to vivify the player’s 
close-quarter tennis, sat broodingly in the player’s box, probably aware that 
his days were numbered.

They won six grand slams together, including the annexation of the 2016 French 
Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/french-open-2016-final-novak-djokovic-beats-andy-murray>
 that completed the set. Djokovic seemed to suffer an emotional crash after the 
landmark win over Murray in the final at Roland Garros.

“The goals we set when we started working together have been completely 
fulfilled,” Djokovic said on Facebook.

“I want to thank him for the cooperation, teamwork, dedication and commitment.”

Becker replied on Twitter: “Thank U! We had the time of our life.”

In Becker’s place now – as the game’s caravan moves to the first major of 
2017, in Melbourne next month – sits not only the player’s long-term friend and 
coach, Marian Vajda, and his tight-knit back-up team, but a new mentor, the 
serene but distant life coach, Pepe Imaz.

If the Spaniard – a fringe player on Tour in his playing days – has played a 
part in Becker’s removal, it would fit the Shakespearian scenario that has been 
building up around Djokovic all summer.

Djokovic was teasingly candid about “private issues‚“ which “everybody goes 
through on a daily basis”. His wife, Jelena, was happily by his side again in 
London. Rapprochement would seem to have provided impetus for a fresh start on 
the court.

One of the game’s all-time greats is on the prowl again.
 