
Novak Djokovic is Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> champion for the sixth 
time, equalling Roy Emerson’s record, but it is unlikely he will be spending 
much time analysing a final in which he eked out a sub-par 6-1, 7-5, 7-6 (7-3) 
win over Andy Murray here on Sunday night.

Andy Murray: I’ll be on next flight home after defeat to Novak Djokovic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-australian-open-wife-kim>
We were left with a familiar impression: Djokovic does everything Murray does, 
only better. But when they lapsed into mistakes of their own making, the Scot’s 
65 were more telling, more regular, more hurtful than the Serb’s 41.

It was Djokovic’s fourth win over Murray in the final of these championships – 
and the most ordinary – and his 11th in their past 12 matches. Djokovic now has 
11 majors, and should overtake Rafael Nadal’s 14 within a year or so, then set 
about passing Roger Federer’s 17. This year? The world No1 will again be in the 
hunt for a calendar grand slam – but this was an inauspicious beginning to his 
campaign.

Murray, meanwhile, has racked up five losing finals at the same slam, an Open 
Era record he will not be shouting about – although, as he says, he has done 
well to reach those finals, the first of which came against Federer in 2010.

Murray raised a laugh when he said courtside: “I feel like I’ve been here 
before. Congratulations Novak, six Australian Opens, an incredible feat, and 
incredible consistency the last year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-wins-australian-open-after-beating-andy-murray-video-highlights&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F31%2F1454247254367%2FKP_1600920_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Novak%20Djokovic%20wins%20Australian%20Open%20after%20beating%20Andy%20Murray%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-wins-australian-open-after-beating-andy-murray-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Novak%20Djokovic%20wins%20Australian%20Open%20after%20beating%20Andy%20Murray%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-wins-australian-open-after-beating-andy-murray-video-highlights&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F31%2F1454247254367%2FKP_1600920_crop_640x360.jpg>
Novak Djokovic wins Australian Open after beating Andy Murray – video highlights
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-wins-australian-open-after-beating-andy-murray-video-highlights>
“Thanks to my own team, too. Sorry I didn’t get it done tonight, it’s been a 
tough few weeks for me away from the court, and I thank you all for your 
support. It’s very, very tough for me right now but I do appreciate playing in 
front of all you people. Amazing atmosphere.

“Finally, to my wife Kim, who’s going to be watching back home. You’ve been a 
legend the past two weeks. Thanks for your support and I’ll be on the next 
flight home.”

Jamie Murray set to beat Andy to world No1 spot after long road to top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/31/jamie-murray-andy-world-no1-doubles-australia-open>
Djokovic added: “I need to pay respect to Andy for another great tournament. 
Tough final, tough luck, Andy. You’re a great player, great friend. I would 
also like to wish you and Kim a very happy delivery of your baby and I hope you 
will experience a feeling like no other, because that’s what happened to me and 
my wife.”

For long stretches in the two hours and 53 minutes the match lasted, the pair 
hit unexplored depths of mutual awfulness, interspersed with rallies worth 
their place in any highlights reel.

Both of them have played significantly better than this, especially against 
each other, in their 30 previous encounters stretching back to 2006. All but 
seven of those were in Tour finals or semi-finals; eight of them were in slams, 
including five finals. But this did not fit that template of excellence. Nor 
did it match the occasion.

“This is the worst match I’ve ever played,” Murray was heard to say within 
earshot of his perplexed coach, Amélie Mauresmo, but there was no sharing the 
blame for this one, no excuses to be laid at the door of others, or 
circumstances beyond his control.

Their biggest challenge was to keep a straight face during the presentation 
ceremony. It was difficult to comprehend that these were the same players who 
entertained us in the semi-final here for four hours and 50 minutes of 
memorable, fighting tennis in 2012.

Unstoppable Novak Djokovic is making the impossible seem possible again | 
Simon Cambers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/31/novak-djokovic-grand-slam-roger-federer-rafael-nadal>
Murray looked unusually relaxed – or was it resigned? He’d been up until the 
early hours after watching his brother Jamie win the doubles title with Bruno 
Soares, not ideal preparation for a grand slam final against the world No1, who 
had beaten him 21 times already. “What are you doing here taking photos?” Jamie 
asked him during his courtside victory speech on Saturday.

“You should be in bed.” He occasionally looked as if he still was.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbea5b2743702707f813619f3bd1a0906d860d39d%2F0_175_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Novak%20Djokovic%20beats%20Andy%20Murray%20to%20win%20the%202016%20Australian%20Open%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Novak%20Djokovic%20beats%20Andy%20Murray%20to%20win%20the%202016%20Australian%20Open%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbea5b2743702707f813619f3bd1a0906d860d39d%2F0_175_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Novak Djokovic paid his respects to Andy Murray and wished him luck with the 
birth of his child. Photograph: Joe Castro/EPA 
A break passed him by within two minutes as Djokovic searched for his rhythm, 
and he handed the Serb a two-love lead with his first double-fault.

In the third game, when he failed to hunt down a drop shot that would normally 
be a routine get for him, concerns rose that he was not at his sharpest.

His balance and timing were way off and shot after shot billowed the net or 
went long. When he hit long to go 0-4 down, there were grumbles of discontent 
around Rod Laver Arena among fans who did not feel they were getting a proper 
contest for their money.

Murray continually glanced towards his box, but his looks were not accompanied 
by his usual exhortations for noise and support. He appeared distracted and 
disengaged; had he been alerted to news from London about the impending arrival 
of his first child? Jamie said he could not bear to watch from his brother’s 
box and would catch as much of it as he could in the players’ lounge before 
heading for a midnight flight back to the UK. The way the match was going, his 
brother could well have joined him.

Djokovic v Murray: Australian Open men's final 2016 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/jan/31/djokovic-v-murray-australian-open-mens-final-2016-in-pictures>
Murray won only five points in the first 20 minutes, and those almost 
irrelevant crumbs as Djokovic coasted towards five-love. Serving to avoid the 
dreaded bagel (there had not been one in the opening set of a championship 
final here since 1953), Murray struggled to loosen himself from his torpor, 
finally rousing the crowd with a magnificent crosscourt forehand that left his 
opponent stranded at the net. Somehow, he held.

“Let’s go Andy, let’s go!” sang his fans – a little late, perhaps. Djokovic 
had good support in the crowd, too, with several Serbian flags dotted around 
the arena, and they inched forward as he served for the set.

Nearly half an hour after his first break chance, Murray got another but 
wasted it. On the half hour, the champion was a set up – and what a weird set 
of tennis it was.

Looking less anxious, Murray let his arms hit more freely through the ball in 
the second set. His ball-striking was more assured. He roared like the lion of 
old when a Djokovic forehand went wide, louder when he induced a shaky backhand 
from him to hold – and go in front for the first time in the match after 37 
minutes.

Murray paused on serve at the start of the third game as a plane passed. A 
double-fault, four aces, four break points, a time warning, an interjection 
from the crowd in the middle of his ball-toss and a few minutes later, he held. 
Nobody ever accused Murray of being predictable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12e120ee23d56dfb485f48d151533ef65cb3df08%2F0_39_3098_1859%2F3098.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Novak%20Djokovic%20beats%20Andy%20Murray%20to%20win%20the%202016%20Australian%20Open%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Novak%20Djokovic%20beats%20Andy%20Murray%20to%20win%20the%202016%20Australian%20Open%20final&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fnovak-djokovic-andy-murray-australian-open-final%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12e120ee23d56dfb485f48d151533ef65cb3df08%2F0_39_3098_1859%2F3098.jpg>
 Andy Murray lost his fifth Australian Open final, his fourth against Novak 
Djokovic. Photograph: Issei Kato/Reuters 
All the while, Djokovic seemed an incidental bystander. He played neither 
brilliantly nor poorly. In fact, he did little more than let the drama take its 
course, holding without fuss then waiting for Murray to implode.

The Scot was plainly angry with himself, but seemed trapped by his own 
inertia. Even his self-flagellatory screaming was subdued. But a rare and 
wonderful point to hold for 3-2 – passing Djokovic tight at the net after an 
artful exchange of drop-shots and lobs – hit the excitement button.

In a slow-burning contest with no reliable patterns, Murray now had captured 
majority support in the stands and seemed to respond to their urgings.

But a welter of unforced errors in a long, nervous seventh game cost him his 
serve, and Djokovic – his own level hardly stratospheric – surely thought the 
set was his to lose.

However, when Murray hit the line with a sizzling backhand to break back 
immediately, there was hope that a proper fight might now ensue, rather than an 
embarrassing collection of mistakes masquerading as a grand slam final.

It had taken the two best players in the world an hour and 20 minutes to rack 
up 50 unforced errors between them. What was worrying for Murray was that he 
had hit the majority of those, 29, and a lot of them were training-level, 
memory-bank shots, carelessly executed at the wrong time.

Still, he saved two break points to hold for 5-4 at the third attempt, and, 
for the first time, the pressure was on Djokovic after 90 minutes of 
unbelievably ragged tennis.

He held, saved three break points, and was as surprised as anyone when Murray 
hit long to blow a golden chance to level at a set apiece.

Australian Open verdict: what must Andy Murray do to beat Novak Djokovic? | 
Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/31/australian-open-verdict-andy-murray-novak-djokovic>
In the 12th game, Djokovic handed Murray break point with a double-fault. 
Murray duly returned the favour, hitting long, then into the net, and the Serb 
had a two-set lead for which he had not had to work that hard.

Djokovic, 171-1 in his career when two sets up, probably anticipated a routine 
stroll to win No 172. Murray, however, had enough perversity left in his bones 
to make a fight of it, to give the final a perhaps misleading veneer of 
respectability.

He nonetheless played some of his most assured tennis in the third set, 
striking the ball sweetly and with more conviction to get to a tie-break, but 
then it all fell to pieces.

Murray, whose serve had held steady in his fightback, double-faulted twice in 
the first four points, to an ace by his opponent, who led 5-1 at the 
turnaround. Murray aced to save one of five championship points but, at 6-3 on 
serve, the champion kept his crown with his seventh ace of the match.

“We still love you, Andy,” someone shouted from the crowd – probably more than 
the player could say for himself at that moment.
 