
Just 7km​ across San Francisco Bay, the city of Oakland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/oakland> has been steadily establishing 
itself as a creative capital to rival its smaller and more famous neighbour. 
Cheaper rents have lured the arty crowd priced out of San Fran, the restaurant 
scene has exploded and hip independent stores are thriving – with the city 
being dubbed the “New Brooklyn”.

“We’re a little bit like Brooklyn,” mayor Jean Quan told the National Journal. 
“Because Oakland is so much more affordable than San Francisco, the whole arts 
scene has shifted over here. The food scene has taken off. Those kinds of 
cultural things have made Oakland very desirable.”

At the heart of the new cultural vibrancy is the area around Temescal Alley – 
described as “Williamsburg-esque” by fashion website Style.com – and nearby 
Telegraph Avenue, where the monthly street festivalFirst Fridays 
<http://www.oaklandfirstfridays.org/> takes place. Festival organiser Sarah 
Kidder says: “As well as the financial benefits, artists and entrepreneurs are 
drawn here by the space to open new places and the community support – there’s 
an exciting feeling of renaissance, there’s always something new happening.”

Lately the scene has spread to Grand and Lakeshore Avenues, near Lake Merritt, 
where new, trendy restaurants are luring gourmands and off-beat boutiques are 
popping up alongside nail salons and car-repair garages.

“I love the diversity here,” says Tim Nugent, a restaurateur who, with fellow 
Top Chef contestant Jen Biesty, opened Mediterranean-inspiredShakewell 
<http://www.shakewelloakland.com/> in Lake Merritt this summer. “And it’s nice 
to see the food scene finally compare to that in San Francisco.”
 The Fox Theater on Telegraph Avenue. Photograph: Alamy 
Shakewell joins Michel Bistro <http://www.michelbistro.com/#!home/c1yuo>, a 
Provençal brasserie launched in April 2014. Last winter, Bay Area culinary 
celebrity Charlie Hallowell (Chez Panisse), openedPenrose 
<http://penroseoakland.com/> here, one of the city’s most talked-about 
eateries. On Grand Avenue,Ordinaire <http://ordinairewine.com/>, a wine bar and 
shop opened last year, hosts pop-up dinners featuring top Oakland chefs in the 
upstairs dining room.

It’s not just new restaurants that are finding a home here – the latest shop 
openings reflect the youthful, DIY atmosphere. Women’s boutiquePosh, showcasing 
Californian designers, recently joined cool vintage storeMaribel on Lakeshore, 
while on Grand, eclecticKnimble <http://www.knimble.com/oakland-shop/>, opened 
last year, buys and sells used clothes, and sells locally made eco-friendly 
toiletries. 

The two bustling avenues are not architecturally memorable, unlike Oakland’s 
old historic core. But as evident in the string of other recent business 
openings – a hair salon, a dance studio, andScarecrow Popcorn 
<http://www.scarecrowpopcorn.com/>, which sells Chicago-style cheese and 
caramel maize kernels — the entrepreneurial energy is palpable and young 
creatives continue to move in. 

But one of the area’s biggest draws might be the Saturday Grand Lake Farmer’s 
Market <http://www.agriculturalinstitute.org/?s=oakland&submit=Search>, with 
live music and a growing number of stands selling the best of California’s 
bounty. Here, you’ll see Oaklanders of all stripes, proving that Lake Merritt 
isn’t trying to copy Brooklyn’s “hip-ification”, but coming of age as a place 
of great diversity.
 