
Obama v Pence on Obamacare

Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> and vice 
president-elect Mike Pence will be facing off on Wednesday as both will hold 
meetings with congressmen and women on the future of the Affordable Care Act, 
the outgoing president’s signature domestic achievement, now under threat from 
his successor. Obama will meet with House and Senate Democrats to discuss 
strategies to save his health reforms, which include focusing on aspects that 
have bipartisan support and exposing Republican divisions. Meanwhile, Pence 
will meet the many members of the majority Republican congress who are eager to 
repeal Obamacare. It brought health insurance to 22 million people and, for the 
first time in US history, means that more than 90% of Americans are insured.

Barack Obama and Mike Pence slated for US healthcare showdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/barack-obama-mike-pence-us-healthcare-showdown>

North Carolina officer slams student to ground

A North Carolina officer has been filmed body-slamming a high school student. 
In a video spread widely on Twitter on Tuesday, the school resource officer at 
Rolesville high school lifts the student up and slams her against the ground, 
causing a thud and a gasp from students. It remains unclear what the cause of 
the incident was. TheNews and Observer 
<http://www.newsobserver.com/news/local/crime/article124286484.html> identified 
the officer as Ruben De Los Santos and reported that he was on paid 
administrative leave. The American Civil Liberties Union of North Carolina said 
it was investigating the issue and that it was considering a lawsuit. “This use 
of force is very disturbing and is never justified, especially in schools where 
kids are supposed to go to learn and be safe and to concentrate on their school 
work,” said staff attorney Irena Como.

North Carolina officer caught on video slamming female student to ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/north-carolina-police-body-slam-high-school-student>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorth-carolina-officer-slams-female-student-to-ground-rolesville-high-school-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=North%20Carolina%20officer%20slams%20female%20student%20to%20ground%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorth-carolina-officer-slams-female-student-to-ground-rolesville-high-school-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=North%20Carolina%20officer%20slams%20female%20student%20to%20ground%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fnorth-carolina-officer-slams-female-student-to-ground-rolesville-high-school-video&media=>
North Carolina officer slams female student to ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/04/north-carolina-officer-slams-female-student-to-ground-rolesville-high-school-video>
China critic picked as Trump trade chief

Longtime China critic and protectionist Robert Lighthizer, 69, has been 
selected as Donald Trump’s trade chief. The move indicates Trump intends to 
follow through on the tough stance he has threatened to take to against China; 
Lighthizer has often advocated increasing tariffs and called for the use of 
harsher methods against China. Beijing has already expressed deep concern about 
Trump’s actions as president-elect, including his threat to use the sensitive 
issue of relations with Taiwan as a bargaining chip in a trade deal. Lighthizer 
will also likely work alongside Peter Navarro, who will lead the presidential 
office for US trade and industrial policy. Navarro has previously described 
China’s government as a “despicable, parasitic, brutal, brass-knuckled, crass, 
callous, amoral, ruthless and totally totalitarian imperialist power”.

China calls US ‘a shooting star’ in history as Trump picks protectionist trade 
chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/china-donald-trump-trade-chief-robert-lighthizer>


Support the Guardian’s fearless journalism

Never has America needed fearless independent media more 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b12582921e8c24a8bd1742ea936a2899be565fa57f54568cd44>
. Help us hold the new president to account, sort fact from fiction, amplify 
underrepresented voices, and understand the forces behind this divisive 
election – and what happens next. Support the Guardian bybecoming a member 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b128f2234dac2a5837d533f2698192ef2caf3b853674fb0d8a1>
 or making acontribution 
<http://click.mail.theguardian.com/?qs=459321946e415b120d4724d9af6c4fe4c9ea0a020c3ef1bd2aa02d3c042741e0>
.

Zuckerberg to turn to politics?

Mark Zuckerberg sparked speculation that he may be considering stepping into 
the political arena after the Facebook chief announced he was planning to visit 
all the states he has not yet been to in 2017. “After a tumultuous last year, 
my hope for this challenge is to get out and talk to more people about how 
they’re living, working and thinking about the future,” he said in aFacebook 
post <https://www.facebook.com/zuck/posts/10103385178272401?pnref=story> 
announcing the challenge. Theories of his potential public service began to 
swirl when court documents from a class action lawsuit in early December 
revealed two of the company’s investors discussing how he could pursue a 
political career while remaining as CEO.

Mark Zuckerberg’s 2017 plan to visit all US states hints at political ambitions
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/03/mark-zuckerberg-facebook-2017-resolution-visit-us-states>

Senators aim to move US embassy to Jerusalem

Three Republican senators – Ted Cruz of Texas, Dean Heller of Nevada and Marco 
Rubio of Florida – have introduced legislation to recognize Jerusalem as 
Israel’s capital and move the US embassy there, which would fulfill one of 
Trump’s campaign promises. After being sworn in, the three Republican senators 
introduced the Jerusalem Embassy and Recognition Act, which is similar to bills 
presented by Republican senators in the past that have not been successful. The 
US embassy has been located in Tel Aviv for half a century, as the state 
department has maintained a policy that the status of Jerusalem will be decided 
in peace talks between Israelis and Palestinians.Critics warn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/21/us-israel-embassy-jerusalem-peace-process>
 that the move could unleash a wave a violence. Meanwhile, one of Israel’s most 
polarizing cases concluded on Wednesday with Israeli soldier, Sgt Elor Azaria
found guilty of manslaughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/israeli-soldier-guilty-manslaughter-shooting-palestinian-elor-azaria-abdel-fattah-al-sharif>
 for the killing Abdel Fattah al-Sharif, in Hebron in the West Bank last March.


Republican senators introduce bill to move US embassy in Israel to Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/us-embassy-israel-jerusalem-republican-bill>

Populism is not the answer

Al From, the founder of the centrist Democratic Leadership Council, calls on 
Democrats to rededicate themselves to third-way politics, and reject the notion 
that a Bernie Sanders or Elizabeth Warren-type figure can save the Democratic 
party. “Democrats should rededicate ourselves to the core New Democrat 
principles – opportunity, responsibility, community,” he writes.

Don’t be fooled. Populism won’t help Democrats win again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/why-populism-wont-help-democrats-win-again>


Serena Williams suffers shock loss

Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> crashed 
out of the Australian open in the second round after suffering a shock defeat 
to American Madison Brengle in three sets 6-4, 6-7 (3-7), 6-4. Eighty-eight 
unforced errors by Williams helped make her loss in the tournament, her first 
since losing in the US Open semi-final.

Serena Williams on shock loss: ‘I’m trying to think of a word that’s not 
obscene’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/04/serena-williams-shock-loss-word-not-obscene-tennis-results>


In case you missed it...

Speaker of the house Paul Ryan thought Congressman’s Roger Marshall’s son, 
Cal, was sneezing when the teenager tucked his head into his bent arm during a 
photo-op. He was in fact dabbing: a viral dance move popularised by US athletes 
and rappers, and embraced by teenagers as an irreverent or celebratory gesture.

Paul Ryan prevents Roger Marshall’s son from dabbing during swearing-in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/paul-ryan-prevents-roger-marshalls-son-from-dabbing-during-swearing-in>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Froger-marshalls-son-dabs-and-confuses-paul-ryan-at-swearing-in-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Roger%20Marshall's%20son%20dabs%20and%20confuses%20Paul%20Ryan%20at%20swearing-in%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Froger-marshalls-son-dabs-and-confuses-paul-ryan-at-swearing-in-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Roger%20Marshall%27s%20son%20dabs%20and%20confuses%20Paul%20Ryan%20at%20swearing-in%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Froger-marshalls-son-dabs-and-confuses-paul-ryan-at-swearing-in-video&media=>
Roger Marshall’s son dabs and confuses Paul Ryan at swearing-in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/04/roger-marshalls-son-dabs-and-confuses-paul-ryan-at-swearing-in-video> 