
So that’s it. The last jobs report of Barack Obama’s presidency has been 
published and the figures encapsulate his eight-year presidency.Job creation in 
December was not bad at 156,000, simply a bit mediocre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/06/us-wage-growth-trump-labour-market-barack-obama-job-creation>
. Better was expected.

In Obama’s defence, he was left the worse possible legacy. The world’s biggest 
economy was in freefall when he arrived in the White House in early 2009.Lehman 
Brothers <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lehmanbrothers>had gone bust six 
weeks before the November 2008 presidential election and the Federal Reserve 
had taken emergency action to stimulate growth as fears grew that the clock was 
about to be turned back to the 1930s.

The full Grapes of Wrath nightmare was avoided, but the economy lost jobs in 
every month of 2009 and didn’t start to recover until February 2010. Since 
then, jobs have been created every month.

US wage growth shows Trump will inherit solid labour market
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/06/us-wage-growth-trump-labour-market-barack-obama-job-creation>
It’s hard to overestimate the importance of a strong labour market for the US. 
The health of the jobs market matters for every country, but more so in the US 
because by the standards of the developed world, it has a relatively ungenerous 
welfare state.

So how does Obama’s record stack up? The answer is that it depends on what is 
measured and what it is measured against.

By the standards of his predecessors in the White House during the seven 
decades since the end of the second world war, Obama’s record is distinctly 
modest. The number of employed people increased on average by around 1% a year 
over his two terms. Only three presidents since 1945 – the two George Bushes 
and Dwight Eisenhower – have a worse record.

The monthly increase or decrease in non-farm payrolls is a key indicator of 
the health of the US jobs market, but it is not the only one. Another 
yardstick, the total labour market participation rate, has been falling 
steadily since the late 1990s and dropped more steeply under Obama than under 
George W Bush. The US participation rate is 10 percentage points lower than 
that of the UK.

As in Britain, the recovery from the financial crisis has recorded weak wage 
growth, especially during Obama’s first term. The squeeze on real wages has 
meant the gap between rich and poor has continued to widen.

If the comparison is with other developed countries, the US does better, at 
least in terms of job creation and unemployment.Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> arrives in the White House 
with the jobless rate at 4.7%, less than half that of the eurozone, and 
reasonably close to what the Federal Reserve considers to be full employment.
US unemployment graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-06T16:18:29/embed.html>
The main reason for the divergence in labour market performance between the US 
and Europe over the past eight years is that US policy has been much more 
strongly skewed towards stimulus.

The guiding principle has been the need to avoid a second Great Depression, 
while eurozone policy makers have, at least until recently, focused on keeping 
inflation low.

The Fed was quicker to cut interest rates than the European Central Bank, and 
years ahead in its willingness to use quantitative easing – bond purchases from 
the private sector – as a way of creating money. It was a priority for Obama in 
his first term to sort out the bad-debt problems of US banks. Europe is still 
struggling with weak banks burdened with non-performing loans.

Would Hillary Clinton have won the 2016 presidential election had Obama’s 
labour market record been better? Perhaps, although it is worth pointing out 
that the much stronger jobs and wage growth under Bill Clinton failed to 
prevent Al Gore losing –admittedly controversially 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jan/29/uselections2000.usa> – in 2000.

What can be said is that Obama leaves the US labour market in better shape 
than he found it, bequeathing Trump a much better legacy than he received 
himself.
 