
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has given a 
rousing defence of the virtues of democracy and warned that a backlash against 
globalisation is boosting populist movements around the world, in what was 
billed as his last public address abroad.

Speaking near the Acropolis of Athens, the outgoing US president said that 
democracy – like the version invented by the ancient Greeks “in this small, 
great world” – might still be imperfect, yet for all its flaws it fostered hope 
over fear.

“Even if progress follows a winding path – sometimes forward, sometimes back – 
democracy is still the most effective form of government ever devised by man,” 
Obama said.

We must rethink globalization, or Trumpism will prevail | Thomas Piketty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/globalization-trump-inequality-thomas-piketty>
“The flame first lit here in Athens never died. It was ultimately nurtured by 
a great enlightenment. It was fanned by America’s founders, who declared that: 
‘We, the people shall rule; that all men are created equal and endowed by our 
creator with certain inalienable rights.”

Referencing a quote from Martin Luther King, he said democracy set people free 
and that allowed them to bend the arc of their lives towards justice.

Globalisation <https://www.theguardian.com/world/globalisation> could not be 
rolled back, Obama told the audience at the newly built Stavros Niarchos 
cultural centre. He said that “we cannot sever the connections that have 
enabled so much progress” but cautioned that it was leading to increasing 
inequality around the world. Fast-moving technological innovation – as well as 
causing enormous disruption to many workers’ lives – was making it easier for 
people to see that inequality, the president added.

“The current path of globalisation demands a course correction,” he said. “In 
the years and decades ahead, our countries have to make sure that the benefits 
of an integrated global economy are more broadly shared by more people, and 
that the negative impacts are squarely addressed.

“When we see people, global elites, wealthy corporations seemingly living by a 
different set of rules, avoiding taxes, manipulating loopholes … this feeds a 
profound sense of injustice.”

In times of old, people had no idea how others lived. Now that was no longer 
the case, they had begun asking questions about their own identity. “And it can 
create a volatile politics.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fobama-calls-for-course-correction-to-share-spoils-of-globalisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd246597311f37881639b1ca8922227ffc568aa3a%2F0_253_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20calls%20for%20'course%20correction'%20to%20share%20spoils%20of%20globalisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fobama-calls-for-course-correction-to-share-spoils-of-globalisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20calls%20for%20%27course%20correction%27%20to%20share%20spoils%20of%20globalisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fobama-calls-for-course-correction-to-share-spoils-of-globalisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd246597311f37881639b1ca8922227ffc568aa3a%2F0_253_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Obama with Eleni Banou, ministry of culture director of Ephorate of 
Antiquities for Athens, during a tour of the Acropolis. Photograph: Brendan 
Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images 
“In the Information Age, the unprecedented exchange of information can always 
accentuate differences, or seem to threaten cherished ways of life.”

That Obama should choose Athens as a backdrop – barely two months before he 
hands the keys of the White House to Donald Trump – was in itself filled with 
symbolism.

It wasn’t just that democracy was first conceived in “these rocky hills”, he 
said, or that he had long yearned to tour the Parthenon, which he did earlier 
in the day. Or even that he wished to show gratitude to all thatGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> had given to humanity through the 
ages. The debt-stricken country has also been on the frontline of Europe’s twin 
economic and refugee crises and in the latter had shown “extraordinary 
compassion”.

“The world, I don’t think, fully appreciates the … tremendous sacrifices that 
you, the Greek people, have made,” he said to thunderous applause from an 
audience that included politicians, businessmen, human rights activists and 
refugees. “I’ve been aware of it, and I’ve been proud of all that my 
administration has done to try and support Greece in these efforts.”

For prime minister Alexis Tsipras’s leftist-led government, Obama’s 30-hour 
visit and repeated expression of support for its efforts to secure debt relief 
was an unexpected gift.

“It’s been incredible,” Nikos Pappas, a leading minister and Tsipras’ closest 
aide, told the Guardian. “He hasn’t been credited enough for the role he played 
saving Greece. He and Jack Lew [the treasury secretary] were on the phone all 
the time at the height of the [eurozone] crisis.”

For Obama, the farewell tour is as much about safeguarding his legacy as 
allaying the fears of European leaders after Trump’s surprise election.

Ex-Nato leaders call for extraordinary meeting with Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/ex-nato-leaders-extraordinary-meeting-donald-trump>
And for many, in Greece at least, there is trepidation about what the 
post-Obama era might bring.

But on Wednesday, the leader of the free world was determined to end his 
Athenian visit on an optimistic note, applauding those who – like the founders 
of democracy – had chosen hope over fear.

“I will say that after eights years of being president of the United States, 
having travelled around the globe, it is absolutely true that every country 
travels its own path, every country has its own traditions,” he continued. “But 
what I also believe, after eight years, is that the basic longing to live with 
dignity, the fundamental desire to have control of our lives and our future, 
and to want to be a part of determining the course of our communities and our 
nations – these yearnings are universal. They burn in every human heart.”

Obama’s speech, before an onward trip to Germany where he will meet the 
chancellor, Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/barack-obama-and-angela-merkel-call-for-continued-transatlantic-cooperation>
, as well as Theresa May and the French and Italian leaders François Hollande 
and Matteo Renzi, followed a morning tour of the Acropolis and its museum. It 
was the first official visit by a sitting US president since Bill Clinton.
 