
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania


Why go? Despite its sprawling size, Philly has kept some period charm, with 
cobbled streets, historic buildings and colonial houses, and is easily explored 
on foot.

Must-see The Old City is 18th-century Philadelphia. Head to the Philadelphia 
Museum of Art <http://www.philamuseum.org/>, and mimic Rocky's famous run up 
the steps. Check out the Comcast Center (1701 John F Kennedy Boulevard), 
at 300m, the city's tallest skyscraper.

Eat Village Whiskey <http://villagewhiskey.com/> (118 South 20th Street), 
which opened last autumn in fashionable Rittenhouse, has more than 80 whiskies 
to try, and monster burgers for under $10.

Nightlife Start at Brauhaus Schmitz <http://www.brauhausschmitz.com/> on South 
Street , a Bavarian brewery that stocks 80 bottled beers plus 20 on tap, all 
served by waitresses in dirndls.

Stay The Morris House Hotel <http://www.morrishousehotel.com/> (+1 215 922 
2446, doubles from $179, room only) is a national historic landmark renovated 
into a cosy boutique hotel.

Fly British Airways <http://www.britishairways.com/travel/home/public/en_gb> 
flies from Heathrow, from £372.

San Diego, California

Why go? This elegant harbour town has miles of beaches, top-notch restaurants, 
historic sites and family friendly attractions galore.

Must-see Balboa Park <http://balboapark.org/> is the largest urban park in the 
US, with museums, theatres, gardens and a zoo.Viva la Revolucion: A Dialogue 
with the Urban Landscape 
<http://mcasd.org/calendar/447/members-opening-viva-la-revolucion>, from 18 
July, will see public spaces transformed into art by artists including Banksy.

Eat Alchemy <http://alchemysandiego.com/>, on 30th Street, is part tapas bar, 
part fine-dining establishment, part art gallery; a meal for two with wine will 
cost less than $50.

Nightlife Fluxx <http://fluxxsd.com/> on 4th Avenue, the latest addition to 
the city's upscale nightlife, has a rotating art feature and a VIP "treehouse" 
area.

Stay Hotel Indigo <http://www.hotelsandiegodowntown.com/> (+1 619 727 4000, 
doubles from $189) is the city's first green hotel.

Fly American Airlines flies from Heathrow, from £455.

Boston, Massachusetts

Why go? This historic city is full of great museums and landmarks, and has a 
thriving live music scene.

Must-see The Freedom Trail <http://thefreedomtrail.org/> 
(thefreedomtrail.org), from Boston Common to Bunker Hill Monument, takes in 16 
historic landmarks. TheMuseum of Fine Arts <http://mfa.org/> ; its new Art of 
the Americas wing reopens  in November after a $300m renovation, and will 
feature everything from ancient gold to paintings.

Eat Coppa <http://coppaboston.com/> on Shawmut Avenue, is a wine bar in the 
South End that opened in December and serves Italian-inspired small plates at 
reasonable prices.

Nightlife The opening of House of Blues <http://www.houseofblues.com/> on 
Lansdowne Street was big news last year. Expect big names and a great 
atmosphere.

Stay The Inn@St Botolph <http://www.innatstbotolph.com/> (+1 617 236 8099, 
doubles from $199) is centrally located and has stylish suites with steel 
four-posters.

Fly Virgin Atlantic <http://www.virgin-atlantic.com/en/gb/index.jsp> flies 
from Heathrow, from £424.

• This entry was amended on 26 August 2010. The original stated that the 
Museum of Fine Arts would reopen in November. This has been corrected.

Portland, Oregon

Why go? Voted one of America's best towns for pedestrians, this eco-conscious 
city has great scenery, and a hip, alternative vibe.

Must-see The 19th-century Pioneer Courthouse 
<http://www.pioneercourthousesquare.org/> and the great vintage shops. 
Hawthorne Bridge, across the Willamette River, is celebrating its 100th 
birthday, with a festival of art and music from 24 July to 7 August.

Eat A perfect lunch stop, Tao of Tea (3430 SE Belmont Street, taooftea.com 
<http://taooftea.com>) serves tasty bites and lots of teas.

Nightlife One of the best places for live music, Doug Fir Lounge 
<http://dougfirlounge.com/> has shows most nights and is open till 4am.

Stay Ace Hotel  <http://www.acehotel.com/>(+1 212 679 2222, doubles from $95) 
is a cool, unpretentious boutique hotel in downtown Portland.

Fly United <http://www.unitedairlines.co.uk> flies from Gatwick, from £345.

Memphis, Tennessee

Why go? It's home of the blues and the king of rock'n'roll.

Must-see Memphis Rock'n'Soul Museum <http://memphisrocknsoul.org/> explores 
the history of the city's music. Graceland <http://elvis.com/graceland/> has a 
new exhibition, Elvis Presley: Fashion King, showcasing everything from 
handmade shirts to the king's flashy jewellery.

Eat Bag a table on the patio of the new Thyme Bistro 
<http://www.thymebistro.com> on Quince Road for salads, pizza and fish.

Nightlife Beale Street <http://www.bealestreet.com> is "home of the blues" 
with bars, clubs and live music nightly.

Stay Talbot Heirs <http://talbothouse.com/> (+1 901 527 9772) has 
self-catering suits in an elegant downtown house from $800 a week.

Fly American Airlines <http://www.americanairlines.co.uk> flies from Heathrow, 
from £435.
 