
Oil prices settled up nearly 6% on Wednesday after the Organisation of the 
Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec) struck a deal to limit crude output. Its 
first agreement to cut production since 2008 follows acrash in the market on 
oversupply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/17/oil-price-slump-true-cost-uk-economy>
and will be finalised at its policy meeting in November.

 Opec reached agreement to limit its production to a range of 32.5m-33m 
million barrels per day (bpd) intalks held on the sidelines of the 26-28 
September International Energy Forum in Algiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/24/oil-price-opec-members-meeting>
, group officials told Reuters. Opec estimates its current output at 33.24m bpd.

 “We have decided to decrease production by around 700,000 bpd,” said Iran’s 
oil minister, Bijan Zanganeh.

Opec <https://www.theguardian.com/business/opec> will agree to production 
levels for each member country at its 30 November meeting in Vienna, group 
officials said. After reaching its group target, it will seek support from 
non-member oil producers to further ease the global glut.

 Brent crude settled up $2.72, or 5.9%, at $48.69 a barrel, hitting a more 
than two-week high of $48.96. US West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude rose by 
$2.38, or 5.3%, to settle at $47.05, after a peak $47.45, its highest since 8 
September.

 The oil rally spilled over into the stock market, with Wall Street’s index of 
energy shares rising 4% for its best one-day gain since January.

 “This is a historic deal. This is the first time Opec and non-Opec will agree 
together in over a decade. This should put a floor on oil and should see oil 
move back toward the $60s,” said Phil Flynn, analyst at Chicago-based brokerage 
Price Futures Group.

 “The cartel proved that it still matters even in the age of shale,” Flynn 
wrote in a market commentary. “This is the end of the ‘production war’ - Opec 
claims victory.”

 Other analysts saw a selloff down the road, citing Opec’s general lack of 
adherence to quotas.

Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> prices have more than halved 
from highs above $100 a barrel in mid-2014 as surging production from US shale 
oil combined with other global oversupplies and Opec output.

 As oil traders looked to Opec to cut output, key members such as Saudi Arabia 
andIran resisted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/02/iran-rejects-oil-output-cap-as-opec-leaders-meet-in-vienna>
, becoming more protective of individual market share even though the rout hurt 
the group’s oil-dependent economies. The deal in Algiers followsfailed talks in 
Qatar in April for a production freeze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/02/opec-fails-reach-agreement-oil-production-levels-iran-saudi-arabia>
.

 “This was unexpected for sure,” said Scott Shelton, energy broker for Icap in 
Durham, North Carolina, referring to the deal. “No one that I know of saw it 
coming. The market doesn’t seem positioned for it. The fundamentals in the US 
are already tighter than we expected and is due to get tighter.“

 Oil prices gyrated earlier in the day after US government data showed a 
surprise drop in domestic crude stockpiles for a fourth week in a row.

 Jeff Quigley, director of energy markets at Stratas Advisors in Houston, said 
it was “too preliminary” to get excited over the Opec deal.

 “The devil’s in the details here,” Quigley said. “And for them to say it’s 
going to start in November is very suspect to me. We don’t know yet who’s going 
to produce what. I want to hear from the mouth of the Iranian oil minister that 
he’s not going to go back to pre-sanction levels.”

 Before the news of Wednesday’s deal, Zanganeh said Iran would agree to curb 
production “at close to 4m barrels per day”. Iran’s output has stagnated at 
3.6m bpd since the lifting of western sanctions.

 Michael Cohen, head of energy commodities research at Barclays in New York, 
was similarly pessimistic. “Our view is that it is likely that what is going to 
happen is nothing more than the status quo, in which the Saudis usually reduce 
their output post-summertime,” Cohen said. “And this is a good way to put a 
good face on what is likely happening already.”
 