
Oil prices have surged to a 17-month high after a group of the world’s largest 
producers, includingSaudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>
 and Russia, agreed to reduce output in a landmark deal.

The weekend agreement between Opec and a number of non-Opec members, notably 
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, has pushed Brent crude up 
more than 4% to $56.64 a barrel, its highest level since mid-July 2015. West 
Texas Intermediate, the US benchmark, is up 4.4% at $53.78.

The move follows an agreement last month by Opec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/oil-price-opec-cut-in-output-saudi-arabia-deal-market>
 to cut production by 1.2m barrels a day from 1 January next year, following 
weeks of wrangling.

Oil price surges after producers agree historic cuts – business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/12/oil-price-producers-cuts-italy-banks-lagarde-business-live>
On Saturday, producers from outside Opec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/opec> agreed to reduce output by 558,000 
barrels a day to help end the supply glut which has sent oil prices tumbling. 
Although less than the targeted 600,000 barrels it was the largest ever 
contribution to production cuts by non-Opec members.

It represents the first such deal between Opec and non-Opec members for 15 
years.

Adding to the oil price momentum was a comment from Saudi Arabia suggesting it 
could make bigger cuts than first envisaged. The Saudi oil minister, Khalid 
al-Falih, said: “I can tell you with absolute certainty that effective 1 
January, we’re going to cutand cut substantially to be below the level that we 
have committed to on 30 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/oil-price-opec-cut-in-output-saudi-arabia-deal-market>
.”

Meanwhile Iraq’s oil minister Jabar al-Luaibi told Reuters it was committed to 
complying with the pact, although it was confident it had the potential to 
raise output in the future. He said: “The cuts will aim at the figures we 
agreed with Opec definitely, but (for) the areas of the cuts there are many 
options on the table.”

Despite the prospect of US shale producers continuing to raise their own 
output levels, analysts believe the oil price has further to climb.

Fawad Razaqzada, market analyst at Forex.com, said: “Make no mistake about it 
– this historic agreement is a gamechanger. Although the crude oil rally has 
already started at the end of last month when the Opec first announced the 
deal, I think there is plenty of fuel left in this rally.

“Admittedly, after a big gap we may see a retracement of some sort in prices 
now but ultimately the fundamentals still point to higher levels going forward. 
The oil market will now be balanced earlier than would have been the case 
without a deal.

“It is very likely that US shale producers will take advantage of this 
opportunity to ramp up their crude output once again but this will be a worry 
for another day.

“On top of the now-favourable supply-side dynamics, the global economic 
recovery is continuing at a steady pace, especially in the US. So rising demand 
for oil from the US – and China – could be additional factors that could help 
fuel a much larger rally in oil prices than many had envisaged a few months 
ago.”

News of the proposed cuts has benefited the rouble, sending the Russian 
currency up more than 2% against the dollar to a 14-month high despite the 
prospect of a US interest rate rise on Wednesday. Bond yields are falling on 
the expectation that the dearer oil price will feed through to higher inflation.

Meanwhile commodity companies were among the biggest gainers on the stock 
market, with Royal Dutch B shares more than 3% higher and BP 2% better.
 