
The price of oil has briefly fallen below $28 to its lowest point for 13 years 
on concerns about a worsening supply glut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/17/oil-price-woes-deepen-as-iran-vows-to-add-500000-barrels-day>
 after sanctions on Iran were lifted, allowing the country to resume oil 
exports.


Why the falling oil price may not lead to boom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/17/why-falling-oil-price-not-mean-global-economic-boom>
The global benchmark of Brent crude tumbled to as low as $27.67 in Asia on 
Monday – a fall of 4.4% on Friday’s close – before rebounding to trade at 
$28.52 at 5am GMT. The last time Brent closed below $28 was in November 2003.

Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> is ready to increase its crude 
exports by 500,000 bpd, its deputy oil minister said on Sunday. Daily global 
demand is more than 80m bpd.


“The drop in price was due to the western sanctions on Iran being lifted. This 
means we will be seeing a bigger oil glut with Iranian crude exports coming 
back to the market,” said Daniel Ang, an analyst at Phillip Futures.

The United States and the European Union lifted the sanctions on Sunday after 
the UN’s nuclear watchdog confirmed that Iran had complied with its obligations 
under a landmark deal last year to curb Tehran’s programme.

The oil price rout is also hurting stock markets, with Asian shares sliding to 
near their 2011 troughs on Monday, stoking further worries about a global 
economic downturn.

There was also nervousness ahead of Tuesday’s release of China’s economic 
growth figures for 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/18/australian-shares-braced-for-more-pain-with-chinese-growth-expected-to-dip>
. The data is widely expected to reveal that the economy grew by less than the 
official target of 7%, amounting to its slowest rate for 25 years.

In Japan the Nikkei average was down 1.5% and in Australia the ASX/S&P200 had 
fallen 0.8% by 5am GMT. In China both the CSI300 index of leading shares and 
the Shanghai Composite index were up slightly at the lunch break having 
recovered from losses earlier in the day as China’s central bank continued its 
efforts to support the yuan.

China’s central bank said on Monday it would start implementing a reserve 
requirement ratio (RRR) on offshore banks’ domestic deposits, in what appeared 
to be its latest attempt to stem speculation in the yuan and manage money 
flowing in and out of the country. The RRR is currently zero.

“Growth keeps slowing ... Lower commodity prices, including oil, partly 
reflect weakening demand itself. In addition, the downturn in mining 
[investment] and the declining income of commodity producers is weighing on 
exports from Asia,” said Frederic Neumann, co-head of Asian Economics Research 
at HSBC, Hong Kong.

Some analysts believe Tuesday’s GDP figures could build pressure for a weaker 
yuan, adding to the swirl of uncertainty about whether the Chinese leadership 
wants the currency to rise or fall.

“The Chinese yuan has been caught up in a vicious circle than can but lead to 
further depreciation of the currency,” Nordine Naam, an analyst at brokerage 
Natixis, said.

“Concerns over the extent of the slowdown in Chinese growth risk fuelling 
capital outflows and in turn a further depreciation of yuan, to which the 
People’s Bank of China seems resigned,” Naam said,despite attempts by the 
central bank in the last week to support the currency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/chinese-efforts-to-talk-up-yuan-fail-to-stop-slide-in-oil-and-stock-prices>
.

ANZ bank said on Monday that it expected the new iranian supply to put further 
downward pressure on oil prices.

“The lifting of sanctions on Iran should see further downward pressure on oil 
... in the short term,” ANZ bank said on Monday.


“Iran’s likely strategy in offering discounts to entice customers could see 
further downward pressure on prices in the near term.”

The international crude market is currently awash with supplies, boosted by 
high production levels from the Opec cartel and US shale oil.

Opec late last year rejected calls for the group to slash output and perk up 
prices, preferring to fight for market share with competitors.
 