
Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> prices have broken through the 
$50 per barrel mark for the first time in almost seven months after storage 
figures suggested that the glut in global crude supplies was easing. Many 
analysts have predicted that the recovery, which will help the North Sea oil 
industry and could steady the global economy but hurt motorists through higher 
petrol costs, could be short-lived.

The price of Brent crude edged up 0.9% to $50.2 a barrel, boosted by data from 
the US government showing a sharper than expected fall in crude stocks last week
 <http://www.eia.gov/petroleum/supply/weekly/>, and it later fell back slightly.

It was Brent’s highest price since early November, and a sign that supply 
disruption triggered bythe wildfires in Canada’s Alberta province 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/18/alberta-wildfire-work-camp-destroyed-evacuated>
 and outages in Nigeria is starting to be felt across the global oil industry. 
The crude price, which compares with $118 nearly two years ago, was also helped 
by a fall in the price of the dollar.
Brent crude price graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/may/2016-05-26T08:18:15/embed.html>
Julian Jessop, chief global economist at Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>, said that while a recovery in 
crude prices should be positive for the global economy, there were downsides. 
He said: “The recovery is, on balance, good news for the global economy and for 
equity prices. Prices in the $50-$60 range would be high enough to ease some of 
the pressure on producers, while still low enough to boost spending on other 
goods and services.

“Higher oil prices are clearly better news for producers, or mixed 
producers/consumers such as the US, than they are for consumers. In particular, 
the rebound in oil prices will sap some of the momentum from the economic 
recoveries in the eurozone and Japan.” Jessop added that a rebound in oil 
prices would remove another reason for theFederal Reserve to delay raising US 
interest rates. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/18/interest-rates-increase-federal-reserve-economy-brexit-china>

But Sebastien Marlier, the senior commodities editor at the Economist 
Intelligence Unit, remained doubtful that the current rally would last: 
“Overall, demand growth is still slower than last year. Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia 
and Russia are still pumping at record levels and Iran has come back faster 
than many expected … A sustained recovery will more probably take hold in 
2017-18.”

Shell to cut 2,200 more jobs in reaction to low oil prices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/25/shell-cut-jobs-low-oil-prices-north-sea>
Chad Holliday, the chairman of Shell, told investors at a company meeting in 
London that it remained a “very demanding time for our industry”, pointing out 
that 42 oil and gas companies filed for bankrupcy in the US last year.

Ric Spooner, the chief market analyst at Sydney’s CMC Markets, told Reuters 
that the world was still oversupplied with oil, even given increased demand and 
supply disruptions fromCanadian wildfires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/15/alberta-wildfire-the-beast-fort-murray-canada>
 and violence inLibya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> and Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>. “Certainly [$50] is a 
psychological barrier. There is a momentum – people will try and push it up 
over that,” he said. “From a practical point of view, will there or will there 
not be a sustainable increase above $50? At the $50-$55 range there has got to 
be a good chance of seeing the peak.”

US crude stocks fell at the steepest rate in seven weeks last week, by 4.2m 
barrels to 537.1m, much larger than the 2.5m-barrel drop analysts were 
expecting. The price of US oil futures also rose by 33 cents to $49.89 a 
barrel, the highest since October.

Michael Hewson, the chief market analyst at CMC Markets, said: “While oil 
inventory levels continue to remain high, the fact that we are now starting to 
see bigger than expected draws on a much more regular basis is helping keep the 
momentum behind the current rally sustained for now, as both Brent and US 
prices move in lockstep with each other.”

 