
“Look at that house,” says Nivia Bruno Ribeiro de Cajazeira, pointing to a 
small dwelling hidden by lush vegetation near the top of Babilônia hill, in the 
south zone ofRio de Janeiro <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rio-de-janeiro>. 
“All the homes in the favela used to be built like that, frompau-a-pique 
[wattle and daub containing bamboo].”

We have arrived at her own blue wooden house via a dirt path splattered with 
the red pulp of thejaca fruit, its terrace offering a glimpse of the distant 
sea. Outsiders rarely come to this part of the favela; to do so requires 
stepping so close to people’s homes that it can feel like an invasion.

Two theories explain why this favela – one of more than 1,000 informal 
settlements in Rio – is called Babilônia: some say it borrowed from a local 
brewery when it was founded at the end of the 19th century; others believe the 
area’s exceptional natural beauty evoked theHanging Gardens of Babylon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/may/05/babylon-hanging-garden-wonder-nineveh>
. Near the top of the green mountain where residents must lug food and supplies 
on foot, many people lack basic sanitation and nature still seems to hold sway.

For five generations, Ribeiro’s family has lived here, a short distance from 
the white sands of Leme beach. The favela has always been known for its 
tranquility, says Ribeiro, 38, who teaches computing. “For years, people used 
lanterns at home as we had no electricity. Being so near the sea we have many 
natural springs, where people would wash clothes. When I wake up, I am 
surrounded by birds in the trees.”


Now, as Babilônia undergoes rapid gentrification, Ribeiro is among the 
residents who are waiting to hear if they will be rehoused 40 miles away in 
Santa Cruz, in the west of Rio – a consequence of the city’s prize-winningMorar 
Carioca <http://www.cidadeolimpica.com.br/en/morar-carioca-2/> plan, introduced 
in 2010 to upgrade all favelas as part of the social legacy of the Olympics. In 
Babilônia, the plan provided for the removal of homes in three “risky” 
categories: those in Areas of Environmental Protection; those whose residents 
receive social rent and who have been rehoused; and homes in “areas of risk”, 
where rains can trigger landslides, such as Ribeiro’s.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9a94a7978440d71c6d4ba9619001e119c9ca990%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olympic%20exclusion%20zone%3A%20the%20gentrification%20of%20a%20Rio%20favela&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olympic%20exclusion%20zone%3A%20the%20gentrification%20of%20a%20Rio%20favela&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9a94a7978440d71c6d4ba9619001e119c9ca990%2F0_0_4288_2848%2F4288.jpg>
 A view of the Babilônia favela from Rio’s popular Leme beach. Photograph: Bert 
Kohlgraf#70921/Flickr Vision 
It is André Constantine, president of the residents’ association, who is 
taking their fight to the city. Fittingly, it seems, the concrete building 
housing his office is located just above the point where the paved road ends. 
From here, he mediates with the housing office, organises meetings to tell 
residents about their rights and dispenses advice to those who climb the stairs 
to his green door. When I visit, a small group of women are waiting in the 
shade outside the health post next door.


Constantine is angry that the city has not kept its initial pledge to rehouse 
all the residents in those categories into three eco-friendly new apartment 
blocks in Babilônia and the adjacent favela, Chapeau-Mangueira. The Morar 
Carioca plan,which has been criticised for not delivering on its original 
promises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/aug/05/rio-de-janeiro-olympics-environment-favelas-architecture>
, led to a partial extension of the main road and improvements to the drainage 
system, but the money ran out before all three apartment buildings could be 
completed. Meanwhile, some residents still lack basic sewerage facilities, he 
points out.

We residents are paying a very high price for these mega-events
André Constantine 
Constantine is particularly enraged by what he says was a deliberate 
deception. “If this is an area of risk, why have they done nothing to make it 
safer? It was declared an area of risk six years ago and nothing has been 
done.” The “lie” of Morar Carioca goes to the heart of a wider cause that 
consumes him: the battle against the city’s “project” of gentrification, which 
he says is pushing poor, mainly black, residents out of favelas in desirable 
areas like the south zone, ahead of the Olympics. “We residents are paying a 
very high price for these mega-events,” he says.

Constantine entered politics following the murder in 2007 of his father, who 
was caught up in the drugs trade. After such a life-changing event, you might 
choose that or religion, he says. He read about political theory and today he 
is a militant leader of the rights movementFavela Não Se Cala 
<https://www.facebook.com/Favela-N%C3%A3o-Se-Cala-421151487976659/> (“the 
favela won’t shut up”). All over the city, he says, similar battles are being 
fought.

Constantine is in no doubt that the ultimate goal of the UPP pacification 
project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/14/rio-olympic-games-2016-favelas-hopes-of-pacification-are-shattered>
 begun in 2009 – whereby armed police seize control of and then occupy favelas 
controlled by drug gangs – is gentrification. “What people have to understand 
is that the UPP police are the protagonists for this process,” he says, 
referring to the tide of property speculation, that has led to inevitable 
“social cleansing”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe77eea88c61a5513ef5e7483c0a85dc7585c020b%2F0_119_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olympic%20exclusion%20zone%3A%20the%20gentrification%20of%20a%20Rio%20favela&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olympic%20exclusion%20zone%3A%20the%20gentrification%20of%20a%20Rio%20favela&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe77eea88c61a5513ef5e7483c0a85dc7585c020b%2F0_119_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Tributes to Mandela and Gandhi on a wall of the Babilônia favela. Photograph: 
Mario Tama/Getty Images 
Since the UPP project began, the price of buying or renting property in the 
favela has doubled, he says, pushing out tenants and preventing settlement by 
migrants from poorer areas ofBrazil <https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>. 
“Someone from the north-east cannot come here and rent a place because it is 
too expensive now. It is only the middle classes who can afford to rent a place 
here now. Even foreigners are moving in to the community, and it is pushing the 
poverty to the edges [of the city].”

Nevertheless, the community looks as though parts of it are still being built 
with bare hands. Above his office, builders are hefting bags of cement on their 
shoulders up the hill. Below, at the UPP unit on the main road, armed police 
look on as foreign tourists trudge up to one of the hostels that has opened 
since pacification. While these new developments might look as modern as any 
building along the beachfront, there are concerns about construction methods 
and materials. Meanwhile, some residents at the top don’t even have toilets, he 
says. Human excrement is just hurled into the trees.

It’s so difficult for us, and tourists add to our problems. It makes me angry
Nivia Ribeiro de Cajazeira 
Ribeiro expresses frustration that the community now has to cater for 
tourists, who leave extra rubbish, for example. “We have so many problems here 
and we have to take care of tourists as well. It’s so difficult for us and 
tourists add to our problems. It makes me angry. We don’t even have a proper 
path to go up [the hill].”


While gentrification has led to new buildings and interest from outsiders, few 
visitors have left anything tangible for the residents, Ribeiro says. “These 
big architecture projects are not carried out in accordance with our reality. 
They don’t bring a school or health clinic, or install internet cables.”

The interest from outsiders is merely transient, she says. “I am tired of 
answering interviews, filling in surveys. Does all that leave anything solid 
behind? If people come here to do a film project, for example, why don’t they 
donate a camera?”


That gentrification has opened up the area and brought new income is evident 
from the crowd usually milling aroundBar do David 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-32884567>, one of several eateries at the 
entrance of Chapeau-Mangueira. The food has won awards and the bar is famous 
for the display of 200 varieties ofcachaça (a spirit made from sugarcane 
juice). Most evenings, Brazilians and tourists alike climb the lower part of 
the hill to sit with a beer and watch the sun go down over the apartment blocks 
that drive a wedge between the favela and the beach. Nearby, a welder in orange 
overalls is mending a rickety metal cart with the word “lunch” scrawled on it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F205603bdf6dbac927921c44fd80cee3a38fde23a%2F0_43_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olympic%20exclusion%20zone%3A%20the%20gentrification%20of%20a%20Rio%20favela&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olympic%20exclusion%20zone%3A%20the%20gentrification%20of%20a%20Rio%20favela&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F205603bdf6dbac927921c44fd80cee3a38fde23a%2F0_43_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A man performs yoga at the top of the Babilônia favela. Photograph: Mario 
Tama/Getty Images 
Bar owner David Bispo, 44, was struggling to make ends meet as a fisherman 
before opening his bar after pacification six years ago. But today he is on 
edge; after years of relative peace, there hasbeen a rare explosion of violence 
between rival drug factions in the two favelas 
<http://odia.ig.com.br/rio-de-janeiro/2016-03-20/tiroteio-no-chapeu-mangueira-mata-dois.html>
. Two nights ago, locals steered foreigners into his bar and drew the shutters. 
During a weekend of gunfire, two men died and a third was injured by a stray 
bullet while he was taking a bath at home. Locals say the gangs were goaded 
into the violence by others from their factions elsewhere in Rio.

Police cars are stationed at the favela entrance as a helicopter hovers 
overhead and acaveirão (the feared black armoured police vehicle) lumbers up 
the hill, sending residents and tourists from the centre to the edges of the 
road.

Bispo, a friendly host who chats in English to customers, says pacification 
has made many feel safer and enabled him to start a successful business, but 
he, too, is wary. “You see foreigners arriving and wanting to live here and 
start a business here in the favela, fleeing taxes elsewhere ... this is a kind 
of cowardice.” He points out that such businesses invariably have an advantage 
over their rivals – the local residents.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb673e00d9b66f274cfc9aaeb49404f2617eba715%2F0_13_2048_1347%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olympic%20exclusion%20zone%3A%20the%20gentrification%20of%20a%20Rio%20favela&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olympic%20exclusion%20zone%3A%20the%20gentrification%20of%20a%20Rio%20favela&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb673e00d9b66f274cfc9aaeb49404f2617eba715%2F0_13_2048_1347%2F2048.jpg>
 Bar owner David Bispo. Photograph:Christine Cellier 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/139213644@N05/25647774082/in/album-72157663582039524/>
His father founded the first residents’ association in Chapeau-Mangueira and 
was involved in theluta, the struggle to remain in the favela under Brazil’s 
military dictatorship. Shouldn’t the benefits of the new era go to the “true 
deservers” he asks, whose ancestors fought for the community? Outsiders help 
businesses like his to thrive, but it irritates him, for example, that a 
foreign toddler has a place at the community nursery but there is no space left 
for a relative’s child.


For decades, state neglect forced a pace of progress that was slow and painful 
in Rio’s favelas, which – unlike many other informal settlements around the 
world – have a largely stable population. While some residents express 
satisfaction that state involvement has brought new income streams and improved 
security, there is anger that changes are imposed from outside, without 
consultation with residents.


Some residents talk about the golden era of the mutirão (an indigenous word 
meaning a group of people who work together to benefit all), when residents 
pooled resources to build their homes.Gentrification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gentrification> belongs to the more 
individualistic development of Rio that has characterised the run-up to the 
Games, they say.

To counter this trend, Pol DHuyvetter, a Belgian who has lived in Babilônia 
since 2012, launchedsolar power project 
<http://www.aroundtherings.com/site/A__54583/Title__Rio-favela-inhabitants-install-solar-panels-in-response-to-soaring-electricity-prices-in-Olympic-city/292/Articles>
 RevoluSolar, empowering residents to become energy self-sufficient as 
electricity bills have risen. “I found out that Babilônia had been presented 
duringRio+20 <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/rio-20-earth-summit> 
summit as a pilot project on sustainable development. But I soon learned this 
had been a PR operation by the Rio host governments and some big companies,” he 
says.

A member of the Belgian renewable energy cooperative Ecopower, he “realised 
that a solar energy cooperative would be a perfect instrument for sustainable 
development with clear economic, social and environmental benefits”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d5899a25c47214854bf28905805c484792124d5%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Olympic%20exclusion%20zone%3A%20the%20gentrification%20of%20a%20Rio%20favela&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Olympic%20exclusion%20zone%3A%20the%20gentrification%20of%20a%20Rio%20favela&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Frio-olympics-exclusion-zone-gentrification-favela-babilonia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d5899a25c47214854bf28905805c484792124d5%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 In Rio, local and foreign entrepreneurs are building hostels in favelas to 
cope with the influx of tourists. Photograph: Pilar Olivares/Reuters 
He says: “One company took advantage of the pacification, the electricity 
company Light … The solar energy project of RevoluSolar wants to counter this 
negative side of gentrification, where a energy company abuses its position and 
is overcharging low-income families despite promises of social tariffs at the 
start of the pacification.”

In Bar Nosso, a restaurant near the bottom of the hill, owner Francisco Nunes 
welcomes the integration of tourists provided that visitors respect the 
residents, a sentiment that Constantine shares, as he tells me when we meet 
again. “We are not against foreigners but we are only in favour of tourism that 
is good for everyone.”

He adds: “We are against ‘safari tourism’ and we have a campaign: the favela 
is not a zoo. It has never been so ‘cute’ to stay in a favela. People take 
selfies in the favela. They come to see how exotic we are.”

Preserving the favela’s culture concerns residents. Some point to Vidigal, 
another favela in the south zone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/23/rio-favela-real-estate>, as an 
example of where gentrification has eradicated this identity. Constantine wants 
to open a museum in the community that celebrates black culture and traditions, 
as well as the Candomblé religion, but the building that was meant to house it 
has been earmarked for more UPP police.

“I dream about a better Brazil, but this is only going to be possible if we 
invest on the right issues like education, culture, art and leisure,” 
Constantine says, clearly frustrated. “What we in the favela want is our rights 
... If you keep the favelas on the margins of society there will always be 
problems.”

The story of cities #15: the rise and ruin of Rio de Janeiro's first favela
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/apr/05/story-cities-15-rio-de-janeiro-first-favela-providencia-2016-olympic-games>
After a deadline expired for the city to reveal its plan for rehousing the 
residents of Babilônia, he is now organising legal action with those affected.

For Ribeiro, meanwhile, the uncertainty continues. “My home is everything. I 
don’t want to leave,” she says. “Ideally, they would build a retaining wall 
behind my house [to prevent a landslide]. I don’t know why they can’t do that.”

Constantine adds: “There are lots of intelligent, interesting people here ... 
[This is] a favela in the middle of a rich area of the city where the taxes are 
the highest, and some people don’t even have a toilet in their home. How long 
are we going to stay here without the government investing in the 
infrastructure and facilities?”

That evening, after leaving Babilônia, I hear on the radio that violence has 
erupted again in the favela. Local residents and foreigners have barricaded 
themselves in a friend’s building and thrown themselves on the floor during 20 
minutes of shooting. A third local man is shot dead.

It seems lasting progress in poor communities is a less reliable outcome than 
gentrification.

Jo Griffin has visited Rio de Janeiro many times with the charity Street Child 
United <http://www.streetchildunited.org/>, which runs sports events and 
programmes for young people in marginalised communities
 