
Cheryl Strayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/26/cheryl-strayed-interview-wild-reese-witherspoon-feminist>
 killed time at a small casino adjoining a Reno bus station at 4am, pack still 
strapped to her back;Jack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac> went down the mountain between 
Las Cruces, New Mexico, and Benson, Arizona, “with the clutch in and the motor 
off to save gas”;Bill Bryson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/billbryson> 
drove through a landscape of gumdrop hills in Virginia, with a sky “full of 
those big fluffy clouds you always see in nautical paintings”, and came across 
towns with names including Snowflake, Horse Pasture and Charity.
 Cheryl Strayed’s memoir Wild was adapted in to a film starring Reese 
Witherspoon. Photograph: DDP USA/Rex Shutterstock 
These are just a handful of the more than 1,500 locations charted in a 
comprehensive and interactive map of American literature’s most iconic 
journeys, created by self-declared “freak for the American road trip” Richard 
Kreitner, in collaboration with developer Steven Melendez, and hosted online by
Atlas Obscura 
<http://www.atlasobscura.com/articles/the-obsessively-detailed-map-of-american-literatures-most-epic-road-trips>
.

“We’re at a time where so many Americans will go to see south-east Asia before 
Kentucky or Arkansas. That’s a real shame,” says Kreitner. He has charted every 
location mentioned in 12 books after travelling around the country himself and 
“obsessively reading” many of the classics. He then spent the last year reading 
and rereading on the subway, manually compiling each of the entries.

To be included, a book needed to have “a narrative arc matching the 
chronological and geographical arc of the trip it chronicles. It needed to be 
non-fictional or, as in the case of On the Road, at least told in the first 
person.” The process, which Kreitner describes as “quixotic”, was a lengthy 
one, but it “wasn’t so difficult with a beer and a record on”, he says.

The project maps something slightly more subtle, too. Kreitner finds special 
resonance in locations about which different authors have written at different 
times. He particularly likes the three varying descriptions of Crater Lake in 
Oregon, where Cheryl Strayed,William Least Heat-Moon 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Least_Heat-Moon> and Robert Pirsig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/19/fiction> “all address the 
contrast between the site’s sacredness to Native Americans and its status as 
just another tourist site to most Americans ... You can ruminate about what 
those differences say about American travel, American writing, American 
history.”

The experience of cross-country trips is still, he argues, quintessentially 
American. His visual representation of this cultural phenomenon also evokes a 
sense of freedom. Until the frontier closed in the 19th century, “[the road 
trip] was like a safety valve for American cities”, says Kreitner. “If anyone 
was restless, they’d just hit the road. ‘Go west, young man,’ was a classic 
phrase. That’s still true – even though there’s no technical frontier anymore, 
you can still pretend there is – that’s what wanderlust is.”
 Jack Kerouac’s On the Road is one of the quintessential novels of the Beat 
movement. Photograph: Jerry Yulsman/Associated Press 
The books plotted by Kreitner and Melendez

• Wild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/09/wild-journey-lost-strayed-review>
 by Cheryl Strayed

• The Cruise of the Rolling Junk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/29/rolling-junk-scott-fitzgerald-review>
 by F Scott Fitzgerald

• Rolling Nowhere: Riding the Rails With America’s Hoboes 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Rolling-Nowhere-Americas-Vintage-Departures/dp/0375727868>
 by Ted Conover

• A Walk Across America 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Walk-across-America-Peter-Jenkins/dp/0449204553> by 
Peter Jenkins

• Cross Country: Fifteen Years and 90,000 Miles on the Roads and Interstates 
of America with Lewis and Clark 
<http://www.amazon.com/Cross-Country-Fifteen-Interstates-America/dp/1582345279> 
by Robert Sullivan

• The Lost Continent <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/lost-continent.html> by 
Bill Bryson

• Blue Highways: A Journey into America 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Blue-Highways-Journey-into-America/dp/0316353299> by 
William Least Heat-Moon

• On the Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/02/100-best-novels-no-76-on-the-road-jack-kerouac>
 by Jack Kerouac

• Roughing It 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Roughing-Signet-Classics-Mark-Twain/dp/0451531108> by 
Mark Twain

• Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/nov/19/fiction> by Robert Pirsig

• Travels with Charley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/aug/03/johnsteinbeck.classics> by John 
Steinbeck

• The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2014/may/02/tom-wolfe-electric-kool-aid-acid-test>
 by Tom Wolfe
 