
‘Lines ready – launch!” The gate in front of me shot open and I flew towards 
Niagara Falls. I was one of the first to try theMistrider 
<http://wildplay.com/niagarafalls/>, a new parallel-line zipwire that hurls 
four people at a time for 670 metres past the American and Bridal Veil Falls 
towards the Horseshoe Falls, at speeds of up to 80km/h.

The three waterfalls comprising Niagara Falls straddle the US-Canadian border; 
the zipwire is on the Canadian side. While Niagara is by no means the world’s 
tallest waterfall (that’s Angel Falls in Venezuela), it is one of its most 
powerful, with more than 168,000 cubic metres of water surging through every 
minute.

“The neat thing about the zipline is that riders get a unique view of the 
falls,” said Tom Benson, CEO of Wildplay, the company that built it. This is 
true not just of the trip down, but of the viewing platform at the bottom, 
accessible only by zipwire. It perches over the Niagara river, close enough to 
Horseshoe Falls that I’m soaked in mist – and deafened by the crashing torrent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F897141e45dc7f3fcfc4df9619ba1d252ffdb9785%2F0_302_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20right%20lines%3A%20a%20new%20zipwire%20over%20Niagara%20Falls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20right%20lines%3A%20a%20new%20zipwire%20over%20Niagara%20Falls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F897141e45dc7f3fcfc4df9619ba1d252ffdb9785%2F0_302_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Letting go at the start of the 670 metre ride, with the gorge 60 metres below 
Photograph: Rachel Dixon for the Guardian 
The line wasn’t yet open to the public (it opened on 15 July ), but it looks 
set to be a hit: the test runs drew large crowds, and 800 riders a day are 
anticipated.

It isn’t as scary as it sounds, though you need a head for heights. The gorge 
is about 60 metres below the launch platform and you can control your descent, 
up to a point. My first time, I “starfished” (arms and legs out wide), which 
slowed me down and let me enjoy the view. On my second go, I “pencilled” (arms 
in, legs out straight), speeding ahead of my fellow riders for a bigger 
adrenaline rush. It takes about a minute to reach the bottom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F204ccea4cb679d344acb1472abc97efd98bd307c%2F166_0_4980_2988%2F4980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20right%20lines%3A%20a%20new%20zipwire%20over%20Niagara%20Falls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20right%20lines%3A%20a%20new%20zipwire%20over%20Niagara%20Falls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F204ccea4cb679d344acb1472abc97efd98bd307c%2F166_0_4980_2988%2F4980.jpg>
 The viewing platform at the bottom is only accessible by zipwire 
The Mistrider isn’t the only new attraction. Also open from yesterday is the 
Whirlpool Adventure Course, an aerial obstacle course above the Niagara rapids. 
It wasn’t ready when I was there, but I did go in a forklift truck to its 
highest point, 15 metres off the ground – with a further 76-metre drop down the 
gorge. The vantage point was dizzying and the course – log ladders, rope 
swings, tightropes and zipwires – looked a lot of fun. A more extreme version 
and a kids’ course are both opening soon.

This is big news for Niagara, where the classic trips seem to have been around 
for ever. The Whirlpool Aero Car, for example, celebrates its 100th birthday 
next month. Eight million tourists visit the Canadian side each year, but now 
Niagara Parks, the government agency that has run the region since 1885, is 
hoping to attract travellers who want more than a quick selfie.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7912229405ade85728dfd3de8d4e9ab3839c4608%2F0_0_1501_1001%2F1501.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20right%20lines%3A%20a%20new%20zipwire%20over%20Niagara%20Falls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20right%20lines%3A%20a%20new%20zipwire%20over%20Niagara%20Falls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7912229405ade85728dfd3de8d4e9ab3839c4608%2F0_0_1501_1001%2F1501.jpg>
 The Niagara Brewing Company 
Another change is in the food on offer. The town of Niagara Falls is all dull 
chains, butthe five restaurants owned by Niagara Parks 
<http://www.niagaraparks.com/niagara-falls-restaurants/> are all certified by 
Feast On <https://feaston.ontarioculinary.com/>, an Ontario scheme under which 
at least 25% of ingredients used have to be sourced locally – I’m told the real 
ratio is closer to 50%.

At the Queen Victoria Place Restaurant 
<http://www.niagaraparks.com/niagara-falls-restaurants/queen-victoria-place-restaurant.html>
 overlooking the falls, I had rainbow trout from Lake Huron ($21) and a glass 
of riesling from nearbyRavine Vineyard <https://www.ravinevineyard.com/>. In 
town, independent restaurantAG <http://www.agcuisine.com/> has a “field to 
fork” menu, using ingredients from local farms and wines from the Niagara 
region. There is even a craft brewery, theNiagara Brewing Company 
<http://niagarabrewingcompany.com/>, which serves beer flights ($8.95) and 
makes a welcome alternative to the Hard Rock Cafe and its ilk. The brewery 
opened last year on what was the World Wrestling Entertainment shop – a neat 
example of how the city is changing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8086f3f792a500a9e6b616fb27bfd273279c1e21%2F0_0_1200_883%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=On%20the%20right%20lines%3A%20a%20new%20zipwire%20over%20Niagara%20Falls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=On%20the%20right%20lines%3A%20a%20new%20zipwire%20over%20Niagara%20Falls&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F17%2Fniagara-falls-new-zipwire-food-restaurants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8086f3f792a500a9e6b616fb27bfd273279c1e21%2F0_0_1200_883%2F1200.jpg>
 AG restaurant 
Niagara is clogged with cars, but driving isn’t necessary: there’s a hop-on, 
hop-off bus, theWego <http://www.wegoniagarafalls.com/>, plenty of places to 
hire bikes, and a 53km Niagara River Recreation Trail to cycle along, plus 15km 
of hiking footpaths through the glen. The area went car-free for Canada Day (1 
July), and plans to make that a regular occurrence.

Other events have included a pilot yoga class by the falls on international 
yoga day (19 June). A food festival is taking place in the botanical gardens in 
September; there are summer gigs in the parks; and a host of activities for 
Canada’s 150th anniversary next year. The souvenir shops are gradually adding 
locally made items that people might actually want to own, rather than snow 
globes and cheesy T-shirts.

There is a long way to go. The overall impression is still of neon, kitsch 
attractions (two waxwork museums!) and bad burgers. And, given the choice, I 
would rather stay at lovely Niagara-on-the-Lake, 22km away, than in the city. 
But it’s a start – even, for riders of the new zipwire, a flying start.

• Accommodation was provided by the Crowne Plaza hotel (doubles from £78, 
crowneplaza.com <https://www.niagarafallscrowneplazahotel.com/>). Flights were 
provided by Air Canada (from £370 return from London to Toronto,aircanada.com 
<http://www.aircanada.com/en/flights/London-to-Toronto.html>). Activities and 
some meals were provided by Ontario Travel (ontariotravel.net 
<https://www.ontariotravel.net/en/home>). The Mistrider zipline costs from 
$50pp and the Whirlpool Adventure Course from $40, book atwildplay.com 
<http://wildplay.com/niagarafalls/>. A two-day Adventure Pass Plus for 
attractions and bus travel is $85 (niagaraparks.com 
<http://www.niagaraparks.com/niagara-falls-deals/niagara-falls-adventure-pass-plus.html>
).
 