
Last year heavy rain across northern England and Wales over Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/25/christmas-day-flood-warnings-prompt-meeting-of-emergency-cobra-committee>
 caused thousands of homes and businesses to flood. Rivers burst their banks 
and residents were evacuated.

At the time we reported on small firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2015/dec/30/business-owners-affected-winter-storms-distraught-everything-is-destroyed>
 whose businesses had been flooded, from a restaurant in York that had only 
been open 18 months, to a gym in Yorkshire that suffered terrible damage. A 
year on, we catch up with the same businesses to see how they are faring.

‘We couldn’t get cover for flooding this year’

Jayne Shepherd co-owns Winner Winner restaurant in Kings Staith, York, with 
her son Michael. The restaurant, which is next to the River Ouse, had been open 
for 18 months when it was completely flooded on Boxing Day

We had been hit by flooding multiple times even before Boxing Day last year. 
We reopened in March, having been closed for three months. We lost absolutely 
everything – tables, chairs, cutlery, kitchen equipment, bar equipment. 
Everything.

It was really difficult. We had a lot of good suppliers who helped us survive. 
On a personal note, there were some great volunteers who pretty much fed us 
every day. It kept us going.

The damage cost around £60,000 and of course, we didn’t have any income for 
three months. We had insurance but we couldn’t get cover for flooding this 
year. There’s not a lot you can do to prevent it. We had floodgates last year 
but the water was so high, it came over the top.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Ffloods-businesses-picked-up-pieces-north-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d6395e0c6dfde6e9d8d1849f4bbe2460ee28a8e%2F0_94_894_787%2F894.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=One%20year%20on%20from%20the%20floods%3A%20businesses%20tell%20how%20they%20picked%20up%20the%20pieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Ffloods-businesses-picked-up-pieces-north-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=One%20year%20on%20from%20the%20floods%3A%20businesses%20tell%20how%20they%20picked%20up%20the%20pieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Ffloods-businesses-picked-up-pieces-north-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d6395e0c6dfde6e9d8d1849f4bbe2460ee28a8e%2F0_94_894_787%2F894.jpg>
 Jayne Shepherd and her son Michael opened the Chicken Shack takeaway this year 
as a backup if the main restaurant is flooded again. 
In August, we opened a small takeaway in the main part of York, in the hope 
that if it happens again we will have something to keep us ticking over. The 
hardest thing over that time was not having any day-to-day income.

We’re looking forward to getting through this winter. By the time we get to 
next summer, we should be back on track. So far, the river’s behaving itself 
but if we get hit again, that will be the end of my business.

‘As soon as it starts raining, we start worrying’

Tony Addison, co-owner of 2 Tone Comics, a comic book store in Hebden Bridge. 
The shop was flooded and lost much of its stock

We opened again in the first week of May. It took us months to dry out and it 
was quite a shock to receive a £2,000 electricity bill for a tiny shop. The 
community raised £12,000 for us and that all went on replacing the damaged 
stock, which was fantastic.


We haven’t seen a massive influx of people coming back to shop in the town. I 
think we’re still suffering from the floods three years ago, when a lot of 
customers started going to Skipton and elsewhere. It would be nice to get back 
to where we were four or five years ago when the town was bustling.

There were so many heroes during the cleanup that a neighbour and I suggested 
holding an alternative Christmas Day in June. We wanted to show the country 
that Hebden Bridge is back open and thank the volunteers who had helped. It was 
weird having carols and snow in the middle of the summer but maybe it will be 
an annual thing.

Today, as soon as it starts raining we start worrying, but I think that’s the 
same for everyone in the valley. Work’s being done on the river but it’s slow.

‘Everything had to go into the skip’

Greg Couzens, owner Greg Couzens hair dressing salon in Rochdale

The floods were horrific. We were lucky because we operate over three floors 
and it was only the ground floor that was affected. We closed off downstairs 
and were open in about three days. The damage cost £7,000.

Everything had to go into the skip because of the sewage in the water, even if 
we suspected it had only been splashed. We used gallons of bleach and 
disinfectant and hosed the shop out.

Business owners affected by winter storms: 'we're distraught - everything is 
destroyed'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2015/dec/30/business-owners-affected-winter-storms-distraught-everything-is-destroyed>
The public and the council have been amazing. We had competitor salons offer 
us somewhere to work, and our neighbour hairdresser, Steve, is still renting 
space with us 12 months later. I would never have considered it before but we 
get on so well and he’s making much more money without the overheads. That’s 
the silver lining for us. Every business here has re-opened, bar one.

‘Business didn’t pick up here until July’

Malcolm Goodwin is the owner of Plonkers Wine Bar in York

We normally get flooded every year, so we’re used to it. If the Foss barrier 
hadn’t failed, no one would have heard anything about flooding in York. It 
would have been classed as a normal occurrence. For once we got help and 
funding, but the council still charges businesses for sandbags – residents get 
them for free.

Because of all the publicity around the flooding, business didn’t pick up here 
until July. Usually Easter is a busy time for pubs and restaurants after 
Christmas but it was a non-event this year. But since July, we haven’t stopped. 
We usually go away in November because it’s quiet but it was too busy this year.

The biggest impact was on cashflow until June. It still cost us the same to 
run the business but we were quieter. But by 1 January, I think that revenue 
for the year will be about the same as 2015.

We all feel we’re not going to get flooded again this year. We’ve been here 26 
years, so you just get a feeling. Let’s hope we’re right.

‘We spent around £15,000 getting back to normal’

Catherine Pearson, co-owner, Seagulls Paint, Kirkstall, west Yorkshire

We were open again reasonably quickly, within two weeks for our main business 
and a couple of months for our art space. That was all thanks to people power. 
The luck of it, if you can call it that, was that it happened over Christmas so 
people were on holiday and had time to help. We had around 40 people 
volunteering.

We probably spent around £10,000-£15,000, getting back to normal but some of 
that was for improvement work so we’d be better equipped if it happened again. 
As a social business, we were able to apply for grants and we ran a 
crowdfunding campaign.

A lot of measures have been put in place to make sure it doesn’t happen in the 
future – one of our neighbours set up a community action group to clean the 
river, which is right behind the yard, and there are going to be new flood 
defences built.

‘Out of every adversity, there’s a solution’

Euan Noble, owner of Rokt Climbing Gym, Brighouse, west Yorkshire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Ffloods-businesses-picked-up-pieces-north-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d5e4f86e2893c992f99820fdfef30cfc4285deb%2F0_326_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=One%20year%20on%20from%20the%20floods%3A%20businesses%20tell%20how%20they%20picked%20up%20the%20pieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Ffloods-businesses-picked-up-pieces-north-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=One%20year%20on%20from%20the%20floods%3A%20businesses%20tell%20how%20they%20picked%20up%20the%20pieces&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Ffloods-businesses-picked-up-pieces-north-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d5e4f86e2893c992f99820fdfef30cfc4285deb%2F0_326_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Euan Noble has spent money on making the building flood resilient. Photograph: 
ROKT Climbing Gym 
Once we were flooded we probably lost £10,000 an hour in terms of our matting 
and equipment. At 4pm on Boxing Day I had to swim out the front door to lock 
up. Thanks to 150 volunteers, we were able to reopen within 48 hours but it was 
April before everything had been rebuilt and repainted.

I don’t think you can calculate the loss of trade. Our normal Christmas period 
was completely spoiled, but trade’s come back reasonably well. We probably 
would have been in profit at the end of last year but it’s going to be early 
next year before we move into a positive trading position.

Since last year we’ve invested in a massive programme to make the place flood 
resilient. We’ve installed steel, waterproof flood doors, bricked up windows, 
put foam poles in walls and bought blocks of high density foam for the floor.

I decided that we could limp along and get the business back to where we 
needed to be, or grow the business. In May we opened an indoor spin studio, and 
we have plans for an indoor nerf studio, an olympic climbing area for 50 elite 
athletes, and we’re building the largest man-made urban climbing structure in 
the country next year.

It’s really lovely to finish the end of the year knowing the fruits of our 
efforts are going to pay off. I suppose it makes you think that out of every 
adversity there’s got to be a solution. You just need to find what it is and 
crack on.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.

 