
What happens when God wants to retire? Although the emperor of Japan is no 
longer a deity, there was a time, not so long ago, when the country’s imperial 
rulers were believed to govern earthly affairs and those of heaven. The current 
emperor, Akihito, is very much human and has no desire to be a god – although 
Japan’s ruling Liberal Democratic party, led by prime ministerShinzo Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe>, would like to restore Japan’s 
pre-war constitution and to return the emperor to god-like status.

That is not something the 82-year-old emperor desires either for himself or 
his successors. In his highly unusualspeech to the Japanese people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/08/japans-emperor-akihito-health-abdication-rare-tv-address>
, he obliquely indicated his desire to relinquish the throne while still alive 
and referred to himself as “a symbol of the state” no fewer than seven times.

Japan's Emperor Akihito says health is failing and hints at abdication
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/08/japans-emperor-akihito-health-abdication-rare-tv-address>
A pacifist who opposes the return to a pre-war militaristic nation, Akihito, 
who came to the throne in 1989, believes firmly in the war-renouncing 
constitution imposed by the allies in 1947, as does his beloved wife, empress 
Michiko. His 2013 birthday press conference spelled it out quite clearly. 
“After the war, Japan was occupied by the allied forces, and based on peace and 
democracy as values to be upheld, established the constitution of Japan, 
undertook various reforms and built the foundation of Japan that we know today. 
I have profound gratitude for the efforts made by the Japanese people at the 
time who helped reconstruct and improve the country devastated by the war. I 
also feel that we must not forget the help extended to us in those days by 
Americans with an understanding of Japan and Japanese culture.” It’s a message 
that the ascending right wing inJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> 
finds unpleasant.

Akihito has a clear disdain for the reinstatement of state shinto. The 
official religion until 1945 was used by the Japanese government to promote 
belief in the divinity of the emperor and became the justification for 
conducting Japan’s imperial expansion in the 1930s. The emperor’s words were 
infallible; the Yamato race was superior. During the second world war millions 
of Japanese soldiers died and killed in the name of emperor Hirohito.

But the son of Hirohito has no truck with forced patriotism. Mark Austin, a 
Scottish journalist in Tokyo who was employed by the Yomiuri, a rightwing 
newspaper that is also the biggest in Japan, wrote in a post on social media: 
“At a press conference on his 68th birthday in 2001, [Akihito] referred to his 
Korean ancestry, shattering a long taboo, and at a spring garden party three 
years later, he mildly, but to devastating effect, admonished a functionary of 
the Tokyo municipal board of education who informed him he’d been touring 
schools to make sure all teachers were standing up for the national anthem, and 
singing it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fjapanese-emperor-akihito-has-feelings-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a4b403f70f44d3df81ca6f64c5637ce719dfa52%2F0_174_2031_2426%2F2031.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%20a%20cruel%20despot%20would%20stop%20Japan%E2%80%99s%20emperor%20retiring%20%7C%20Jake%20Adelstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fjapanese-emperor-akihito-has-feelings-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%20a%20cruel%20despot%20would%20stop%20Japan%E2%80%99s%20emperor%20retiring%20%7C%20Jake%20Adelstein&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fjapanese-emperor-akihito-has-feelings-too%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a4b403f70f44d3df81ca6f64c5637ce719dfa52%2F0_174_2031_2426%2F2031.jpg>
 The Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe: ‘Abdication and the debate and legal 
revision it would require stands in the way of Abe’s burning desire to make 
state shinto a centrepiece of civil society again.’ Photograph: Jiji 
Press/AFP/Getty Images 
“‘It is not good if it is forced,’ he said.

“The lickspittle functionary bowed deeply.

“The encounter created a stir.”

His compassionate work for social causes and his hands-on approach to 
comforting survivors of disasters, meanwhile, have endeared him to the people. 
After the 2011 earthquake and nuclear disaster, he visited survivors who were 
temporarily housed in a gym. He got down on his knees on the floor of the gym 
to speak with them as equals. He later gave an official address to Japan, 
calling on the people to work together to overcome the tragedy. The only other 
time an emperor had made an official address to the nation was on 15 August 
1945, when Hirohito told his subjects that Japan was going to surrender.

The emperor and his wife have also made a point of looking after poor people, 
disabled people and even the Korean-Japanese or Zainichi – many of whom arrived 
in Japan as slave labour and are routinely blamed for economic woes and openly 
harassed. The new governor of Tokyo,Yuriko Koike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/31/tokyo-elects-first-female-governor>
, along with several other cabinet ministers handpicked by Abe, have 
been associated with Zaitokukai, a political group accused of inciting 
hostility towards all foreigners, and Korean-Japanese in particular.

Akihito’s compassion and humility are, by contrast, much appreciated by the 
people, with most polls showing that 80% or more believe he should be allowed 
to abdicate the throne.

Public support for his desire to abdicate may, as Devin Stewart – an expert on 
modern Japan at theCarnegie Council <https://www.carnegiecouncil.org/index.html>
 – has noted, reflect much broader social changes. “Japan is gradually becoming 
a more flexible and individualistic, less traditional society. Paradoxically, 
that also means that people feel they should be able to spend more time with 
their families (a traditional value) as well as more time pursuing hobbies and 
being rested and healthy.”

Under the current law Akihito has to carry on until he dies, and 
constitutional constraints mean that he can’t ask directly for changes in the 
law, he can only hint.

After a lifetime of selfless service and of battling illness and frailty, the 
emperor is, in effect, asking for some mercy and compassion for himself and his 
family. What cruel despot could possibly deny him the rest and retirement he 
deserves? The current prime minister might. Abdication and the debate and legal 
revision it would require stands in the way of Abe’s burning desire to alter 
the constitution, limit civil liberties and make state shinto a centrepiece of 
civil society again.

Akihito’s words about the duty of being a good emperor are, in my opinion, his 
own way of reminding Japan’s leaders to think less about themselves – and 
more about the welfare of the people. It’s a lesson the prime minister could 
certainly learn.

“I ascended to the throne approximately 28 years ago,” Akihito eloquently 
explained, “and during these years, I have spent my days together with the 
people of Japan, sharing much of the joys as well as the sorrows that have 
happened in our country. I have considered that the first and foremost duty of 
the emperor is to pray for peace and happiness of all the people. At the same 
time, I also believe that in some cases it is essential to stand by the people, 
listen to their voices, and be close to them in their thoughts.”

If prime minister Abe really cares about the peace and happiness of the 
Japanese people, he might actually listen to the will of the people and the 
wishes of the man he worships as a god.
 