
It’s time that a decision was made as to whether Israel and Palestine can live 
side by side. Without change soon, the option will not be there. Israel’s 
50-year military occupation of Palestinian territory harms us all. The British 
minister for the Middle East, Tobias Ellwood, has deemed it “unacceptable and 
unsustainable 
<http://jewishnews.timesofisrael.com/middle-east-minister-uk-very-proud-of-role-in-establishing-israel/>
”.

US abstention allows UN to demand end to Israeli settlements
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
Hope of change came when the UN security council, after eight years of 
silence, adopted a resolution with strong UK support once morecondemning 
Israeli illegal settlements in the West Bank and East Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
, and when the US secretary of state, John Kerry, set out hisframework for a 
just peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/obama-and-allies-seek-to-isolate-netanyahu-before-trump-takes-office>
. This Sunday, France will host an international conference seeking an 
equitable basis for ending the occupation.

Our prime minister, Theresa May, is a firm friend of Israel. Friends should 
tell each other the truth. Already, Israel’s prime minister,Benjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/27/netanyahu-john-kerry-friends-security-council-video>
, has rejected the resolution, bizarrely accused Kerry of anti-Israel bias, and 
dismissed the Paris conference without bothering to await its outcome. In 
truth, this is disregard for the law, and the express will of the international 
community. So systematicsettlement expansion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/ban-ki-moon-calls-israeli-settlement-expansion-affront-to-world>
,demolition of Palestinian homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/02/palestinian-families-homeless-as-israeli-military-demolishes-west-bank-houses>
 and the closure of Gaza are set to continue in this low intensity, 
asymmetrical Israel/Palestine war.

The world is weary of this unending occupation and of entrenched, callous 
disregard and hatred, one for the other. The status quo is anything but static. 
It is going wrong fast – increasing injustice for the Palestinians, storing up 
trouble for Israel’s children, and causing grave concern here among those 
responsible for Britain’s national security.

Netanyahu has ignored the advice of his own law officer by supporting 
unprecedented Knesset legislation which wouldlegalise most of the 100 settler 
outposts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/08/un-criticises-israel-settlement-law-west-bank>
 in the Palestinian West Bank, hitherto illegal even under Israeli law. If that 
bill passes, Britain and our partners will need to respond decisively to an act 
designed to prevent the solution of two states long espoused by both peoples – 
Israeli and Palestinian – and by us. Kerry called the one state outcome 
“separate and unequal” – apartheid by my definition, inevitably provoking 
chronic violence.

Indiscriminate Palestinian violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/31/israel-palestine-violence-knife-attacks-west-bank-gaza>
 is morally wrong and futile, whether labelled terrorism or resistance. The 
Palestinians should be pressed to reunite on the basis of Palestine Liberation 
Organisation principles, first among them the recognition of the state of 
Israel on pre-1967 borders, done byYasser Arafat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/nov/11/israel.guardianobituaries> in 
1993 and reaffirmed by Mahmoud Abbas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mahmoud-abbas>. Elections are overdue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/palestinians-national-movement-seventh-fatah-conference>
 in Gaza, the West Bank and East Jerusalem, the occupied Palestinian 
territories recognised as the state of Palestine by over 130 countries – 
although not yet by the UK.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ftwo-state-solution-middle-east-israel-palestine-west-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97f0a186b4af6e661246e8f2fb43a3f8b02a8282%2F5_209_5357_3215%2F5357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%20a%20two-state%20solution%20will%20bring%20peace%20to%20the%20Middle%20East.%20Let%E2%80%99s%20help%20to%20realise%20it%20%7C%20Vincent%20Fean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ftwo-state-solution-middle-east-israel-palestine-west-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%20a%20two-state%20solution%20will%20bring%20peace%20to%20the%20Middle%20East.%20Let%E2%80%99s%20help%20to%20realise%20it%20%7C%20Vincent%20Fean&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Ftwo-state-solution-middle-east-israel-palestine-west-bank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97f0a186b4af6e661246e8f2fb43a3f8b02a8282%2F5_209_5357_3215%2F5357.jpg>
 ‘Benjamin Netanyahu has rejected the UN resolution, bizarrely accused Kerry of 
anti-Israel bias, and dismissed the Paris conference without bothering to await 
its outcome.’ Photograph: Menahem Kahana/AFP/Getty Images 
This conflict is emphatically not between equals, but between the occupier and 
the occupied. Israel is creating new facts on the ground “leading towards one 
state and perpetual occupation 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/28/us/politics/john-kerry-israel-palestine-peace.html>
” as Kerry warned. Before asking what Britain can do now to promote a just 
peace, it is worth saying what won’t work. Quiet diplomacy, for one. We’ve 
tried that. Quiet diplomats get ignored. Second, US-led shuttle diplomacy, such 
as Kerry conducted for nine months. The US is necessary but not sufficient to 
resolve this conflict. And while no one can be sure what hand President Trump 
will play,the omens are bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-israel-ambassador-david-friedman>
.

And we can’t leave it to the two conflicting parties to sort it out. The 
Middle East peace process became just that – a process. Direct unconditional 
negotiations between the strong and the weak only leave the weak, weaker. 
That’s not how to end the occupation. It will need an initiative by the 
international community, shaping the outcome, providing security guarantees, 
upholding the law, ensuring a better tomorrow for both peoples. The Paris 
conference should develop a wider consensus based onsecurity council resolution 
2334 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_Nations_Security_Council_Resolution_2334> 
and re-commit all Arab states to recognising Israel in return for a sovereign 
Palestine.

It is not enough to offer more carrots to both parties, hoping that both will 
bite. Israel has had a surfeit of carrots over the decades. Incentives to the 
Palestinians are contingent on ending the occupation – which only Israel can do.

So there are two things Britain should do. They go together. First, recognise 
the state of Palestine on 1967 borders now, or as soon as the Knesset 
“legalises” outposts, in breach of international humanitarian law; and secondly 
uphold that law without fear or favour – with serious consequences for whoever 
breaks it.

British recognition of Palestine acknowledges the Palestinian right to 
self-determination, affirmed by the UK 18 years ago at the Berlin European 
council. Far from delegitimising Israel, it reaffirms our 1950 recognition of 
Israel on the borders created two years before, unless both parties agree to 
any change. I commenda petition asking our government to recognise Palestine 
<https://Petition.parliament.uk/petitions/174181>.

If we mean what we say about two states, we need to will the means. By 
recognising both states in the two-state solution, we legitimise both. 
Affirming the equal rights of both peoples is consistent with our values and in 
our national interest. One state – separate and unequal – would be unjust, 
unstable and violently divisive: an avoidable disaster for Israelis, 
Palestinians and us. Five years ago, the then foreign secretaryWilliam Hague 
said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/foreign-secretary-updates-parliament-on-middle-east-and-north-africa--2>
: “We reserve the right to recognise a Palestinian state bilaterally at a 
moment of our choosing and when it can best help bring about peace”.I’ve said 
it before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/10/britain-recognise-palestinian-state-uk-vote-parliament>
, but never has it been more true – now is the time.
 