
The Kenyan Ministry of Transport has announced that it is moving forward with 
its plans to build a standard gauge railway (SGR), linking Nairobi with the 
port city of Mombasa, that will cut throughNairobi National Park 
<http://www.kws.go.ke/parks/nairobi-national-park>. 

Nairobi is one of the world’s fastest growing cities. It is also unique in 
encompassing, within its precincts, a major national park that supports lions, 
rhinos, and other large wild animals. Despite its modest size, the biological 
diversity of Nairobi National Park is greater than that of some entire 
countries. It is also a sanctuary of global significance for some endangered 
species, notably the black rhinoceros.

These wonders lie within easy reach of millions of Nairobi residents, as well 
as tourists and business visitors from all over the world. The co-existence, 
side by side, of bustling metropolis and natural wildlife paradise sets Nairobi 
apart from every other capital city on earth.

The proposal to construct a railway through the park has led to a major 
conflict between conservation and development interests, and a heightened level 
of public concern about environmental compliance in the implementation of 
large-scale development projects. It has also divided the conservation 
community in Kenya.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fafrica-wild%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fopposing-camps-to-hold-dialogue-on-railway-through-nairobi-national-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff3a84e8d2bee0d391ad636c8908fa28c2cf09cb%2F0_17_4793_2876%2F4793.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Opposing%20camps%20to%20hold%20dialogue%20on%20railway%20through%20Nairobi%20National%20Park&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fafrica-wild%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fopposing-camps-to-hold-dialogue-on-railway-through-nairobi-national-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Opposing%20camps%20to%20hold%20dialogue%20on%20railway%20through%20Nairobi%20National%20Park&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fafrica-wild%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fopposing-camps-to-hold-dialogue-on-railway-through-nairobi-national-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff3a84e8d2bee0d391ad636c8908fa28c2cf09cb%2F0_17_4793_2876%2F4793.jpg>
 Environmental and wildlife campaigners protest against plans to build a 
railway through Nairobi National Park. Nairobi, Kenya Monday, 17 October 2016. 
Photograph: Ben Curtis/AP 
Most Kenyan conservationists are resolutely opposed to the proposal. However, 
one our most famous and respected colleagues, Richard Leakey, has been at the 
forefront in supporting the proposed project. In my many conversations with 
him, it is clear that he is convinced that, like it or not, Kenya will continue 
to develop and therefore change is inevitable, especially in one of Africa’s 
fastest growing cities.


He thinks that the only way to save the park is to raise the railway on 
pillars like a viaduct 18 m above the park. He is convinced that this will not 
harm the wildlife, but may in fact become recognized as a wonder of technology, 
like the Forth Railway Bridge in Scotland, Cikurutug Bridge in Indonesia which 
soars above a rainforest, and the Landwasser Viaduct in Switzerland to name a 
few.


Richard Leakey believes Africa should not be afraid to aspire to greatness in 
construction, but most of all, he is so confident that it will work in Nairobi 
Park that he believes it will be a model for other African countries facing 
similar challenges, such as the Tanzanian plan to put a road across the 
Serengeti.

The Government of Kenya’s argument in favour of the route through the park is 
more straightforward: it is the cheapest and, technically, the easiest option 
available. But most conservationists in Kenya, and many people around the 
world, would say that it is madness to take a decision like this based purely 
on economic and technical criteria.


New Yorkers would never fill their Central Park with more office buildings, 
even though they would generate tremendous profit. Central Park is the 
soul-restoring asset of New York City. Like Central Park, Nairobi National Park 
is irreplaceable. But it is quintessentially Kenyan, and immeasurably grander 
and greater than anything in New York City.

Surely, this argument goes, the park is a priceless asset. No amount of money 
can buy the feeling of awe and wonder at meeting 4-metre tall giraffes for the 
first time, or the sound of the galloping hooves of thousands of zebras. No 
economic benefits are sufficient to compensate for the loss of the peace and 
tranquillity, the feeling of being at one with nature that the park provides.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fafrica-wild%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fopposing-camps-to-hold-dialogue-on-railway-through-nairobi-national-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ba8657fbe35e0a3a6c6881ef32b9a05fd764c90%2F0_174_5230_3138%2F5230.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Opposing%20camps%20to%20hold%20dialogue%20on%20railway%20through%20Nairobi%20National%20Park&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fafrica-wild%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fopposing-camps-to-hold-dialogue-on-railway-through-nairobi-national-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Opposing%20camps%20to%20hold%20dialogue%20on%20railway%20through%20Nairobi%20National%20Park&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fafrica-wild%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fopposing-camps-to-hold-dialogue-on-railway-through-nairobi-national-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ba8657fbe35e0a3a6c6881ef32b9a05fd764c90%2F0_174_5230_3138%2F5230.jpg>
 A group of female impala stand in grass made long and lush by seasonal rains 
in Nairobi National Park, Kenya, 17 May 2015. Photograph: GRAYLING KENYA PHOTO 
/ STUART PRICE/MEAACT Kenya 
A further concern of environmental experts is that, if the railway crosses 
Nairobi Park, it will set a very dangerous precedent.National parks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/national-parks> in Kenya face multiple 
threats, including from poaching, illegal grazing, mining, and unregulated 
urban and agricultural expansion. At root, all these threats arise from 
conflicts—real or perceived—between economic and environmental conservation 
goals.


By allowing economic interests to trump environmental ones in this case, the 
government and KenyaWildlife <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> 
Service (KWS) will lose the moral authority to protect other parks facing 
comparable threats. This will damage Kenya’s reputation and, potentially, roll 
back decades of conservation successes.

I appreciate all these arguments. To understand them better, I have spoken to 
engineers, land owners, communities, children, politicians, wildlife managers, 
and conservationists. I have visited the site of the massive new railway 
terminal under construction in Nairobi.


I have been criticized by conservationists for considering all options and 
discussing the matter with the railway engineers themselves. But I needed to do 
this in order to understand the different issues and develop my own position.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fafrica-wild%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fopposing-camps-to-hold-dialogue-on-railway-through-nairobi-national-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d3c05eeff6734f2a4710f6633d4904bc0005e13%2F0_199_5293_3176%2F5293.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Opposing%20camps%20to%20hold%20dialogue%20on%20railway%20through%20Nairobi%20National%20Park&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fafrica-wild%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fopposing-camps-to-hold-dialogue-on-railway-through-nairobi-national-park%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Opposing%20camps%20to%20hold%20dialogue%20on%20railway%20through%20Nairobi%20National%20Park&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fafrica-wild%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fopposing-camps-to-hold-dialogue-on-railway-through-nairobi-national-park%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d3c05eeff6734f2a4710f6633d4904bc0005e13%2F0_199_5293_3176%2F5293.jpg>
 Giraffe grazing in Nairobi National Park, Kenya, with the city skyline in the 
background on 17 May 2015. Photograph: GRAYLING KENYA PHOTO / STUART 
PRICE/MEAACT Kenya 
I have come to two conclusions. Firstly, we should apply the precautionary 
principle. Richard Leakey and Kenya Railways have assured President Kenyatta 
that the railway will not damage the park or the wildlife, a view he has 
repeated in speeches. They may be right, but hundreds of experts think 
otherwise, and we will not know who is right until it is done. In my view this 
is simply too risky an experiment for us to test.

But secondly, I recognize that I have no right to expect that my opinion will 
prevail. There is a need for dialogue. By bringing as many people involved 
together to discuss the proposal, we may be able to mitigate some of the 
negative effects and reduce the uncertainty regarding its consequences. It 
could give democratic legitimacy—that is currently sorely lacking—to the final 
decision that is taken.


Last but not least, it will provide the opportunity to initiate an ongoing 
national conversation around the wider issues raised by this case—issues that 
go to the heart of our vision for the future of Kenya and the African continent.

Like many people in this largely Catholic country, I have been inspired by the 
wisdom of Pope Francis in his Encyclical on Nature, where he urgently appeals 
for a new dialogue about how we are shaping the future of our planet:

We need a conversation which includes everyone, since the environmental 
challenge we are undergoing, and its human roots, concern and affect us all … 
Regrettably, many efforts to seek concrete solutions to the environmental 
crisis have proved ineffective, not only because of powerful opposition but 
also because of a more general lack of interest. Obstructionist attitudes, even 
on the part of believers, can range from denial of the problem to indifference, 
nonchalant resignation or blind confidence in technical solutions. We require a 
new and universal solidarity … All of us can cooperate as instruments of God 
for the care of creation, each according to his or her own culture, experience, 
involvements and talents.

When I first mooted the idea of a dialogue a few weeks ago, I had no idea what 
the response would be. I have been heartened by the widespread and generous 
support the idea has received. This has enabled my organization WidlifeDirect, 
together with other conservation organizations, Kenya Railways, KWS and three 
research institutions to convene a meeting between government and other 
stakeholders that will take placin Nairobi on 27th October.

Even though the Phase 2 of the railway was formally launched last week, our 
hope is that there is still time to achieve a negotiated consensus on the best 
outcome for conservation and development. If successful, this dialogue will not 
only help secure the future of Nairobi National Park. It can also be the start 
of a process, building bridges between politicians, planners, engineers and the 
conservationists to improve decision making for future development projects.

 