
WINTER IS COMING

With Storm Angus currently battering the UK with torrential rain and high 
winds, The Fiver can’t think of anywhere it would rather spend a cold, wet, 
dark November Monday night listening to its own teeth chatter than the Premier 
League’s highest, most exposed football stadium. Luckily, we won’t have to 
because we live in a well-appointed yurt in that there cosmopolitan Big London, 
unlike the good people of West Bromwich, where actual tornadoes have been 
reported in recent days. Still, at least locals planning to brave the terrible 
weather, wrap up well and shuffle along to Mt Hawthorns (168m above sea level) 
to support their local football team against Burnley can at least console 
themselves with the prospect of a thrilling night’s football entertainment, eh? 
Eh? Oh.

West Brom’s Saido Berahino returns to fitness camp in France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/20/west-broms-saido-berahino-returns-fitness-camp-france>
In a match for which the phrase “nil nil written all over it” might well have 
been coined, the inclement weather is unlikely to add to the gaiety of the 
spectacle on a night that promises to be so miserable even James McClean might 
consider wearing a poppy on his jersey if he thought it would afford him that 
extra little bit of extra protection from the cold. What’s more, if the Baggies 
are to out-counter-attack their counter-attacking visitors in a match where 
there seems to be a genuine possibility the ball won’t actually leave the 
centre-circle, they will once again have to do so without Saido Berahino. 
Having just returned full of vim and vigour from a fitness camp in the south of 
France after being judged overweight and unfit in September, the strikerhas now 
announced that he is going back there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/20/west-broms-saido-berahino-returns-fitness-camp-france>
 in a statement that suggests he is currently in a dark place.

“This last year has been the most difficult of my career and it has left me 
short of the form and fitness required for the Premier League,” said Berahino, 
who has gone from 20-goal-a-season striker to punchline in under two years. “I 
have never been a player who lacked confidence or a belief in himself but that 
has been where I have found myself and it has hit me hard. It has left me 
feeling depressed and struggling for focus which has made it even more 
difficult to regain full fitness.”

While The Fiver hopes Berahino finds the answers to whatever it is he’s 
looking for across the Channel, we can’t help but feel that, for tonight at 
least, he’s dodged a bullet and it will be interesting to see how many of West 
Brom’s fans also decide to avoid a trip to the Hawthorns tonight by opting to 
stay home, turn on their TVs and watch something else. With their team’s match 
being broadcast live by Sky Sports, the alternative seems so much more 
appealing: stay home, turn on the TV and settle down to watch something else.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE TONIGHT!

Join Gerard Meagher for red-hot minute-by-minute coverage of West Brom 0-0 
Burnley at 8pm GMT. <https://www.theguardian.com/football>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“If they come, they come. We have many dogs at home” – Helsingborg boss Henrik 
Larsson reminds hooded fans who confronted his son on the pitch after the 
club’s relegation from the Swedish first division thatthey’ll get a friendly 
welcome if they come knocking at his front door 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/20/henrik-larsson-jordan-son-confronted-helsingborg-supporters-relegation>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fopting-to-stay-home-turn-on-their-tvs-and-watch-something-else%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06bb20170ae7d5e947e9081066e04e1b12d813ac%2F0_156_3019_1812%2F3019.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Opting%20to%20stay%20home%2C%20turn%20on%20their%20TVs%20and%20watch%20something%20else&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fopting-to-stay-home-turn-on-their-tvs-and-watch-something-else%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Opting%20to%20stay%20home%2C%20turn%20on%20their%20TVs%20and%20watch%20something%20else&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fopting-to-stay-home-turn-on-their-tvs-and-watch-something-else%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06bb20170ae7d5e947e9081066e04e1b12d813ac%2F0_156_3019_1812%2F3019.jpg>
 Henrik Larsson without his dogs, earlier. Photograph: Robin Aron/Ombrello via 
Getty Images 
FIVER LETTERS

“Can I be the first of the many heartwarming prison-based drama pedants to 
point out that Andy Dufresne is sanding a boat at the end of The Shawshank 
Redemption, not polishing it? Although given his reported living arrangements 
it’s easy to imagine Jose sat in his hotel room with only a poster of Rita 
Hayworth for company” – David Hopkins (and no others).

“Re: Rooney. A lot of fluff about nothing, really. Couldn’t help but be 
reminded of the time, (long ago, children), when Taxpayers FC were away at 
Blackpool, got beat there, very surprisingly, at the time. Out pops a news 
story to the effect that Bobby Moore had been out on the pop the night before 
the game!! Ooh, it was a proper scandal. Some West Ham fans were interviewed 
outside Upton Park; there were the predictable whingers, but then, out of the 
blue, a senior fan, (looked about 80), said that if he was Bobby Moore, and if 
he had to play with some of the players at the club … he’d have a few himself. 
He then beetled off, stage left: I’m sure you could hear the TV crew shoving 
fists in their mouths trying (unsuccessfully) to stifle the guffaws” – James 
Treacy.

“After Pep banned post-midnight shenanigans for his players, Alex Neil may 
want to stop his from readingThe Joy of Six 
<https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fthe-joy-of-six-nefarious-goal-line-handballs&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEP2QOWVyWcut9oyi2mCEtHtApysA>
 before games in case they get any morebright ideas 
<http://www.skysports.com/football/news/11709/10664449/watch-norwichs-martin-olsson-sent-off-inside-two-minutes-in-qpr-defeat-for-handball>
” – Jim Hearson.

“Looking forward to seeing Gary Mantle’s letter in Monday’s Fiver” – Adam 
Roberts (and 1,056 others).

“May I be the last of 1,057 to point out that of the five teams Arsenal have 
dropped points against this season, four have names beginning with either an L 
(Liverpool, Leicester) or M (Middlesborough, Manchester United), the other team 
being Spurs. Of course, I considered this tidbit alone unworthy of T he Fiver  
Football Manager 17, and so investigated further and wouldn’t you know it, of 
the five players to score against them in these games, four have names starting 
with K (Kane), L (Lallana), or M (Mané, Mata), the other player being Coutinho. 
So there you go, Arsenal are definitely winning the league this season. Or not. 
Can I have Football Manager now?” – Joseph Scott.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
letter o’the day isJim Hearson, who receives a copy of Football Manager 2017 
<http://www.footballmanager.com/games/football-manager-2017> from those good 
people at Football Manager Towers, and it’s out now! We’ve got a few more 
copies to give away, so if you want one, keep the letters coming.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING

Join AC Jimbo and co for the latest dose of Football Weekly! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/footballweekly>

BITS AND BOBS

Police are investigating alleged racial abuse towards Wycombe Wanderers’ 
Adebayo Akinfenwa. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/cambridge-united-adebayo-akinfenwa-wycombe-wanderers>
 “It’s a shame that a small group of Cambridge fans focus on colour rather than 
the game,” he said.


Liverpool boss Jürgen Klopp accepts that teams are going to pull down the 
shutters when his tricky Reds are in town. “There is nothing to moan about, you 
can’t ask them: ‘Come on, give us a little more space or something?’ Before the 
season we had to work on this,” heKlopped. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/20/liverpool-jurgen-klopp-southampton>

David Moyes has been busy blowing smoke up Victor Anichebe’s tail. “Victor was 
like a young Didier Drogba,”parped Moyes. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/20/victor-anichebe-sunderland-david-moyes-hull-city>
 “He was immense [against Hull].”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fopting-to-stay-home-turn-on-their-tvs-and-watch-something-else%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5419cca7addb07fbb60f945d416c64360aa4582%2F0_44_1733_1040%2F1733.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Opting%20to%20stay%20home%2C%20turn%20on%20their%20TVs%20and%20watch%20something%20else&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fopting-to-stay-home-turn-on-their-tvs-and-watch-something-else%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Opting%20to%20stay%20home%2C%20turn%20on%20their%20TVs%20and%20watch%20something%20else&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fopting-to-stay-home-turn-on-their-tvs-and-watch-something-else%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5419cca7addb07fbb60f945d416c64360aa4582%2F0_44_1733_1040%2F1733.jpg>
 The new Didier Drogba, left. Photograph: Craig Brough/Reuters 
José Mourinho reckons Paul Pogba is eventually finding his feet in the 
Manchester United midfield. “He is comfortable on the pitch. That is the best 
way of saying it,”soothed Mourinho. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/20/jose-mourinho-paul-pogba-arsenal-manchester-united>

And Jürgen Klinsmann’s USA! USA!! USA!!! side will definitely qualify for the 
World Cup despite a 4-0 rout in Costa Rica, says, erm Jürgen Klinsmann. “This 
team is always capable of reacting,”he bellowed. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/jurgen-klinsmann-usa-football-team-world-cup-2018-qualifying>
 “We’ll correct this with the two games in March [against Honduras and Panama] 
and we’ll take one game at a time from there to get our points. I’m 1,000% sure 
we’ll qualify.”


STILL WANT MORE?

There’s plenty to mull over at Bayern Munich after defeat by Dortmund at the 
weekend,writes Raphael Honigstein. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/21/bayern-munich-make-for-uncomfortable-viewing-as-dortmund-issue-statement>


About Him.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/21/cristiano-ronaldo-takes-one-last-look-at-the-calderon-as-zidanes-legacy-begins>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fopting-to-stay-home-turn-on-their-tvs-and-watch-something-else%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e993de3c21b1dc9af0594c1d1622e671891404a%2F0_258_3257_1954%2F3257.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Opting%20to%20stay%20home%2C%20turn%20on%20their%20TVs%20and%20watch%20something%20else&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fopting-to-stay-home-turn-on-their-tvs-and-watch-something-else%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Opting%20to%20stay%20home%2C%20turn%20on%20their%20TVs%20and%20watch%20something%20else&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fopting-to-stay-home-turn-on-their-tvs-and-watch-something-else%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e993de3c21b1dc9af0594c1d1622e671891404a%2F0_258_3257_1954%2F3257.jpg>
 Him being Him. Photograph: Gerard Julien/AFP/Getty Images 
Silvio Berlusconi offered-up a theatrical farewell, but is he really going to 
do one from the San Siro,ponders Paolo Bandini. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/milan-derby-inter-silvio-berlusconi-farewell>

Here’s a thought, writes Gregg Bakowski, how the eff do footballers do what 
they do? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/heres-a-thought-how-do-footballers-do-what-they-do>


Ed Aarons has had a chin-wag with John Ruddy about Norwich City’s predicament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/nov/21/norwich-john-ruddy-backs-alex-neil-manager-qpr-pressure>
 and hard lines for Alex Neil.


Is Gustavo Viera heading to Anfield? More unfounded tittle-tattle right here 
in today’s Rumour Mill. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/football-transfer-rumour-mill-liverpool-gustavo-viera-liverpool>


Might Robbie Keane and $tevie Mbe’s pending exits from USA! USA!! USA!!! spell 
the end for LA Galaxy’sGalácticos era? 
<https://dashboard.ophan.co.uk/info?path=/football/blog/2016/nov/21/los-angeles-galaxy-mls-steven-gerrard-robbie-keane>


What’s going on at Everton, Virgil van Dijk’s burgeoning price-tag and Nathan 
Aké’s touch of class.That and seven more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/21/premier-league-10-talking-points-crystal-palace-arsenal-west-ham>
 talking points from the weekend’s Premier League action. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/21/premier-league-10-talking-points-crystal-palace-arsenal-west-ham>


Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


VOTE HAL!  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/lionel-messi-goal-fifa-puskas-award>
 