
A rusting, unusable boat, abandoned at sea. Its crew left to fend for 
themselves 70 nautical miles off the coast of Guinea, west Africa, without 
radio or safety equipment, abandoned by the boat’s operator.

This is just one shocking story of a global fishing industry that is rife with 
incidents of abuse, murder and slavery. Human rights exploitation in the 
seafood sector is a tragedy that has been documented for a decade.

The abandoned boat story dates back to 2006 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/news/features/zombie-ships/>; while 
aUN survey <http://www.no-trafficking.org/reports_docs/siren/siren_cb3.pdf> 
(pdf) dating back to 2009 found that nearly two-thirds of migrants aboard Thai 
fishing boats reported seeing a fellow worker murdered. In a few, fortunate 
cases, people have been rescued, such as theBurmese crewmen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/01/slave-ships-papua-new-guinea-hunt-burmese-men-trawler>
 found enslaved in cages in Indonesia last year.

This human crisis at the heart of the seafood sector was the topic of a 
seminar discussion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jul/18/slavery-in-the-seafood-supply-chain-what-can-we-do-about-it-event>
, hosted by the Guardian and supported by Seafish, a non-departmental 
government body. A panel of experts was chaired by Guardian journalist Annie 
Kelly.

Boycotting slavery

For Thailand, the issue became more acute last year, when the EU threatened it 
with atrade ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/21/eu-threatens-thailand-with-trade-ban-over-illegal-fishing>
 on seafood imports if it did not tackle illegal fishing and labour abuses. An 
EU-wide ban could cost the country$1bn (£780m) a year 
<http://www.eubusiness.com/news-eu/thailand-fishing.12m8/> in lost trade. 
Companies and retailerslinked to slavery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/10/supermarket-prawns-thailand-produced-slave-labour>
 via their supply chains, including Tesco, Aldi, Iceland and the Co-op, have 
also been under pressure to boycott the country’s exports.

“I have never witnessed anything remotely like what was going on in Thailand – 
in case after case you were talking violent abuse and murder,” said Steve 
Trent, co-founder of the Environmental Justice Foundation. “These were not 
isolated cases. It was institutionalised in the seafood sector.” He blames the 
scale of the problem on a poor culture of enforcement in Thailand and the 
inherent vulnerability of its seafood workforce; 90% are migrants, many of whom 
have been trafficked into the country.
 A podcast of the Guardian debate on slavery in the seafood supply chain - 
September 2016 
Thai Union 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/07/27/world/outlaw-ocean-thailand-fishing-sea-slaves-pets.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&module=photo-spot-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news&_r=5>
, the world’s biggest tuna exporter and owner of the John West brand, is one of 
the brands alleged to have benefited from the use of labour. Itclaims 
<http://tu.listedcompany.com/newsroom/20160615-tu-modern-slavery-en.pdf> to 
have terminated relationships with 17 suppliers as a result of forced labour or 
human trafficking violations since the start of 2015. But the company’s 
sustainability director, Darian McBain, said boycotting Thailand would achieve 
little. “Companies might say they’ll just source from another country that has 
no slavery in their supply chain, but I’d like to know what that country is. 
This is an issue that occurs across the fishing industry worldwide.”

By staying put in Thailand, companies can have more impact, said Libby 
Woodhatch, head of advocacy at Seafish. “[Companies] have the buying power 
collectively to make a difference and ensure [slavery] isn’t acceptable and 
that regulations are enforced,” she said.

Threat of lawsuits

Since the publication of damning investigations by the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jun/10/supermarket-prawns-thailand-produced-slave-labour>
 and Associated Press, multinationals, includingNestlé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/nov/24/nestle-admits-forced-labour-in-seafood-supply-chain>
 andThai Union 
<http://tu.listedcompany.com/newsroom/20160615-tu-modern-slavery-en.pdf>, have 
openly admitted to problems with slave labour and human rights abuse in their 
supply chains. McBain sees little benefit to this transparency. “There are a 
lot of companies you have never heard of that are dealing with seafood. That 
isn’t to say they are being more transparent with their supply chains or 
investing more into them, it’s just that you’ve never heard of them,” she said. 
“Some of theUS legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/obama-revives-anti-slavery-law-to-target-thailands-seafood-exports>
 like the Trade Facilitation and Trade Enforcement Act actually makes you more 
cautious about what you say about what you find in your supply chain, rather 
than encouraging transparent dialogue.”
Yuki Lo (@yukilo) 
Great panel on slavery in seafood industry "it seems we care more about the 
fish than the fishermen"#slaveryevent 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/slaveryevent?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/MrRdBqgYmu 
<https://t.co/MrRdBqgYmu>
 <https://twitter.com/yukilo/status/776351188291903488> September 15, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/yukilo/status/776351188291903488> 
For human rights barrister and UN expert on trafficking Parosha Chandran, it 
is not media coverage that companies should worry about but legal action from 
individual victims of slavery or human rights abuses. While theModern Day 
Slavery Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/dec/14/modern-slavery-act-explained-business-responsibility-supply-chain>
 in the UK does not provide for civil remedies for those who have been abused, 
she said it could be possible under international law.

In the US, cases against Nestlé and Costco have failed. But an ongoing lawsuit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/18/cambodian-villagers-sue-us-thai-firms-human-trafficking-forced-labour-claims-walmart-shrimp>
 brought on behalf of Cambodian fishermen recruited to work in the Thai seafood 
industry and filed against four companies, including alleged suppliers to 
Walmart, could set a successful precedent. “There is a momentum towards 
litigation because as human rights lawyers we are looking at the abused and 
ways to have their voices heard that say stop this,” said Chandran.


One of the main obstacles at present is the defenselessness of workers in the 
seafood sector, particularly those working on boats. “This is an incredibly 
vulnerable community of victims ... out at sea, remote. Unless there is a 
system that enables victims to feel safe and encouraged to come forward and 
give evidence there is going to be a big gap in bringing companies to account,” 
said Chandran.

Response from industry

While much of the focus has been on Thailand as a major supplier of seafood to 
Europe and the US, Trent pointed out that you could also find human rights 
abuses on an individual scale in the UK, France or Spain. In response, Seafish 
has added human rights clauses to its certification scheme for fishermen. 
Backed by third-party checks, the updatedResponsible Fishing Scheme (RFS) 
<http://www.seafish.org/rfs/> aims to give fishermen and boat operators a 
chance to prove they are not exploiting or endangering crews, as well as 
adhering to sustainable catching methods, Woodhatch said.

A number of UK retailers, including Marks & Spencer, have made commitments to 
ensure all their suppliers are RFS certified. However, a former fishing 
industry auditor in the audience criticised the scheme for interviewing only 
the captain as part of the auditing process, rather than speaking to ordinary 
crew members. Trent agreed, “It makes no sense. They are the fishermen catching 
the fish. They are completely outside all these schemes”. Woodhatch said they 
wanted to incorporate crew interviews into future revisions of the scheme.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fslavery-thai-fishing-industry-worker-suicides-video-animation&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402326079810%2FThai-Prawns-Animation-2-010.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Slavery%20in%20the%20Thai%20fishing%20industry%3A%20how%20workers%20are%20being%20driven%20to%20suicide%20%E2%80%93%20video%20animation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fslavery-thai-fishing-industry-worker-suicides-video-animation>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Slavery%20in%20the%20Thai%20fishing%20industry%3A%20how%20workers%20are%20being%20driven%20to%20suicide%20%E2%80%93%20video%20animation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fjun%2F10%2Fslavery-thai-fishing-industry-worker-suicides-video-animation&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F6%2F9%2F1402326079810%2FThai-Prawns-Animation-2-010.jpg>
Slavery in the Thai fishing industry: how workers are being driven to suicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2014/jun/10/slavery-thai-fishing-industry-worker-suicides-video-animation>
Chandran also pointed out that as the scheme was voluntary and did not yet 
cover non-UK boats, its impact on the wider global problem of human rights 
abuse in the seafood sector was limited. To get that global impact in Asia, 
Africa and Europe, individual companies need to be accountable under UK laws, 
she said. “If a British company is able to establish itself in an industry 
where there is an absence of rights for workers, then it’s a necessity to 
ensure there is protection for the workers.”

McBain and Woodhatch agreed that this is a difficult task for seafood 
companies, especially when they source fish on a daily basis from multiple 
boats. Chandran said the most obvious solution is to work with competitors to 
check on suppliers or shorten the supply chain. Trent concurred: “The more 
companies only source from people they have reasonable degrees of surety 
[about] the more it squeezes out the dark side. You can’t switch to a situation 
where you have no slavery or abuse tomorrow, but you can push very hard.”
Helen McTaggart (@helenmctaggart) 
At @GuardianSustBiz <https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz> #slaveryevent 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/slaveryevent?src=hash> @ejfoundation 
<https://twitter.com/ejfoundation> calls on biz to show l'ship in slavery + 
fish. M&S set out public target on@SeafishRFS <https://twitter.com/SeafishRFS>
 <https://twitter.com/helenmctaggart/status/776379093176705024> September 15, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/helenmctaggart/status/776379093176705024> 
For Thai Union those first steps have seen it end the use 
<http://tu.listedcompany.com/newsroom/20160615-tu-modern-slavery-en.pdf> of 
employment brokers to source workers for its seafood processing plants. This 
was to stop workers being indebted to brokers (bonded labour) – but it does not 
apply to workers on fishing boats.

Beyond companies changing their policies, Chandran and Trent said there needed 
to be laws to protect worker rights and allow them to unionise. Both of these 
steps would undoubtedly come at the cost of cheap seafood.

McBain pointed out that at least one retailer promises to bring prices down 
every year. “If prices are going down each year, where is the money for the 
workers and the living wage at every point along that supply chain?” The 
answer, said Woodhatch, was that retailers had to take the decision out of 
consumers’ hands and ensure they don’t sell seafood produced using slave 
labour. “The consumer is hit with so much information about what they should 
and shouldn’t eat. When they go into the supermarket they are just trying to 
decide what to eat for dinner. The retailer must make those decisions and have 
standards.”

The panel
Chair: Annie Kelly, Guardian Global Development
Parosha Chandran, human rights barrister and UN expert on trafficking
Libby Woodhatch, head of advocacy at Seafish
Darian McBain, sustainability director at Thai Union
Steve Trent, founder of the Environmental Justice Foundation
 