
Andrew Clements


For me, the best concert was the one given by Martha Argerich and Daniel 
Barenboim, friends since childhood and two of the greatest musicians of our 
age. They were dazzling together forLiszt’s Second Piano Concerto with the 
West-Eastern Divan Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/18/west-eastern-divan-orchestra-barenboim-argerich-review-prom-43-royal-albert-hall>
, and in the Schubert four-hand duet as an encore, all followed by extracts 
from Tannhäuser, Götterdämmerung and Die Meistersinger that showed that 
Barenboim has no peers today as a Wagner interpreter.

The most memorable single performance was the centrepiece of a late-night 
tribute to Pierre Boulez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/04/berlin-po-rattle-bbc-singers-eic-review-proms-pierre-boulez>
: Jeanne-Marie Conquer’s fabulously assured account of his exuberant Anthèmes 
II for solo violin and electronics, setting up intricate polyphonies between 
the live instrument and its digitally transformed alter ego and sending 
luscious tendrils of sound spinning around the Albert Hall.

Malcolm Hayes’s Violin Concerto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/14/bbc-now-sondergard-proms-2016-review-huw-watkins-malcolm-hayes>
, introduced by Tai Murray, with the BBC National Orchestra of Wales conducted 
by Thomas Søndergård, was easily the most impressive new work in the season, 
clearly rooted in the English pastoral tradition, but steering it in a 
strikingly different direction.


Erica Jeal

Pekka Kuusisto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/25/facing-the-music-violinist-pekka-kuusisto>
 playing theTchaikovsky violin concerto 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ecmwhn#p04470vv> – because the Proms should be 
about making us listen to well-known repertory in a new way.And because he’s 
one of those performers who always reminds me of why I love music 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/3ty9xdhRff7rXLDSmrlrH5z/how-to-ace-an-encore-in-8-easy-steps>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fbbc-proms-2016-highlights-guardian-critics-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb56cc5d1ecc992165af76686fbe3e9b4ee89497e%2F8_92_1552_931%2F1552.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20critics'%20proms%20highlights%20-%20what%20were%20yours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fbbc-proms-2016-highlights-guardian-critics-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20critics%27%20proms%20highlights%20-%20what%20were%20yours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fbbc-proms-2016-highlights-guardian-critics-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb56cc5d1ecc992165af76686fbe3e9b4ee89497e%2F8_92_1552_931%2F1552.jpg>
 Marin Alsop conducts the Orchestra of the Age of Enlightenment and the BBC 
Proms Youth Choir in a performance of Verdi’s Requiem. Photograph: Chris 
Christodoulou/BBC 
The penultimate night’s Verdi Requiem with Marin Alsop, the OAE and the Proms 
Youth Choir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/11/verdi-requiem-last-night-of-the-proms-juan-diego-florez-martin-alsop-oramo-review>
. A big “event” piece such as this suits the Albert Hall perfectly, and this 
was done really well.


Steve Reich in the Peckham car park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/04/multi-story-orchestrabold-tendencies-review-peckham-proms>
 was the Prom I personally enjoyed most. I like that the Proms went out and 
about this year, possibly to involve new audiences - but I hope they don’t move 
the emphasis much further away from the Albert Hall, and, if they are really to 
get a substantially different crowd in, they need to look at new ways of 
selling and promoting the tickets.

Martin Kettle

Philippe Jordan’s prom on 30 August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/31/gustav-mahler-youth-orchestra-jordan-bruckner-bach-royal-albert-hall>
 with the Gustav Mahler Jugendeorchester produced the best sheer orchestral 
playing I heard all season, with near ideal balance and weight of sound in 
Bruckner’s 9th. The pairing with Bach’s Cantata “Ich habe genug”, with 
Christian Gerhaher’s fine artistry in the solo baritone part, was hugely daring 
but very compelling, giving a spare Lutheran and a grand Catholic vision of 
mortality.


Simone Young’s command of Zemlinsky’s Lyric Symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/01/bbcso-young-review-royal-albert-hall-london-prom-62>
 the following evening was a reminder that this very fine female conductor has 
been neglected by UK orchestral managements during her many years in Germany. 
It’s high time the BBC Symphony Orchestra added a female conductor to their 
roster; Young would be an ideal choice.

For sheer musical personality power, no one bettered Martha Argerich in 
Liszt’s first piano concerto on 17 August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/18/west-eastern-divan-orchestra-barenboim-argerich-review-prom-43-royal-albert-hall>
, a performance that elevated the piece from hackneyed to dazzling.

Stephen Moss
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fbbc-proms-2016-highlights-guardian-critics-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cc7ce4818e89bc0c4cb9c8cffaf3a1833ee805a%2F0_191_1792_1075%2F1792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20critics'%20proms%20highlights%20-%20what%20were%20yours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fbbc-proms-2016-highlights-guardian-critics-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20critics%27%20proms%20highlights%20-%20what%20were%20yours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fbbc-proms-2016-highlights-guardian-critics-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cc7ce4818e89bc0c4cb9c8cffaf3a1833ee805a%2F0_191_1792_1075%2F1792.jpg>
 Herbert Blomstedt conducts the Leipzig Gewandhausorchester in an all-Beethoven 
prom. Photograph: Chris Christodoulou/BBC/Chris Christodoulou 
My live highlight was Stephen Hough 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/events/performers/fd7e7a8f-38b4-4c6a-964f-3c9ed53a898e>
’s lovely, funny and unexpected encore, whenhe imagined the lilting Russian 
song Moscow Nights in the style of Rachmaninov 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/eq5c8g#b07pj9zk> [55mins 20 seconds in]. It was a 
very nice moment when the audience realised what he was doing. It was perhaps a 
season of encores – theArgerich-Barenboim 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ezw2mb#b07rkvp4> pairing in Schubert was also 
irresistible.

The concert I’ve made a point of listening to a couple of times on catchup is 
HerbertBlomstedt conducting the Leipzig Gewandhaus 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ex65v2#b07qbnvz> in an all-Beethoven programme. I 
feltI was hearing the pulsating Beethoven 7 with fresh ears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/30/leipzig-gewandhaus-blomstedt-beethoven-proms-royal-albert-hall-london>
.

I also enjoyed William Christie and Les Arts Florissants in Bach’s Mass in B 
Minor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/02/les-arts-florissants-william-christie-bach-review-prom-63>
, a work I know I should appreciate but have never quite got my head around. 
Some critics in the hall found Christie’s chamber-music approach underwhelming, 
but listening at home I was spellbound.


Tim Ashley

The semi-staged operas that came towards the season’s end struck me as 
particularly thrilling:Janáček’s The Makropulos Affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/21/the-makropulos-affair-review-proms-2016-karita-mattila-jiri-belohlavek-janacek>
, with Karita Mattila simply outstanding as Emilia Marty; andRossini’s 
Semiramide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/05/semiramide-at-the-proms-review-opera-rara>
, in which Mark Elder conducted a virtuoso cast more than capable of coping 
with its demands.Thomas Larcher’s Second Symphony 
<https://backward-compatible/music/2016/aug/29/bbcso-bychkov-larcher-premiere-proms-royal-albert-hall-review-faultless-performance-of-larchers-furious-premiere>
, meanwhile, made a huge impression at its UK premiere: an immensely powerful 
work that combines rigorous structural logic with an angry lament for those who 
drowned in the Mediterranean during the refugee crisis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fbbc-proms-2016-highlights-guardian-critics-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71f5bda2a09b1018795ed33e673b88428581737d%2F0_260_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20critics'%20proms%20highlights%20-%20what%20were%20yours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fbbc-proms-2016-highlights-guardian-critics-readers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20critics%27%20proms%20highlights%20-%20what%20were%20yours%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fbbc-proms-2016-highlights-guardian-critics-readers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71f5bda2a09b1018795ed33e673b88428581737d%2F0_260_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 The Multi Story Orchestra conducted by Christopher Stark perform Steve Reich’s 
Vermont Counterpoint, Eight Lines and Music for a Large Ensemble, part of the 
2016 BBC Proms.. Photograph: BBC/Mark Allan 
Fiona Maddocks

I’d been to several events at the Bold Tendencies Multi Storey Car Park before 
and feared theall-Reich concert <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e2pj5v#b07rkv00> 
was a belated attempt for the Proms to be urban and edgy. In fact the mood was 
as intense and exhilarating as any concert all season, the audience a mix of 
never-miss-a-Prom regulars and curious locals.

George Hall

In terms of a conductor and a top-class orchestra devoting themselves to a 
particular repertoire and delivering it to the highest standards possible, the
John Wilson Orchestra’s Gershwin <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ednbp6#b07pj9nl> 
prom was a true standout.

I’d also pick the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra’s prom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/26/royal-liverpool-philharmonic-vasily-petrenko-review-prom-53-emily-howard-torus>
 with their chief conductor Vasily Petrenko. The programme included one of this 
year’s finest new works – Emily Howard’s Torus – and in the Rachmaninov and 
Shostakovich items highlighted the special relationship between conductor and 
orchestra that has brought them such a consistent following in Liverpool and 
elsewhere over the last decade.
 