
On 9 December 1952 the Great Smog officially ended – for five days a thick 
layer of air pollution, mostly caused by coal fires, had covered London and 
caused the deaths of thousands of residents. 64 years later theLondon Mayor has 
committed £875 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/07/london-mayor-double-funding-tackle-air-pollution>
 to tackle the problem. This week the Royal Society of Biology hosted an event 
on air pollution and health 
<https://www.rsb.org.uk/news/14-news/1658-invisible-air-pollution-becoming-harder-to-detect>
 (#greyskyresearch <https://twitter.com/RoyalSocBio/status/805798557806641152>) 
and theRoyal Society of Chemistry will run their annual Air Pollution conference
 <http://aamg-rsc.org/> next week. After two centuries of fatal London fogs, 
what have we learnt?


Fogs were relatively common in London in the 1700s 
<http://www.pascalbonenfant.com/18c/weather.html>, but by the early 1800s these 
had become deadly, as the smoke and fumes from industrialisation and urban 
growth were trapped by calm, still air. It was not just the pollution that was 
a threat to life and health, but also the traffic, and newspapers were full of 
tragic stories of accidents: in the 1837 December fog theTimes reported that 
“an aged female named Jane Wilson” was “knocked down by a cart and severely 
injured” and Chelsea resident Mr Phillips was thrown out of his chaise into the 
road where a “cart passed over his right thigh, and fractured it dreadfully”. 
Animals suffered too - in1873 the annual cattle show at Smithfield market was 
ruined 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=uipUCwAAQBAJ&lpg=PA80&ots=YTWwwML6VB&dq=rollo%20fogs%20of%20London&pg=PA78#v=onepage&q&f=false>
 by a December fog that left the “fat cattle…panting and coughing”, and many of 
the animals collapsed and died.

The Victorians are famous for their public health activity – ambitious sewer 
schemes, the introduction of Medical Officers ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, and vaccination programmes – so 
why did they struggle, as we do, to deal with deadly air pollution?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpollution-air-london-smogs-fogs-pea-soupers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1708e027e846f74f937e4211e70086b89e50cd07%2F0_852_4683_2809%2F4683.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Over%20200%20years%20of%20deadly%20London%20air%3A%20smogs%2C%20fogs%2C%20and%20pea%20soupers%20%7C%20Vanessa%20Heggie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpollution-air-london-smogs-fogs-pea-soupers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Over%20200%20years%20of%20deadly%20London%20air%3A%20smogs%2C%20fogs%2C%20and%20pea%20soupers%20%7C%20Vanessa%20Heggie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpollution-air-london-smogs-fogs-pea-soupers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1708e027e846f74f937e4211e70086b89e50cd07%2F0_852_4683_2809%2F4683.jpg>
 The Illustrated London News, Volume 10, 1847. The men and boy carrying lighted 
torches are acting as guides to the carriage and pedestrians: fogs were often 
so thick it was impossible to see across a street. Illustration: Wellcome 
Library, London/Wellcome Library, London. Wellcome Images 
If it’s everyone’s fault, it’s no one’s fault

 One problem lay in the fact that the smogs had many causes. Heavy industry 
was one source, but so too were the railways and steamer-boats, and 
particularly domestic coal-burning fires. Various societies were formed to 
campaign for what was often called ‘smoke abatement’, but they met with 
resistance. At a meeting of the ‘Noxious Vapours Abatement Association 
<http://discovery.nationalarchives.gov.uk/details/rd/91cbb54e-cf60-499d-a0f2-0288603060fc>
’ in Manchester, a representative from the Health Committee of the Salford 
Corporation (like a modern city council) won applause from a working class 
audience when he objected to smoke abatement because


“he would be sorry to see a persecution commenced against the manufacturers, 
for if they were driven from the borough, where would the bread of the working 
man come from 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Of6hwwn2kqEC&lpg=PA261&ots=KeAI5ByrC7&dq=The%20'Smoke%20Nuisance%20and%20Environmental%20Reformers%20in%20Late%20Victorian%20Manchester%2C%E2%80%9D%20Manchester%20Regional%20History%20Review%201&pg=PA261#v=onepage&q&f=false>
?”

 If ‘big business’ wasn’t going to reform, why should individuals? Smoke 
abatement campaigners seem to have thought that education was all that was 
needed: in 1881 the Smoke Abatement Committee opened asmoke-prevention 
technology exhibition 
<http://www.historytoday.com/john-ranlett/smoke-abatement-exhibition-1881> in 
London which attracted an extraordinary 116,000 visitors in just a few months; 
all the installations were independently tested to make sure that the 
manufacturers’ claims were accurate. Yet this did not lead to a mass take-up of 
smoke-reducing technology, andan attempt to force changes by passing a law 
regulating domestic smoke failed in 1884 <https://www.jstor.org/stable/3985326>.

Some industries had been regulated by the Smoke Nuisance Abatement 
(Metropolis) Act of 1853 <https://www.st-andrews.ac.uk/~dib2/atmos/control.html>
, but only in London, and this excluded some factories such as glass works and 
potteries. Rather oddly, a lot of the discussion about this Act focused not on 
the health risks of smoke,but on the expense of laundry caused by the dirty air 
of London 
<http://hansard.millbanksystems.com/lords/1853/aug/16/smoke-nuisance-abatement-metropolis-bill>
 (estimated as high as £2 million) - as one member of the House of Lords 
suggested: “The smoke so affected the clothing of the working classes that it 
was computed every mechanic paid at least five times the amount of the original 
cost of his shirt for the number of washings rendered necessary.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpollution-air-london-smogs-fogs-pea-soupers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f71f7176376af9daa5573120400f50a3d88bd32%2F0_834_4884_6100%2F4884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Over%20200%20years%20of%20deadly%20London%20air%3A%20smogs%2C%20fogs%2C%20and%20pea%20soupers%20%7C%20Vanessa%20Heggie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpollution-air-london-smogs-fogs-pea-soupers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Over%20200%20years%20of%20deadly%20London%20air%3A%20smogs%2C%20fogs%2C%20and%20pea%20soupers%20%7C%20Vanessa%20Heggie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fthe-h-word%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fpollution-air-london-smogs-fogs-pea-soupers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f71f7176376af9daa5573120400f50a3d88bd32%2F0_834_4884_6100%2F4884.jpg>
 Front cover for booklet advertising Peps cough and cold tablets in 1913. The 
‘peril’ refers to deaths from respiratory diseases during heavy fogs in cities. 
Photograph: Wellcome Library, London/Wellcome Library, London. Wellcome Images 
 Who pays the price?

 Even if it saved on washing bills, there was a genuine fear that 
over-regulation might lead to job losses. Worse, the Victorians were also 
concerned that reforming domestic fireplaces would actually make peoplesicker, 
rather than healthier. Although open fire places were serious sources of coal 
smoke pollution, they had one advantage over more efficient systems: they 
created draughts. Through most of the nineteenth century medical professionals 
thought that disease was spread by ‘miasmas’, clouds of harmful matter. One way 
to tackle the danger of miasma was to ensure air did not become ‘stagnant’, and 
open fireplaces helped to create a ‘healthy’ circulation of air.

While the larger, airier homes of the middle and upper classes could be 
ventilated in other ways,investigations into the slums and basement dwellings 
of the poor suggested that open fires were vital. 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0266543032000047387> Of course, 
this could be solved with serious slum clearances and massive investment in 
homes for the poor, but it proved hard to justify that expense on the grounds 
that it would prevent air pollution. In any case, reformers worried, people 
were ‘sentimentally attached’ to their open fires, and resisted technological 
change.

Suggestions to solve the smoke problem remained small scale 
<http://www.victorianlondon.org/weather/londonfogs.htm>: taxes on new stoves or 
fireplaces, restrictions on certain manufacturing plants, the formation of 
small local societies to help people buy efficient stoves ‘by instalments’, and 
so on. But one problem not tackled was the rather obvious one: pollution 
travels. Responsibility for enforcing anti-pollution and anti-smoke laws 
rested, by the late 19th century, with local governments and the London County 
Council, so if pollution was blowing in from a factory in an uncooperative 
neighbouring jurisdiction, there was nothing councils could do to enforce the 
limited rules that existed. In 1914 central government was finally persuaded to 
set up a committee to reconsider the legislation about pollution, but its work 
was interrupted by the outbreak of war.

It was not until 1956 that a Select Committee’s recommendations, pushed by 
backbenchers against a sceptical Conservative government, led to the passing of 
the1956 Clean Air Act <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/Eliz2/4-5/52/enacted>
, a direct response to the smog of 1952. For the first time, this Act regulated 
domestic fireplaces as well as industrial furnaces, and createdsmoke control 
areas <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clean_Air_Act_1956> where only smokeless 
fuels could be burnt.

Although a milestone in public health, just 60 years later Londoners are 
dying, again, from polluted air. Although the London Mayor has announced that 
funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/07/london-mayor-double-funding-tackle-air-pollution>
 for this problem will be doubled the challenges remain essentially the same 
faced by the Smoke Abatement Leagues in the 1800s: the causes are complex, some 
pollution is (thought to be) linked to economic growth and jobs, there are 
social reasons why people resist changes (especially if they require personal 
sacrifices, such as giving up car or air travel) and the miasma of pollution 
still travelsacross regional and national boundaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/29/uk-coal-power-station-in-breach-of-eu-air-pollution-law>
. Do we have any new solutions?
 