
Bolton celebrated the dismissal of Gary Megson with a victory more emphatic 
than anything they mustered while under his control, though few would suggest 
that the performance was a significant improvement on the lacklustre displays 
that cost Megson his job.

Bolton's progress to the fourth round was in the end comfortable enough, but 
the scoreline does not tell of a first half in which they were rarely 
uncomfortable, but frequently unconvincing. It took a stroke of scandalously 
good fortune to give them the lead, and though they improved as the game 
progressed, the scoreline was considerably more impressive than the display 
that brought it. "It probably wasn't a 4-0 game," said theLincoln 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/lincoln> manager, Chris Sutton. "But, 
ultimately, it was."

Lincoln, like Bolton third-bottom of their division but 72 places below their 
opponents on the league ladder, were not likely victors. Though unbeaten in 
four, they have won just one of their past nine league games. But no gulf in 
class was immediately apparent, and though the home side had the better of the 
first-half chances, none of them was very good.

So the Imps had plenty of reasons for optimism as they took the field for the 
second half, but five minutes later they were two down and the game was all but 
over. The first was unlucky, Matt Taylor's cross flicking off Lincoln's hapless 
Moses Swaibu at the near post and trundling into an empty net. Within a minute 
Bolton had a second, Ivan Klasnic carrying the ball down the left side of the 
penalty area before pulling back for the otherwise unimpressive Lee Chung-Yong 
to score with ease.

Chris Herd tested Ali al-Habsi on several occasions with his shooting from 
distance, but Gary Cahill made the game safe by coolly converting a right-wing 
cross in the 83rd minute and Johan Elmander added the fourth from Paul 
Robinson's stoppage-time centre.
 