
6.53am BST 

And that was dinner. We went down to Pompei's Grotto down by Fisherman's 
Wharf. Nothing to write home about, which is a shame because it's the point of 
the blog. Had a small cup of clam chowder and then the crab linguine plus a 
couple of beers. It's fairly average and expensive - it came to $111. Oh well, 
we just needed something to eat. It's been another long, long day. Thanks for 
reading and thanks for tipping. Tomorrow is San Francisco. Get thinking. Night.

5.53am BST 

We're now having some food down at Fisherman's Wharf. My word, we're tired. 
Tomorrow if anyone wants to recommend sleeping, that would be great.

5.52am BST 

Ok, we're in the San Remo hotel which is in North Beach. Interesting place, 
that's what I'll say. The room is tiny but at least there are some raisins by 
the two twin beds. Makes you feel at home. Come back, Discovery Inn, all is 
forgiven!

4.32am BST 

Status update: tired, in need of food and beer.

4.27am BST 

SAN FRANCISCO, WE ARE IN YOU!

We've just driven over the Golden Gate Bridge and are heading to the San Remo 
hotel. A full eight hours after that bloody Giants game. Where should we eat? 
Send your tips here or to@jacobsteinberg <https://twitter.com/jacobsteinberg>.

Updated at 4.32am BST

3.53am BST 

Bolinas is calling
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2104969> fulhamfan  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2104969> 31 May 2013 3:52am 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23964590> 
A few miles [7-8?] after Olema [that's the Hwy 1 junction with Sir Francis 
Drake Blvd] you'll see the first and smallest of 2 possible unmarked right 
turns to Bolinas [it's on a downhill after a grove of eucalyptus]. The 2nd and 
bigger turn is a mile further at an unmarked crossroads/4-way just before the 
Bolinas lagoon. If you reach the lagoon you've gone too far.
Say Hi to 'Flossie' at Smileys.
There will be flags waving...and bands marching...!

3.40am BST 

We're driving through the winding roads on Highway 1. Paul says it's just the 
most brilliant thing. This car is swerving more than Ryan Giggs as it turns the 
corners. The view is, as expected, excellent. We can see the Pacific Ocean. Be 
careful going in, mind you. Photographer Dan has warned us about the great 
whites lurking. He knows someone who got bitten. Meanwhile, we're listening to 
hip hop.

Updated at 3.44am BST

3.29am BST 

Recap: The journey so far...

Day 4: Distance travelled so far, Eureka-Petaluma: 234 miles

Expected distance, Eureka-SF: 271 miles

Begins: The Discovery Inn <http://www.discoveryinnonline.com/site/>, a small 
motel in Eureka, in a room that won't lock. They rammed a chair up by the door. 
Breakfast was in thelast lumber camp-style cookhouse in America 
<http://www.samoacookhouse.net/‎>. But it was actually in Samoa. California.

Next stop: A quick gander at sleepy Ferndale before hitting the Avenue of 
Giants <http://avenueofthegiants.net/‎>, where the boys drove through a giant 
redwood tree.

Lunch: Aiming for the mom 'n' pop style diner of the Bluebird Cafe in Hopland, 
which is actually in wine country, and smacking their lips at the prospect of 
an elk burger, but it was closed. So they settled for a mighty fine pizza in
Piazza Campovida <http://piazzadecampovida.com>.

Next stop: Francis Ford Coppola Winery <http://www.franciscoppolawinery.com>, 
Geyserville. Where Jacob might have been affected by a sudden rush of sun to 
the head because he jumped in a VERY FAMOUS director's swimming pool. The life 
guard was not amused. The phrase “swimming with the fishes” was not used.

Now: En route to San Francisco via Highway 1 and looking for a place to stay 
in Fog City...

Updated at 3.38am BST

3.18am BST 

Suggestions coming in for places to stay in SF
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11932684> HeckYeah  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11932684> 31 May 2013 3:06am 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23964329> 
Place to stay suggestion: Metro Hotel

It is cheap, hip, and not in the middle of the Union Square craziness. The 
rooms are small but it is a fun spot. Divizadero Street has a lot of great 
places on it to eat and shop. You are also close to Height Street (good and 
bad). The Page which is a pretty decent dive is just down the street as is 
Toronado, a fantastic beer bar, and Mavin which has pretty solid cocktails.

3.07am BST 

Jacob: The scenery has changed again. We're now in the rolling hilly expanses 
just outside Petaluma. Not green here. It's largely a hazel hue thanks to the 
sun but it's still beautiful. I think Clark Kent grew up around here.

Updated at 3.43am BST

3.06am BST 

Dan adds:

We are on hwy 1. Just left Point Reyes Station

Updated at 3.08am BST

3.06am BST 

And we're now in the suburbs. The houses look expensive here...

3.05am BST 

There's a lobby starting to form pressing for the crew to stop in Bolinas
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2104969> fulhamfan  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2104969> 31 May 2013 2:48am 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23964244> 
The Peoples Republic of Bolinas is organizing a demonstration to welcome you 
to their city-state...
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/4314239> markier  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/4314239> 31 May 2013 2:57am 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23964280> 
@AndyPietrasik - have them stop in Bolinas and stay at smiley's. they don't 
want to get to s.f. this time of day

2.59am BST 

We're now in downtown Petaluma 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Petaluma,_California>, a quiet little place.

Updated at 3.00am BST

2.58am BST 

Very calm at the moment. Feel in a bit of a haze. There's a strong chance I 
might drift off before we get to Highway 1. We're almost at the turn-off for 
these spectacular views people have been talking about...

2.37am BST 

San Francisco bound

Jacob, Paul and Dan are now heading for the bright lights of Fog City - no 
doubt to sup on the dregs of the party after the Giants beat the Oakland As 
today. And, before you start, yes, they're going via the scenic route, Highway 
1.

They're looking for a place to stay first though. The San Remo 
<http://www.sanremohotel.com> has been mentioned in an article on budget San 
Fran hotels 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2013/may/30/us-san-francisco-best-budget-hotels-hostels-bandbs>
written for the Guardian by Bridget Gleeson, a contributor to the excellent
DiscoverAmerica.com <http://DiscoverAmerica.com> blog. Jacob is erring towards 
The Touchstone Hotel <http://www.thetouchstone.com>.

Can anyone reccomend these or suggest anywhere else?

You know the form - tips most welcome in the comments, @JacobSteinberg 
<https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel>
 The San Remo, San Francisco 
Updated at 2.38am BST

2.01am BST 

Francis Ford Coppola

Hello again. We've just been at Francis Ford Coppola Winery 
<http://www.franciscoppolawinery.com>. A bit of a weird place. There's a lot of 
tat on sale and some fairly cool Godfathers stuff. Wine tasting, too, 
obviously. Didn't bother with any wine. It's like a holiday resort though - 
there's a pool and a pool bar. Paul and Dan made me go and get my swimming 
shorts and fall backwards into the pool, leading the lifeguard to ask whether I 
was meant to be in there. Why? Is it a viewing pool or something?

Back on 101 now and heading towards 1, as suggested by readers in the 
comments. Also listening to WHY? - I believe they've been making a playlist for 
this trip.

Updated at 2.04am BST

1.20am BST 

Francis Ford Coppola Winery, Geyserville

Photographer Dan reports:

Jacob just jumped into Francis Ford Coppola's pool and then the lifeguard came 
over and yelled at him.

Updated at 2.05am BST

12.56am BST 

Arrived at Coppola Winery, Geyserville. More in a mo...

12.55am BST 

Music update - now listening to Jamie T

12.19am BST 

Tuneage

While the lads are on the road again for some 30 miles, on their way to 
Coppola's Winery in Geyserville, there's just time for a bit of tuneage from 
the songs you've been sending in via Twitter and below the line.

Thanks to everyone, and keep them coming via the usual channels @JacobSteinberg
 <https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg>, TwiTrips, 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash> @GaurdianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel>

12.04am BST 

Baseball final

Photographer Dan is now leaping about the place and making a general 
exhibition of himself after finding out that the Giants have won.

11.53pm BST 

There's also a Subway opposite this restaurant - a tough choice, I'm sure you 
can imagine. This restuarant also has a winery down the street.

Updated at 11.53pm BST

11.52pm BST 

Pizza review

And that was lunch at Piazza de Campovida <http://piazzadecampovida.com> - a 
pizzeria and taverna - as recommended by@daisywaisy 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23959937>). Went for the 
pepperoni. Pepperoni with buffalo mozarella with black olives and tomato sauce. 
It was like a pizza you'd get in Italy and light too. Very tomatoey. The 
pepperoni cost $16 while the margherita was $12. There are also a selection of 
larger plates and paninis. We're just waiting to pay up and then I think we're 
heading to Geyserville/Geezerville next.

Updated at 12.06am BST

11.39pm BST 

Route rage

While the guys are busy troughing pizza, there's all manner of route rage 
going on below in the comments. All started by one loose direction...
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2754821> Paulk14  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2754821> 30 May 2013 10:33pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23961457> 
Plus one more vote for doing at least part of Highway 1......I am just not 
sure where the best place is to cut over from 101 if you are still in Hopland.

Seems like it might be easier to head back back north about 8-10 miles, and 
take the 253 across towards Manchester. it only adds on about 25 minutes 
further than going down to "Dutcher Creek Rd".

Also, on yesterday's blog I suggested getting a view of the Golden Gate Bridge 
from Hawk Hill -- depending on what the daylight is like when you arrive in SF, 
it might be worth doing it on your way in this evening...rather than coming 
back out tomorrow. And you can also get some great shots from Battery Spencer 
which is on the road up to Hawk Hill....indeed from Battery Spencer, it 
sometimes feels like you can almost reach out and touch the bridge.

Here's an article 
<http://www.californiabeat.org/2009/05/11/where-are-the-five-best-spots-to-photograph-the-golden-gate-bridge>
 that mentions 5 great places to view the bridge from.
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/4314239> markier  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/4314239> 30 May 2013 10:42pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23961617> 
@Paulk14 - there's no way they're getting to the coast that way; mountain view 
road from Boonville to Manchester is a nightmare. their first option is really 
to go through Guerneville from Healdsburg or Windsor
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3466086> daisywaisy  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3466086> 30 May 2013 10:47pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23961701> 
@Paulk14 - Don't take 253!! It will take you to Boonville and then it's a 
cursed windy steep drive to Manchester, which is in the middle of nowhere. I 
suggest you head south and take River Road, just north of Santa Rosa, along the 
Russian River, through Guerneville to Jenner and then head south on 1. That way 
you'll avoid the Santa Rosa traffic this afternoon.

11.33pm BST 

Ball game latest
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3466086> daisywaisy  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3466086> 30 May 2013 10:50pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23961756> 
Whoo hoo! Giants are up 2-1 bottom of the 6th.
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3466086> daisywaisy  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3466086> 30 May 2013 10:57pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23961862> 
@daisywaisy - Make that 4 to 1! On to the 7th...

11.22pm BST 

Drive-through tree (reprise)

Apologies that this is a little out of sequence, but we've just received the 
pictures of the guys driving through a tree in Avenue of Giants - and here's 
the proof (@daisywaisy 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23958478> among others). I 
know - it's almost like animation.

Updated at 11.24pm BST

11.08pm BST 

As we came into Hopland, the sign said the population here is 817 people. It's 
very peaceful.

11.04pm BST 

We're sitting outside - in the shade - and there's a light breeze. The waiter 
is going to bring some beers to taste. We've also very much into wine country. 
I would like to taste some wine.

Updated at 11.14pm BST

10.57pm BST 

It's also suddenly got very hot. Readers, get ready to see some men in shorts.

10.57pm BST 

We're in Hopland. Hello Hopland. Unfortunately, the Blue Bird Cafe is shut, so 
we've strolled across the road to the Piazza for some pizza.

Updated at 11.13pm BST

10.44pm BST 

More from Dan: We just got into Hopland. Walking to Bluebird Cafe now.

Updated at 11.11pm BST

10.43pm BST 

Fresh from the Nerve Centre

The power of the lobby!

This just in from photographer Dan:

I'll make sure we get out to HWY 1. We will do the Petaluma route. Head into 
the hills from Petaluma, past Nincasio and into Point Reyes. Head south from 
there. I used to ride my bike on that route into San Francisco when I was in 
college.

10.08pm BST 

Route wrangling

Lobby forming for the guys to get off 101 and onto Highway 1 before SF from 
@fulhamfan <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23960600>, 
@HeckYeah, <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23960058>
@FoolishMuzzies <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23959569>, 
@DWillis108 <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23960174>among 
others. What does everyone else think?
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2104969> fulhamfan  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2104969> 30 May 2013 9:52pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23960600> 
Puhleeze at least do the last 25 miles into SF along Highway 1! 
You can cut across from Petaluma to Point Reyes Station then down to Muir 
Beach via Bolinas [on the side]. It should only add about 30 minutes to your 
driving time.
Marin Headlands [via Sausalito] is a great suggestion that's been made already.
If you head back to 101 via Fairfax, I'd be honored to treat you to ice creams 
at the infamous Fairfax Scoop.

9.56pm BST 

Bluebird Cafe addition

From @daisywaisy <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23960513>

Blue Bird Cafe has a giant moose head on the wall. Cross the street and go to 
Naughty Boy Vineyards tasting room and see their moose as well.

Naughty Boy Vineyards tasting room - that might have sealed the fate of this 
blog. Cell coverage may become patchy again

Updated at 9.57pm BST

9.48pm BST 

Giants update

Just in from AT&T Park San Fran
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3466086> daisywaisy  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3466086> 30 May 2013 9:18pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23960005> 
Oakland As just took a 1-0 lead over the Giants in the top of the 2nd

9.42pm BST 

We're trying to get to Hopland to the Blue Bird Cafe.

As recommended by our good friend @fantod 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23955336>. It's in wine 
country (Hopland being the clue, oh no, that's beer), in Mendocino county. From 
what we can gather, it's been around since the 50s and is in a nice old 
two-storey, whitewashed clapboard building with a porch and a balcony - like 
you see in the Westerns. The reviews say it does good burgers.

Updated at 11.16pm BST

9.25pm BST 

Lunch and music

It's a bit of a drive to the Coppola Winery 
<http://www.franciscoppolawinery.com> in Geyserville, and the crew will be 
stopping for lunch on the way, so any suggestions will be devoured - to the 
usual places

More updates later, but in the meantime, here's a playlist that Berkeley band 
WHY? have sent in. You can add to it, if you like, on thisplaylist in Spotify 
<http://open.spotify.com/user/guardianmusic/playlist/6zjIOTpgXVTSz78Sfvzc99>.

8.50pm BST 

Land of the giants

We lost reception while we were in the Avenue of the Giants, which we've now 
gone through. We're back on 101 now. All in all those trees are some big trees.

We managed to stop in one place and make it down to the river bank to have a 
dip. We've driven through a tree too. Not entirely sure it was worth $6. Now 
back in the car and have my shoes off. Feet are drying. We've set the SatNav 
for Geyserville, and it's about two hours' away so send in lunch tips between 
here and there! Please!

Music: Donovan.

8.41pm BST 

Redwoods

We've just had a first glimpse of the Avenue of the Giants. These trees are 
tall. I tried climbing one. Giving myself a 7/10 for the effort. We're reading 
down to Myers Flat now to get more of the Giants. Incidentally that infernal 
Giants game kicks off in an hour. I think these Giants are better.

7.45pm BST 

Avenue of the Giants

What we've learned about Avenue of the Giants - is mostly what the website 
<http://avenueofthegiants.net> and Wikipedia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avenue_of_the_Giants> have told us. So here goes:

This world-famous scenic drive is a 31-mile portion of old Highway 101 in 
Humboldt Redwoods State Park 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humboldt_Redwoods_State_Park>

Coast Redwoods <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coast_Redwood> overshadow the 
road and surround the area. It is from these towering trees that the Avenue of 
the Giants takes its name.

The Immortal Tree is over 950 years old, and is currently around 250ft (76m) 
tall, though originally it was much taller.

Avenue of the Giants features three trees that visitors can drive through. The 
southernmost of these trees,Chandelier Tree 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chandelier_Tree>, is located in Drive-Thru Tree 
Park in the town ofLeggett. <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leggett,_California>
 Driving through the Chandelier Tree in the Avenue of Giants. 
Updated at 7.50pm BST

7.29pm BST 

I should add that I've been carrying around the Wimbledon bag they give you 
when you turn up to cover the tennis at SW19, so the strawberries are a good 
fit.

7.29pm BST 

Health drive

You might not have actually been able to guess from this trip, but I am a very 
healthy eater. All about the smoked fish and salads. So imagine my delight when 
we stumbled across a fruit stand on the side of the road. They get their fruit 
from the central valley and we've bought white grapes, strawberries and 
cherries, all for $11. The strawberries taste as if they've been bathing in 
sugar for the last week. Music? The Eels. Destination?Avenue of the Giants 
<http://avenueofthegiants.net>.

7.07pm BST 

Ferndale, CA

And that was Ferndale. A quick stop in this old Victorian town. Very quiet but 
there was a cracking little antiques store, selling relics from the 30s, 40s 
and 50s and so on. If I had more space in my bag, I would have snapped 
something up. Instead we had to rely on snapper Dan.

Updated at 8.43pm BST

6.42pm BST 

Shuffle

We're playing a game whereby I flick through Paul's iPod without looking and 
tell him to shout stop. Not sure why this keeps happening but we keep landing 
on Neil Diamond.

Meanwhile more tunes coming in via #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TwiTrips&src=hash>

Do It Again - Steely Dan

Sunspots - Julian Cope

Hillbilly Highway - Steve Earle

Keep them coming and we'll share the playlist via Spotify later in the day

Updated at 6.43pm BST

6.29pm BST 

The plan

We're going to try to head to Ferndale and then go through the redwoods at the 
Avenue of the Giants <http://avenueofthegiants.net>. Then we'll head down 101 
towards Geyserville in wine country and try to get to theCoppola Wine Movie 
Gallery <http://www.franciscoppolawinery.com/visit/amenities/movie-gallery>. 
We've had shouts to head to Highway 1 but it will probably add on a fair bit of 
driving which doesn't seem ideal.

6.18pm BST 

Meeting the locals

We've just stopped by the Humboldt County Bureau of Tourism after being 
contacted by@redwoodbigfoot  <https://twitter.com/RedwoodBigfoot>on Twitter. In 
there, Megan gave us a load of ideas for the drive and now we're going to check 
out the big mansion that@fantod 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23955336> suggested we see 
in Eureka. Then the drive begins.
RedwoodBigfoot (@RedwoodBigfoot) 
@JacobSteinberg <https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg> @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> We are at 1034 2nd Street in Old Town 
(corner of L Street, near the Carson Mansion and Humboldt Bay).
 <https://twitter.com/RedwoodBigfoot/statuses/340142772625502208> May 30, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/RedwoodBigfoot/statuses/340142772625502208> 
Updated at 6.21pm BST

6.13pm BST 

Trees

@daisywaisy <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23955338> is 
demanding the guys drive into (and out of) a tree and wants photographic proof.

Another regular tipster Paulk14 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23956086> suggests these 
places to do it

Chandelier Tree  <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chandelier_Tree> is in Legget, 
which is where Highway 1 splits from 101, and heads over to the coast.

Also worth doing, as it is on your route anyway, is the Avenue of the Giants 
<http://avenueofthegiants.net/>, which is about 30 minutes south of Eureka, 
just off 101.
 <https://witness.guardian.co.uk/assignment/519e370ee4b0e3928886150d/326452> 
Chandelier Drive-Thru Tree 
<https://witness.guardian.co.uk/assignment/519e370ee4b0e3928886150d/326452>

You can't miss this....

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.guardian.co.uk/>

 By daisywaisy <https://witness.guardian.co.uk/user/daisywaisy> 

29 May 2013, 18:50 

5.58pm BST 

Tunes...
we are telescopic (@wearetelescopic) 
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> @JacobSteinberg 
<https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg> #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TwiTrips&src=hash> Must have Old Crow Medicine 
Show. Any of their songs really, but start with Wagon Wheel!
 <https://twitter.com/wearetelescopic/statuses/340140823993798656> May 30, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/wearetelescopic/statuses/340140823993798656> 
And here it is...although it appears to be about North Carolina
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1gX1EP6mG-E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1gX1EP6mG-E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1gX1EP6mG-E&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1gX1EP6mG-E&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1gX1EP6mG-E>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1gX1EP6mG-E&media=>
close 
5.47pm BST 

The bill arrives - $38 between three.

Updated at 6.23pm BST

5.39pm BST 

Guardian angel

@fantod <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23955336> is up 
bright and bushy-tailed this morning with more tips for the crew.
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/1989094> fantod  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/1989094> 30 May 2013 5:10pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23955336> 
Hey guys,

Sorry to hear about your difficulties in Eureka. Wish I had thought to direct 
you to the Eureka Inn but by the time I thought of it it was too late. Too bad 
about missing Brick & Fire but I'm glad 511 fit the bill - still haven't been 
there. Glad you liked Trinidad - if I could afford to live there I would!

If only you had more time! Still, you've seen a bit of the area (and the West 
Coast in general) and maybe some day you'll return when you have more leisure 
to explore. I hope you're keeping all the suggestions you've received!

On your way south, do try to stop at Humboldt Redwoods State Park. Try to get 
off the highway and drive a mile or two up Mattole Valley Road to the Founders 
Grove area.

Lunch ideas: 

The Blue Bird Cafe in Hopland. Excellent burgers, including ones made with 
game meats like elk, wild boar, etc.GREAT milkshakes. And there's a new beer 
bar across the street on the old Hopland Brewing company (now Mendocino 
Brewing) building.

The Hamburger Ranch and BBQ in Cloverdale. Great burgers and some of the best 
'cue around.

Bistro Ralph on the plaza in Healdsburg. This is where the local winemakers go 
for a great meal out. Pricey but fantastic.

If you have time stop by the Russian River Brewery in Santa Rosa and have a 
glass of Pliny the Elder, one of the most sought-after and hard to get beers in 
the west.

Anyhow it's been fun following you and feeding you tips. Enjoy the rest of 
your trip, and come back with more time some day!

5.34pm BST 

We're being rivalled in the road trip stakes now. A family has just arrived at 
the Cookhouse and they've driven from San Diego in a rental car.

"That's a long way away," says the waiter.

Right, but not as long as us, is it? We win. Go us.

The music in here is banjo-based and I'm enjoying the vibe. This morning we 
were wondering whether or not to just have a croissant ... an hour later and 
Paul's had three pancakes. "That might have been a mistake."

Updated at 5.35pm BST

5.21pm BST 

Breakfast in Samoa

So we've decided to drive up to the Samoa Cookhouse 
<http://www.samoacookhouse.net/>. Enjoyed driving over the three 
rollercoasterish bridges from Eureka. It's only 10 minutes away and here we are 
at the Cookhouse. It was established circa 1893 and there are only six more 
people in here. The sign at the front says it's the last lumber camp-style 
cookhouse in America. They're big on their logging inside. It's *almost* 
blogging.

We've just been served pancakes, sausages and scrambled eggs. I'll steer clear 
of the scrambled eggs. Haven't had any since they made me violently ill when I 
was five or six. "This is a true working man's American breakfast," says 
photographer Dan.

Updated at 5.46pm BST

5.12pm BST 

Snappy tunes

Photographer Daniel has sent in his Cali soundtrack, and it goes like this:

Sonoma County band: The Velvet Teen - No Star

SF bands: Mikal Cronin- Weight; Ty Segall - Goodbye Bread; Terry Malts - I Do; 
The Trainwreck Riders - Delia

We'll put those up on Spotify soon, but in the meantime, here's The Velvet 
Teen (cos they're close to Sonoma)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjS77ciZeL58&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjS77ciZeL58>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjS77ciZeL58&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjS77ciZeL58&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjS77ciZeL58>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjS77ciZeL58&media=>
close 
Updated at 5.14pm BST

4.58pm BST 

We'd like to thank...

By the way thanks to @Fantod  
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23934405>for saving our 
bacon in Eureka. We're just loading the car now and will either head to 
breakfast at Los Bagels here in Eureka, or theSamoa Cookhouse 
<http://www.samoacookhouse.net/>, which is 10 minutes away by car, across 
Humboldt Bay in Samoa.

Updated at 4.58pm BST

4.53pm BST 

Driving music

To get everyone in the mood, here's a blast of music as recommended by 
@Speedicut <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23904454>
 I have a musical suggestion for your upcoming stretch from the Cal border 
south to SF. The venerable American indie band Camper Van Beethoven just 
recently issuedLa Costa Perdida (The Lost Coast) using as a theme that very 
northern Cal strip of coast. Highlights include "Come Down the Coast" "Too High 
for the Love-In" (with the line of the year "Bring to me the anti-venom. And 
make me a sandwich."), "Northern California Girls" and the title track. Great 
humor and musicianship. They're from Cal and the sound captures that regional 
spirit well. In other words it grooves. Easily downloadable (legally) from many 
websites. A must. 
Let us know what your Cali roadtrip mix would be
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhZ76d5eC518&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhZ76d5eC518>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhZ76d5eC518&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhZ76d5eC518&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhZ76d5eC518>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhZ76d5eC518&media=>
close 
4.29pm BST 

Shower traumas

Just got out of the shower and I'd like to meet the guy who designed the 
showers in this place and clump him round the head with a large mallet. I'm 
only 5ft 10in so this shouldn't have been a problem, but turns out that the 
shower head is only suitable for people around 5ft 8in and shorter. The only 
way to get my head under the water was by squatting. The indignity. 
Alternatively, you had the option of twisting it so it was horizontal, at which 
point you were treated to the joys of hot water shooting directly at your neck 
and not much else.

4.27pm BST 

Help Jacob and the gang on their way down the Pacific coast by posting tips to 
the usual places - below in the comments field, via Twitter@JacobSteinberg 
<https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash>, or on GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.guardian.co.uk/assignment/519e370ee4b0e3928886150d>.

We thank you

4.05pm BST 

Good morning, Eureka!

Trinidad bay

Hello and welcome to day four – I think it's day four – of the Guardian's romp 
down the west coast of America. We're currently in Eureka, a small coastal town 
off Highway 101. We're staying in theDiscovery Inn 
<http://www.discoveryinnonline.com/site/>, a small motel where a double room 
costs $75. Admittedly it's a double room without a lock. We've rammed a chair 
up by the door just to be sure and the car is parked right outside. For about 
the last hour, the person in the room above has been making some weird noises.

We're around 270 miles from San Francisco, our final destination, and we're 
aiming to be there around 6pm this evening. That won't happen, of course, but 
it's always good to have goals in life. We've got a lot of driving to get 
through again and a lot of tips. It should be a smooth ride today. We have 
plans for plenty of stop-offs along the way; last night a Eureka local 
overheard our conversation in a restaurant and advised stopping off at 
Ferndale, so we might do that. But keep your tips coming. Time is on our side – 
famous last words. 

Yesterday was an experience. Overall we drove 414 miles and spent around nine 
hours on the road. We picked up a bit of flak for our dream of making it to 
today's Giants game, a dream we've long abandoned, and for a long time this 
blog became the worst blog in the world as we drove through the mountains and 
the fog on Highway 101 without any signal. Actually my phone still has no 
signal. Oh good. We saw a lot, though, and nothing was better than the small 
town of Trinidad. I urge you to check it out.

Discovery Inn, Eureka

Updated at 5.42pm BST
 