
8.07am BST 

That might have to be it for the day. Tomorrow we're going to spend a bit of 
time in Astoria and then head down to Portland, hopefully getting there around 
lunch. In the meantime, here's a video of a very tired me trying to recap what 
I've gone and learnt today. Not very much. Thanks for reading, sharing and 
advising. See you again in a few hours. Ah.

Updated at 8.08am BST

7.37am BST 

And we're back. We just scooted out to Fort George for a couple of beers and a 
late night snack. It's both a bar and a brewery, so it's pretty, pretty, 
prett-eh good.

That right there, above, is three beers in jam jars. You've got your Sunrise 
Oatmeal Pale Ale, described as a "nice and creamy American pale ale". Your 
Quick Wit, a Belgian Leffe-style number. And an 1811 Bicentennial Lager.

They also do food and make their own sausages. We got two Italian hot and 
spicy ones and one French garlic one. They are excellent and came with fries. 
All in all, the food and two beers each came to 52 dollars between three.

6.07am BST 

Here's a shot of the bridge opposite to where we're staying in Astoria.

i think we might need to get some food and drink. The lady on reception has 
offered us a glass of wine. 

6.00am BST 

Hello again and apologies for the delay. It was a long drive and an 
awe-inspiring drive. The scenery in this country is epic. I've never seen trees 
like it. They are tall trees. Tall, tall trees. We've just arrived in Astoria. 
We're staying in a hotel on a pier and it's called the Cannery Pier Hotel. It's 
good. The room - 189 dollars - is huge, the beds are huge, we have a bath, 
there's a spa, a gym and the cookies at the reception are mouthwatering. 
Photographer Dan had around 15, by my count.

Updated at 6.05am BST

3.39am BST 

This is an update that didn't post. I don't feel you should miss out on its 
awesomitude.

Evening America. We've left Olympia having refreshed ourselves and Paul is now 
at the wheel. I'm quite proud of myself for navigating us through to Olympia. 
In an automatic car. While armed with a Sat Nav. But don't take this away from 
me. It should take us around two hours to get to Astoria and - fingers crossed 
- the road looks pretty clear. The National's new album is booming around the 
car. 

3.32am BST 

We've just driven past the turn-off to Aberdeen, where Kurt Cobain came from. 
It would have been great to see it but unfortunately we're on a tight schedule 
so we're ploughing on. Alas. Any suggestions for what we should do in Astoria? 
Everyone says we should go to the Goonies house. Correct? We don't have loads 
of time before we get on the road to good old Portland.

3.28am BST 

Heading south...

Latest check in from Jacob et al:

We're in the car on I5 heading to Astoria. Might stop in Olympia on the way to 
see a brewery, time depending. Might put on some banging tunes on.

Thank you Seattle, and goodbye - Jacob, his mate Paul and Dan the photographer 
are heading south to Astorias on the Oregon coast, where they'll be staying at 
theCannery Pier Hotel <http://www.cannerypierhotel.com/>. They took no chances 
and booked ahead as it's Memorial Day. It looks pretty cool - "built on the 
site of the former Union Fish Cannery, 600 feet into the river".

They're thinking of breaking the journey and having a shandy stop at the Fish 
Brewing Company <http://www.fishbrewing.com/>in Olympia - one of the many 
recommendations bytPoehlstergard.  
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23800242>It also looks 
pretty cool - "a small, locally owned craft brewery producing truly authentic 
British-style organic ales and German style lagers for beer lovers." In a 
building painted with mountains and fish. What's not to like?

3.04am BST 

Belgian beer

They've got a Belgian triple beer here called Monkfish. It's 9%. Dare we? We 
daren't.

2.35am BST 

Olympia, we toast you

Olympia! We are in you! The brewery company is shut, would you believe, but 
the pub opposite isn't. Glug, glug! We're taking a well-earned pitstop and 
having a couple of beers. Not the driver, I hasten to add. The town looked dead 
- turns out everyone's in this pub.

Pub opposite - open! And everyone in Olympia appears to be in it

Brewery - shut on Memorial Day

Updated at 2.40am BST

2.32am BST 

The journey so far - kick-ass breakfast to I5

And it begins: Jacob started his day at The Moore Hotel 
<http://www.moorehotel.com/>, 2nd Av, where he was mostly kept awake by the 
dulcet tones of Beth Ditto performing next door in the Moore Theater.

Breakfast: He headed to the 5 Spot Cafe <http://www.chowfoods.com/5-spot> , on 
Queen Anne Av N, as recommended by@Poehlstergard 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23800242>, a packed 
music-themed diner with booths and Motown filling the air. He tucked into a 
'kick-ass' breakfast of Low Country Hash - smoked brisket, peppers, onions, 
rice, crumbled biscuit and jack cheese, with a side of toast and fruit. 
Jealous? You're jealous.

Seattle Space Needle: It's tall and has a stonking view of ... Everything. In 
the rain.

Out of the rain and into EMP Museum <http://www.empmuseum.org>: "The kind of 
place where we could spend all day." It's worth checking out for the Nirvana 
and Jimi Hendrix exhibitions...

Shucking oysters: Whizzing through Pike Place Market, Jacob stopped for lunch 
atTaylor's Shellfish Farm 
<http://taylormelrose.com/sip-and-slurp-beer-fest-at-wine-world-may-12th/> (as 
recommended byProvence Calling blog 
<http://provencecalling.com/where-to-eat-geoduck-in-seattle/> on Guardian 
Witness) where he decided he didn't like oysters after all, but didn't seem 
fazed by the huge, raw geoducks.

Last heard from: Driving through driving rain en route to Astoria on the 
Oregon coast via Fish Brewing Company in Olympia.

Updated at 3.34am BST

2.15am BST 

Rain? Check

Just driven through 10 minutes of apocalyptic rainfall on the freeway. 
Couldn't really see anything. We're all in tears and holding each other. 
However, happy to report that we appear to have seen off the worst. No wonder 
it's so green round here.

Updated at 2.23am BST

12.21am BST 

Lunch over...Astoria bound

So that was seafood. You can get geoduck sashimi for $12 - raw geoduck  
<http://www.ecy.wa.gov/programs/sea/pugetsound/species/geoduck.html>[big clam] 
with soy sauce. That was pretty tasty. Not such a fan of the oysters though, 
but that's just personal taste. You can get Puget Pacific oysters for $14.99 
per dozen and Shigokus for $20.99 for the same. There's a raw atmosphere in 
here but we haven't come on the best day as they're shutting early due to 
Memorial Day. Anyway it's time to hit the road... Astoria would appear to be 
our next destination.

Your geoduck is served...

Updated at 12.31am BST

12.16am BST 

BREAKING NEWS: I don't like oysters.

Updated at 12.32am BST

12.15am BST 

Seafood lunch

Finally, lunch. And we're at Taylor's Shellfish Farm 
<http://taylormelrose.com/sip-and-slurp-beer-fest-at-wine-world-may-12th/> (as 
recommended byProvence Calling blog 
<http://provencecalling.com/where-to-eat-geoduck-in-seattle/> on 
GuardianWitness). I'm a little bit nervous ... Not a huge seafood eater. Here's 
to no food poisoning! It's a very popular place, mind you. Not a lot of space, 
we managed to get some seats at the bar.
 <https://witness.guardian.co.uk/assignment/519e370ee4b0e3928886150d/320903> 
Drive-by coffee 
<https://witness.guardian.co.uk/assignment/519e370ee4b0e3928886150d/320903>

Get a drive-by coffee at Seattle's 'other' coffee chain Tully's Coffee 
http://provencecalling.com/where-to-eat-geoduck-in-seattle/

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.guardian.co.uk/>

 By ID533885 <https://witness.guardian.co.uk/user/guardianUser4735741> 

24 May 2013, 16:45 

Updated at 12.28am BST

11.55pm BST 

Where next?

Jacob is taking a well-earned lunch break and tapping up his notes in Pike 
Place Market (more of which later)...but after that he'll be high-tailing it 
out of Seattle and pushing on south. Where should he go next? Is there anything 
to recommend Olympia? Aberdeen? Or should he shoe it down to Astoria - as 
recommended bymartinusher  
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23811425>and ID2071554 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23813796>?

And he doesn't fancy camping in his car - with his mate and the photographer 
Dan - so is there somewhere good to stay en route? Let him know at
@JacobSteinberg <https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg> #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TwiTrips&src=hash>

ID4328328 <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23805234> 
recommends Mount Rainier National Park: "Between Portland/Seattle, we were 
thrilled by Mt St Helens and Mt Rainier. Stayed in the delightfully quirky 
no-frillsPackwood Hotel <http://www.packwoodwa.com/Hotel%20Packwood.htm> on the 
edge of Mt Rainier National Park, bit like a Wild West saloon (minus the bar), 
wooden carvings everywhere and elk roaming the main street."

Updated at 12.08am BST

10.33pm BST 

Pike Place Fish Co

At Pike Place Fish Co <http://www.pikeplacefish.com>, they like to make a show 
of their work. The staff... Let's call them boisterous. They're loud. It's 
loud. And it's brilliant. They're holding the attention of a large crowd by 
chucking huge salmons between them.

"Do you ever drop it?"
"We're human, of course we drop it!"
"What happens then?"
"We pick it up... But we don't sell it to humans. It goes to the zoo for the 
bears."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP6ssn6WqxFc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP6ssn6WqxFc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP6ssn6WqxFc&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP6ssn6WqxFc&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP6ssn6WqxFc>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DP6ssn6WqxFc&media=>
close 
Updated at 10.57pm BST

10.25pm BST 

Pike Place Market - Chocloate linguine stall

Papardelles <https://www.facebook.com/pikeplacepastaguys> - they make their 
own chocolate linguine and have roughly every combination of pasta going. 
Chocolate linguine? Max recommends chilli sauce with it. The amazing thing 
about this market is that different smells are hitting you every few seconds 
and they're all special.

Updated at 10.51pm BST

10.23pm BST 

Pike Place Market - apples and pears

Confession time - I'm a massive fan of a pear. So I was fairly pumped to 
stumble across a pear stand, run by Brandan fromMartin Family Orchard 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Martin-Family-Orchard/144950508855412>, which 
is three hours east of Seattle. I bought one of the nicest pears I've ever had 
and sampled some of his apple cider too. Oh my - no sugar, no water and one of 
the most refreshing drinks you'll ever have. Brandan wasn't too keen on being 
photographed at first but we twisted his arm with our British charm. "Make me 
look good," he said.

Updated at 10.52pm BST

10.17pm BST 

Pike Place Market - it's cheese

So we're at Pike Place Market - and if you like your cheese, go to Beechers 
<http://www.beechershandmadecheese.com>. It's extraordinary. You can actually 
see them make the cheese in this huge tub. Imagine bathing in it. Quite the 
pong. There's also a huge selection of cheeses to buy, cheese boards, books on 
cheese, a make your own cheese kit, plus a handmade cheese menu - sandwiches, 
soups, mac and cheese and so on.

Updated at 10.56pm BST

9.54pm BST 

Those videos...

Sorry, we're a bit late getting these two to you - technical fly in the 
ointment (or was it the rain?)

Here's something we made earlier at the 5 Spot Cafe

and the Space Needle

9.49pm BST 

Homage to Kurt

Goodbye Experience Music Project and hello rain. Having spent the last 20 
minutes trying to work out how to post a video, photographer Dan turned to us 
and said, "This is probably the kind of place where we could spend all day." So 
we've left. It's worth checking out for the Nirvana and Jimi Hendrix 
exhibitions - but it's time to head to Pike Place Market.

9.46pm BST 

Nirvana cover art

The model for the cover of In Utero by Nirvana. Big name retail stores found 
this image offensive. The band's label, DGC, considered the album 
"unreleasable" and "unlistenable".What did they know, ha! Read more about it on 
thisDaily Loaf post 
<http://cltampa.com/dailyloaf/archives/2010/03/03/the-stories-behind-three-seminal-albums-by-nirvana-the-beach-boys-and-billy-joel#.UaPEar_i5Ss>

Updated at 9.50pm BST

9.27pm BST 

Hendrix tribute

If he'd still been around, Jimi Hendrix would have celebrated his 70th 
birthday last November (27/11/2012)... "On the anniversary of his birth, Jimi 
Hendrix's hometown of Seattle celebrated the legendary musician in an exhibit at
EMP Museum <http://www.empsfm.org/> titled, "Hear My Train A Comin': Hendrix 
Hits London 
<http://www.empsfm.org/about-emp/press/press-releases/press-release-august-1,-2012.aspx>
." Devoted entirely to the guitarist's nine month stint in the UK capital, the 
collection of lyrics, instruments, photographs and fashion covers Hendrix's 
1960s British debut"Read more about and see the pictures in this Huffington 
Post article 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/11/27/happy-birthday-jimi-hendr_n_2193834.html>
.

Updated at 9.51pm BST

9.10pm BST 

This is what the EMP website 
<http://www.empmuseum.org/about-emp/the-emp-building.aspx> has to say about the 
building designed by Frank Gehry: "A classical music fan, Gehry wanted to 
understand rock 'n' roll, so he traded in his Bach for Hendrix and took a trip 
to the neighborhood guitar store. He bought several electric guitars, took them 
back to his office, and cut them into pieces. The guitar pieces were the 
building blocks for an early model design. Influenced by the colors in the 
early model, Gehry's final design brightly displays the red and blue hues of 
electric guitars."

Updated at 9.12pm BST

8.54pm BST 

Typo

Ever the journalistic eye for detail...

8.43pm BST 

Experience Music Project

We've just entered the Experience Music Project <http://www.empmuseum.org/> - 
as recommended bykeinnon 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23877803> and rickyredmanc 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23878732>. $20 dollars to 
get in. But we've already decided the admission price is worth It for the Game 
of Thrones style, er, throne in the entrance. We've all had a pose. Very regal. 
Resisted the temptation to order an execution.

Updated at 8.56pm BST

8.27pm BST 

Hail Chief

There's a statue of an old native American chief on Denny and Fifth. History 
lesson: his name was Seattle. By now you might have worked out the city was 
named after him. He's currently surrounded by a Thai restaurant, Zeeks pizza 
bar, a lawyer's office and a car shop.

Updated at 8.46pm BST

8.02pm BST 

Wired in Seattle

Uptown Espresso <http://www.velvetfoam.com>, on Fourth Avenue and Wall Street 
- or whatever the correct terminology is - is one of eight in Seattle. It's 
local to this city, though, and not quite as big as Starbucks. Fair to say the 
vibe is mellow. There are students over on table huddled over their laptops. 
Scrounging, no doubt. My mate Paul is claiming to be absolutely wired after his 
coffee, which is locally roasted in Georgetown. Our server, Gretchen, is 
rightly pleased with herself.

Updated at 8.04pm BST

7.40pm BST 

I don't drink coffee but my companions do. We're in a coffee shop called 
Uptown Espresso <http://www.velvetfoam.com> - they've just had their first sip 
of theirs and both did double-takes at how strong it is. You can really smell 
the beans. Not sure where we're going to head after this. There are many 
possibilities and suggestions...

7.27pm BST 

More music
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/4684226> HinnySW18  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/4684226> 27 May 2013 7:12pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23879151> 
The EMP is a great exhibition to Seattle-based music and all, and it does have 
some great things to show, but I do prefer my music places to have more to do 
with performance and records.

For that, Easy Street Records in West Seattle is wonderful. If he's there, the 
owner Matt enjoys a good chat with out-of-towners as much as the regulars. The 
Queen Anne location near the Space Needle closed down earlier, but the base in 
West Seattle is still there. There's a statue of Hendrix statue in Capitol Hill 
for a decent photo op.

Which gives us an excuse to play this...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK3K8t6wKjdg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK3K8t6wKjdg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK3K8t6wKjdg&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK3K8t6wKjdg&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK3K8t6wKjdg>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK3K8t6wKjdg&media=>
close 
7.20pm BST 

More tips...

Couple of shouts coming in for the Experience Music Project 
<http://www.empmuseum.org/> at the Seattle Center from keinnon 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23877803> and rickyredmanc 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23878732> "If you're into 
Jimi Hendrix and Seattle's grunge scene, i.e., Nirvana, then the EMP is a must 
see, if you're not into that kind of music, like me, it's still worth a visit, 
kind of. Into Sci Fi ? Visit the Science Fiction Museum right next door to the 
music musuem".

Which gives us an excuse to play this. Had to be done!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTWKbfoikeg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTWKbfoikeg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTWKbfoikeg&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTWKbfoikeg&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTWKbfoikeg>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTWKbfoikeg&media=>
close 
Updated at 8.40pm BST

6.49pm BST 

Austin Powers

The Space Needle is actually 184.41m high and was built for the 1962 World's 
Fair.

It's probably best known for being in the opening credits of the 90s TV sitcom 
Frasier <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J17L0FhctxU> and for serving as the 
base for the villainDoctor Evil <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doctor_Evil> in 
the 1999 filmAustin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Austin_Powers:_The_Spy_Who_Shagged_Me>. We'll 
pass on the Sleepless in Seattle references
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqnMaroAlfvI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqnMaroAlfvI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqnMaroAlfvI&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqnMaroAlfvI&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqnMaroAlfvI>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqnMaroAlfvI&media=>
close 
Updated at 7.01pm BST

6.44pm BST 

Space Needle

We're at the Space Needle. It's tall and has a stonking view of ... Everything.

The rain feels much more persistent up here. I can't help thinking that 
Seattle rains out of habit, like it's saying "Yeah, might as well rain, got 
nothing better to do". That's just its thing.
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2892007> purplearth  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2892007> 27 May 2013 7:09pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23879066> 
If it's not raining, it's not Seattle (though it was 90F+ and sunny last time 
we were there... locals shriveled in the sun, and no one had AC).

Updated at 3.17am BST

6.38pm BST 

Ride envy

Jacob (left) and his mate Paul want one...

Updated at 6.39pm BST

5.50pm BST 

What should Jacob do next?

We've had a couple of recommends to do the underground tour - as it's raining 
- and the intriguingly namedHoney Hole <http://www.thehoneyhole.com/menu_day/> 
for a sandwich lunch...any advances?
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2456675> riggbeck  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2456675> 27 May 2013 4:35pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23875770> 
I lived there for 20 years. The Moore Hotel has a gloriously delapidated 
gingerbread theatre in the same building, where I saw The Tigerlillies and Dame 
Edna. It will be the death of the place if they ever renovate.

You should have gone on the Underground Tour <http://www.undergroundtour.com/> 
of the city below the streets. See the Hundred Year Old Toilethere 
<http://beautifulrailwaybridgeofthesilverytay.me/2011/08/16/seattle-underground/>
, and a video with a fine bluesy sound trackhere 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pCohJRzXVuI&feature=related>.

Enough. This is making me so homesick.
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11724467> rumdoodled  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11724467> 27 May 2013 5:14pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23876537> 
@ArrowgantAmerican - if you drive south to north you're on the wrong side of 
the road for the views from the Pacific Coast Highway, surely?

Anyway. Another vote for Honey Hole here, and definitely go on the Underground 
Tour. Go out to Alki and get fish and chips at Spud.

5.39pm BST 

Breakfast

So all I can say is go to the 5 Spot Cafe <http://www.chowfoods.com/5-spot> if 
you want breakfast in Seattle. My word! The menu is huge - although largely 
egg-based, which is a problem for me - and there was also a special, which I 
went for. It was called Low Country Hash - smoked brisket, peppers, onions, 
rice, crumbled biscuit and jack cheese, with a side of toast and fruit. 
Jealous? You're jealous.

The place is totally packed and we're in a booth. Motown music filling the air 
and a great waiter called Ricky, who tells me that the diner has themes. The 
current one is Blues Highway and in three weeks it's going to change to San 
Francisco. There are Blues paintings on the walls ... And even the men's 
toilets have been decked out. We'll send a picture through of that soon, though 
people might wonder what we're up to in there.

All in all breakfast came to $51.30. Two specials, one egg sandwich, a side of 
fruit, two OJs and two coffees.

The gents at the 5 Spot Cafe

Updated at 6.07pm BST

5.06pm BST 

Booth ache

There's a queue building up outside The 5 Spot Cafe (1502 Queen Anne Ave N). 
There are booths. Very Pulp Fiction.

I'm hungry. My stomach is rumbling. Five minutes till they open.

"I don't know if I've ever been hungrier," says my mate Paul.

Standing outside a breakfast diner and waiting for it to open is some pure 
form of torture.
 The 5 Spot cafe: this is what lays behind those doors, according to their 
Facebook page. Photograph: /The 5 Spot Cafe 
Updated at 5.32pm BST

4.13pm BST 

Sleepless in Seattle – thanks, Beth Ditto

In a cab on our way to the 5 Spot Cafe <http://www.chowfoods.com/5-spot> for 
breakfast at last. Guess what? It's raining in Seattle. It's really cool of 
them to make us Londoners feel at home.

One more thing about our hotel – it's connected to the Moore Theatre 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore_Theatre>, which was apparently a huge deal 
in the 90s. Less so now. Last night, Gossip were playing there and we could 
hear Beth Ditto screaming at the top of her lungs at around 10.30pm. It's not 
exactly at the top of the list of things I want to hear when I'm trying to 
sleep.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNKPDojFLvvI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNKPDojFLvvI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNKPDojFLvvI&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNKPDojFLvvI&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNKPDojFLvvI>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNKPDojFLvvI&media=>
close  Gossip: Beth Ditto performing at the Moore Theatre on Sunday night  The 
Moore Theatre.Photograph: Paul Sableman/flickr 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/pasa/5883112961/> 
Updated at 2.34am BST

3.27pm BST 

Showering infernal...

Unfortunately, progress is being somewhat stifled by the fact that there is no 
shower in our hotel room. Instead there's a communal shower on each floor and 
the bloke in there at the moment is taking his sweet time about it. At what 
point is it socially acceptable to kick a door down?

2.46pm BST 

Last night...

Finally, last night we went to a bar called Auto Battery 
<http://www.autobatterybar.com> up on Capitol Hill to watch the LA Galaxy v 
Seattle Sounders MLS game. The bar was packed with Sounders fans in their green 
kits and it was a remarkably sedate atmosphere – a strange experience for me, a 
West Ham fan, and my travelling companion, a Chelsea fan. Unfortunately, the 
jovial mood didn't last too long; a first-half hat-trick from Robbie Keane had 
the Sounders trailing 4-0 at half-time. Final score: 4-0. Oh dear. We must have 
been an unlucky charm.

Auto Battery is a great place though. If you go there, get one of their hot 
dogs (and there are some tasty sides on the menu too). I went for the Deep 
Fried Danger Dog. Pretty much the best hot dog I've ever had – a frankfurter 
with pepper bacon, sauteed onions, chilli sauce and deep fried. Get the chips.
 Auto Battery Bar, a sports bar with po dogs 
<http://www.autobatterybar.com/food/>. Photograph: Autobatterybar.com 
Updated at 4.25pm BST

2.42pm BST 

And he's up...

Good morning Seattle! This is actually our second day in the city, so we've 
had a chance to get used to its fairly odd street signs. On Sunday morning, 
after eating a glorious breakfast of sausage, potatoes and er, fruit atBacco 
<http://www.baccocafe.net>, we walked up to the Seattle Center 
<http://www.seattlecenter.com>, where we were surprised and amazed to find a 
hippy festival called theNorthwest Folklife Festival 
<http://www.nwfolklife.org/festival/>. Very new age. It's going on for four 
days in Seattle, is organised by the local community and is free - they just 
ask for donations. Worth checking out.

We then lost our bearings on the way back and ended up half-an-hour late 
picking up our car. Once in the car we spent 45 minutes being bested by 
Seattle's one-way system in our bid to find a parking space.

We never found a parking space.

Highlights so far include:

1. Inadvertently starting a queue at Chicago airport while waiting to board. 
We were there very early and were idling about near the front. After about 10 
minutes, we turned around to see a massive queue had formed behind us. Decided 
to test the water by moving forward two steps. Lo and behold everyone else took 
two steps forward. I've never felt such power. A fascinating social experiment.
2. Our taxi driver from the airport having not the remotest clue as to where 
our hotel is (The Moore Hotel <http://www.moorehotel.com>, 2nd Av, $90 a night 
- friendly staff, Spartan rooms but good double beds. Our entire floor has 
leaopard skin carpet, which is kind of unsettling) and then congratulating 
himself when we found it for him, before accepting a highly undeserved $10 
dollar tip.
3. Two "youths" walking past us and observing "Look at these two faggots". 
Simply because we were wearing skinny jeans. Honestly, some people.

Waiting for everyone else to get up and then it's breakfast ...

In the meantime, still salivating over yesterday's lunch...
Jacob Steinberg (@JacobSteinberg) 
If you're after crabs in Seattle, Seatown in Pike Place Market is a good place 
to go#TwiTrip <https://twitter.com/search/%23TwiTrip> @guardiantravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel> twitter.com/JacobSteinberg… 
<http://t.co/12UQmbNZol>
 <https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg/status/339009594615549952> May 27, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg/status/339009594615549952> 
I'd never actually had crab legs before, so the waitress at Seatown 
<http://tomdouglas.com/index.php?page=seatown> presented it to me as a 
challenge yesterday afternoon. A bit of a mess, all told, but once I got to 
grips with it, the crab was shown who's boss. Came with butter, lemon and 
garlic bread and washed down with a golden lager from Seattle called Old 
Seattle Maritime Lager. Recommended.

Updated at 4.47pm BST

2.30pm BST 

Hitting the road ...

Good morning, Seattle. Happy Memorial Day! And welcome to the live blog of 
@JacobSteinberg <https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg>'s crowdsourced road trip 
down the Pacific coast. This trip is all about your tips. And first up, Jacob 
is looking for a good place for breakfast. Set up him right for the day, 
people, by sending your tips via Twitter, @JacobSteinberg 
<https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg>, or #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TwiTrips&src=hash>, or GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.guardian.co.uk/assignment/519e370ee4b0e3928886150d> and view 
other tips submitted by our followers.

We've already had loads of good suggestions on the blog, especially the screed 
sent in by@Poehlstergard 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23800242> – which covers 
Seattle-San Fran and all points in between. Included in the inventory is theHi 
Spot Cafe <http://www.hispotcafe.com/> in Madrona and the 5Spot diner on Queen 
Anne Ave North. <http://www.chowfoods.com/5-spot>The 5 Spot starts out each day 
with a ' <http://www.chowfoods.com/5-spot>kick-ass breakfast' 
<http://chowfoods.com/5-spot/menus?page=1>, according to its website. Thanks 
for the kick up the ass.

After that, Jacob will be looking for something to entertain him. Should he go 
up the Space Needle? Or to Pike Place Market, as suggested by@kooosh? 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23835104> Or should he try 
the Klondike Gold Rush museum to see what made Seattle great before grunge, 
Microsoft and Starbucks, as suggested by@clashgour1 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23817049>?

And is eating geoducks a Seattle no-brainer, as suggested on GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.guardian.co.uk/assignment/519e370ee4b0e3928886150d>?

To get us all in the mood, we asked local rockers Kinski to put together a 
playlist for the city. Enjoy, and keep the tips coming ...
 <https://witness.guardian.co.uk/assignment/519e370ee4b0e3928886150d/320927> 
Pike Street Market 
<https://witness.guardian.co.uk/assignment/519e370ee4b0e3928886150d/320927>

And you wont be able to miss Pike Street Market open every day since 1907 
http://provencecalling.com/where-to-eat-geoduck-in-seattle/

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.guardian.co.uk/>

 By ID533885 <https://witness.guardian.co.uk/user/guardianUser4735741> 

24 May 2013, 17:04 
 