
3.45am BST 

Thank you San Francisco! And good night!

I can't quite believe it. It's over. After five long, eventful and brilliant 
days, our journey is at an end here in San Francisco. I can only say thank you 
to everyone who has either read the blogs or sent us tips and advice either on 
here or on Twitter. This incredible trip wouldn't have been possible without 
your help, even if it has meant we are all the most tired we have ever been.

It's been surreal. Time no longer has any meaning - but there are no 
complaints. This has been an adventure and I would recommend anyone reading the 
blog to try some of the stuff we have experienced. At the very least, get 
yourself down to Highway 101. It's not quite as spectacular as going both 
clockwise and anti-clockwise on the M25, but it's up there!

The week started on Monday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2013/may/27/pacific-road-trip-day-one>, which 
feels a long time away. We were in Seattle, staying at the Moore Hotel. It 
rained, as it does, but we had fun. Maybe the rain was for us English people. 
We went up the Space Needle, saw the Folk Farm Festival, went to Pike Place 
Market and saw a Sounders game at a Sounders bar with some Sounders fans. I 
even tried oysters for the first time and will not try them again. From there 
we had a long drive to a small coastal town called Astoria, where we stayed at 
the Cannery Pier Hotel, a place overlooking Columbia River. It was, quite 
frankly, heaven. I can highly recommend going there. We went up Astoria Column 
and saw the Goonies House too.

It was then a drive to Portland on Tuesday 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2013/may/28/pacific-road-trip-twitrip-day-two>
, stopping off at Cannon Beach along the way. Unfortunately a lot of stuff was 
closed there but we saw the Pacific for the first time and then made it on to 
Portland by the afternoon. We stayed at the ace Ace Hotel, lost ourselves in 
Powell's books and had a great meal at Montage. Try the alligator. It was then 
back to Clyde Common for a nightcap and then an early rise for the mega-drive 
to San Francisco on Wednesday.

We had ambitions to make it to San Francisco by Thursday morning for the 
Giants game 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2013/may/29/pacific-road-trip-twitrip-day-three>
. It didn't happen, sadly. The drive was too long and there were just too many 
stops, while we also lost wifi connection up in the mountains, leading to a 
slight glitch in the live blog. Eventually, we rescued the situation, although 
spirits were low for a while, and managed to swing in to Eureka for the night, 
staying in the Discovery Inn. It was a motel. An experience.

From Eureka, we continued on Highway 101 and went through the Avenue of the 
Giants to see the Redwoods 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2013/may/30/pacific-road-trip-twitrip-day-four>
. Do it, do it, do it. It is awe-inspiring. We even drove through a tree. A 
quick stop for an excellent pizza in Hopland and we were finally in San 
Francisco after driving through the equally majestic Highway 1.

And here we are now. San Francisco. We like it here. Luckily, me and Paul are 
staying until Monday morning. But the blog isn't. All good things must come to 
an end. We've earned a drink or two, we feel. Once again, thanks for reading 
and for tipping. Bye!

2.49am BST 

Lombard Street Challenge - Done!

We've just driven down Lombard Street! PD suddenly jumped out and disappeared. 
Suddenly, we had no idea where he was and we were driving down a street at 
roughly 1mph, behind some people refusing to do the suggested 5mph. For God's 
sake.

When we got to the bottom, Photographer Dan/Bear Grylls, having gone feral 
again, was at the bottom, having sprinted all the way down and having knocked 
down a few old ladies along the way.

2.20am BST 

Latest update - the Lombard challenge

We're leaving Mission. To Lombard Street!

2.19am BST 

The day so far

Starts: The San Remo Hotel <http://www.sanremohotel.com/>, where Paul has 
trouble opening the door of the tiny box room.

Next stop: Breakfast. Tried to get into the Blue Bottle Cafe 
<http://www.bluebottlecoffee.com> in the Ferry Building, but the line was long. 
Bacon and cheese roll from theGolden Gate Meat Company 
<http://www.goldengatemeatcompany.com> instead.

Next stop: Golden Gate Park and the de Young Museum <http://deyoung.famsf.org/>
 for art.

Next stop: Cliff House <http://www.cliffhouse.com/home/introduction.html> for 
sea views and ozone.

Next stop: Beach Chalet <http://www.beachchalet.com> for lunch of calamares 
and sunshine overlooking the Bay.

Next stop: Twin Peaks for the panoramic views of the city.

Next stop: Shotwell's <http://www.shotwellsbar.com/>, an old-fashioned pub in 
the Mission for old-fashioned lager and pool.

Next stop: Clarion Alley for the protest art.

Last heard from: In Fecal Face <http://www.fecalface.com/%E2%80%8E>, an art 
gallery whose reputation goes beyond its name.

The boys are on a Mission at the moment but will need refuelling (MEXICAN! 
MEXICAN!) and to see the bright lights of the big city tonight, so do keep 
sending tips:@JacobSteinberg <https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg> #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash>.

If you see them around town, they may even buy you a beer!

Updated at 2.35am BST

2.00am BST 

Fecal matters

We've stopped off at ... Fecal Face <http://www.fecalface.com/‎>. It's a 
gallery. Don't judge it by the name. It's one of the best galleries around 
here. And also provides respite from the sun.

Updated at 2.29am BST

1.47am BST 

Zeitgeist beer garden on a sunny San Fran day

Went to the beer garden. Packed. Left the beer garden.

Updated at 1.54am BST

1.26am BST 

And now we're out on Valencia Street. Which is totally gentrified. Heading to 
the beer garden. TGIF, am I right?

1.24am BST 

We're in Clarion Alley. A bit deserted and ever so slightly intimidating. If 
you don't hear from us again, tell my brother he can have my xbox.

Updated at 1.30am BST

1.21am BST 

Musical interlude

Thanks to @Paisley 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23988602> for this 
suggestion - some nice SF scenes in the background
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSuoTjYYqe4c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSuoTjYYqe4c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSuoTjYYqe4c&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSuoTjYYqe4c&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSuoTjYYqe4c>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSuoTjYYqe4c&media=>
close 
1.19am BST 

We're on Mission Street - rough and ready round the edges.

1.13am BST 

Mr Pickles Sandwich Shop. There's a Pickle Cowboy with holstered condiments 
outside and PD tells us that it was once stolen from outside the shop and a 
people were distraught. Due to popular demand, it was eventually returned.

Updated at 1.14am BST

1.06am BST 

@BeauG <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23988436> - 
Photographer Dan approves of your choice. Here's hoping it's not packed - 
they're on their way.

1.01am BST 

Our readers think the boys should be outside on such a sunny day. So they've 
recommended - a beer garden (Zeitgeist <http://www.zeitgesitsf.com>, corner of 
Valencia and Duboce)
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2880920> BeauG  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2880920> 01 June 2013 12:47am 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23988436> 
Also recommend Zeitgeist for drinking, added plus is that it's got outdoor 
seating.

12.53am BST 

There's a Giants game tonight! Could we?

12.49am BST 

Playing pool now.

12.38am BST 

Barman is called David.

Updated at 12.38am BST

12.37am BST 

That time already

We're in Shotwell's <http://www.shotwellsbar.com/>, an old-fashioned pub on 
Shotwell and 20th street. We're having a beer. Might shoot some pool.

Updated at 1.36am BST

12.21am BST 

Mission

PD says the Mission District used to be a predominantly Irish area but has 
slowly turned into a more Hispanic area since the 60s.

12.21am BST 

Mission

We've met Photographer Dan's brother Carpenter Kevin. He doesn't have a beard. 
About to head down to Clarion Alley.

12.17am BST 

Music request
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11932684> HeckYeah  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11932684> 01 June 2013 12:10am 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23988131> 
Two totally different songs:

"San Francisco" by Foxygen

"Tenderloin" by Rancid

We haven't had chance to put together a Spotify mix today, but we like this 
Foxygen track, so thought we'd share - seems appropriate
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKtdWGGpvY1s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKtdWGGpvY1s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKtdWGGpvY1s&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKtdWGGpvY1s&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKtdWGGpvY1s>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKtdWGGpvY1s&media=>
close 
11.58pm BST 

We're currently experiencing an authentic American traffic jam.

11.37pm BST 

We're all about the spectacular views over here. We've just driven up the 
windy hill and are now looking over the city from Twin Peaks.

Updated at 11.38pm BST

11.22pm BST 

Twin Peaks

We're now back in the car and heading up Twin Peaks 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twin_Peaks> for the view (@PaulK14 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23980722>, @HeckYeah 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23981693>, @fulham fan 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23986444>). Don't think it 
has anything to do with the great show.

Updated at 11.25pm BST

11.21pm BST 

Gauntlet accepted

Just saw the suggestion to go down Lombard Street. Paul, who's driving, says 
"Thank you. That sounds like a challenge."

Updated at 3.30am BST

11.01pm BST 

Gauntlet thrown down
 Lombard Street, San Francisco. Photograph: Alamy 
Following seamlessly on from the Bullitt car chase sequence, @paisley 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23987106> sets the 
challenge for the boys to drive down Lombard Street. They have driven through a 
tree after all.

Will they? Should they?
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3234972> Paisley  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3234972> 31 May 2013 10:48pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23987106> 
Some good calls on the scary drives here. But don't think you're too cool to 
do Lombard street either.If you can drive through a tree you drive down the 
curvy street. I didn't bother doing it when I first visited, it took my mother 
years to get over the shock. And she still brings it up on occasion...

10.19pm BST 

Lunch is served

We're sitting outside getting burnt at the Beach Chalet, where they do some 
very good food.

To start we had little pieces of fried calamari, which were excellent. Then 
some small pieces of fried chicken for the main with sweet potato fries. Paul 
went for the bacon-wrapped meatloaf in ciabatta and PD went for the the roasted 
beet salad and the tuna rolls with ginger.

PD's got a beer, I've got some wine and Paul is driving.

Everyone is very content. Do we have to leave?

Updated at 11.40pm BST

10.15pm BST 

Bullitt car chase

Nice suggestion from @fulhamfan 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23986444> who has been 
serving us well with tips these past couple of days

Since they're driving - maybe check out Potrero Hill where Clint Eastwood 
[Bullitt etc?] filmed those classic car chase scenes....the ones where the car 
takes off at the crest of the hill! That's around Arkansas/Carolina and 20th St.

And here it is - all 10 minutes or so of it
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjtLhYkeOpo0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjtLhYkeOpo0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjtLhYkeOpo0&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjtLhYkeOpo0&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjtLhYkeOpo0>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjtLhYkeOpo0&media=>
close 
10.01pm BST 

Good local advice re the ferry option
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3466086> daisywaisy  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3466086> 31 May 2013 8:58pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23985643> 
Being an old seadog, I'm pushing for us to get a ferry across the bay. Big fan 
of the sea over here. Big fan.

Do it before all the commuters start heading home to Marin. You can have a 
drink on the boat, which makes it all much more worthwhile.

9.51pm BST 

Beach Chalet for lunch

And here we are at the Beach Chalet. Outside in the sun. Might have a glass of 
red out here.

9.40pm BST 

We're still cruising around Cliff House. We found a cave to walk through. At 
the end of it there was a rail and sign warning you not to climb over it on 
account of the possibility of falling on to the rocks. But no sign can tame 
these two intrepid, rugged explorers in their skinny jeans and Converse 
trainers.

There was also some cool graffiti on a rock that seemed impossible to reach. 
We're working up a bit of a sweat now and are driving past Ocean Beach, where 
the surfers go.

Next stop is the Beach Chalet <http://www.beachchalet.com> for lunch - as 
recommended by@BeauG. 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23985336>

San Francisco is a great city.

Updated at 9.42pm BST

9.32pm BST 

Cliff House

We're now at Cliff House. Of course the house is in ruins now, having been 
allowed to fall into disrepair. There's what used to be a public bath down by 
the sea. It's now full of goldfish - and a river otter named Sutro Sam. It's 
the only river otter on this side of the bay. They're not sure how it got here. 
Possibly by swimming across the bay from Marin. We haven't spotted him yet 
though.

Updated at 9.41pm BST

9.21pm BST 

9.08pm BST 

Just pitched up around Cliff House. Peaceful - a recurring theme... Birds 
tweeting. The preferable kind of tweeting.

9.05pm BST 

History lesson

Here's what we know about Cliff House <http://www.cliffhouse.com> - mostly 
gleaned from their website and Wiki:

Cliff House is restaurant on the headland above the cliffs just north of Ocean 
Beach, on the western side of San Francisco. It has a room-sized camera 
obscura. 

The first Cliff House was a modest structure built in 1863 by Senator John 
Buckley and C. C. Butler. Captain Junius Foster leased the Cliff House 
Restaurant and under his management wealthy San Franciscans flocked to the 
coast to enjoy the unique restaurant and wonderful views. The guest register 
bore the names of three US presidents as well as prominent San Francisco 
families such as the Hearsts, Stanfords, and Crockers, who would drive their 
carriages out to Ocean Beach for horse racing and recreation.

Updated at 9.10pm BST

8.57pm BST 

To Cliff House

We're now back in the car and heading to Cliff House 
<http://www.cliffhouse.com/home/introduction.html> (as recommended by quite a 
few) from Golden Gate Park.

Enjoyed the park and the brief stop at the de Young Museum. Unfortunately, we 
had to speed through it.

Being an old seadog, I'm pushing for us to get a ferry across the bay. Big fan 
of the sea over here. Big fan.

Also we're about to drive past another folk festival on Geary.

8.49pm BST 

8.36pm BST 

De Young Museum Observation Tower

8.33pm BST 

8.31pm BST 

We're in the de Young Museum <http://deyoung.famsf.org/>. A lot of kids 
around. Damn kids

8.16pm BST 

Thinking of lunch ...

While we wait for more updates, our thoughts turn to food (again), and the 
thorny issue of lunch. A lot of tips have come in recommending the guys try
Mexican food at some stage today.

When we put this to Jacob, he asked what other options there were.

Mexican Food

@purplearth  <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2892007>Some time 
before you go home, make sure you get a meal of good Mexican food. From what I 
remember of your home country, it doesn't exist there (Tacky Smell doesn't 
count). California is one of the best places in the world to eat Mexican, so 
you'd be depriving yourselves if you don't have some. As to where, I'd suggest 
the Mission District in SF, but any local can point you to the right place 
in/near any town along the way.

@Fantod  <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23981207>You must 
get Mexican food, preferably from a straight-up Mission district taqueria. 
Can't beatEl Farolito <http://www.elfarolitoinc.com/>, which has several 
locations.

@dixonium  <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3689034>You can't 
leave California without having some great Mexican food. Check out Mamacita on 
Chestnut Street.

@rocket_morton  <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11929819>
Taqueria Cancún in the Mission for outstanding mexican food. There are loads of 
good Mexican places in the Mission. Try the carnitas (pork) or carne asada 
(beef) tacos or burritos.

Updated at 8.26pm BST

7.59pm BST 

There's a concert area in this here park.

7.59pm BST 

You can really smell the eucalyptus trees. 

7.51pm BST 

A short drive through the city, Hot Chip on in the background, and we're in 
Golden Gate Park.

A lot of joggers around. It's a lovely park, no two ways about it.

Meanwhile we left the fruit in the car overnight - the grapes have turned into 
wine. Eat that, Coppola.

Updated at 8.28pm BST

7.51pm BST 

Great suggestion for Golden Gate Park just came in - to see light and space 
artistJames Turrell <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Turrell‎>'s 
installation there
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/4703534> FLProf  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/4703534> 31 May 2013 7:41pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23984287> 
If you're headed to the de Young museum, do have a look into the James Turrell 
installation: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z9a8JGzXnkc

For me at least, his installations and "sky spaces" are rest stops for the 
soul.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz9a8JGzXnkc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz9a8JGzXnkc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz9a8JGzXnkc&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz9a8JGzXnkc&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz9a8JGzXnkc>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz9a8JGzXnkc&media=>
close 
7.37pm BST 

En route

The crew are heading to Golden Gate Park. The Deyoung museum has cropped up in 
a few tips, like this one yesterday from@markier 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/4314239>

The tower at the deyoung museum in golden gate park has brilliant 360 views

What else should they do when they get there?

Updated at 10.22pm BST

7.04pm BST 

We've just cabbed it back to the hotel to pick some stuff up. We're in the 
Italian area. You can see Italian flags on the lamp-posts. I approve. We're 
going to get the car and head toGolden Gate Park. Having the car will ensure we 
can keep the wifi equipment charged, you see.

In a bit.

6.44pm BST 

Wherever next?

Loads of good suggestions coming in - many to do with open spaces, not 
surprisingly, as the crew have been in a car for the past three days. We thank 
you

Sterling tipster @daisywaisy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/3466086> suggests a boat ride
 Get a lunch to go at the Ferry Building and take a ferry ride across the Bay 
to Sausalito. Fabulous views of everything. 
@evankarp <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11889130> suggests 
Golden Gate Park
 Golden Gate Park is an absolute treasure of fun things to do (and, for me, 
this far outweighs the Wharf), and you can pretty much drop for a picnic 
anywhere; this is a great way to spend an entire day 
@ <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11889130>Aaron_Rayburn 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11899941> reckons a bike ride

Also while in San Francisco, you can rent bicycles on the pier, then bike 
across Golden Gate Bridge (thrilling!) into a small coast town called 
Sausalito. From there, you can lunch and ferry back with your bike into the 
city. Quite an epic way to see the bay.

@ <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11889130>RTUSAguide  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11935625>says

Sutro Baths <http://www.cliffhouseproject.com>, the Cliff House, and best of 
all: the coast path that follows the water back towards the Golden Gate Bridge, 
on one of the most beautiful short walks on the whole West Coast .

@ <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11889130>Paulk14 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2754821> has listed lots of 
places with stunning views of the city, including this famous scene from a1960s 
Todd Walker poster of California Street 
<http://www.allposters.com/-sp/California-Street-San-Francisco-1964-Posters_i290991_.htm>

Updated at 6.46pm BST

6.31pm BST 

We're in the Embarcadero bit and have just walked through a waterfall.

6.24pm BST 

Breakfast

We went to that Blue Bottle Cafe <http://www.bluebottlecoffee.com> - as tipped 
by@HellYeah <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23965488> and 
@Paisley <http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23973242> - but 
the line was huge and they didn't seem to have any... Food.

Went back outside and spotted some people eating sandwiches, so we went up to 
them and asked where they got them - not exactly social media, but there you go.

Off we went to the Golden Gate Meat Company 
<http://www.goldengatemeatcompany.com> for a sandwich then. They describe 
themselves as Fourth Generation Meat Specialists, which is essentially 
meaningless.

The problem for me was that every sandwich comes with egg. I asked the lady 
serving if I could have a sandwich without egg.

There was a long pause followed by "So you want it with egg."

In the end, she saw sense and gave me a bacon and cheese roll. Had it out by 
the bay. Cheap, simple and tasty. Photographer Dan went a bit weird when he saw 
an Oakland As fan.

Updated at 6.24pm BST

5.55pm BST 

We have pictures

We've finally found Photographer Dan. We're around the Ferry Building and 
looking out at Treasure Island. Aaargh!

Need to find some breakfast. There are many options. It's an upmarket Pike 
Place Market.

Updated at 5.59pm BST

5.36pm BST 

We're now just sitting by the bay and waiting for PD (photographer Dan) to 
show. A seagull has joined us. Can see the Bay Bridge and Oakland in the 
distance.
Jacob Steinberg (@JacobSteinberg) 
Bay Bridge #twitrips <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash> 
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> pic.twitter.com/30en3nLahL 
<http://t.co/30en3nLahL>
 <https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg/statuses/340506542065479680> May 31, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg/statuses/340506542065479680> 
Updated at 5.37pm BST

5.27pm BST 

We're sitting near the Ferry Building waiting for photographer Dan, who's been 
stricken down by transport blunders. Just like home.

It's a clear blue sky up there. A real European feel to this city.

Although it did threaten to get 'pwopa nawtee' outside our hotel.

I was waiting for Paul to come down and listening to some Rihanna to get 
pumped for the day when some old geezer, smoking a cigarette, walked up to me.

"Hanbcxn kdkznx kdnxgh jjrnBdh."
I still had my earphones in. So I took them out.
"Hey buddy, give me a sigawett."
"Sorry mate, don't have any."
"Come on buddy. Give me a sigawett."
"Just told you, don't have any."

And with a grumble, he was off. Danny Dyer 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-fRinBrGXts>, eat your heart out.

5.10pm BST 

Keep them coming...

4.56pm BST 

Breakfast - on a roll in the comments
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11768528> david aldhouse  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11768528> 31 May 2013 4:50pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23981021> 
If you wanted to hit Golden Gate Park there's a bakery nearby called 
Arizmendi, it's not the 'essential SF experience' but it's a good quick wheat 
fix.

And again, not breakfast as such but Philz coffee (either near the Giants 
stadium or the original one in Mission) once gave me the best cup of coffee 
I've ever had in my life.

Alternatively I'm sure someone knows a good Valencia hangout for breakfast, 
and then If you're in an arty frame of mind you could check out the murals down 
the side alleys (I forget which alleys now). Some of them are really beautiful.

Updated at 4.57pm BST

4.53pm BST 

It's a sunny day in San Francisco. We could yet see shorts. Stay tuned.

4.49pm BST 

Right, me and Paul are looking lively and heading off to meet photographer Dan 
for breakfast. He's not staying in our hotel. I think it's a safety hazard to 
have three people in this room.

4.37pm BST 
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2880920> BeauG  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/2880920> 31 May 2013 4:31pm 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23980497> 
Breakfast suggestion: Mama's on Washington Square (Stockton & Filbert)

Also go to the Ferry Building Market, it's sorta SF's version of Pike Place 
but expensive.

Go to the beach today! You've got a rare warm day today. Baker Beach would 
work.

4.30pm BST 

Incoming - breakfast tips

Thanks to @HellYeah 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23965488> and @Paisley 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23973242> for suggesting the
Blue Bottle Cafe <http://www.bluebottlecoffee.com>at the Ferry Building. 
They're going to need lots of coffee today by the sound of it - even Jacob, who 
doesn't drink the stuff.

Jamie Jenson, from RoadTrip America <http://www.roadtripamerica.com> has just 
emailed these suggestions

For breakfast I'd send them west to the Cliff House at Point Lobos  
<http://www.yelp.com/biz/the-cliff-house-bistro-san-francisco>(opens at 9am)

or the more "local favorite" Louis' 
<http://www.yelp.com/biz/louis-san-francisco-2> (right next door)

Any advances?
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11932684> HeckYeah  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/discussion/user/id/11932684> 31 May 2013 7:02am 
<http://discussion.guardian.co.uk/comment-permalink/23965488> 
To start tomorrow I suggest you go to the Ferry Building and get some Blue 
Bottle Coffee, and whatever other goodies you want, then sit out back by the 
bay and drink it all in. Looks like it is going to be a nice one.

4.15pm BST 

We have a photographer Dan plan, now our local has surveyed the suggestions. 
Going to shower then busting this joint.

4.08pm BST 

Ready to roll

Good morning, San Francisco! Well, here we are, the final day. Although saying 
that, time seems to have lost all meaning - we've been fitting roughly three 
day's work into one all week. As we were walking around North Beach last night, 
Paul observed that we'd been having breakfast in Portland the day before. As I 
write, he's currently trying to work out how to open the door of our cosy 
little box in theSan Remo hotel <http://www.sanremohotel.com/>. The raisins 
remain uneaten.

We're a bit sad the epic driving is over though. It was one of the most 
enjoyable experiences of my life and I'm glad we managed to get on both 
Highways 101 and 1, even if they need to sort out the wifi reception up there. 
Yesterday we started in Eureka, had breakfast in Samoa, drove through a tree, 
drove over the Golden Gate Bridge and had some excellent pizza in Hopland. 
Today? It's San Francisco all the way. Get tipping.

Usual places: below, @JacobSteinberg <https://twitter.com/JacobSteinberg>, 
#TwiTrips <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel>, GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.guardian.co.uk/assignment/519e370ee4b0e3928886150d>

Updated at 5.48pm BST
 