
One hundred and fifty years ago the Pacific Northwest 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pacific_Northwest> was a wooded anarchy. 
Inhabited by thwarted goldrush castoffs – crazed land-dwelling pirates – and 
a still sizable Native American population.

The Oregon Trail <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oregon_Trail>, a perilous hike 
across thousands of miles – and two icy mountain ranges – was often a one-way 
proposition, and appealed mainly to the desperate and the crazy. For a long 
time, the Pacific Northwest (NW to residents) was even wilder than most of the 
wild west.

Now, we're very civilised. The culture has an almost Scandinavian bearing. Our 
politics are liberal and we are bookish, very polite. As a home to Microsoft, 
Amazon, Starbucks, Boeing, Nike and much of Intel, millionaires abound, but 
even our rich people are demure. I once saw a mink coat here with the fur on 
the inside – from the outside it looked like an army-green raincoat.

If you're planning to visit, don't rent a monstrous SUV or a canary-yellow 
Mustang. In the summer months, hire a convertible, because you're about to 
experience the best weather of your life. The other nine months of the 
year, bring waterproof boots, and skip the convertible.

We're stuck indoors much of the year watching the drizzle, but people here 
don't own umbrellas: using an umbrella is admitting defeat. But we don't mind 
if you use one. There's even a trendy umbrella store downtown calledBella 
Umbrellas <http://www.bellaumbrella.com/>. The store is in Pike Place Market 
<http://pikeplacemarket.org/> , which is a mandatory stop for visitors.
 Pike Place Market, Seattle. Photograph: Delimont Herbig 
Ostensibly a farmer's market, Pike Place is best known for its theatrical 
flair: fishmongers toss a giant salmon like a hot potato (grim aside: the fish 
in question is quickly rendered inedible by all the abuse, and gets discarded 
at the end of the day). The original Starbucks is there, too, among the 200 
small businesses that inhabit the underground warrens and brick streets (bricks 
that were ships' ballasts in the 19th century). Slip down Post Alley and find
The Pink Door <http://thepinkdoor.net/>, a hidden Italian joint where burlesque 
trapeze artists swing overhead while you eat.

After dinner, ask a local for a recommendation for morning coffee. In the NW, 
we're truly obsessed with coffee. It's a cliche, yes, and it's true. Ever felt 
the urge to visit a drive-through coffee stall operated by young women in 
bikinis? Good news – there are several chains, but of questionable quality. 
There are also hundreds of beloved cafes (where the baristas wear clothes), 
with many roasting their own beans, including Portland'sStumptown Coffee 
Roasters <http://stumptowncoffee.com/> and Seattle's Caffe Ladro 
<http://caffeladro.com/>.

For a more blue-collar Seattle experience, drive north, weaving around 
sailboat-dotted Lake Union, and make your way to the Ballard neighbourhood. 
This independent fishing town was annexed by Seattle in 1907 (it's still a sore 
subject: you'll see "Free Ballard" bumper stickers everywhere).

Ballard's farmer's market <http://ballardfarmersmarket.wordpress.com/> is a 
quintessential Northwest culinary experience you'll find curly green 
fiddleheads (the delicious young fronds of a local fern) and live geoduck clams 
at the fishmongers.

If you don't feel like preparing your own geoduck, you're only a couple blocks 
fromThe Walrus and The Carpenter <http://thewalrusbar.com/>, a stylish new 
oyster bar serving an array of molluscs and sea creatures, including geoducks.

Ballard is the NW in miniature. Bearded hipsters converge for pricey cocktails 
atSexton <http://www.sextonseattle.com/>, the cheekily named bistro in the spot 
that was once supposedly home to a brothel. A couple of blocks away, you can 
unwind at a working-class greasy spoon-style dinerHattie's Hat 
<http://hatties-hat.com/>, which opened in 1904, and still reeks from a century 
of burning tobacco and spilled whisky.

When Hattie's Hat first opened, the Northwest was a hotbed for crimping, or 
Shanghaiing, the practise of coercing or kidnapping able-bodied men – often 
temporarily incapacitated by strong drink – to work aboard merchant ships. 
You'd be innocently guzzling a pint of your favourite grain alcohol at Hattie's 
Hat one minute, and the next, you'd wake up with a bad headache on a schooner 
bound for Indochina.
 Bainbridge Island, Puget Sound. Photograph: Radius Images/Corbis 
Another route out of Seattle involves driving on to the ferry to Bainbridge 
Island, which nuzzles the Olympic peninsula on the opposite side of the Puget 
Sound. You can play spot the mountain during the ride: it's a great place to 
see Rainier, the Olympics and the distant Cascades ranges. It's a 30-minute 
trip, so even if you are hungover, you'll survive. Bainbridge is a fine place 
for lunch, probably atHarbour Public House <http://harbourpub.com/>, which was 
built by a pious veteran of the civil war in the 1880s, but today offers views 
of the boats bobbing in Eagle Harbor.

After lunch, carry on to Port Townsend at the peninsula's northeastern rim. 
Walk or ski on the peninsula's soaring Olympic mountain range, weather 
permitting. If weather doesn't permit, entertain yourself in the city itself. 
Port Townsend was supposed to bethe big city – back then it was speculated that 
it would be the largest harbour on the whole US west coast – but being 
surrounded by water on three sides, it wasn't exactly on the way to anywhere 
else. During the economic collapse of 1890s, the railway robbed the city of its 
dream, and focused on another port across the sound, Seattle.

Move south along Route 101 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/U.S._Route_101> and 
arrive inAstoria, just across the border in Oregon. Grand Victorian houses – 
many of them long vacant – fill Astoria, along with cafes, eerie antique shops, 
moustachioed bail bondsmen and hipsters. Meriwether Lewis and William Clark's
western expedition <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lewis_and_Clark_Expedition>, 
spent the miserable, rain-filled winter of 1805-06 in a cabin here. They hoped 
someone would send a ship to fetch them. That didn't happen, so they turned 
around and hiked home.

Continuing down the coast, ignore the cheesy casinos, and head for the 
blustery fishing town ofNewport, Oregon. If you have kids in tow, there's a 
charming but slightly underwhelming aquarium that features an underwater 
Plexiglas tunnel. Stay at the quaintSylvia Beach Hotel 
<http://www.sylviabeachhotel.com/>, perched atop a cliff by the beach. Each of 
the rooms is named and decorated in honour of an author. My wife and I stayed 
in the Robert Louis Stevenson, which is the cheapest, but if you prefer to 
travel like Poirot, go for the Agatha Christie.

Finally, ascend through the twisting mountain roads to Portland, a few hours 
inland. Timber is still a big industry in the NW, and majestic evergreens are 
especially notable on this stretch. Stately Douglas firs and burly cedars are 
"really something", as Agent Dale Cooper memorably said on David Lynch's 
suitably weirdTwin Peaks <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Twin_Peaks>.

If you can, spring for the elegant Heathman Hotel in Portland 
<http://portland.heathmanhotel.com/>. The hotel's cosy library is home to 
signed copies from the hundreds of authors who have stayed there, including 
yours truly.

Portland is a bit smaller and weirder than Seattle, and has a vigorous 
food-van economy. There are car parks all over town filled with vans offering 
every kind of food imaginable, including Korean tacos.

There are also dozens of exceptional breakfast joints, but you would be remiss 
if you didn't make room forTasty N Sons <http://tastyntasty.com/>, and the best 
breakfast I've ever had: Moroccan chicken hash. Yes, it sounds bizarre, but 
this is Portland, where bizarre goes to retire. If you're disappointed, send me 
your receipt and I will mail you a photo of my disbelieving face.
 Portland is renowned for its many food carts and vans. Photograph: Alamy 
Portland is flat, with well-signed bike paths, so ditch your car while in town 
andrent a city bike 
<http://bikeportland.org/2009/08/19/where-to-rent-a-bike-in-portland-22171> or 
a surrey with the fringe on top (horse carriage) – if you fancy having a sing!

As with many Northwest cities, Portland has a fantastic arboretum, the Hoyt 
Arboretum <http://www.hoytarboretum.org/>. And downtown, there's a small, but 
surprisingly effective amphitheatre inPioneer Square 
<http://www.thesquarepdx.org/>, where, if you stand in the right spot, and 
speak in a normal voice, your words will echo back loudly – the perfect place 
for an impromptu political invective.

But most importantly, you have to go to the downtown branch of Powell's City 
of Books <http://www.powells.com/>, which claims to be the largest independent 
bookstore in the world, and merits an afternoon's perusal. The NW is book crazy 
– perhaps due to all that rain – and even small towns have superb independent 
bookstores. (Seattle's 11-storey, glass-facedCentral Library 
<http://www.spl.org/>, designed by Rem Koolhaas, is one arresting testament to 
the region's bibliophile soul.)

Finally, no trip to the Pacific Northwest would be complete without time spent 
in aMcMenamins <http://www.mcmenamins.com/> establishment. McMenamins owns 
hotels and restaurants throughout the region, all decorated with a unique and 
whimsical style that's pure NW: equal parts hippy paint-job and oddball 
yard-sale flotsam. TheEdgefield Hotel 
<http://www.mcmenamins.com/54-edgefield-home> (doubles from $70), once a 
dilapidated old farm in quiet countryside by the Columbia river gorge east of 
Portland, is a great spot for a relaxing weekend. For a more rambunctious 
experience, try theKennedy School 
<http://www.mcmenamins.com/161-kennedy-school-detention-bar>, a former primary 
school in Portland, now home to a hotel, movie-theatre, soaking pool, 
restaurant, and five – yes, five – bars including The Detention Bar.

All McMenamins pubs and hotels serve beer brewed on the premises; the chain 
also makes its own liquors and wine from Oregon's superb grapes. And yes, they 
roast their own coffee. As with everything here, there's a casualness that 
hints at the region's rustic roots – formal dress is almost unheard of in the 
NW – but the exacting standards also bespeak the quiet intensity that has 
distinguished the area for generations.

If you've got time, head south toward California. But keep the top down on 
your convertible until you make it to the border, so no one thinks you're 
showing off.

Peter Mountford <http://petermountford.com/> lives in Seattle. His debut 
novel, A Young Man's Guide to Late Capitalism (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt), won 
the 2012 Washington State Book Award

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 