
One episode of Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/game-of-thrones-episode-by-episode>
 tells you all you need to know about how important city walls used to be for 
defence. But they were also about identity and belonging, as Wendy Pullan, 
director of Cambridge University’sCentre for Urban Conflicts Research 
<http://www.urbanconflicts.arct.cam.ac.uk/research-projects/conflict-in-cities>
, explains: “If you lived within the walls then you were a citizen; if you 
didn’t then you weren’t. The status used to matter a lot.”


In recent times, since the collapse of the iron curtain, one might have 
imagined separation walls would be less in vogue. But walls within cities, 
slicing one community from another – whether on ethnic, religious or political 
lines – are still prevalentfrom Jerusalem to Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2013/nov/walls#intro>, not to 
mention in war-torn cities such as Homs in Syria.

“All over the Middle East, you’re seeing walls between Sunni and Shia 
residents,” says Raghda El-Halawany, who works for global peace movement
MasterPeace <http://www.masterpeace.org/>. Homs is now peppered with walls – 
the most famous one encloses Baba Amr, a rebel stronghold, surrounded by Sunni 
and Christian quarters.


It’s a similar story in Iraq’s capital, Baghdad. While many of its walls have 
been built for security around schools and hospitals, or forprotection against 
militant attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/04/iraq-builds-wall-and-trench-around-baghdad-to-stop-militant-attacks>
, they’re also to keep sectarian communities apart: a three-mile wall was built 
byUS soldiers in 2007 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/apr/20/iraq.usa>, 
for instance, which gated off a minority Sunni community.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Finternational-peace-day-murals-painting-city-walls-separating-communities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93eed9891bd1deec9b7e984840e6f917d2e0d3b9%2F0_234_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Painting%20for%20peace%3A%20global%20mural%20project%20highlights%20the%20walls%20that%20divide%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Finternational-peace-day-murals-painting-city-walls-separating-communities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Painting%20for%20peace%3A%20global%20mural%20project%20highlights%20the%20walls%20that%20divide%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Finternational-peace-day-murals-painting-city-walls-separating-communities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93eed9891bd1deec9b7e984840e6f917d2e0d3b9%2F0_234_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 A painter decorates a security wall sealing off the southern section of the 
Shia enclave of Sadr City in Baghdad. Photograph: Karim Kadim/AP 
In São Paulo, Brazil, walls separate rich from poor communities. The most 
well-known is the gated communities of Alphaville, in which 60,000-odd 
residents are surrounded by around 40 miles of wall. The high-rise buildings 
inside the compound, with their bright blueswimming pools on apartment balconies
 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/564x/f4/15/10/f415103cf5b1fc89631e472084372a6b.jpg>
, jar against the dusty red roofs of the surrounding, low-lying favelas.

Referring to separating walls as a “hot topic”, El-Halawany also cites the 
recent UK proposal for a “big, new wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/uk-immigration-minister-confirms-work-will-begin-on-big-new-wall-in-calais>
” in the French port city of Calais – four-metres-high and 1km-long – to stop 
refugees boarding lorries to reach England illegally.


Pullan says it’s unclear whether there has been the same kind of growth in 
city walls as along the borders between countries – a phenomenon that will 
surely increase shouldDonald Trump become the next US president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/31/donald-trump-mexico-meeting-president-pena-nieto-immigration>
. Certainly, though, “various municipal authorities are using walls and it 
seems to be more prevalent,” she suggests.

It’s with the aim of subverting the trend, and turning walls of separation 
into walls of connection, that MasterPeace has invited artists to spend 21 
September, the UN’s annualInternational Day of Peace 
<http://www.un.org/en/events/peaceday/>, painting walls in 30 cities around the 
world for one of the biggest mural projects in history. Walls will be painted 
in Nairobi’s Kibera slums, one of the worst spots of post-election violence in 
recent years; in the Bangladeshi city of Sylhet, prescient in a country that’s 
home to the world’s longest border wall; and in Mexico City, where the Trump 
wall is on everyone’s minds.

***
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Finternational-peace-day-murals-painting-city-walls-separating-communities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77aac25d3b21c46bc3c75b991d9c53aa6bad2271%2F0_101_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Painting%20for%20peace%3A%20global%20mural%20project%20highlights%20the%20walls%20that%20divide%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Finternational-peace-day-murals-painting-city-walls-separating-communities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Painting%20for%20peace%3A%20global%20mural%20project%20highlights%20the%20walls%20that%20divide%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Finternational-peace-day-murals-painting-city-walls-separating-communities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77aac25d3b21c46bc3c75b991d9c53aa6bad2271%2F0_101_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Banksy’s work on the West Bank wall in Ramallah. Photograph: Marco Di 
Lauro/Getty Images 
In most cases, separation walls are imposed, usually by some sort of 
authority, and usually against the wishes of some, if not all, affected 
inhabitants. The separation wall in Jerusalem, for instance, built by Israel 
from 2002 onwards to cut East Jerusalem off from the rest of the West Bank, has 
been built against the wishes of the overwhelming majority of Palestinians.

When you build a wall, you need to guard it … walls create hatred automatically
Raghda El-Halawany 
In Northern Ireland, however, Belfast’s walls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/sep/29/belfast-berlin-wall-moment-permanent-peace-walls>
 are unusual as the majority of those living beside them – built from 1969 to 
divide Protestant and Catholic communities – seem to favour them.


In desperate times, such walls can be a pragmatic answer to a city’s volatile 
rifts. As Pullan concedes: “You can understand that when there is fighting 
going on, and people are killing each other, the municipal authorities will 
react usually quickly in wanting to pull the warring communities apart.”

Although many walls start life as temporary, they very quickly take on a 
permanence, and divisions become harder to heal. For El-Halawany, they are 
antithetical to the very nature of cities: “Cities are built on integration, 
mobility and connections. The feeling of separation creates more of this 
feeling of ‘I don’t belong’, ‘I’m hated’, so it’s more okay to be violent.”

She feels their ill effects in her native Cairo: “Whenever there is a new 
compound, there is increased security – when you build a wall, you need to 
guard it … walls create hatred automatically.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq7JHbwVD2wU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq7JHbwVD2wU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dq7JHbwVD2wU&media=>
What makes these walls so damaging, says Pullan, who who is speaking from 
Jerusalem where she lived for over a decade, is that they’re “often in a place 
where no one would have expected a wall, they divide the urban fabric – they 
cause spacial discontinuities. If you get that, you usually get social 
discontinuities as well – it cuts the normal flow of movement in a city, it 
means that people never encounter each other, or very rarely.”

She takes the example of the wall and UN buffer zone built between the Turkish 
and Greek communities of the Cypriot capital, Nicosia: “[It] goes right through 
what was their major commercial street ... and that’s what’s so damaging – you 
end up with two rump cities. Once you do that, it’s very hard to put the city 
back together again.” You only need tolook at pictures of the area now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2014/apr/12/cyprus-buffer-zone-photographs-agencies>
 – eerie, like a ghost town – to understand what she’s talking about.

In Jerusalem today, some of the same issues apply as in Nicosia’s old 
commercial heart. In such a badly divided city, Pullan says, “it’s very 
important that occasionally people see a face that doesn’t look like theirs … 
The Palestinians hear quite a lot of Hebrew, because that’s the dominant 
language at this point, but the Israelis need to hear Arabic … These are little 
things but they’re really important if societies are ever to come together.”

'Erase and I will draw again': the struggle behind Cairo's revolutionary 
graffiti wall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/23/struggle-cairo-egypt-revolutionary-graffiti>
So separation walls feed into a much bigger narrative of estrangement in 
divided cities: without contact with “the other side”, communities will tend, 
Pullan says, to vilify “the other”.

The roots of division often run very deep and it’s difficult to bring walls 
down even when they’ve been physically removed. So is there an answer? Public 
space, according to Pullan, is essential. “There’s the tendency – even in 
cities that have a very low level of conflict – to privatise, put in barriers.” 
Turning the areas around walls into useable public space is one of the things 
El-Halawany hopes MasterPeace’s project will achieve. They painted a wall in 
Cairo a few years ago, not far from Tahrir Square. Ever since, she says, the 
space around it has been used for pop-up concerts and events. The local 
community have invested in it.

“There probably is something fairly inherent in the way we live that we tend 
to want to live with our own people,” Pullan says. “… And I suppose there’s 
nothing so terrible about that. However, there have to be places in cities 
where we meet other people, and that’s key. Diversity has to be there – without 
it you really don’t have a city.”


Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 