
One of the world’s largest producers of palm oil has drained and planted on 
areas of peatland supposed to be protected by Indonesian law, claims anew report
 <http://www.greenpeace.org/BurningIssue> from Greenpeace, with levels of 
damage potentially worse than previously reported.

The NGO says satellite images of Ketapang, west Kalimantan show drainage 
canals covering an area of peatland that the Malaysia-based company IOI had 
marked for restoration in a sustainability commitment in 2014.

Draining peatland is the first step for developing a palm oil plantation, but 
dry land is at increased risk of catching fire.Greenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> says satellite images 
suggest nearly a third of the Ketapang landscape - once home to endangered and 
vulnerable species including orangutans, proboscis monkeys and sun bears says 
the NGO - burned in 2015.
Map showing west Kalimantan 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/jun/2016-06-09T09:22:06.html>  Map 
showing west Kalimantan 
The new report is the latest blow for the IOI Group. A founding member of the 
Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO), a body set up to address 
environmental and social issues in palm oil, IOI’s sustainability certification 
was suspended in April afterallegations of wrongdoing in Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/09/ioi-malaysian-palm-oil-company-unilever-mars-kellogg-rspo-deforestation>
.

Companies including Dunkin’ Donuts, McDonald’s, Nestlé and Unilever have 
pledged not to source from the palm oil company, which earlierthis week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/07/palm-oil-ioi-rspo-unilever-nestle-kelloggs-mars-deforestation-indonesia>
 decided to drop a lawsuit against RSPO for suspending its certification.

Greenpeace is calling on the RSPO to maintain its suspension until IOI has a 
meaningful plan in place to resolve damage to the Ketapang peatland landscape 
and prevent fires. So far, it has called the new draft policy and action plan 
offered by IOI, weak and lacking significant commitments.


Among other suggestions, Greenpeace recommends that IOI improves transparency 
by publishing concession maps for its operations throughGlobal Forest Watch’s 
<http://www.globalforestwatch.org/> online forest monitoring and alert system. 

Indonesia cracks down on deforestation in symbolic u-turn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/27/indonesia-cracks-down-on-deforestation-symbolic-u-turn>
Dr Surina Binti Ismail, sustainability group head for IOI stresses that its 
draft policy is still a work in progress and that it has “taken note of 
Greenpeace’s suggestions” and is in favour of a few of them. She adds: “Even 
prior to our suspension [from the RSPO], we have instigated restoration of the 
peatland that we had accidentally cleared and even reported to RSPO on this 
matter.”

With regards to fire prevention, Ismail says IOI is engaged in activities 
including watch towers to monitor fires, water gauges to monitor peat water 
tables, and installing tube wells for water access.

A spokesperson from RSPO says the organisation cannot comment on next steps 
for IOI’s suspension until its complaints panel has made a decision.
 