
Gabriel Jesus has not yet been registered to play for Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> due to the Football 
Association continuing the due diligence process regarding a player who was 
third-party owned at his previous club, Palmeiras.

However there is no suggestion that the £27m move 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/03/manchester-city-sign-gabriel-jesus-palmeiras>
 is under any threat and, as the process only began on 1 January, no particular 
deadline has been missed regarding his eligibility to play for Pep Guardiola’s 
side.

Enter Gabriel Jesus: an intriguing punt for Pep Guardiola and Manchester City 
| Barney Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/06/brazilian-teenage-striker-gabriel-jesus-manchester-city>
It is understood City completed all of the work required by the club earlier 
this week and it is now down to the FA to complete his registration.

Guardiola said: “He cannot play – [due to] papers. When Palmeiras and the FA 
solve the problems he will be able to play.”

In a separate matter that has no bearing on the transfer or the fact that 
Jesus is not yet available for City, there is a dispute between an agent in the 
player’s native Brazil and Palmeiras. This relates to third-party ownership and 
concerns a claim of around £8.7m.

A lawyer directly involved in the case confirmed to the Guardian on Friday 
evening that this will not affect Jesus’s transfer or his current status at 
City.

Guardiola’s side are at Everton in Sunday’s early afternoon game and the 
Catalan is confident John Stones,who moved from Goodison Park to City in the 
summer for £47.5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-city-complete-signing-of-john-stones-from-everton>
, will be able to handle what may be a hostile reception on a first return to 
his former club.

Guardiola said: “He is strong enough, I don’t have doubt about that. Hopefully 
they can respect him because I know how John respects the club. They helped him 
to develop his performance and play in the Premier League but, after what 
happened in the past with other players, I can expect absolutely everything.”

Another player in contention is Vincent Kompany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/vincent-kompany>, who has been declared fit 
after two months out with a knee injury. Guardiola said: “He has trained. The 
last two or three days he was a full part of the training sessions, so he is 
back.”

Kompany has not played a full match since April and has been hampered by a 
series of problems in recent seasons,with his latest injury being his 35th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/vincent-kompany-sidelined-for-manchester-city-with-another-muscle-injury>
 since joining City in 2008. There is a feeling the Belgium defender now needs 
a run of games to prove he has a long-term future at the club“Hopefully he can 
play and be used for the second part of the season,” Guardiola said.

Kompany seems likely to be included in City’s Champions League squad for the 
knockout stages despite his problems. The 30-year-old might have been 
vulnerable because of the form of Yaya Touré, who was not included for the 
group stages because of limits on overseas players but looks set to be restored.

However, Ilkay Gündogan is likely to make way after suffering a season-ending 
knee injury. Jesus can also be accommodated because Kelechi Iheanacho, after 
two years at the club, can now be registered as a homegrown player.
 