
Paramedics in Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> 
will be fitted with body cameras in a $500,000 trial to see if it reduces the 
level of violence they face on the job.

Paramedics were exposed to violence at more than 5,000 cases in 2015-16, 
according to figures provided by Ambulance Victoria, at a rate of about 13 a 
day.

Of those 581 – about two a day – were formally reported as occupational 
violence incidents.

“It’s a sad indictment unfortunately of the community that these things are 
necessary but each day our paramedics are exposed to two cases per day of 
occupational violence and, in one of those cases a day, they are actually 
physically assaulted or abused,” the chief executive of Ambulance Victoria, 
Tony Walker, said. “That’s unacceptable.”

Victoria pledges $500m to ambulance services after thunderstorm asthma deaths
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/27/victoria-gives-500m-boost-to-ambulance-services-after-thunderstorm-asthma-deaths>
The trial will be run out of Ambulance Victoria’s northwest metropolitan 
district, which includesMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> city as well parts of 
the outer suburbs.

It is intended both as a deterrent and as a means to ensure successful 
prosecution of anyone who does assault a paramedic.

The Andrews government has funded 200 cameras for 150 paramedics as part of a 
$2.7m violence prevention fund directed at health workers.

It follows a similar trial among Victoria police officers, the results of 
which are still being evaluated.

Speaking to the media at the ambulance station in Sunshine, in Melbourne’s 
western suburbs, on Sunday,the Victorian health and ambulance services 
minister, Jill Hennessy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/victoria-to-overhaul-health-system-after-hospital-safety-review-over-baby-deaths>
, said paramedics would turn the body cameras on if they felt a situation had 
become volatile and tell everyone around them that they were now being filmed.

“What we want to ensure is we are using this as a tool to be able to 
discourage people and understanding that they will be subjected to 
accountability if they subject paramedics to violence and aggression.”

Paramedic Shelly Brown was allegedly assaulted in 2015 while working with a 
patient in the back of the ambulance.

“I was assisting a patient who was alcohol affected and had police around me 
and out of the blue she just attacked me and punched me in the face,” Brown 
told reporters.

“We were inside the ambulance when it happened, which is my office, and it 
really did mentally affect me. I had a bit of time off after that.”

The woman was charged with assault and the case is currently before the court.

Brown said she had noticed an increase in violent behaviour toward ambulance 
staff in her nine years as a paramedic, mainly in people affected by alcohol.

“Hopefully people are aware that if they are being filmed they might be a bit 
more conscious of their actions,” she said.

Alcohol remains the main risk-factor faced by paramedics, despite high-profile 
attention on drugs such as methamphetamines, particularly ice.

Steve McGhie, the secretary of the Victorian branch of Ambulance Employees 
Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/22/ambulance-crisis-victoria-woman-died-of-heatstroke-after-two-hour-wait>
, said it was “disappointing” that the cameras were necessary but hoped the 
trial would be successful in reducing the number of violent incidents.

“The agenda is to try and prevent and stop people from even thinking about 
assaulting paramedics,” he said.
 