
A government-funded hip-hop centre seems like a paradox – given the history of 
tensions between rappers and the establishment. Both the former president – the 
Republican Nicolas Sarkozy – and Socialist prime minister Manuel Valls have 
denounced French rap groups in the past. But now La Place, a new hip-hop 
cultural centre, has become the centrepiece of thecontroversial Canopée des 
Halles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/06/les-halles-paris-architecture-custard-coloured-flop>
, a €1bn architectural space designed to breathe new life into the notoriously 
ugly and dangerous Les Halles station, and draw a line under Paris’s shame at 
the destruction of the beautiful 19th-century wrought-iron market that was 
bulldozed in 1971.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-hip-hop-cultural-centre-la-places-les-halles-first-season-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24798e830b4ae785eeada93c97043a105f5b0b62%2F0_47_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%E2%80%99s%20hip-hop%20cultural%20centre%20launches%20first%20season%20of%20events&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-hip-hop-cultural-centre-la-places-les-halles-first-season-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%E2%80%99s%20hip-hop%20cultural%20centre%20launches%20first%20season%20of%20events&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-hip-hop-cultural-centre-la-places-les-halles-first-season-events%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24798e830b4ae785eeada93c97043a105f5b0b62%2F0_47_4256_2553%2F4256.jpg>
 The redeveloped Canopée des Halles, which houses La Place hip-hop centre and 
the second largest shopping centre in France. Photograph: Frederic 
Stevens/Getty Images 
Featuring two concert halls, studios, 200 square metres of co-working space 
for hip-hop entrepreneurs and a bar open to everyone, La Place is as much about 
paying tribute to hip-hop as it is a space for musicians to collaborate. While 
the bar has been open since April, La Place only announced its programme of 
events this month. Its first season will kick off with the theme Paris-New York 
where, from 5-9 October, it will present DJ sets, conferences and concerts with 
New York artists such asKRS-One <http://www.krs-one.com/> and Dynasty. The 
season will continue with the French beatbox championship qualification, an 
exhibition on French hip-hop activists, dance performances, documentary 
screenings about the lives of graffiti and hip-hop artists, and French rap 
concerts.

La Place follows several other officially funded projects that recognise 
underground art. Last summer SNCF partnered with street artists to turnGare du 
Nord station into a gallery of urban art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2015/jun/12/paris-street-art-gare-du-nord-goes-graffiti-with-quai-36-project>
; and this year the state-owned rail giant, the biggest landowner in Paris,
invited artists to transform disused industrial sites into creative venues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jul/03/sncf-paris-art-music-regeneration-projects-la-station>
 focused on art, sustainability and urban farming. “There is a strong tradition 
in France of public finance for cultural endeavours. Hip-hop is like every 
other discipline … but it was the only one not yet benefiting from funding,” 
said Paris’s deputy mayor, Bruno Julliard.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-hip-hop-cultural-centre-la-places-les-halles-first-season-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96dc77655e64fe9bfc6b732776529e10b1cfb1a3%2F22_0_3986_2392%2F3986.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%E2%80%99s%20hip-hop%20cultural%20centre%20launches%20first%20season%20of%20events&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-hip-hop-cultural-centre-la-places-les-halles-first-season-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%E2%80%99s%20hip-hop%20cultural%20centre%20launches%20first%20season%20of%20events&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-hip-hop-cultural-centre-la-places-les-halles-first-season-events%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96dc77655e64fe9bfc6b732776529e10b1cfb1a3%2F22_0_3986_2392%2F3986.jpg>
 A dancer performs at the September launch for La Place’s Paris-New York season 
Les Halles is Europe’s busiest underground station, used by 750,000 passengers 
a day, many of them travelling in from Paris’s suburbs, where French hip-hop 
originated. Its concourses have long been a place of spontaneous street dance 
and music. Locating a homage to underground art in the heart ofParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> is symbolic at a time when tension 
between a social and cultural elite and deprived ethnic minorities is among the 
most pressing issues facing politicians.

But not everyone is sold. French hip-hop journalist Salim Jawad is pleased 
about the location of La Place. “Les Halles is central: there are lots of 
different people passing through, and it was always a hip-hop neighbourhood. 
Plus hip-hop shouldn’t be ghettoised and found only in the suburbs,” he said. 
However, he is sceptical about the government’s attitude. “That’s all just 
smoke and mirrors to me. Look at what happened toBlack M at his Verdun concert 
<http://en.rfi.fr/culture/20160514-french-rapper-black-m-banned-world-war-centenary-verdun>
 [the rap artist was to perform at the commemoration of the Battle of Verdun, 
but his concert was cancelled as the government deemed him an unfit guest for 
the occasion], and when politicians like Henry de Lesquen talk about abolishing 
‘negro music’, it seems like politics and hip-hop don’t mix well. Government or 
no, hip-hop has often served as an excuse for politicians to come down hard on 
various communities in France.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-hip-hop-cultural-centre-la-places-les-halles-first-season-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F097a13312c27e2caa168be289dc8e59dca867b05%2F0_55_3960_2376%2F3960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%E2%80%99s%20hip-hop%20cultural%20centre%20launches%20first%20season%20of%20events&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-hip-hop-cultural-centre-la-places-les-halles-first-season-events%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%E2%80%99s%20hip-hop%20cultural%20centre%20launches%20first%20season%20of%20events&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fparis-hip-hop-cultural-centre-la-places-les-halles-first-season-events%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F097a13312c27e2caa168be289dc8e59dca867b05%2F0_55_3960_2376%2F3960.jpg>
 The bar at La Place 
For the government, La Place is much more than a symbol of integration. It 
opens at a time when terrorist attacks, floods and strikes have had a dramatic 
impact on tourism, withvisitor numbers falling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/23/france-hit-by-drop-in-tourism-strikes-terror-attacks>
. Paris City Hall alongside the Ministry of Foreign Affairs reacted with a 
sizable online campaign, budgeting €2.5m to promote Paris as a tourist 
destination to foreigners, recently releasinga new promotional video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yV2HSv-dwEI> that will be broadcasted on Air 
France flights and on the outdoor screens of Decaux, an international 
advertising company.

Although the principal goal of La Place is to nourish the underdog of the art 
world, Julliard hopes that on an international scale it will be a means “to 
show that Paris can be the most beautiful city in the world, not only for its 
heritage but also because it is a place of innovation”.

• La Place Centre Culturel Hip Hop, 10, passage de la Canopée des Halles, 
75001 Paris, +33 1 70 22 45 48,laplace.paris <http://laplace.paris/>
 