
In the final meeting of the Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> 
talks on climate change on Saturday night, the debating chamber was full and 
the atmosphere tense. Ministers from 196 countries sat behind their country 
nameplates, aides flocking them, with observers packed into the overflowing 
hall.

World leaders hail Paris climate deal as ‘major leap for mankind’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/world-leaders-hail-paris-climate-deal>
John Kerry, the US secretary of state, talked animatedly with his officials, 
while China’s foreign minister Xie Zhenhua wore a troubled look. They had been 
waiting in this hall for nearly two hours. The French hosts had trooped in to 
take their seats on the stage, ready to applaud on schedule at 5.30pm – but it 
was now after 7pm, and the platform was deserted.

After two weeks of fraught negotiations, was something going badly wrong?

Then at 7.16pm, the French foreign minister, Laurent Fabius, returned abruptly 
to the stage, flanked by high-ranking UN officials. The last-minute compromises 
had been resolved, he said. And suddenly they were all on their feet. Fabius 
brought down the green-topped gavel, a symbol of UN talks, and announced that a 
Paris agreement had been signed. The delegates were clapping, cheering and 
whistling wildly, embracing and weeping. Even the normally reserved economist 
Lord Stern was whooping.

Outside the hall, a “Mexican wave” of standing ovations rippled across the 
conference centre as news reached participants gathered around screens outside 
for the translation into their own language. The 50,000 people who attended the 
summit had been waiting for this moment, through marathon negotiating sessions 
and sleepless nights.

The contrast with the last global attempt to resolve climate change, at 
Copenhagen in 2009, which collapsed into chaos and recriminations, could not 
have been greater. In a city recently hit by terrorist attacks that left 130 
dead and scores more critically injured, collective will had prevailed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fparis-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff326b8cae30b7cc01e254aeef618fe0002e8a812%2F0_0_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20climate%20change%20agreement%3A%20the%20world's%20greatest%20diplomatic%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fparis-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20climate%20change%20agreement%3A%20the%20world%27s%20greatest%20diplomatic%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fparis-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff326b8cae30b7cc01e254aeef618fe0002e8a812%2F0_0_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Villagers on Kutubdia island, Bangladesh, which is prone to extreme weather, 
including cyclones and storm surges. Photograph: Zakir Hossain 
Chowdhury/Barcroft 
Paris produced an agreement hailed as “historic, durable and ambitious”. 
Developed and developing countries alike are required to limit their emissions 
to relatively safe levels, of 2C with an aspiration of 1.5C, with regular 
reviews to ensure these commitments can be increased in line with scientific 
advice. Finance will be provided to poor nations to help them cut emissions and 
cope with the effects of extreme weather. Countries affected by climate-related 
disasters will gain urgent aid.

Like any international compromise, it is not perfect: the caps on emissions 
are still too loose, likely to lead to warming of 2.7 to 3C above 
pre-industrial levels, breaching the 2C threshold that scientists say is the 
limit of safety, beyond which the effects – droughts, floods, heatwaves and sea 
level rises – are likely to become catastrophic and irreversible. Poor 
countries are also concerned that the money provided to them will not be nearly 
enough to protect them. Not all of the agreement is legally binding, so future 
governments of the signatory countries could yet renege on their commitments.

The deal alone won’t dig us out of the hole that we’re in, but it makes the 
sides less steep.
Kumi Naidoo, executive director of Greenpeace International 
These flaws may shadow the future of climate change action, but on Saturday 
night they took second place. As the news spread through the world, the 
reaction from civil society groups, governments and businesses, was 
overwhelmingly positive.

Kumi Naidoo, executive director of Greenpeace International, summed up the 
mood: “It sometimes seems that the countries of the UN can unite on nothing, 
but nearly 200 countries have come together and agreed a deal. Today, the human 
race has joined in a common cause. The Paris agreement is only one step on a 
long road and there are parts of it that frustrate, that disappoint me, but it 
is progress. The deal alone won’t dig us out of the hole that we’re in, but it 
makes the sides less steep.”

Even as delegates celebrated at the conference’s end, there was a palpable 
sense of relief from the exhausted French hosts. At many points in this 
fortnight of marathon negotiating sessions, it looked as if a deal might be 
beyond reach. That it ended in success was a tribute in part to their diligence 
and efficiency and the efforts of the UN.

“France has brought openness and experience in diplomacy, and mutual respect 
to these talks,” said Stern, one of the world’s leading climate economists. 
“They have taken great care to make everyone listened to, that they were 
consulted. There was a great sense of openness, of professional diplomacy, and 
skill.”

Saturday night was the culmination not only of a fortnight of talks, but of 
more than 23 years of international attempts under the UN to forge collective 
action on this global problem. Since 1992, all of the world’s governments had 
been pledging to take measures that would avoid dangerous warming. Those 
efforts were marked by discord and failure, the refusal of the biggest emitters 
to take part, ineffective agreements and ignored treaties.

For these reasons, the Paris talks were widely seen as make-or-break for the 
UN process. If they failed, collective global efforts would be at an end and 
the world would be left without a just and robust means of tackling climate 
change.

The threat was catastrophic and the stakes could scarcely be higher. Without 
urgent action, warming was predicted to reach unprecedented levels, of as much 
as 5C above current temperatures – a level that would see large swathes of the 
globe rendered virtually uninhabitable. What is more, infrastructure built 
today – coal-fired power plants, transport networks, buildings – that entail 
high carbon emissions will still be operating decades into the future, giving 
the world a narrow window in which to change the direction of our economies.

“This was the last chance,” said Miguel Arias Canete, Europe’s climate chief. 
“And we took it.”

The terrorist attacks on Paris raised questions about whether the talks would 
go ahead at all but François Hollande, the French president, insisted that they 
must and, in a show of unity, more than 150 heads of state landed in the French 
capital for the opening day. Barack Obama hailed the conference as “an act of 
defiance” in the face of terrorism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fparis-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2917fda9b557fad95e26e9a7c1f21551de6c04f%2F0_0_3984_2391%2F3984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20climate%20change%20agreement%3A%20the%20world's%20greatest%20diplomatic%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fparis-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20climate%20change%20agreement%3A%20the%20world%27s%20greatest%20diplomatic%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fparis-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2917fda9b557fad95e26e9a7c1f21551de6c04f%2F0_0_3984_2391%2F3984.jpg>
 Activists write on a sphere during a demonstration near the Arc de Triomphe. 
Photograph: SEVGI/SIPA/REX Shutterstock 
Immediately after the attacks, the first concern was for security. A planned 
march through central Paris by protesters was cancelled, though a version of it 
did go ahead as the talks opened and was marred by clashes with police and a 
small number of protesters, and arrests. Security for the conference was 
stepped up, with police and army patrolling the immediate area and transport 
routes nearby shut down for two days.

This was the biggest ever gathering of world leaders, whose presence was 
needed to empower their negotiators to move out of positions entrenched for 
more than 20 years. When they arrived, a series of key meetings were held, with 
Obama seeing Xi Jinping of China, Narendra Modi of India and representatives 
from the least developed countries. Hollande concentrated on forging links with 
the developing world. Angela Merkel, in a private meeting with Vladimir Putin, 
secured his pledge that Russia would not stand in the way of a deal.

Behind the conference centre gates, French delegates were marshalling their 
diplomatic forces. They had carefully arranged the conference centre so that 
their part of the compound – behind barriers staffed by UN guards and secret 
service officers, unlike the rest of the delegations which were open to access 
– was directly above the UN’s offices.

Christiana Figueres: the woman tasked with saving the world from global warming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/27/christiana-figueres-the-woman-tasked-with-saving-the-world-from-global-warming>
Fabius, from his office, could be with Christiana Figueres, the UN climate 
change chief, for a face-to-face chat within seconds. His fellow minister, 
Ségolène Royal, was just along the corridor, flanked with the offices of 
ambassadors and high-ranking officials. Within the buzzing control room, 
screens relayed pictures of what was happening in each of the conference rooms 
scattered around the compound and 24 hour news from French and international 
channels.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdelegates-celebrate-as-historic-climate-pledge-adopted-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Delegates%20celebrate%20as%20historic%20climate%20pledge%20adopted%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdelegates-celebrate-as-historic-climate-pledge-adopted-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Delegates%20celebrate%20as%20historic%20climate%20pledge%20adopted%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdelegates-celebrate-as-historic-climate-pledge-adopted-video&media=>
 Delegates celebrate as the agreement is accepted 
About 60 French officials were there. In preparation for the all-night 
sessions that began almost immediately the conference started, a room with 20 
cubicled beds was waiting for exhausted officials to refresh themselves with a 
few snatched moments of sleep.

Procedurally, the French took great care. They instituted a series of talks 
known as “confessionals”. These were intended as confidential places where 
delegates could, in the words of one French official, “speak from the heart” to 
listening French diplomats, with no holds barred and an assurance of privacy.

There were also the absurdly named “informal informals”, in which a small 
group of delegates from various countries were charged with tackling a small 
piece of disputed text often as little as a paragraph at a time. Their task was 
to try to remove the infamous “square brackets” denoting areas of disagreement 
on the text and they met in small huddles around the conference centre, 
squatting on the floor in corridors or standing around a smart phone.

After these measures were still not producing enough progress, Fabius turned 
to “indabas” – by Zulu tradition, these are groups of elders convened to try to 
discuss disputes in communities. They were first tried out at the Durban 
climate talks in South Africa, in 2011, and under France’s plan they consisted 
of groups of up to 80 delegates at a time gathered to thrash out the remaining 
disagreements.

While the French could draft in experienced diplomats on every side, some of 
the smallest countries had difficulty in keeping up with the meetings – many 
happened in parallel and they did not have the personnel to attend them all.

One way of getting around that was the formation of a “coalition of high 
ambition”, which was announced with three days to Friday’s deadline. Forged by 
small island states – a key figure was Tony de Brum of the Marshall Islands – 
and the EU, it was joined by many of the least developed countries, adding up 
to more than 100 nations. They could then negotiate together, with an agreed 
common interest. Before the end, this coalition had been joined by the US, 
Canada and Australia. It was hailed by Europe’s climate and energy commissioner 
Miguel Cañete as a key factor in the end agreement.

And yet with three days of the conference to go, it looked as if all of these 
efforts might yet come to nothing. On the second Wednesday of the talks, the 
French produced a second iteration of the core text, reducing the number of 
brackets from more than 300 to fewer than 40. They were hopeful that this could 
be almost the end – and it needed to be in order to have the legal “scrubbers” 
and linguistic experts assess the text and ensure it was in line with 
international law and accurate in all languages.

But it soon became apparent that things were not going to plan. As countries 
examined the draft agreement, ministers started raising concerns. On Wednesday 
afternoon, leading delegations trooped one by one into Fabius’ personal office: 
Edna Molewa of South Africa, Xie Zhenhua of China, John Kerry of the US, Julie 
Bishop of Australia.

For South Africa, issues over “loss and damage” emerged – for developed 
countries, this meant the question of whether developing countries should be 
entitled to special aid in the event of climate-related disasters; for the 
developing, it meant compensation and liability, which the US would never agree 
to. For China, a key sticking point was differentiation – the concept that 
developing countries have less responsibility for climate change. For the US, 
some parts of the deal could not be legally binding in order to pass Congress.

Fabius sought to allay their concerns and find a compromise. At 8pm, he 
convened a new plenary session, at which all countries were able to speak. It 
carried on through the night.

At this point, it was clear that further efforts were needed. There followed a 
rapid round of telephone diplomacy. Obama spoke personally to the Chinese 
leader. Hollande picked up the phone to as many of his counterparts across the 
world as he could manage.


Finally, after two more days of fraught negotiation, a consensus emerged. None 
of the major countries wanted to be seen as wrecking a deal that had come so 
close. All could agree that they wanted an agreement and all made compromises. 
The EU backed down on having the intended emissions cuts, agreed at a national 
level, to be legally binding; the US accepted language on “loss and damage”; 
China and India agreed that an aspiration of holding warming to 1.5C could be 
included.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fparis-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F573b6f9e97687d9ce7cae90380613f36812008c8%2F0_207_5126_3075%2F5126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paris%20climate%20change%20agreement%3A%20the%20world's%20greatest%20diplomatic%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fparis-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paris%20climate%20change%20agreement%3A%20the%20world%27s%20greatest%20diplomatic%20success&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fparis-climate-deal-cop-diplomacy-developing-united-nations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F573b6f9e97687d9ce7cae90380613f36812008c8%2F0_207_5126_3075%2F5126.jpg>
 US secretary of state, John Kerry, talks with China’s special representative 
on climate change Xie Zhenhua. Photograph: Xinhua / Barcroft Media 
For the diplomats involved, the efforts were exhausting. The talks took a 
personal toll. In the months before the conference, Laurence Tubiana, appointed 
as special ambassador on climate change, played a key role in liaising with 
developing and developed countries. Then disaster struck. A week before the COP 
was scheduled to begin, she suffered a sudden sharp pain. It was acute 
appendicitis, necessitating emergency surgery. Within days, however, she had 
resumed her key role. When the deal was signed, she was on the podium, 
receiving hugs from Ban Ki-moon, Figueres, Fabius and Hollande, a recognition 
of the sacrifices she had made.

All of these efforts came to a head in the final crucial days. On Saturday 
morning, a new draft text was prepared. Fabius assembled the delegates and told 
them to have lunch while they waited for it to be translated. That afternoon, 
they examined the text and nearly all agreed that, with minor reservations, 
they could accept it. The final meeting was scheduled for 5.30pm. As for the 
last-minute hitch that kept delegates waiting in the hall for two hours? A 
matter of minor aspects of wording, including the translation of a few terms 
and the placement of a comma. It was rectified, apologies given, and the 
jubilation could begin.

It is easy to forget what an extraordinary event these UN talks were. The 
UNFCCC is one of the last remaining forums in the world where every country, 
however small, is represented on the same basis and has equal say with the 
biggest economies. Most modern diplomacy carries on in small, self-selected 
groups dominated by richer countries – the G7, the G20, the OECD, Opec – but 
all 196 states have a seat and a say at the UNFCCC. Agreement can only be 
accepted by consensus.

If this makes for an unwieldy and frustrating process, it is also a fair one. 
The poorest countries of the world, so often left out of international 
consideration, are those which have done least to create climate change, but 
will suffer the most from it. Only at the UN are they heard.
 