
Things in Bristol are really going downhill. A proposal by artist Luke Jerram 
<http://www.lukejerram.com/> aims to transform Park Street by setting up a 
90-metre water slide to transport its citizens from the top of the hill to the 
bottom.

The Park and Slide <http://www.lukejerram.com/projects/urban_slide> project – 
which is currently raising money through acrowdfunding 
<https://spacehive.com/parkandslide> site – will consist of a temporary slide 
made from plastic sheeting and hay bales, and will be free for the public to 
use. Compared to the pricetag attached to many urban infrastructure schemes the 
cost is low; a paltry £5,621.

"If we think about forms of transport, the best kinds are pleasurable as well 
as practical," says Jerram, who has a history of working on interactive public 
artprojects, including the hugely popularStreet Pianos 
<http://www.streetpianos.com/> project, which now operates in 43 cities across 
the world.

"Bristol's very hilly – imagine if we had permanent slides about the city, 
running from Clifton to Hotwells or Cotham to Stokes Croft?" says Jerram, who 
conceived the idea during last summer's heatwave.

"I've got an office on Park Street and I was just looking out the window and 
thought, how nice would it be to have a slide out there..." he says. "It's all 
about looking at the city in a new way. I'm interested in thinking ofBristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol> as a canvas for architectural 
intervention. This is our city and it's up to us to think about how we want it 
to be in the future."
 The waterslide gets a test run at Ashton Court last October Photograph: Luke 
Jerram 
For Jerram, the project is quite tailored to Bristol, and not just because of 
the hills. "I think it would have been very hard to get a project like this off 
the ground in London, for example, arranging for a major road to be closed for 
the day. Bristol is smaller and the project highlights the willingness and 
possibility of a city. Everyone says a city should be creative, dynamic, edgy, 
but is it really? Can we overcome the bureaucracy? It's a test."

On this occasion the outlook is good. The idea, which already has the backing 
of Bristol City Council, enjoyed atest run last year 
<http://alittlebristol.com/news/2013/10/30/giant-water-slide-to-come-to-park-street-next-summer>
, when a 50m chute was set up in Ashton Court. If the plan goes ahead the slide 
will be installed on May 4 as part of the city's Make Sundays Special programme 
of cultural events.
 