
Francis Kéré first started building things back in his home town of Gando in 
easternBurkina Faso <https://www.theguardian.com/world/burkina-faso>. Sent with 
other children to keep an eye on the livestock, Kéré and his friends would cut 
down tree branches and build a structure on the floor to sit on.

“Perhaps we did it in the spirit of creating a house, or perhaps simply to 
protect us from the sun, but in any case, we did it quite meticulously,” the 
architect remembers.

Kéré grew up in an environment where, with each rainy season, houses built 
with mud bricks melted and disappeared. When he began designing buildings, it 
was with the clear idea of “doing something sustainable” for his village.

The rise and fall of Burkina Faso's coup: what you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/24/burkina-faso-coup-rise-and-fall-of-what-you-need-to-know>
Now 51, Kéré has moved on to designing sustainable structures for his country: 
he is steering plans for the new Burkinabé parliament to replace the one set on 
fire during the 2014 revolution when citizens thwarted President Blaise 
Compaoré’s attempts to stay in power and quashed an attempted military coup 
launched a year later.


It is the first time the country has been free of dictatorial rule for more 
than three decades, and Kéré is marking the occasion by designing a structure 
that will “scale up the village dynamics while bolstering national identity”.

At the Venice Biennale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/venice-biennale> this year, which 
united architects under the theme Reporting from the Front, Kéré presented his 
project as an answer to the question: “What kind of parliament should be built 
for a people who have chosen to throw out their rulers?”

The stakes for a new building are high, Kéré says. “It’s a very delicate 
situation. I would like to open the project to as many contributors as 
possible, from artists to professional architects.”

According to Giovanni Quattrocolo, an architect who has been working in 
Ouagadougou for two years, the government was on the verge of launching a 
contest for the reconstruction project when Kéré intervened and insisted on 
starting an open discussion with local architects instead.

Though no opening date has yet been announced, in Ouagadougou a rumour is 
spreading that Kéré plans to keep the parliament’s burnt door in place, a 
reminder for MPs entering every morning of the power of the people they 
represent.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Ffrancis-kere-the-architect-rebuilding-burkina-fasos-political-heart-in-clay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4fc7cfa8bb443fbe6ff23d3aa0bf09002f31a3e%2F0_118_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parliament%20for%20the%20people%3A%20the%20architect%20rebuilding%20Burkina%20Faso's%20political%20heart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Ffrancis-kere-the-architect-rebuilding-burkina-fasos-political-heart-in-clay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parliament%20for%20the%20people%3A%20the%20architect%20rebuilding%20Burkina%20Faso%27s%20political%20heart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Ffrancis-kere-the-architect-rebuilding-burkina-fasos-political-heart-in-clay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4fc7cfa8bb443fbe6ff23d3aa0bf09002f31a3e%2F0_118_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Francis Kéré’s Lycée Schorge secondary school in Koudougou, Burkina Faso. 
Photograph: Sophie Garcia | hanslucas 
Burkina/Bauhaus

One of his models for the new parliament is Louis Kahn’s National Assembly 
building in Dhaka, Bangladesh 
<http://www.archdaily.com/83071/ad-classics-national-assembly-building-of-bangladesh-louis-kahn>
, completed in 1982. Along withLudwig Mies van der Rohe 
<http://www.miessociety.org/legacy/>, the German master known for his 
rationalism and modularity, Kahn has had a big influence on Kéré designs.

Kéré was exposed to the Bauhaus style after winning a scholarship in Germany. 
He went on to study architecture in Berlin when he was in his early 30s. There, 
Kéré created an association, Schulbausteine für Gando, to raise funds to build 
a school in his home village.


Realised in 2001 with a tight budget of $30,000 (then about £20,000), the 
school became Kéré first building project. In the absence of heavy and costly 
equipment such as cranes, Kéré was forced to be creative.


He used perforated clay and light steel bars for the roof, making the natural 
ventilation a central part of the structure. The school earned himthe 
prestigious Aga Khan award <http://www.akdn.org/award-cycle/2004-cycle>“for his 
architectonic clarity and transformation value”.

“Honestly, without the Aga Khan prize, my work would never have been 
discovered,” Kéré says. “The visibility and recognition attached to it bring a 
lot of energy, and of course the money enabled me to pursue my research and 
projects.”

Distinctive traits of Kéré’s work can be traced back to this first building in 
Gando: first, the use of local materials. “Since the French [colonial] rule, 
the old system is still in our heads,” says Kéré. “People were at first 
surprised that my plan was to build the school in clay, not in cement or glass.”

Community is also at the centre of Kéré’s work. “Everybody in the village was 
a part of this. This is how we build things in rural areas. It enables us to 
integrate each individual’s knowhow into the final project.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Ffrancis-kere-the-architect-rebuilding-burkina-fasos-political-heart-in-clay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6001716649998b37833f25a54bf1eb16e83a47dc%2F0_118_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parliament%20for%20the%20people%3A%20the%20architect%20rebuilding%20Burkina%20Faso's%20political%20heart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Ffrancis-kere-the-architect-rebuilding-burkina-fasos-political-heart-in-clay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parliament%20for%20the%20people%3A%20the%20architect%20rebuilding%20Burkina%20Faso%27s%20political%20heart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Ffrancis-kere-the-architect-rebuilding-burkina-fasos-political-heart-in-clay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6001716649998b37833f25a54bf1eb16e83a47dc%2F0_118_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Kéré sketching during a lunch break with colleagues in Koudougou, Burkina 
Faso. Photograph: Sophie Garcia | hanslucas 
Burkina Faso election: millions vote in first poll since coup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/30/burkina-faso-election-millions-vote-in-first-poll-since-coup>
This is, however, is at odds with the main building trend in west Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, where there is a voracious appetite 
for cement. “It’s not so much the material which is a problem here,” says Kéré. 
“It’s the lack of reflection. Project developers don’t think quality, they 
think quantity. Replica, not authenticity. Their production boils down to cheap 
copies of foreign influence, not at all in tune with the climatic conditions 
here.”

With the help of the Aga Khan Foundation, the architect also worked on two 
major projects in Mali to mark 50 years of independence in 2010: a national 
park in the capital, Bamako, and the Centre for EarthArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> in Mopti.

“I was surprised to see what you can do when you work with partners with a 
long-term vision,” says Kéré. “They said: ‘We want a green lung for Bamako’, 
and we created something impeccable.”

At the time, Mali <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mali> was tackling an 
Islamist insurgency in the north, and terror attacks were becoming increasingly 
frequent. Kéré said that, like in Burkina Faso, he was inspired by what 
architecture can achieve in times of unrest, by “creating space for future 
generations without destroying the environment”.

A version of this article first appeared in Brownbook <http://brownbook.tv/>

 