
I don’t get seasick. Not under normal circumstances. But as I stood in the 
wheelhouse of expedition cruise ship Stella Australis, the perfect storm of a 
dawn shore excursion, followed by a bellyful of cooked breakfast – plus a 
“warming” mug of hot grog – conspired to leave me feeling a little nauseous.

There was also a very literal storm brewing, causing the horizon to see-saw 
dramatically as we navigated Drake Passage, the most notorious sailing route on 
Earth, named after Sir Francis Drake, who was blown off-course here during his 
1578 circumnavigation of the globe. The stretch of water between Cape Horn, the 
southernmost tip of South America, and Antarctica is many a mariner’s graveyard.

The 29th of this month will mark 400 years since the discovery of Cape Horn, 
when a Dutch ship, the Eendracht, made the first recorded voyage through the 
passage. Captained by Willem Schouten, he named the island after his home town 
of Hoorn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F525fd2c3017cc9c087834cddc7f32ea4fa3fb327%2F0_212_6000_3601%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patagonia%20adventure%3A%20a%20voyage%20round%20Cape%20Horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patagonia%20adventure%3A%20a%20voyage%20round%20Cape%20Horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F525fd2c3017cc9c087834cddc7f32ea4fa3fb327%2F0_212_6000_3601%2F6000.jpg>
 An excursion in inflatable boats from the Australis 
My expedition was a little less arduous: a four-night cruise from Punta Arenas 
in ChileanPatagonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/dec/13/guide-to-patagonia-chile-argentina-where-to-stay>
 to the world’s southernmost city, Ushuaia, in Argentina. It would take in 
excursions to glaciers, sub-polar forests and penguin colonies, and land on 
Cape Horn itself. Australis is one of few cruise lines that allow passengers to 
set foot on the island; though whether it can sail through Drake Passage 
depends on the weather.

We’d arrived at Isla Hornos by stealth, sneaking in via the fjords and glacial 
alleys that riddle the Tierra del Fuego archipelago. The sea was 
uncharacteristically calm as we climbed into the inflatable boat, 
lifejacket-clad, and watched the legendary rock, a sheer 425-metre rocky 
promontory, bob toward us.

A stark figure strode across its windswept hilltop, his black frock coat 
flapping in the breeze as he descended a winding cliff-side staircase, 
incongruous against the bleak backdrop. This was José Aguayo, a second sergeant 
in the Chilean navy, two weeks into a year-long posting as Cape Horn’s 
lighthouse keeper. In his pressed black-and-whites he reminded me of the 
Magellanic penguins that had waddled up to us on the beaches of the Tuckers 
Islets a few days earlier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faddf08c898ebbe9b7da1b2c810c5a4e5eafe8bb9%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patagonia%20adventure%3A%20a%20voyage%20round%20Cape%20Horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patagonia%20adventure%3A%20a%20voyage%20round%20Cape%20Horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faddf08c898ebbe9b7da1b2c810c5a4e5eafe8bb9%2F0_0_6000_4000%2F6000.jpg>
 ‘The sea was uncharacteristically calm as we climbed into the inflatable boat 
and watched the legendary rock bob toward us’ 
The romantic might imagine this solitary sailor’s situation as the epitome of 
isolation. But José had chosen this posting as a way of being with his wife 
Natalia and their two young children instead of being away on a ship for months 
at a time. “We’ve not had time to go stir-crazy yet,” insisted José, as Natalia 
appeared, smiling, at his side. “I have to bake my own bread, home-school my 
children … and, of course, prepare the lighthouse for the celebrations.”

The 400th anniversary will be marked with a televised “parade of sails” around 
the island. It will be broadcast across the world and attended by Chilean 
presidentMichelle Bachelet <https://www.theguardian.com/world/michelle-bachelet>
 and Dutch dignitaries; a lot of eyes will be on that lonely lighthouse.

As cruise destinations go, Cape Horn, surrounded by notoriously treacherous 
waters and blasted by gale-force winds known to sailors as the Furious Fifties, 
is not the most obvious holiday choice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb80a0fd97a4f20238c9d20770fa0e3427386e018%2F0_306_6000_3601%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patagonia%20adventure%3A%20a%20voyage%20round%20Cape%20Horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patagonia%20adventure%3A%20a%20voyage%20round%20Cape%20Horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb80a0fd97a4f20238c9d20770fa0e3427386e018%2F0_306_6000_3601%2F6000.jpg>
 Cape Hope’s lighthouse keeper José Aguayo, a second sergeant in the Chilean 
navy, and his wife Natalia. 
Nevertheless, this ship accommodates up to 210 passengers and my fellow 
travellers were a diverse bunch: a couple of French-Canadian pastry chefs; a 
Swiss backpacker; a pizzeria owner from Iowa; a Californian socialite and her 
retired husband Jim, cousin to Dick Cheney, he told me. Despite en suite 
showers, à la carte dinners, and endless canapés and cocktails, it felt as 
though we were on a genuine adventure.

Since the Panama Canal opened in 1914, allowing vessels to take the shortcut 
through Central America, “rounding the Horn” has become the preserve of 
thrill-seekers. So few people pass through Drake’s Passage now that, without 
need of monument or edifice, there’s a palpable connection with the past, and 
the feeling you’re following in the footsteps of illustrious company.

We saw bus-sized chunks of ice break off vast glaciers, the reverberant 
cracking sound following afterwards like thunder. Condors soared above the 
world’s southernmost forest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97d644cca201e75a0adab64f0c26f2d69c9ad93d%2F0_179_6000_3601%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patagonia%20adventure%3A%20a%20voyage%20round%20Cape%20Horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patagonia%20adventure%3A%20a%20voyage%20round%20Cape%20Horn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fpatagonia-cape-horn-voyage-cruise-chile%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97d644cca201e75a0adab64f0c26f2d69c9ad93d%2F0_179_6000_3601%2F6000.jpg>
 A feeling of adventure despite the luxury catering. 
As we milled around on the Horn, chatting with José, a member of our ship’s 
crew arrived hurriedly to tell us: “If we leave right now we can actually sail 
around Cape Horn. Conditions are only calm enough a few times a year. Let’s go!”

Back on the bridge, I finished my hot rum and watched third officer Ignacio 
Vasquez chart our progress on paper with a pencil and dividers. As we moved out 
into Drake Passage, the wind picked up, the ship began to roll, and my stomach 
churned. Crockery crashed and various objects slid off tables. Ignacio marked a 
line out of the chart and into the void of the southern margin: we were off the 
map. My head spun. I closed my eyes, took a deep breath, and reminded myself it 
wasn’t the end of the world.
• The cruise was provided by Australis (australis.com 
<http://www.australis.com/site/en/>) whose four night all-inclusive trip on the 
Stella Australis costs from $1,440pp and runs from September to April

• This article was updated on 18 January to correct the caption which said the 
view from the cruise ship was of Cape Horn. The view is of the Darwin ranges.
 