
Pep Guardiola called it “fun” but his body language throughout a frenetic 
contest betrayed him. TheManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> manager was a model of 
fashionable fury, punching the air and pacing up and down in his trendy 
sneakers as his makeshift team toiled against Celtic. The only fun to be had 
belonged to Patrick Roberts and Brendan Rodgers.

So much for a dead-rubber. Roberts, the 19-year-old on an 18-month loan from 
City, swept Celtic into an early and merited lead against his parent club. 
Kelechi Iheanacho replied swiftly with an equally impressive finish. Both teams 
pressed for victory until the final whistle, there wasfighting in the crowd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/manchester-city-celtic-fans-fighting>
 and, when the anger had dissipated and the game had finished, Rodgers could 
take satisfaction from a performance that was much closer to his ideals for 
Celtic than City were to Guardiola’s. A makeshift, disjointed City side 
admittedly.

Manchester City may face sanctions after crowd trouble during Celtic match
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/manchester-city-celtic-fans-fighting>
“We played really well against a good team,” said Guardiola. “The experienced 
players helped the young players a lot. It was a good experience for them – 
they deserved to play because they trained well, their behaviour is always 
perfect and I’m so happy to give them the opportunity to play in theChampions 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>. The game was 
good, both teams tried to attack, it was fun. It was a pleasure to play against 
Celtic Glasgow.” As with his description of City’s opponents, Guardiola’s words 
did not tally precisely with his team’s performance or his demonstrative 
frustrations with it.

Rodgers, by contrast, had every reason to savour Celtic’s development on the 
European stage. “Apart from the first game our performance level has been very 
good,” he said. “We competed against two of the superpowers of European 
football and we haven’t been beaten by Manchester City. Arguably we could have 
won both games. I am absolutely proud of the team.”

City and Celtic knew their place before kick-off, second and bottom of the 
group respectively, but the finale was refreshingly full of energy, chaotic 
defending and opportunity from the first whistle. The opening was reminiscent 
of theenthralling 3-3 draw in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/celtic-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
 when City arrived boasting a 100% record from their first 10 games under 
Guardiola but departed with defensive concerns that have not been adequately 
rectified. They have won four of 14 matches since that first encounter with the 
Scottish champions and were exposed defensively once again as they struggled to 
adjust to Guardiola’s switch to a three-man rearguard. It is now seven games 
since City last kept a clean sheet.

The City manager made nine changes to the team beaten by Chelsea  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-v-chelsea-premier-league-live-report>
on Saturday, deploying Pablo Maffeo and Leroy Sané as wing-backs and pushing 
Nolito up in support of Iheanacho. It was initially a mess. Celtic revelled in 
the spaces outside City’s defence as well as the uncertainty throughout the 
home ranks. With only three minutes gone Fernando had played Moussa Dembélé in 
on the City goal, forcing Willy Caballero to make an important tackle and save 
the follow-up from Tom Rogic. Seconds later, with Maffeo clearly bewildered by 
Guardiola’s instruction to push deeper into the Celtic half as Caballero took a 
goal kick, the visitors were ahead.

Claudio Ranieri takes weakened Leicester squad to Porto but dismisses job fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/claudio-ranieri-leicester-porto-weakened-squad-job-fears>
Roberts was making his first start at the Etihad since signing for City in an 
£11m deal from Fulham in July 2015. The 19-year-old, who made only three brief 
appearances for City before joiningCeltic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> in January, was intent on 
reminding his employers of the potential at their disposal and enjoyed a fine 
game on the right wing. The England Under-20 international punished the hosts 
when Caballero played a risky clearance to Sané, who slipped as he attempted to 
keep the ball in play. Roberts took over, cutting inside three weak challenges 
in the penalty area and sweeping a fine shot into the far corner.

The boisterous travelling hordes celebrated manically and with a smoke bomb 
that, along with City’s customary jeering of the Champions League anthem and 
the later crowd trouble, may result in a reprimand from Uefa. Guardiola’s 
problems rested entirely on the pitch but his team drew level from their first 
moment of quality, Iheanacho’s pace punishing the visitors’ high back line. 
Ilkay Gündogan picked out Nolito with a cross-field ball, the Spaniard slid an 
inviting pass behind Jozo Simunovic and Iheanacho sprinted away from the 
defender to beat Craig Gordon with an emphatic finish into the roof of the net.

Dembélé squandered a glorious chance to restore Celtic’s advantage when he 
found the side-netting having rounded Caballero. Gordon saved well from 
Iheanacho’s flick and the striker, now with greater responsibility with Sergio 
Agüero banned for the next four games, side-footed wide from Pablo Zabaleta’s 
inviting pass. The second half could not match the frenzy of the first, 
understandably, but Nolito thought he had edged City ahead from Jesús Navas’s 
low cross only to be flagged offside. The Celtic substitutes Leigh Griffiths 
and Gary Mackay-Steven both went close in the final stages and Rodgers, despite 
bidding farewell to this season’s Champions League, departed the more contented 
manager.
 