
Sengai, the renowned Japanese Zen-master <http://www.wikiart.org/en/sengai> 
made innumerable small paintings for his visitors. Consider his famous frog who 
says: “If one could get wisdom by contemplative sitting (zazen), I should be 
very wise indeed.” In a few simple brush strokes he questioned rituals and at 
the same time shows the holiness of a modest frog.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fpatricia-kopatchinskaja-in-praise-of-minimalism-favourite-works%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5a78f5b999f2083dd5d0c947424d85c06d2c252%2F0_65_1015_609%2F1015.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Patricia%20Kopatchinskaja%20in%20praise%20of%20minimalism%20%E2%80%93%20less%20is%20much%2C%20much%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fpatricia-kopatchinskaja-in-praise-of-minimalism-favourite-works%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Patricia%20Kopatchinskaja%20in%20praise%20of%20minimalism%20%E2%80%93%20less%20is%20much%2C%20much%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fpatricia-kopatchinskaja-in-praise-of-minimalism-favourite-works%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5a78f5b999f2083dd5d0c947424d85c06d2c252%2F0_65_1015_609%2F1015.jpg>
 Meditating frog by Sengai 
Perhaps the frog observes beams of light shining through whooshing tree 
leaves. Or perhaps he is listening to raindrops asIannis Xenakis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/feb/05/guardianobituaries> did, counting 
them, finding the mathematical rules they observe and making music out of them? 
Leaves, raindrops, grass, ants 1... everything can become music.

Arguments do not get more convincing by using more words or by shouting

Less can be more. Arguments do not get more convincing by using more words or 
by shouting, and a woman does not get more beautiful by hanging lots of 
jewellery around her. Art forms that make their statements with a minimum of 
means carry a strong attraction, especially in music. And minimalism is far 
from a 20th-century invention. Here’s some of my favourite pieces of 
“minimalist” music.

In the Swiss Alps before nightfall, herdsmen sing a traditional prayer that 
probably dates from the stone age, to protect themselves and their cattle from 
illness and accidents. The magic works as far as the sounds can carry, that’s 
why they use a wooden milk funnel as an amplifying device.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dblv3crUMcZQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dblv3crUMcZQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dblv3crUMcZQ&media=>
Listen to Alpsegen, Swiss herdsmen’s sung evening prayer 
<https://youtu.be/blv3crUMcZQ> 
Eight hundred years ago the Notre Dame school of Paris sounded minimalistic 
and radically modern.Listen to Viderunt omnes by Perontinus 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KA6oq_UYbyA&feature=youtu.be>.

Or take this traditional music of the Csangos 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h-1xucUxNp0.>, a Catholic and 
Hungarian-speaking minority in Moldova and Romania 
<http://www.eliznik.org.uk/RomaniaHistory/csango.htm>. They may be poor and 
their instruments modest, but what expressive joy and conviction!

After these preliminaries comes the father of modern minimalism: Erik Satie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/01/erik-satie-a-life-less-ordinary>
. This famously eccentric composer did away with all the romantic pomposity of 
the 19th century and was an inspiration for Debussy, Ravel and John Cage 
amongst others. His Gnossienne No 1, composed around 1890, has become a new-age 
icon. Reinbert de Leeuw’s playing is like contemplating the most hidden place 
in a garden, where the dust of time becomes a poem.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMlb9i-waZJo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMlb9i-waZJo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMlb9i-waZJo&media=>
Listen to Erik Satie’s Gnossienne No 1 <https://youtu.be/Mlb9i-waZJo> played by 
Reinbert de Leeuw 
For me the most outstanding and radical composer of recent times – Galina 
Ustvolskaja 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/apr/08/contemporary-music-guide-galina-ustvolskaya>
 – published only some two dozen works and destroyed the rest, an act which in 
itself is a form of minimalism. Isolated in the USSR,she wrote the most extreme 
music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/apr/08/contemporary-music-guide-galina-ustvolskaya>
, limiting herself to the minimum of musical material and instrumentation, but 
achieving the maximum of spiritual strength. Her music comes “as is” out of 
nothing or from deep and primordial sources. She renounces any artificial 
elaboration. I often think only a woman could become this kind of medium. A man 
would immediately try to understand, analyse, systematise, “count the legs” of 
his creature.Ustvolskaja 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/apr/08/contemporary-music-guide-galina-ustvolskaya>
 did nothing of the sort.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpnZ0UBC07Ow&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpnZ0UBC07Ow>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpnZ0UBC07Ow&media=>
Listen to Galina Ustvolskaya’s Composition No 2 <https://youtu.be/pnZ0UBC07Ow> 
Here is her Composition No 2 “Dies irae” (1972/3): 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pnZ0UBC07Ow> You see the wooden box that looks 
like a coffin <http://Ustvolskaya.org/eng/precision.php#cube>. This is an 
instrument of her own invention. In Orthodox Christian countries the closing of 
the coffin over the body of a beloved relative is a ritual: the hard sound of 
hitting the coffin nails becomes the memory of a cruel farewell. Throughout her 
music she is saying – “I give all my soul, all my heart” – and you will do so 
as well, either as an interpreter or as a listener. Whether you like it or not, 
your brain will be in serious danger of exploding, and many other pieces of 
music will suddenly seem an unnecessary waste of time and paper. Of course the 
piece was banned in her home country after its first performance.

When I play Adams's violin concerto I feel as if I am looking at myself as a 
half-dead body in an intensive care unit

Morton Feldman’s For John Cage <https://youtu.be/oer0Me_nhDM> uses very few 
notes, but, at over an hour, is pure and hypnotic. Try it with closed eyes.

John Adams’s early work was seen as being representative of American 
minimalist music. When playing the second movement of his violin concerto 
Chaconne: Body Through Which the Dream Flows I feel as if I am looking at 
myself as a half-dead body in an intensive care unit, hearing the beeps of the 
respirator and seeing an infinite film of past memories.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTx1ktwTcPz0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTx1ktwTcPz0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTx1ktwTcPz0&media=>
Listen to Chaconne: Body Through Which the Dream Flows by John Adams 
<https://youtu.be/Tx1ktwTcPz0> 
A great composer who condenses his material to the extreme is the Hungarian 
György Kurtág 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/mar/12/contemporary-music-guide-gyorgy-kurtag>
, a severe teacher and pianist (in duo with his wife Martha). Some of his 
compositions last only for seconds. Essence of essence. Listen to hisone-minute 
piece Quarrel <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g319gW5_O0o#t=19m00s>. And do 
not missthe couple playing Bach <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z8lTh58jhA8>.


How about even fewer notes? Ligeti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/aug/27/gyorgy-ligeti-contemporary-music-guide>
 spoke of hisMusica Ricercata II for piano 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Os-cHI9G2KU&feature=youtu.be> as “A knife in 
Stalin’s heart”. Only three notes, it’s threatening, unforgettable. Stanley 
Kubrick used it for the most scary and symbolic moments of his last movieEyes 
Wide Shut <https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/sep/10/3>.

The eccentric Italian Giacinto Scelsi loved to use just one note, for example 
in hisQuattro Pezzi su na Nota <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SpfGfqkiZCo>, 
exploring the universe of timbre and colour.

John Cage, the American apostle of minimalism and Zen-philosopher of music, 
went even further with his a cheeky no-rules approach.Watch his close associate 
David Tudor play his revolutionary piece 4’33 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HypmW4Yd7SY>”.

In a world suffocating from growth, overconsumption and pollution, minimalism 
is more than just an aesthetic principle, it may be the principle and hope of 
survival.

 * Patricia Kopatchinskaja performs works by Galina Ustvolskaya and JS Bach 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/deep-minimalism-saturday-pass-95188> 
at theDeep Minimalism festival 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/festivals-series/deep> at St John’s 
Smith Square, London, on 25 June
 