
It was about 12 hours after the Sunday papers went to press last weekend that 
the Reverend Paul Flowers got in touch. “The Sunday Mirror has had a mild go at 
me today,” began the email, inviting me to interview him about how he had ended 
up in the tabloids once more, after yet another male prostitute secretly filmed 
him at what was described as a drug-fuelled party in his Salford home.

The double-page feature included a picture of the methodist minister and 
former chair of the Co-op bankasleep, half naked, with crisps balanced on each 
nipple 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/church-reverend-pictured-crisps-nipples-7547510>
, and the headline: The Crispal Methodist. It was a pun on the nickname he was 
given the first of the three timeshis peccadilloes have been publicly exposed 
in recent years 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/5269021/Ex-Co-op-Bank-chief-Paul-Flowers-buys-Class-A-drugs.html>
, when he was caught on camera buying crystal meth in November 2013, six months 
after quitting the Co-op when a £1.5bn black hole was revealed in its balance 
books.

“Don’t worry, I don’t want or need money!!!” ran the breathless email, giving 
his home phone number. I rang him up. He sounded oddly euphoric, cracking jokes 
about his new boyfriend, whom, he said, was “a refugee from the nightclubs of 
Manchester”. He would get this young beau to do the gardening in the nude for 
the paparazzi later, he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F19%2Fpaul-flowers-dont-laugh-but-i-try-to-be-a-decent-christian-person-co-op-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60664cb298d5d3a08078b1ae3753088dcf8a928f%2F68_188_3006_1807%2F3006.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Flowers%2C%20former%20Co-op%20bank%20chief%3A%20%E2%80%98Don%E2%80%99t%20laugh%20too%20horribly%2C%20but%20I%20try%20to%20be%20a%20decent%20Christian%20person%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F19%2Fpaul-flowers-dont-laugh-but-i-try-to-be-a-decent-christian-person-co-op-bank%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Flowers%2C%20former%20Co-op%20bank%20chief%3A%20%E2%80%98Don%E2%80%99t%20laugh%20too%20horribly%2C%20but%20I%20try%20to%20be%20a%20decent%20Christian%20person%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F19%2Fpaul-flowers-dont-laugh-but-i-try-to-be-a-decent-christian-person-co-op-bank%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60664cb298d5d3a08078b1ae3753088dcf8a928f%2F68_188_3006_1807%2F3006.jpg>
 Flowers arriving at a police station in Leeds in 2014 to answer bail. 
Photograph: Nigel Roddis/Getty Images 
The following day I drove to his house. I was unsure he would even answer the 
door: he didn’t the last time he invited me round a few months after he had been
fined £525 for drugs charges in May 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/07/co-op-bank-paul-flowers-court-drug-charges>
. I arrived then at the anointed hour, rapping the bishop-shaped door knocker, 
but no one stirred. Opening the letter box, I could hear music. I was pretty 
sure he was home. All of the upstairs windows were flung wide open. I waited 
outside for eight hours before I started to seriously worry that he might be 
dead. He only replied to my texts the following day, when I said I was so 
concerned about him that I was going to ring the police if he didn’t send signs 
of life. He was terribly apologetic, blaming new medication prescribed for his 
“severe clinical depression”, which he said was causing him to sleep up to 15 
hours at a time.

This time he opens the door with a flourish. He is wearing a lilac shirt and 
khaki slacks, full of regret for standing me up last time. He couldn’t have 
talked then, he says: he would have been “largely incoherent”. The new 
boyfriend, a sweet, skinny lad from the West Country who doesn’t want to be 
named, is in the back garden, where the previous weekend the Sunday Mirror 
claimed a “sordid hot tub party” had taken place. The Jacuzzi was rented, the 
boyfriend explains: they had been celebrating his 25th birthday party with 
friends, including the young n’er-do-well who covertly filmed the lot and sold 
the footage to the Sunday Mirror.

Flowers, now 65, wants the world to know how he ended up in such a mess. He 
figured it out at the Priory in Birmingham, where he spent 28 days at the end 
of 2013 after his drug use and sexual proclivities were revealed in the Mail on 
Sunday. It had not been a good year. He had stepped down as chairman of the 
Co-op in early June, shortly before the bank was taken over by two US hedge 
funds. In the November he was summoned to parliament to appear in front of the
treasury select committee. It did not go well 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmtreasy/728/131106.htm>
. “I made an ass of myself,” he says of how he came to underestimate the bank’s 
assets by £44bn (he thought they were worth just £3bn).

How a Labour councillor and Methodist minister ended up chairing one of the 
UK’s most respected banks is still a little hard to fathom – especially when 
taken with his less than saintly past, which included convictions for cottaging 
and drink-driving, and an ignominious departure from Lifeline, a Manchester 
drugs charity he chaired for 16 years, after being accused (and then cleared) 
of dodgy expenses.

But Flowers still insists he wasn’t out of his depth. Chatting in his 
conservatory, surrounded by books, includingJohann Hari’s investigation of 
failed drug prevention policies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jan/02/johann-hari-interview-drugs-book-independent>
, Chasing the Scream, he says he beat five others in an “open competition” to 
get the gig, and his appointment was twice “affirmed” in interviews with the 
Financial Services Authority (FSA). When Flowers first contacted me, in the 
summer of 2014, he said he wanted to correct the “sloppy journalism” that 
implied one of the reasons he left the Co-op was his drug use. He said police 
trawled through 38,000 of his emails and found nothing in his time as chair of 
the bank that they would wish to use in a drugs prosecution. But he now admits 
that during his chairmanship, which began in 2010, he was “very occasionally” 
taking drugs, usually cocaine and sometimes ketamine, and having sex with male 
prostitutes in Manchester’s Renaissance hotel. He did cocaine alone at home in 
Bradford in the days leading up to his disastrous select committee appearance.

Former Co-op bank boss Paul Flowers pleads guilty to drug charges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/07/co-op-bank-paul-flowers-court-drug-charges>
It was behaviour that began in 2009, he said, when he was on the Co-op board 
and he started to spend more time in Manchester, where the bank has its 
headquarters. He suggests – via the second person he often employs when 
discussing his chequered past – that it was the stress of the job that led him 
to trawl the internet for paid sex: “You had nights when you had been battling 
through the issues of the day, then the senior officers had to entertain the 
troops in the evening and I was bloody well worn out. That was part of the job, 
but you were knackered. And like many thousands of other people – judges, 
lawyers, journalists, people of all professions and none – I sought intimacy 
among escorts.”

I ask how many escorts he has used over the years. More than 10? “Oh yes.” 
More than 20? He pauses. “I think it would be almost salacious to put a number 
on it, forgive me. Just say that I have, over the years, at points where I was 
often spending three or four nights a week in one particular hotel in 
Manchester, often sought comfort and solace.”

Flowers prides himself on finding out who the escort “really” is. “Often they 
have been in care, often they have suffered different kinds of abuse, whether 
physical or mental, and they struggle with their demons, too.” He has his own 
peculiar justification for paying for sex: “If I could be terribly blasphemous 
for a moment, as somebody who tries to be, please don’t laugh too horribly, 
someone who tries to be a decent Christian person, I would like to use that 
little mantra that is often beloved of evangelicals, though that is not the 
evangelical camp from which I come at all. They often use the mantra: ‘WWJD – 
What would Jesus do?’” He’s midway through a long lecture about the Bible 
before I realise that he has just compared himself to the son of God, who 
befriended Mary Magdalene and other female prostitutes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F19%2Fnew-co-op-chair-promises-review-paul-flowers-drug-scandal-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F11%2F19%2F1384875243420%2FUrsula-Lidbetter-015.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20Co-op%20chair%20promises%20'root%20and%20branch'%20review%20afer%20Paul%20Flowers%20drugs%20scandal%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F19%2Fnew-co-op-chair-promises-review-paul-flowers-drug-scandal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20Co-op%20chair%20promises%20%27root%20and%20branch%27%20review%20afer%20Paul%20Flowers%20drugs%20scandal%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F19%2Fnew-co-op-chair-promises-review-paul-flowers-drug-scandal-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F11%2F19%2F1384875243420%2FUrsula-Lidbetter-015.jpg>
 New Co-op chair promises ‘root and branch’ review after Paul Flowers drugs 
scandal - video 
He doesn’t see the contradiction between his own acknowledgement of the 
vulnerability of the escorts and the fact that he may be exploiting it. “With 
respect, I often ended up in counselling sessions with them,” he says. Who was 
counselling whom? “I was counselling them, because I listened to them. And lots 
of them would tell you, if you bothered to ask, that I had a reputation for 
being a very kind person who listened to people I spent time with, in a way 
that they were never listened to before.”

The man who secretly filmed the hot-tub party earlier was an escort, too. 
“He’s gay for pay,” says Flowers’ boyfriend, who adds that lots of his friends 
are escorts. He and Flowers contest some of the account the escort gave the 
Sunday Mirror, but far from all of it. Flowers admits in a roundabout way that 
he had taken drugs at the party, “but that doesn’t happen to be a criminal 
offence of taking them in my own home”. I challenge his misunderstanding of the 
law, but he stands firm.

He won’t tell me what he ingested, only that he has never, ever tried crystal 
meth. “I know I have this reputation as the Crystal Methodist, my dear,” he 
says, “because when they [the companion of Flowers who supplied the phone 
camera footage to the Mail on Sunday] filmed me in that car I was purchasing 
... crystal meth.” But he insists he has never inhaled anything in his life, 
including cigarettes: “I cannot take things down my throat.” In the first video 
that got him in so much trouble, the man filming was the one for whom he was 
buying crystal meth, he says. He’s just too generous with his cash: he says he 
gave £200 to the escort who turned him over at the weekend, too. TheSunday 
Mirror implied the money was for sex, or at least company 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/church-reverend-pictured-crisps-nipples-7547510>
. Not so, says Flower: “I’m a generous person so I lent him some money. But, a 
bit like Bill Clinton my dear, I did not have sex with that person.”

The Co-op scandal: drugs, sex, religion … and the humiliation of an idealist 
movement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/23/coop-scandal-paul-flowers-mutual-societies>
It was in the Priory, tasked with writing his own life story as part of his 
therapy, that Flowers remembered a long-buried incident that took place at 
theological college in the early 1970s, when he says that he was raped by 
another student. He never told a soul, but believes now that the trauma stopped 
him from developing “profound” relationships with men. He has never been 
closeted, he says, but nonetheless has never managed to forge lasting romantic 
relationships beyond about two months. Growing up in Portsmouth, his family 
knew he was gay. They were used to it: his grandma had both a gay brother and 
sister, and Flowers’ only sibling, his younger brother, Ian, was gay too. He 
died in 1993 from an Aids-related illness.

Flowers says it is only now, at 65, that he is experiencing true love. He 
gazes adoringly at his willowy partner, who brings us drinks throughout the 
interview and has scrubbed the downstairs loo ahead of my arrival. He knows 
some will disapprove of his relationship with a man 40 years his junior, but he 
doesn’t care. “I have found profound happiness now in a relationship that the 
world will look at and think, ‘He’s a dirty old bugger.’ I couldn’t give a 
tiddler’s fuck what they think.”

It’s not his fault that the Co-op has lost customers, he says, moving into the 
third person. “They’ve not taken their accounts away because six months after 
Paul Flowers had resigned from office he was charged with this minor offence of 
possession, which would not have got into the public press at all if I had not 
been Paul Flowers, former chair of the Co-op bank. They didn’t do it because of 
that. There is no convergence between the time I chaired and the other issues I 
had. The personal peccadilloes of someone who seeks intimacy and support has 
sod-all to do with the issues of whether or not we soundly or properly tried to 
run a bank.”

The conversation turns back to drugs. He insists he is not an addict because 
he doesn’t crave them and can go weeks or months without. I suggest that there 
is another contradiction: that he says he took drugs to deal with loneliness 
and lack of love, but here he is telling me that he is blissfully in love and 
yet is still hoovering coke up his nose in the tabloids. “At each stage in our 
development, we do things to get by,” he says, by which he means drugs. “And 
then at some stage, you discover something quite interesting about the way in 
which they help your connections to other people. And you then do things 
because you enjoy them, all right? A lot of your readers will identify with 
that too.”

He is still furious about his 2014 conviction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/07/co-op-bank-paul-flowers-court-drug-charges>
, claiming that one of the officers who dealt with him after his arrest 
apologised for what was a “media-led investigation” and that the Crown 
Prosecution Service was under pressure from 10 Downing Street to press charges. 
There is no evidence to substantiate this claim. He has been suspended from the 
Methodist Church since his drug use was made public in November 2013, but has 
yet to attend a tribunal because his doctors say he is too unwell. Meanwhile, 
he has begun working on his memoirs, and thinks he may soon be strong enough to 
face the panel. He is optimistic about its outcome. “My experience of the 
Methodist Church is that you are treated with great kindness and gentility, and 
you are treated like a human being,” he says. “My past experience of being 
involved in some of these processes is that grace operates, rather than law, 
and that they will be inclined to be considerate and kind. They understand that 
human nature is such that we make mistakes. It’s how we learn from these 
mistakes and turn them positively for good.”

• This article was amended on 20 March 2016. An earlier version said a man who 
filmed Paul Flowers buying drugs in 2013 was an escort commissioned by the Mail 
on Sunday. The Mail on Sunday would like to make clear that it did not 
commission the man, who was not an escort. He approached the Mail on Sunday 
after he had shot the footage.

 