
US-born experimental composer and electronic music pioneer Pauline Oliveros 
died on Thursday, aged 84. She was best known for her philosophy of “deep 
listening”, an approach to music thatshe described as “listening in every 
possible way <http://deeplistening.org/site/content/about> to everything 
possible to hear no matter what one is doing”. Her work explored the difference 
between the involuntary nature of hearing and the voluntary, selective nature 
of listening. She coined the term deep listening in 1988, after descending four 
metres into an underground cistern to make a recording (enjoying the pun, that 
allowed her to joke about her “underground hits”). It led toa band 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deep_Listening_Band> and an institute 
<http://deeplistening.org/site/content/about> where she made it her life’s work 
to “take care of each other individually and collectively”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpauline-oliveros-deep-listening-dead-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82269362a9bd745efd46466a093e06864be3984%2F401_187_626_375%2F626.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pauline%20Oliveros%2C%20'deep%20listening'%20pioneer%2C%20dies%20aged%2084&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpauline-oliveros-deep-listening-dead-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pauline%20Oliveros%2C%20%27deep%20listening%27%20pioneer%2C%20dies%20aged%2084&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fpauline-oliveros-deep-listening-dead-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd82269362a9bd745efd46466a093e06864be3984%2F401_187_626_375%2F626.jpg>
 Pauline Oliveros at London’s St John’s Smith Square in summer 2016 for the 
Southbank’s Deep Minimalism festival. Photograph: Alice Boagey 
Her primary instrument was the accordion, and she continued to make music and 
experiment until the end of her life. TheGuardian reviewed her last release 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/22/botanikk-review-pauline-oliveros-olsen-storesund-dillan-atterklang>
 in September 2016, writing: “She’s always a friend to her audience, always 
aware of how and where and why we might get something from a piece of 
improvisation. She’s also a restlessly alert collaborator.”

A guide to Pauline Oliveros's music
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/may/07/guide-contemporary-music-pauline-oliveros>
Tom Service’s profile of Oliveros was published in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/may/07/guide-contemporary-music-pauline-oliveros>
 and is a superb introduction to her music. He cautioned that the deep 
listening concept is nothing about soft-focused meditation. “Her deep listening 
encompasses the whole world, it doesn’t separate you from it; the noise of 
politics, identity and representation is part of what she hears.” One of her 
works, a 1971 “sonic meditation” called Native, contains the instruction: “Walk 
so silently that the bottoms of your feet become ears.”
 