
Zlatan Ibrahimovic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic> 
has no doubt that Paul Pogba can handle the “24-hour pressure” of playing for 
Manchester United despite a poor display against Liverpool which included 
conceding the penalty that gave Jürgen Klopp’s side a first-half lead.

United required Ibrahimovic’s header in the 84th minute to share the points on 
Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 after Pogba handled a corner to gift Liverpool a penalty which James Milner 
converted. This was the headline mistake in a disappointing display from the 
23-year-old, who cost United a world-record £93.2m and had been among United’s 
best recent performers.

Yet Ibrahimovic said: “Pressure is something I enjoy. I don’t know Paul 
personally to be able to answer that for him. But I think he likes it also 
because, without pressure, we would not be on our toes at the top level. If you 
want to play at the top pressure is 24 hours and if you play well or better the 
pressure becomes even greater. So it’s something that we learn from and 
something we have to handle because we belong to the top. Paul belongs at the 
top absolutely and the pressure will be there.”

Jürgen Klopp’s diamond surprise tires under Manchester United pressure | 
Michael Cox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/15/jose-mourinho-jurgen-klopp-manchester-united-liverpool-tactics>
Last week Pogba became the first footballer to have his own emoji on Twitter. 
This was widely publicised, including on United’s website. Ibrahimovic does not 
believe this affected the midfielder. “I think football is like that today,” he 
said.

“With social media, the media building up the game. When I started to play 
football there was no social media, none of these things. But it’s part of the 
game now. What is too much, what is too little? We don’t know. We just follow 
the game. We are professional, we train like always, try to do our best every 
game. For Paul the [Liverpool] game was different. It was a ‘dirty’ game, in 
the way we had to play more direct, by jumping over the midfield because the 
pressure Liverpool put on us was hard. It was difficult and the first game 
against them was the same. The guys told me every game we play against 
Liverpool looks like this.”

Ibrahimovic likened outside pressure on him to that from a kindergarten. “I 
think the pressure I have all around me is nothing compared to the pressure I 
put on myself. I really want to do, not perfect, more than perfect, every game, 
even in training. I’m not happy if I don’t win in training so imagine what it’s 
like in the games. That is the pressure I put on myself and so your pressure 
becomes like a kindergarten for me. My pressure is really high. I’m not 
satisfied if I get what I want. What I want is to win.”

Meanwhile, Louis van Gaal has confirmed he intends to retire from coaching  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/16/louis-van-gaal-manchester-united-retire>
despite the former United manager receiving an offer to manage a club in Asia 
that would have seen him earn £44m in just three seasons. The Dutchman, 65, has 
been out of work since leaving Old Trafford last May and but told Dutch 
newspaper the Telegraaf that “events in his family” have persuaded him not to 
take up another post despite the chance to earn a lucrative salary overseas.
 