
I’ve never liked competitions. So when I was approached about becoming one of 
the new artistic directors of “the Leeds”, my first reaction was to say no. 
Then I began to wonder if it might be possible to reinvent the competition in 
terms of what benefits the participants. It still feels like only yesterday 
that I was entering competitions myself, and I remember only too well how it 
felt – and how I wished it could feel different.

I was fortunate enough to win some good prizes, including second prize in the 
London international piano competition. But I always found such contests 
intimidating. I’m not a naturally competitive animal – I don’t enjoy getting 
into a metaphorical boxing ring, playing the piano and waiting to see who’s 
going to knock me out. I’ll never forget that awful feeling of: “Oh God, I 
played two wrong notes in that Chopin study,” or worrying that I’d lose points 
for an unusual fingering.

So I decided that if I were to take on Leeds, I wanted it to be a competition 
that got away from all that. I want to create an environment where participants 
feel they can be heard as a musician, in an atmosphere that’s like a festival, 
that includes associated events such as masterclasses and talks. You can take 
technical brilliance for granted; we want a better way to find and nurture the 
really interesting musical thinkers and communicators.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fpaul-lewis-leeds-piano-competition-pianists-reboot-adam-gatehouse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F493e4d4f40e7159bbfadd73dc2253b33ac38bd68%2F0_31_3981_2389%2F3981.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Lewis%3A%20how%20we're%20transforming%20'the%20Leeds'%20to%20nurture%20tomorrow's%20pianists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fpaul-lewis-leeds-piano-competition-pianists-reboot-adam-gatehouse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Lewis%3A%20how%20we%27re%20transforming%20%27the%20Leeds%27%20to%20nurture%20tomorrow%27s%20pianists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fpaul-lewis-leeds-piano-competition-pianists-reboot-adam-gatehouse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F493e4d4f40e7159bbfadd73dc2253b33ac38bd68%2F0_31_3981_2389%2F3981.jpg>
 Anna Tsybuleva, on stage with conductor Mark Elder, wins the Leeds 
international piano competition 2015. Photograph: LIPC 
Part of the problem is that while the format of music competitions has 
remained largely unchanged for more than half a century, the music world in the 
same period has changed beyond recognition. When I first started attending 
concerts as a child, I always felt that the performer was someone very distant 
and terribly famous: there was a tremendous sense of occasion about being in 
his or her presence. I don’t think it’s still like that.

Today, we have to be far more connected to our audience in all sorts of ways: 
presentation, talking about music, going into local schools to play to the 
kids, meeting audiences afterwards, and more. This is hugely important: we have 
to reach out. And I think a competition must reflect what it means to be an 
international musician in the 21st century.

We decided to hold round one in three different places – Berlin, New York and 
Singapore – six months ahead of round two, when 20-25 pianists will be invited 
to Leeds. These first rounds will all be recorded by the online classical music 
video streaming platform Medici TV, which will live-stream the second and each 
subsequent round to a global audience for free. As before, the BBC will 
broadcast the semi-finals on radio and the finals on TV and radio, but our new 
digital partnership and our presence in these three cities will help us reach a 
much larger international audience and show the world what the competition is 
really about: taking care of musicians, finding real communicators and 
nurturing them.

Can the Leeds Piano competition recover its greatness?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/15/can-the-leeds-piano-competition-recover-its-greatness>
That also means that our responsibility doesn’t end when the winner is 
announced. I want to help young pianists avoid some of the bear traps 
associated with winning competitions. Certain contests that offer their 
laureates management or promotion have a time limit: you’re only the winner 
until the next one comes along. That outlook is too short. To build a career 
you must have the longest possible view: good management is essential. And the 
relationship has to be right: the manager really has to believe in the 
musician, which is why you can’t say that X will definitely represent the 
first-prize winner, or that Y pianist will play with Z orchestra. So in the 
package we’ve put together, the management companyAskonas Holt 
<https://www.youtube.com/user/AskonasHolt> will take up one of the three 
winners, but not necessarily the first-prize winner – and there will be 
enhanced partnerships, such as concerts and other opportunities with, among 
others, BBC Radio 3, the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, the Wigmore 
Hall and Southbank Centre in London.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fpaul-lewis-leeds-piano-competition-pianists-reboot-adam-gatehouse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe84d33bcedf641eeb05094fc05bf718398d4b8be%2F0_164_4336_5469%2F4336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Lewis%3A%20how%20we're%20transforming%20'the%20Leeds'%20to%20nurture%20tomorrow's%20pianists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fpaul-lewis-leeds-piano-competition-pianists-reboot-adam-gatehouse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Lewis%3A%20how%20we%27re%20transforming%20%27the%20Leeds%27%20to%20nurture%20tomorrow%27s%20pianists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fpaul-lewis-leeds-piano-competition-pianists-reboot-adam-gatehouse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe84d33bcedf641eeb05094fc05bf718398d4b8be%2F0_164_4336_5469%2F4336.jpg>
 Michael Roll, a17-year-old pianist From Leeds, after winning the Leeds 
competition in 1963. Photograph: ANL/Rex/Shutterstock 
Another danger for young winners is that they are catapulted very suddenly 
into the limelight, and must immediately be able to withstand a gruelling 
schedule and the pressure they are under to blow everyone away whenever they 
walk on stage. That’s not what I think Leeds should be about. I want to take 
the long-term wellbeing of its winners into consideration.

That is where mentoring comes in. I was enormously lucky to have been mentored 
byAlfred Brendel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/29/alfred-brendel-impatience-was-not-a-vice>
. I know how vital it is for a musician starting out to have an established, 
experienced performer taking an interest and being there to advise. Life as a 
soloist can be lonely; it can feel like an uphill struggle and there are so 
many potential pitfalls that the sense of support a mentor can offer is 
incredibly valuable. I’ll be offering mentoring myself, and we are encouraging 
our jury to do likewise. Nor will it be limited to the prizewinners (a first, 
second and third prize will be awarded, along with an audience prize which will 
be voted for online). We will offer mentoring to any competitor we think would 
benefit.

The topic of corrupt competitions, with jury members voting tactically for one 
another’s students, has been done to death. Leeds will be as transparent as 
humanly possible. Our jury, rather than consisting principally of full-time 
teachers, will be performer-led. Some competitions publish all the jury’s marks 
to ensure transparency; if we decide to do that, too, it’s fine with me.

I’d like the repertoire to be as unrestricted as possible. We’re going to ask 
the 10 semi-finalists to offer two different recital programmes and write 500 
words explaining their choices: when you present pianists with the entire piano 
repertoire and ask them to build something interesting, you can learn a lot 
about their musical thinking through their choices. We’re also introducing a 
chamber music round, a vital test in the 21st century.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fpaul-lewis-leeds-piano-competition-pianists-reboot-adam-gatehouse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bafeb854f5663cb77ffc78171c4e7a9a86568c9%2F0_77_2724_2722%2F2724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paul%20Lewis%3A%20how%20we're%20transforming%20'the%20Leeds'%20to%20nurture%20tomorrow's%20pianists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fpaul-lewis-leeds-piano-competition-pianists-reboot-adam-gatehouse%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paul%20Lewis%3A%20how%20we%27re%20transforming%20%27the%20Leeds%27%20to%20nurture%20tomorrow%27s%20pianists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fpaul-lewis-leeds-piano-competition-pianists-reboot-adam-gatehouse%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bafeb854f5663cb77ffc78171c4e7a9a86568c9%2F0_77_2724_2722%2F2724.jpg>
 Dame Fanny Waterman, founder of the Leeds piano competition, who on 17 October 
was given the lifetime achievement award at the 2016 Women of the Year awards. 
Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
As for the final, we have decided to ask for an extra concerto. Finalists must 
prepare one that is Romantic or later, and another that is classically 
oriented. This doesn’t necessarily mean Mozart – although I’d love it if more 
people did choose him. His works are the staple of the piano concerto 
repertoire but are often overlooked in favour of more crowd-pleasing repertoire 
in competitions. Who knows, someone might even play Bach: the last time his 
music featured in a Leeds final was when it was played byAndrás Schiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/classical/page/0,,1943867,00.html>, in 1975. 

Leeds is among the most recognised piano competitions in the world. To build 
on the legacy of its founder,Dame Fanny Waterman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/aug/06/leeds-international-piano-competition-waterman>
, will be a huge challenge, and it’s one I take on with great enthusiasm.


• Applications for the 2018 competition <http://www.leedspiano.com> open in 
June 2017. First rounds take place in Berlin, New York and Singapore in April 
2018 with semi-finals and finals in Leeds in September 2018.


• This article was amended on 19 October 2016. Askonas Holt will represent one 
of the three winners, not one of the five finalists as an earlier version said. 
Applications for 2018’s competition open in June 2017 not September.
 