
Pearson <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson> has appointed Sidney 
Taurel, the former chief executive of pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly, as its 
new chairman.

Taurel, who is also a board director at IBM and McGraw Hill Financial, will 
takeover as non-executive chairman of the parent of the Financial Times on 1 
January.

He replaces Glen Moreno, who has held the post for a decade, who confirmed he 
would stand down at the end of the year at the company’s annual general meeting 
in April.

“This is an important time to be joining the world’s leading education 
company. Pearson has a great purpose at its heart - to help more people 
progress in their lives through learning,” said Taurel, who ran Eli Lilly from 
1998 to 2008. “I am looking forward to helping thePearson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pearson> management team develop our 
strategy and deliver long-term value for our students, customers and our 
shareholders.”

Moreno’s tenure has spanned a period of major change as the once sprawling 
conglomerate, which once owned assets including Madame Tussauds, has looked to 
focus almost exclusively on its global education business.


The Financial Times is in the process of being sold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jul/23/financial-times-sale-pearson> to 
Japanese group Nikkei for £844m and in Augustoffloaded its 50% stake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/12/pearson-sells-economist-stake-exor>
 in the Economist Group, publisher of the Economist, for £469m.

And in 2012, Pearson merged Penguin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/oct/29/penguin-random-house-merger-bertelsmann>
 with rival Random House and retained a 47% stake in the new business which is 
the world’s biggest publisher.


“I am very pleased to be handing over to Sidney, a decade after joining the 
Pearson board myself,” said Moreno. “It has been a true privilege to be 
involved with Pearson’s evolution into the world’s leading learning company, 
and I wish all of my colleagues every success with the company’s future growth. 
We are delighted to have in Sidney a new chair with strong experience of global 
business and markets, used to leading in a complex regulatory environment.”

Moreno also presided of the appointment of John Fallon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/oct/03/pearson-marjorie-scardino-step-down>
, the former head of Pearson’s international education division, as the 
successor to Dame Marjorie Scardino, the chief executive of Pearson from 1997 
to 2012.


Taurel arrives at a tough time for Pearson which last week suffered its 
biggest slump in share price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/21/pearson-shares-profits-warning> 
in a single day since the stock market crash of 1987.


The company, which effectively issued a full-year profits warning to 
investors, blamed lower enrolments at some colleges in the US and a fall in 
school textbook purchases in parts of South Africa.

“Sidney knows global markets well, particularly North America having lead a 
large, complex business through a period of great change,” said Fallon. “He 
shares Pearson’s values and sense of purpose, and I look forward to working 
with him.”

Pearson is also facing the prospect of industrial action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/22/financial-times-industrial-action-pension-dispute-nuj>
 as Financial Times staff clash with management over proposed changes to 
pension arrangements as the title is sold off to Nikkei.


Ian Whittaker, an analyst at Liberum, noted that Taurel was due to start 
before Pearson publishes its January trading update which could be crucial if 
the company fails to hit its revised performance forecast.

“[Taurel] will start his chairmanship before Pearson’s trading update in 
January,” said Whittaker. “If therefore Pearson misses its revised guidance in 
January and needs to do more restructuring, would the chairman look to replace 
the chief executive, John Fallon. Arguments either way but our view is that 
Fallon would probably stay given a replacement would take time to find, fit in 
etcetera. It might be viewed as better if he stayed and carried out the 
restructuring.”
 