
Pearson <https://www.theguardian.com/business/pearson>, which recently agreed 
to offload the Financial Times, and the publisher of the Wall Street Journal 
have sold off their stakes in Russian business newspaper Vedomosti.

For Pearson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/pearson> the sale represents 
its final move out of newspaper publishing, having already sold its 50% stake 
in the Economist and just weeks from completing a deal for Nikkei to takeover 
the FT, although it still owns a minority stake in book publisher Penguin 
Random House.

Pearson took a stake in Vedomosti, a Russian language business daily, in 1999 
in a venture betweenDow Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dowjones>, 
the WSJ publisher, and Independent Media with each party holding equal stakes.

In 2005, Finnish media group Sanoma acquired Independent Media.

In April, Sanoma sold a 33.3% stake to Damian Kudryavtsev, a Russian 
entrepreneur and former publisher of rival publication Kommersant.

Kudryavtsev has acquired the remainder of Vedomosti for an undisclosed sum. 
Given Pearson was not required to make a statement to investors via the 
stockmarket it means that the sale price was not material.

““We are very proud of the work we have done with Vedomosti and our 
contribution to independent press in Russia for the past 15 years,” said 
Pearson and Dow Jones in a joint statement. “Due to the newly passed law 
limiting foreign ownership of media organisations in Russia, Dow Jones and 
Pearson have entered into an agreement to divest their stakes in Vedomosti.”

A new media law adopted in September 2014, which tightens the limits for 
foreign investment from 50% in TV and radio to 20% in all media, comes into 
force on 1 January.

“The quality and integrity of the Vedomosti editorial team is outstanding and 
both the FT and The Wall Street Journal plan to continue licensing content to 
Vedomosti to provide high-quality, international news to readers in Russia,” 
said Pearson and Dow Jones.
 