
The first Democrat and first woman to serve as Pennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania> attorney general was 
sentenced to jail on Monday, completing a catastrophic fall from grace for a 
rising political star.


Former Pennsylvania attorney general Kathleen Kane, once seen as a potential 
future governor, was convicted in August of two felony counts and seven 
misdemeanors in her perjury trial. Sheresigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/16/pennsylvania-attorney-general-kathleen-kane-resigns>
 from her position two days later, having served since 2013.

Kane was sentenced to 10 to 23 months in jail and eight years of probation by 
a Montgomery County judge who said Kane’s ego drove her to take down enemies 
and break the law. If Kane posts bond of $75,000 cash bail, she will remain 
free while she appeals her conviction.

The jury at her criminal trial in August found her guilty of illegally leaking 
grand jury findings to the press to embarrass a political enemy. She then 
plotted a cover-up and lied about it under oath.

Kane, 50, was convicted of two felony counts and seven misdemeanors in her 
perjury trial. Sheresigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/16/pennsylvania-attorney-general-kathleen-kane-resigns>
 from her position two days later, having served since 2013.

Looking back at her swift downfall, Bruce Ledewitz, a law professor at 
Pittsburgh’s Duquesne University said: “This illustrates once more, if anyone 
ever needed reminding, that the cover-up is worse than the crime.”

Kane could initially have gotten away with a slap on the wrist for the leak 
itself, he told the Guardian.

“The grand jury leak would have been a minor embarrassment if she had gone to 
court and apologized. But instead she started covering up,” he said.

Kane’s short reign was one of paradox.

She became known for standing up for victims of sexual violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/02/pennsylvania-bishops-hid-priest-sex-abuse-children>
 anddefending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/11/pennsylvania-attorney-general-aclu-gay-marriage-lawsuit>
 gay rights.

And she took on a state criminal justice establishment she called the “old 
boys’ club”, including acrackdown 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/pornographic-email-scandal-ripples-through-pennsylvania-politics/2015/12/26/fc411a76-a374-11e5-b53d-972e2751f433_story.html>
 after racist, sexist and pornographic emails were discovered being swapped on 
government computers.

But she also developed a reputation for grandiosity, score-settling and 
show-boating, some observers noted.

“Her fall has been shocking. There was nothing on her track record to suggest 
that she was going to become corrupted by power. She came into that office as 
Bambi and turned into Richard Nixon overnight – seeking to get even with 
political foe,” Ledewitz said.

Judge Wendy Demchick-Alloy said during sentencing that Kane assumed an “off 
with your heads” mentality as she ran the state’s top law enforcement agency. 
The judge called Kane a political “neophyte” who failed to make the transition 
from campaigner to public servant after she took office.

“This case is about retaliation and revenge against perceived enemies who this 
defendant ... felt had embarrassed her in the press,” Demchick-Alloy said.

Kane campaigned for office pledging to investigate whether Republicans were 
dragging out theslow process 
<http://www.pennlive.com/midstate/index.ssf/2011/11/special_report_why_the_jerry_s.html>
 ofindicting 
<http://www.pennlive.com/midstate/index.ssf/2011/11/former_penn_state_coach_jerry.html>
 Jerry Sandusky, for political reasons.

The former Penn State football coach was eventually convicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/23/jerry-sandusky-convicted-penn-state>
 in 2012, found guilty of 45 counts of abusing young boys after a long grand 
jury probe had found crimes going back decades.

No politically motivated delays in the case were ever proved, but Kane became 
embroiled in feuds with Republican governor Tom Corbett, Sandusky prosecutor 
Frank Fina and others.

Fina ended up being the main target of the leak that sunk Kane. Over a 
relatively short period 
<http://www.politicspa.com/the-kathleen-kane-saga-a-timeline/65556/>, her 
leadership becamemarred 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/08/16/how-racy-emails-and-a-grand-jury-leak-brought-down-a-political-rising-star/>
 by vendettas,lawsuits 
<http://www.pennlive.com/midstate/index.ssf/2015/11/the_boys_club_fights_back_form.html>
 and leaks.

Harrisburg-based attorney Walter Cohen, a former attorney general, said Kane’s 
motives were often just but her execution was heavy-handed and her style became 
grandiose.

“She started to believe all the great things people were saying about her and 
believed she was indestructible,” Cohen said.

Kane came under investigation in 2014.

But even as the perjury case was closing in on her, her team was working hard 
behind the scenes on a secret grand jury investigation into pedophile priests.

In the spring of 2016, Kane released a report exposing decades of “monstrous” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/08/catholic-priest-child-sex-abuse-ebensburg-pennsylvania>
 child abuse by Roman Catholic priests in the Pennsylvania archdiocese of 
Altoona-Johnstown.

A series of other Pennsylvania archdioceses are now similarly under 
investigation 
<http://www.mcall.com/news/nationworld/pennsylvania/mc-pa-allentown-catholic-dioceses-priest-grand-jury-20160916-story.html>
.

Meanwhile Kane encouraged state lawmakers’ attempts to lift the statute of 
limitations so that morevictims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/10/catholic-priest-child-abuse-suicide-brian-gergely>
 of child abuse could sue the church, despite those efforts being repeatedly 
thwarted bypushback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/17/pennsylvania-catholic-church-sexual-abuse-bill-mafia-tactics>
 from Catholic leaders.

In 2015, Kane’s law license was suspended 
<http://www.mcall.com/news/breaking/mc-pa-kathleen-kane--law-license-suspended-by-court-20150921-story.html>
 and she was charged by Montgomery County district attorney Kevin Steele, the 
same prosecutor whoindicted Bill Cosby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/bill-cosby-trial-date-sexual-assault-charges>
 for sexual assault.

Ironically, with her trial looming in 2016, Kane hired a Republican 
prosecutor, Bruce Castor, to, essentially, stand in for her. He was best known 
for declining to prosecute Bill Cosby a decade ago and wasperceived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/21/bruce-castor-pennsylvania-bill-cosby-jerry-sandusky-cases>
 by some as acting against the interests of victims of sexual violence.

Castor left 
<http://articles.philly.com/2016-09-08/news/75312988_1_general-kathleen-g-kane-new-attorney-general>
 shortly after Kane’s conviction.

A new attorney general will be elected in November. The race, reportedly, has 
been lacking in drama.

“That’s not a bad thing,” Ledewitz said.

With reporting from the Associated Press.
 