
Pep Guardiola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola> came to 
England with a reputation as the best coach in the world yet he travels to 
Liverpool prepared to accept he does not have a monopoly on entertaining 
football, describing Jürgen Klopp – his opposite number at Anfield on Saturday 
– as “the best manager in the world” when it comes to creating attacking sides.

The Manchester City manager knows Klopp of old – both have won Bundesliga 
titles and after eight meetings between Bayern Munich and Borussia Dortmund, 
the final score was four apiece. And when Guardiola took the opportunity to 
watchLiverpool’s 4-1 victory against Stoke City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/27/liverpool-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 on Tuesday he could see the German coach had successfully imported the “heavy 
metal” brand of football that brought him to prominence.

“I can see why they call it that,” Guardiola said in the lead-up to the first 
Premier League meeting between the two coaches. “Our styles are not similar but 
I like a lot the way they play. Maybe Klopp is the best manager in the world at 
creating teams who attack the back four with so many players, from almost 
anywhere on the pitch. They have an intensity with the ball and without the 
ball, and it is not easy to do that. They attack wide sometimes with 
[Nathaniel] Clyne and [James] Milner but they especially like to attack from 
inside, through the middle. I don’t think there is another team in the world 
attacking in this way with so many players capable of launching moves in an 
instant.”

Jürgen Klopp finally gets a chance to face Pep Guardiola on level playing 
field | Andy Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-pep-guardiola-manchester-city>
“ I learned a lot in Germany the first time I played his team. I was new and 
it was ‘wow’, what a good lesson. We lost 4-2. Afterwards in the league I 
learned a bit more about how to control those situations but it was never easy. 
When Klopp speaks about his football being heavy metal, I understand 
completely. It is so aggressive. For the fans it is really good.

“Our styles are not similar but I like a lot the way they play, for the 
spectators, because in three or four seconds they are attacking.”

Liverpool’s emphasis on attack is bound to put pressure on the City defence 
and Guardiola has already admitted he lacks numbers at centre-back and might be 
in the market for a new full-back. Concentration, he feels, will be key. 
“Liverpool have quality players up front but, when you play against aJürgen 
Klopp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jurgen-klopp> team, the tactics are 
so important,” he said. “You have to reach a certain level. They have a 
specific way to attack you and you have to be in control.”

Liverpool are one point better off than City going into the game, which 
Guardiola regards as evidence of how well his side have playedwhen being 
deprived of Sergio Agüero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/fa-bans-manchester-city-sergio-aguero-fernandinho-chelsea>
 for a total of seven matches due to bans. The club’s leading scorer returns 
from suspension on Saturday and City hope their attacking spearhead will help 
them gain ground on Chelsea as well as Liverpool.

Yaya Touré the reborn star in Manchester City’s war to win league | Barney 
Ronay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/30/yaya-toure-reborn-star-manchester-city-league-title>
“There are still six teams going for the title, or at least competing for 
Champions League places,” Guardiola said. “From my point of view I always want 
to fight until the end of my last chance. Once when I was a player we were 12 
points behind Real Madrid and we still ended up champions. Tomorrow is not a 
final but it is an important game for both teams.”

And does Guardiola expect Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, with their draining, 
high-energy pressing game, still to be around at the end of the season? “They 
are definitely title contenders,” the former Barcelona manager said. “Liverpool 
do put a lot into games but they are helped by playing one game a week without 
Europe. When you are playing three games a week it is more complicated. But 
based on what I saw with Dortmund I think Klopp will be able to maintain a high 
level for a season. He is a huge motivator.”
 