
A tetchy Pep Guardiola refused to accept Manchester City have a discipline 
problem despite Fernandinho’s sending off inthe 2-1 win against Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-city-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
 being his side’s seventh of the season.

The Brazilian’s two-footed challenge on Johann Berg Gudmundsson in the 32nd 
minute was his second red card of the campaign in the Premier League and third 
in all afterone against Borussia Mönchengladbach in the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/borussia-monchengladbach-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
.

Manchester City’s 10 men sink Burnley thanks to Clichy and Agüero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-city-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
With Sergio Agüero also being sent off twice, along with the red cards issued 
to Claudio Bravo and Nolito, Guardiola faced questions regarding his players’ 
ability to remain on the field.

Yet the Catalan was in no mood to accept he has an issue to address. “We had a 
lot of disciplinary problems. Now we expect what the FA [Football Association] 
decide,” he said.

Asked if he feels the need to speak with his players, Guardiola said: “Yes, 
[from] the team with the most ball possession. Yeah, yeah, yeah. We try to play 
football – don’t forget it, right. My teams always in my career try to play 
football. I cannot control the other circumstances.”

Pressed if Fernandinho needed to be more prudent when tackling, Guardiola 
said: “You’re the journalist, not me. Ask the referee, not me. It is always our 
fault, it’s always City’s fault. Yeah, yeah. I saw other games.”

The City manager was also unhappy that Ben Mee’s late goal for Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> was allowed to stand after the 
goalkeeper Claudio Bravo flapped at a cross and the defender turned the ball 
home.

“All around the world, the Burnley goal on Claudio Bravo is a fault [foul],” 
he said. “Here, and all around the world, the rules say the goalkeeper in the 
six-yard box cannot be touched. He goes here and the striker does this. OK, so 
I have to adapt and I have to understand there are special rules here in 
England. Now I learn, so now we’re going to play.

“I didn’t see it [the Fernandinho challenge]. But I saw the fault for Claudio 
Bravo, that was definite.

“Now we are going to accept the three or four games. But remember it was a 
fault [for Bravo].”

Pep Guardiola sorry for City fracas but refuses to blame Sergio Agüero
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/pep-guardiola-sergio-aguero-manchester-city-chelsea> 