
Pep Guardiola has admitted making mistakes since arriving at Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> and has been forced to 
adapt his managerial style to suit the demands of English football.

The City manager’s frank confession came in the wake of Friday night’s 5-0 
demolition of West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/west-ham-united-manchester-city-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
 in the third round of the FA Cup, a victory that should reinvigorate City’s 
season following a patchy spell as they slipped to fourth in Premier League.

London Stadium helped Manchester City beat West Ham, says Pep Guardiola
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/pep-guardiola-bigger-london-stadium-helped-manchester-city>
“I’m not going to change England and I don’t want to do that,” he said. “Of 
course, it’s going to change me. That’s why I came here – to be changed. That 
is nice. When I do all my career the same thing, 15 or 20 years as a coach, 
it’s boring.”

Guardiola, in contrast to the tetchy responses he gave after City’s 2-1 win 
with 10 men over Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-city-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
 in the league on Monday, was more forthcoming and said that some of his ideas 
were misplaced and rather than blame his players he should shoulder the 
responsibility for his side’s performances.

“Sometimes I have an idea: three at the back or play a player like this. And 
sometimes it didn’t work and when that happens it is always the manager and I 
never complain to the players,” he said. “Because when I see them training, how 
they suffer and what they did in the last game against Burnley after 65, 70 
minutes with 10 against 11, two days later after Anfield. They want to do that.

“You have to look at yourself and see what [you] have to do to help them find 
each other and play to each other more fluently, not all the time with 
[aggression] and all these kind of things. That is my job. I have to help them. 
And I tell them. And most of the times we were not good, it was my 
responsibility.”

He conceded that City need to recover the consistency that meant they were 
unbeaten in his first 11 games in charge at the Etihad, 10 of them victories. 
“It’s the only way. We made in the first part of the season some really, really 
good games and good performances. But the moment we felt mistakes, especially 
in defence – own goalin [the 2-0 defeat by Tottenham at] White Hart Lane, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/tottenham-hotspur-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 our miss[3-3 Champions League draw] at Celtic in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/celtic-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
 – we lost a little bit our confidence to play.

Manchester City cruise past West Ham thanks to David Silva masterclass
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/west-ham-united-manchester-city-fa-cup-third-round-match-report>
“And at times my ideas were not good, because I’m still in the process to know 
the players, to know what is the best position, the best way to play, to adapt 
to them. But through the control of the game, through the passes, was the 
beginning and [against West Ham] – and we have to try.

“It’s not always possible because the opponents are playing too and they are 
so aggressive and it’s not easy to do that. But that is what I think we have to 
try to do, through the passes, through the multi, multi, multi passes, the 
situation comes along. When that happens you concede few. [But] when the ball 
is up and down, any team in the Premier League is better than us – much, much 
better.”

Making the transition to the Premier League was challenging, Guardiola added. 
“I come here and I said a thousand million times, I try to adapt to English 
football in the way I believe you can do that. But in the end it’s 11 against 
11 and the pitches here are smaller – or looks like it more than the other 
places – and the intensity and the [aggression] and the permission for playing 
for more time with few fouls makes it’s a bit more difficult.

“So I understand that, I never complained and never complained in the past. 
It’s just we can do better to improve.”
 