
Pep Guardiola conceded Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> were out of the Premier 
League title race after enduring the heaviest league defeat of his managerial 
career against Everton.

City were beaten 4-0 at Goodison Park where two teenagers, the impressive Tom 
Davies and the new signing Ademola Lookman, scored their firstEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> goals and two Belgium 
internationals, Romelu Lukaku and Kevin Mirallas, were also on the scoresheet. 
The defeat left City 10 points adrift of the league leaders Chelsea and outside 
the Champions League qualification places.

Ademola Lookman adds flourish for Everton in defeat of Manchester City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/everton-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
Asked whether City were out of the title race, Guardiola replied: “Yes. The 
first one is a 10-point gap and that is a lot. The second one is three points, 
so we have to see. I spoke with the players for the last three weeks to forget 
about the table, focus on the next game and do our best. After that, at the end 
of the season, we’ll analyse how our level was, our performance, the coach, the 
players. After we are going to decide.”

Everton opened the scoring with their first shot on target – the fourth time 
in seven Premier League games City have fallen behind to an opening attempt. 
Guardiola insisted the problem lay not with his defence but the team’s failure 
to convert one of several chances before Lukaku struck. He said: “Believe me, I 
would like to know why [it keeps happening]. I will be concerned and worried 
when the opponents arrive six or seven times and create a lot of chances. 
That’s then our problem to control the game.

Everton teenager Tom Davies ensures Pep Guardiola knows his name | Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/15/everton-tom-davies-ensures-pep-guardiola-knows-name-manchester-city>
“I know in many cases the people don’t agree with me but to control the game 
means you have the possession to create enough chances and concede as few as 
possible. That has happened. But what happens when they arrive for the first 
time it’s a goal. Gaël Clichy loses the ball, they make the counterattack and 
we don’t have our line. To avoid that you put the ball up. Then you lose the 
ball because our strikers are our strikers, and 10 men behind the ball. Maybe 
we would be solid with that but I don’t believe in it.

“I want us to get better and better and feel we are able to score goals. When 
that happens we are going to suffer less behind. Our strikers will have more 
confidence. It is tough for the players. I was a player and understand how 
tough it is for them right now. We are trying to do absolutely everything. But 
it’s not the first time it’s happened this season.”
 