
Pep Guardiola has moved to clarify remarks made in a recent interview with NBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-manager-football-interview>
, which led to speculation that the Manchester City manager might be 
disillusioned in England and was already thinking about retirement.

“All I said was that I would not be still a trainer when I am 60,” Guardiola 
said. “I still stand by that, because I started young and I have been in 
football for a long time, but at the moment I am 45. I have no plans to retire. 
I love my job and I am in a perfect place to do it, here in England. I am not 
thinking of retiring in the next four or five year, I am happy atManchester City
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> and grateful for the 
chance to come and work here. Maybe it was inappropriate to say I am starting 
to say goodbye to my career, but I know what I am thinking of when I talk about 
when I am going to retire.”

Pep Guardiola’s winter of discontent is nothing new in Premier League circus | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/03/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-liverpool-jurgen-klopp-christmas-fixtures>
Guardiola also raised eyebrows in the same interview when he suggested City 
were some way behind leading teams such as Liverpool, Manchester United, 
Barcelona and Bayern Munich in terms of titles, though in advance of Friday’s 
FA Cup game at West Ham he was at pains to stress that he was talking in terms 
of history and tradition.

“I never said that City is below that level at the moment,” he said. “When I 
said we were behind Liverpool, United and the other clubs I was speaking about 
titles won in the past, and I hope people understand that. I think Manchester 
City is one of the best clubs in the world right now and it is my job to make 
it stronger.

“We have not got the history of those clubs, but we are in a good position to 
do something about it. Even in the league table right now we are not in too bad 
a position, it is just that Chelsea have opened up quite a lead. We are two 
points behind the team in second, and I am happy with that at this stage of the 
season.”
 