
The FA Cup arrives like the cavalry at the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/fa-cup-third-round-draw> to 
interrupt an engrossing title race and temporarily shelve Pep Guardiola’s 
rhetorical question about whether or not Manchester City are in it.

Pep Guardiola denies Manchester City discipline problem after latest red card
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/pep-guardiola-denies-manchester-city-discipline-problem-after-latest-red-card>
To judge by their last couple of games City cannot be certain of a Champions 
League place at the end of the season, let alone first place, and this 
realisation appears to have dawned on their manager during his televised press 
conferences. Tetchy Pep has been a diverting sideshow over the past few weeks 
but in his post-match interview with the BBC after the new year bank holiday 
fixtureagainst Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/manchester-city-burnley-premier-league-match-report>
 the manager’s dissatisfaction with just about everything English was plain to 
see.

English referees keep sending off his players, then English reporters will 
make the situation worse byasking if City have a discipline problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/pep-guardiola-denies-manchester-city-discipline-problem-after-latest-red-card>
. English opponents make life difficult for his goalkeeper at corners in a way 
that would not be allowed anywhere else in the world. English teams play too 
many games in too short a time around the turn of the year and, Guardiola only 
mentions this two or three times a week, the English system somehow allows 
Chelsea and Liverpool to fight for the title even though they do not have to 
play in Europe.

All things considered, Guardiola is not a happy man at the moment. Neither is 
Jürgen Klopp, whose efforts to catch Chelsea were hindered when his sidecould 
manage only a draw at Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/sunderland-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
, though at least the Liverpool managermostly railed against the stupidity of a 
fixture programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/jurgen-klopp-frustrated-two-penalties-liverpool>
 that sent his players to the north-east less than 48 hours after their 
previous game. Liverpool came unstuck by conceding two penalties and when he 
calms down Klopp will accept that and move on. Guardiola, on the other hand, 
appears to be getting stuck on the idea that everything in England is set up so 
that a gleeful public can rejoice in his failure. City actually passed the 
Stoke City test with flying colours in August, coming away from the Bet365 
Stadium withan impressive 4-1 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/stoke-city-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
, although in Guardiola’s mind at least all those predictions that his 
aesthetic style would not be sufficiently robust for the English game are now 
playing out as self-fulfilling prophesies.

Manchester City’s Bacary Sagna asked by FA to explain ‘10 against 12’ post
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/manchester-city-bacary-sagna-fa>
He has a point about the absurdity of the festive fixtures but so does every 
other manager. It is the new arrivals in the country who find the English habit 
of building a crisis into a constitution so difficult to understand, and 
particular sympathy should go to Claude Puel and Southampton, who ended up with 
three games in six days. Klopp’s breezy pre-Christmas confidence, when he said 
the festive programme was sillybut at least it was the same for everybody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/25/jurgen-klopp-christmas-can-make-or-break-liverpool-title-challenge>
, did not survive a couple of setbacks at Sunderland and was based on a false 
premise anyway.

All too clearly the festive programme was not the same for everyone. 
Southampton had to play three times in six days, Liverpool three times in seven 
days, while the burden on Chelsea is a relatively normal three games in 10 
days, all without leaving London. If English football insists on doing 
Christmas and new year differently to everyone else, if it imagines a 
steeplechase-type spectacle is somehow character building at the halfway point 
of the season, it really should do more to make certain the demands made on 
each team are as equal as possible. At the moment, particularly with games 
involving leading sides being switched for television, the festive programme is 
too much of a lottery. You can understand coaches from other leagues failing to 
appreciate the novelty – andapparently next season’s festive list is even more 
demanding <https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/815939030777008128>.
Gary Lineker (@GaryLineker) 
If you think this PL holiday fixture list is mad, here's next year: December 
16/20/23/26/30 January 1. World Cup follows. Utterly Bonkers.
 <https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/815939030777008128> January 2, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/815939030777008128> 
Based on his performance on the BBC, it is not too early to begin wondering if 
Guardiola will still be here by then. The particular novelty he is failing to 
appreciate at the moment is being up to 10 points off the pace, as he was when
City lost at Anfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/liverpool-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 after Chelseahad won earlier in the day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/chelsea-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
. He has limited experience of that sort of situation – and it is beginning to 
show. He is not enjoying England and that is beginning to show, too. Just as 
City would not have expected to be so far behind Chelsea at this stage, with 
seven red cards, key players continually being suspended and a manager unable 
or unwilling to discuss disciplinary matters, so Guardiola must be trying to 
work out how he can turn around such a difficult position.

Pep Guardiola feels pressure as tempers fray and Manchester City toil | Andy 
Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/01/pressure-grows-on-pep-guardiola-manchester-city-toil>
At Barcelona and Bayern Munich, dominant teams in their leagues, his players 
always appeared to do exactly what their coach wanted. At least that was the 
impression from outside and one can only assume that was what City thought they 
were buying into. Yet City’s players seem in some way resistant to Guardiola’s 
ideas and influence. This group of players do their own thing, often to the 
evident frustration of the manager on the sidelines. Against Chelsea, City had 
been out of control, their inability to stay with the leaders spilling over 
into petulant spite once the match had been won. AtLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> they were too passive and 
ineffective, against Burnley at home Fernandinho at least was so fired-up he 
was dismissed before half-time.

What could Guardiola say to explain such inconsistency? No wonder he chose to 
concentrate on an alleged foul on Claudio Bravo in the buildup to Burnley’s 
goal. “I’ve seen it back, it’s just a goal,” his opposite number, Sean Dyche, 
said. Guardiola will continue to disagree, although had he been in a position 
to watch Jeff Stelling and co on Sky as the goal was scored he might have found 
it a useful aid to his English education. No one in the studio mentioned a foul 
on the goalkeeper. The opinion instead was Bravo had not dealt with the cross 
very well. There are no special rules in England, as Guardiola rather 
ludicrously suggested. But (who knew?) there are a lot of crosses.
 