
Pep Guardiola offered a glimpse of his unique vision of football when he said 
Manchester City have been better at times this season than his gilded Barcelona 
and Bayern Munich sides. Before the club’s finalChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> group match on Tuesday 
night, a dead rubber against Celtic, the word he chose to describe City’s 
finest passages of play under him was “faster” than Barça and Bayern.

This may cause some surprise given the quality of those previous teams. 
Barcelona claimed 14 major trophies, including two Champions League titles, 
between 2009 and 2012 while the count at Bayern was seven in three seasons. In 
particular, theBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> side 
who swept all before them in Guardiola’s first season as manager are considered 
one of the finest in history.

Manchester City must show more mental strength, says Pep Guardiola
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/manchester-city-pep-guardiola-celtic>
Yet just 23 matches into his City tenure, Guardiola was full of praise for his 
side despite theirdefeat by Chelsea on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/03/manchester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 when they conceded three times in the final 30 minutes before Fernandinho and 
Sergio Agüero were sent off.

“We play good – faster than in Munich and even in Barcelona, when we had one 
player [Messi], who was amazing and helped us to create those steps,” he said. 
“In general, I am so satisfied in the short time we have been together. We 
attack with 10 players and try not to concede on the counterattack. I decide 
this because I did it all my career, attacking smaller spaces and defending 
bigger spaces. For that you need time but I am sure when you are able to do it 
you are more attractive and you are more safe.

“Of course, we need time in a world we don’t have. But in general I’m 
satisfied. When we are talking about the last game, I’m so satisfied. I saw 
again the game and what we have to improve and how many things we did well.”

As to his comparison of City with Barcelona and Bayern, Guardiola’s view that 
the display in losing to Chelsea gives him hope that “this season is going to 
be good” may seem counterintuitive. A Guardiola mantra, though, is that what 
matters is how well the side play rather than, necessarily, the result.

Also stark is his contentment with life in English football after an opening 
four months. “I am enjoying it a lot,” Guardiola said. “Of course, when I win I 
am happier and when I don’t win I am not so happy. I am enjoying working with 
the guys and where I am working. I am trying to do my best. The biggest 
challenge was when I started working at Barcelona, I had to create my career. I 
go to Germany to improve myself, I come here to improve myself. I would not be 
here if in Barcelona I didn’t make [it] good. It would be another coach here. I 
was inBayern Munich <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bayernmunich> because 
I was quite good in Barcelona. I am here because I was quite good in Germany.”

With qualification secured for the Champions League knockout phase, the 
last-16 draw in Nyon on Monday is keenly awaited. Yet Guardiola believes 
current form may be irrelevant to their chances of progressing against whoever 
they will meet in the spring.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fpep-guardiola-reacts-after-manchester-citys-defeat-by-chelsea-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pep%20Guardiola%20reacts%20after%20Manchester%20City's%20defeat%20by%20Chelsea%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fpep-guardiola-reacts-after-manchester-citys-defeat-by-chelsea-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pep%20Guardiola%20reacts%20after%20Manchester%20City%27s%20defeat%20by%20Chelsea%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fpep-guardiola-reacts-after-manchester-citys-defeat-by-chelsea-video&media=>
Pep Guardiola reacts after Manchester City’s defeat by Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/03/pep-guardiola-reacts-after-manchester-citys-defeat-by-chelsea-video>
“In my experience in the Champions League, it is how you arrive, how you are, 
in February. Now Monday is going to be the draw and we will analyse the team 
and say who is the favourite to go to the next round. But in February many 
things are going to happen before. That is why I am so happy to be [already] 
there, to prepare the game. I have to focus on Leicester and Watford and 
Arsenal [in the Premier League]. What I have to think about as a coach is the 
way we play.”

Willy Caballero could be in line to start against Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> after he was presented to the 
media in Monday’s pre-match conference. Despite the game being academic, the 
goalkeeper will have no problem regarding focus if he is selected.

“I think just playing in the Champions League is a big motivation,” the 
Argentinian said. “When you hear the hymn or the song of the Champions League, 
it’s a big motivation for every player. It’s the most important competition in 
the world, for a team, for a player. This is enough but you have to respect 
this kind of game. We are going to play against a champion team. We have to be 
focused and play in the same way that we did against Borussia and Barcelona.”
 