
Pep Guardiola has denied that Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> will be in the market for 
a centre-half in January, dismissing in particular reports that he is 
interested in Southampton’s Virgil van Dijk.

“He is not going to come here – it is impossible,” the City manager said. “At 
this stage I don’t think we will be buying anyone in January but that could 
change over the next few weeks. We might need to strengthen in one position, 
maybe a full-back, but right now I have no immediate plans.”

Guardiola says he is happy with the centre-backs at his disposal and that 
nothing untoward should be read into the fact thatJohn Stones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/john-stones> has missed the past two 
games, both of which resulted in City victories.

“John will improve; if I didn’t have confidence in him he would not have 
played the number of games he has,” the City manager said. “The only way you 
can improve as a footballer is to play, play and play. At the moment John is 
working hard in training so he will be fit and prepared when I decide he’s 
going to play again.

Manchester City unlikely to spend big in transfer window, says Pep Guardiola
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/manchester-city-transfer-window-pep-guardiola>
“He has played a lot in the last few months. It is the first time in his 
career he has had to play every three days and adapt to the Champions League 
and you have to keep your focus. Of course John must improve like Nicolás 
Otamendi must improve, like Aleksandar Kolarov must improve and because Vincent 
Kompany is coming back.

“I decide to play with a back four against Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/manchester-city-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 for some reasons and I tried the same back four for theArsenal game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
. I know that people think if a player doesn’t play it is because the coach 
doesn’t trust him any more. That is not the truth.

“Our job is uncomfortable. It is unfair in some cases because many players 
deserve to play and I cannot find a solution for everyone. But everyone has to 
stay prepared because the season is so long and we have the Cup and the 
Champions League in the new year.”

Stones has apparently accepted the situation professionally, impressing his 
manager with his maturity. “He is young and still learning but he has a lot of 
personality,” Guardiola said. “He has the character to play for a big team. All 
the big clubs buy huge players. The players at Chelsea, United, Arsenal, 
Tottenham all have quality. The difference is the personality, how they react 
in the bad moments. John has what it takes. I don’t have any doubts about his 
character.”

With Raheem Sterling <https://www.theguardian.com/football/raheem-sterling> 
also being rested on occasions this season Guardiola was asked whether he 
believed English players have difficulty adapting to the style of football he 
wants to play. “Not at all,” he replied. “Definitely not, because my game is so 
simple. Raheem is back to the level at which he started the season but we 
cannot forget how young he still is. In general, his performance has been high 
and we need this guy in the team for one against one. He is not our top scorer, 
but he knows how important it is to score goals, and he can do that whether he 
is used narrow or wide.”
 