
For almost half a century Peter Maxwell Davies <http://www.maxopus.com/> was 
one of the great fixed points in the firmament of British music, one of its 
most respected and admired figures. Together with his contemporaries Alexander 
Goehr and Harrison Birtwistle, whom he had met while studying in Manchester in 
the 1950s, they gave a new direction to British musical culture in the 60s, one 
that instead of looking inwards, absorbed and learnt from musical developments 
elsewhere in Europe.

Almost to the end of his life Maxwell Davies remained astonishingly prolific – 
so much so that his output was divided between three music publishers and took 
in almost every conceivable music genre. There were full-length operas and 
ballets, chamber and children’s operas, 10 symphonies, a dozen concertos, a 
raft of occasional pieces and much chamber music. And then there were the works 
he composed in the 60s and 70s for the performing group he founded, with 
Birtwistle as co-director, as the Pierrot Players in 1967, and re-formed under 
his sole directorship as the Fires of London three years later. Among those are 
some of his most enduring achievements, music as strikingly original as 
anything being composed in Europe at that time, includingEight Songs for a Mad 
King <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m6357vL9TPg> and Vesalii Icones 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=acx_0hp4lB4>, which, together with pieces by 
Goehr and Birtwistle from the same period effectively defined a new homegrown 
genre of music theatre.

Orkney inspired softer-edged elements in his scores and brought an iridescent 
sheen into his soundworld

Maxwell Davies’s music then was explicitly expressionist and confrontational. 
In his 1966 song cycle Revelation and Fall,a soprano dressed in a scarlet nun’s 
habit screams through a loudhailer 
<http://www.ebay.co.uk/itm/ASD-2427-Gerhard-Collages-Sym-No-2-Maxwell-Davies-Revelation-And-Fall-S-C-/222037020627>
, while – when it received its premiere at the 1969 Proms – Worldes Blis, his 
huge motet for orchestra, drove many from the hall. Like his first opera, 1972’s
Taverner <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taverner_(opera)>, this was music 
composed at white-heat, and in retrospect no composer could have maintained 
such intense creativity indefinitely.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fpeter-maxwell-davies-british-composer-appreciation-andrew-clements%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F119668e0fb2c773bc2e0f476a636d6ec127d066a%2F0_35_2023_2532%2F2023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Maxwell%20Davies%3A%20strikingly%20original%20music%20composed%20at%20white%20heat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fpeter-maxwell-davies-british-composer-appreciation-andrew-clements%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Maxwell%20Davies%3A%20strikingly%20original%20music%20composed%20at%20white%20heat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fpeter-maxwell-davies-british-composer-appreciation-andrew-clements%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F119668e0fb2c773bc2e0f476a636d6ec127d066a%2F0_35_2023_2532%2F2023.jpg>
 ‘Explicitly expressionist and confrontational’ … Maxwell Davies in London, 
July 1972. Photograph: Evening Standard/Getty Images 
The first great stylistic shift in Maxwell Davies’s music came when he settled 
in Orkney in 1971; even though the inner steel and rigour of his writing 
remained intact, the history, landscape and literature of the islands, and the 
sea around it, inspired new, softer-edged elements in his scores and brought an 
iridescent sheen into his sound world.

And then, after his First Symphony in 1976, his music began to shift its 
emphasis more decisively, towards a more orchestral way of writing, which over 
subsequent decades went hand in hand with his growing career as a conductor: he 
held posts at various times with the BBC and Royal Philharmonic, and the 
Scottish Chamber Orchestra. The flood of works that followed – the later 
symphonies, the series of Strathclyde Concertos, composed for the principals of 
the SCO – were immaculately crafted and wonderfully fluent, but there’s no 
doubt some of the freshness and originality had disappeared.


What never disappeared was the almost boyish enthusiasm he brought to writing 
and making music

Yet every so often Maxwell Davies could still produce a work that was 
startlingly effective, and which in its own way carried as much impact as any 
of the earlier scores. Two of the last substantial pieces to be heard in 
London, the opera about student protestKommilitonen! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/mar/21/kommilitonen-review> and the 
10th Symphony, premiered bythe London Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/feb/03/lso-pappano-peter-maxwell-davies-tenth-symphony-review>
 two years ago, stand comparison with almost anything in his output.


What never disappeared, either, was the almost boyish enthusiasm Maxwell 
Davies brought to writing and making music, and to his involvement with those 
performing it.The St Magnus international festival 
<http://www.stmagnusfestival.com/>, which he founded on Orkney in 1977, became 
a vital part of his musical life,and much of his music for children and amateur 
performers was first heard there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/jul/08/peter-maxwell-davies-80th-birthday-concert-st-magnus-festival-music-education>
.

When he became master of the Queen’s music in 2004, he did not hesitate to 
speak out on the wider musical issues that mattered, just as he had never 
shrunk from addressing bigger political subjects in his own works, whether it 
was uranium mining in Orkney in the 70s or the second Iraq war. It’s thoroughly 
appropriate that the last large-scale piece he completed was a community and 
children’s opera,The Hogboon, which will receive its first performance at the 
Barbican in London in June 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=17633>; it’s based on an 
Orkney legend of supernatural beings who inhabit the prehistoric burial mounds 
that are found all over the islands, and who are entirely benign.

 