
Peter Maxwell Davies's Tenth Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZbAtDXeRWHw> premieres on Sunday, with Antonio 
Pappano conducting theLondon Symphony Orchestra 
<http://lso.co.uk/sir-peter-maxwell-davies-world-premiere>, who commissioned 
it. It's another fascinating addition to one of the mostimportant symphonic 
canons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/oct/22/symphony-guide-peter-maxwell-davies-first-tom-service>
 of the 20th and 21st centuries, and its performance marks yet another 
watershed for a composer in his 80th year. It's a piece that's a homage to one 
of the most important inspirations in his creative life, the architecture of
Borromini <http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/74478/Francesco-Borromini>
. Max - who's also been Master of the Queen's Music since 2004, a post he 
relinquishes this year - has already composed a major instrumental work based 
on Borromini, his7th Naxos Quartet 
<http://www.naxos.com/catalogue/item.asp?item_code=8.557399>, in which each 
movement is named after one of the 17th-century architect's churches. (Great 
Italian architecture in general has been an important compositional spur for 
Max: hisThird Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8EtygiI7-ys> is a homage 
to the structural mysteries and genius of Brunelleschi's buildings.) But the 
symphony is a completely different structure, both in terms of how it is made, 
and what Max is trying to do in the piece.

Max asked the LSO if he could have a chorus, and a baritone soloist - and 
luckily Pappano told him to write for whatever he wanted. His piece is 
simultaneously a meditation on some of the architectural and mathematical 
principles that Borromini's work is based on (including, Max says, some of the 
most controlled yet "wildest music I've written - I bring in lots of clangorous 
percussion!"), as well as a vocal and choral dramatisation of the end of 
Borromini's life, his attempted suicide, and the last testament he wrote in the 
two days between falling on his sword and his eventual death. In addition, the 
piece starts with the chorus singing a scurrilous sonnet about how Borromini is 
more fit to be a mason than an architect, and there's also a favourite poem of 
Leopardi that symbolises, Max says, Borromini's depression.

This could be a tragically hard-hitting piece - yet Max gives the very end of 
it an unexpected emotional atmosphere, having the chorus chant the names of 
Borromini's great buildings. As he told me, "It's saying: look whatBorromini did
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/feb/05/borromini-book-kerry-downes-architecture>
 despite his depression and whatever else he was going through. I think it's an 
upbeat ending: and in the first rehearsal we had, even I was rather moved by 
it."

Max had planned the structure of his new symphony before he was diagnosed with 
leukaemia, for which he underwent a harrowing course of chemotherapy. He wrote 
much of the piece in hospital. "I was just determined I was going to write it. 
I had my own room at the University College Hospital, and whenever I was well 
enough, I was up at 7 in the morning with my pencil, slaving away. I had 
already started the piece, and I just went on with it. I think it pulled me 
through. I had to make a huge effort. But I still can't believe it that I'm 
alive: I was given six weeks maximum if I didn't go into hospital, and I still 
have to pinch myself: come on, you're alive! The piece, though, went on more or 
less as I had planned it before. The only fresh idea was the very ending, 
finishing with the intoning of the names of his buildings rather than with 
Borromini's falling on his sword."

There's more, too: Max is the most disarmingly modest and humble of composers, 
but he says that "this piece has a somewhat different soundworld, which I can't 
quite get yet. It's as if it all takes place in a bigger place somehow." That 
musico-spatial illusion is a realisation of the essential genius that Max 
identifies in Borromini's buildings: the way they achieve feeling of making 
small spaces bigger than they actually are.Max's 10th <http://www.maxopus.com> 
is a tribute to his ceaseless musical adventure - and his extraordinary 
creative courage and strength.

Sunday's concert will be broadcast live on radio 3, from 730pm 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03t08n1>.
 