
My friend Peter Reynolds, a composer and the vice-chair of the Welsh Music 
Centre,Tŷ Cerdd <http://www.tycerdd.org/>, has died of a heart attack aged 58. 
A veritable encyclopedia of music, he was a wholly unassuming man.

The son of Dorothy and John Reynolds, he was born and bred in Cardiff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/cardiff>. His parents were steeped in Labour 
politics and his father served as leader of the city council. But Peter was 
destined for a life in music, a mere toddler when he worked out how to use the 
family radiogram.

Educated at St Teilo’s school and in the sixth form of the Bishop of Llandaff 
high school, he went on to take music degrees at Cardiff University, where the 
annual festival of contemporary music fed his growing interest in composition. 
At Dartington in Devon, in the mid-1980s, he studied withPeter Maxwell Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/14/sir-peter-maxwell-davies-obituary>
 and Morton Feldman, and in 1986 was given the Michael Tippett award.

In 1993, Peter went into the Guinness Book of Records as composer of the 
shortest opera,The Sands of Time 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/four-minute-opera-cracks-the-record-1497607.html>
. A sub-four-minute affair, it was only the least of his endeavours in terms of 
length. He founded the PM Ensemble in 1990; he was artistic director of the
Lower Machen festival <http://lowermachenfestival.co.uk> from 1997 until 2009, 
and his work as composer-in-residence to theDyfed Young Composers  
<http://ymmd.org.uk/en/dyfed-young-composers>project was exemplary. From 2002, 
he taught composition at the Royal Welsh College of Music and Drama, where 
students found in him the proverbial rock, whose mentoring continued long after 
their graduation.

Three years ago, an Arts Council Creative Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales> award had helped give new impetus to 
Peter’s composing and his closest colleagues felt that his finest output was 
just beginning to emerge.

He wrote criticism for various periodicals, including the Wales Arts Review, 
Opera Now, and the online Bachtrack. Concertgoers also knew him for his 
programme notes, carefully fashioned pieces that combined erudition with wit.

His tongue-in-cheek Twitter moniker was @Byttering, the name taken from the 
15th-century composer about whom little is known. By contrast, since Peter’s 
death, social media has ensured a flood of appreciation for the man and his 
achievements.

Wales has lost a fine champion and his friends the most loyal and genial of 
companions.

Peter is survived by his sister, Tricia.
 