
Their voices are almost completely missing from the Bible, yet it was women 
who were closest to Jesus in his final days.The Gospel According to the Other 
Mary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/17/gospel-according-to-other-mary-review>
, a new opera by John Adams, tells the story of that tumultuous time through 
what those women saw and experienced. In addition to the scriptures, the 
libretto draws on work by 20th-century writers, including Primo Levi and the 
journalist and activist Dorothy Day. Through their words, we are able to look 
at Mary and her sister Martha in much more depth – and also tell the story of 
today’s dispossessed and disempowered generation.

You could take the piece in any number of directions, but for me there was 
only one way. The production I am directing forEnglish National Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/english-national-opera-eno> is set today, in 
Los Angeles’s Skid Row. Mary and Martha have opened a house of hospitality for 
homeless and unemployed women, which survives on small donations and small 
miracles.

Day, whose words form much of the libretto, was one of the founders of the 
Catholic Worker Movement and its newspaper. In the early 1930s, during the 
Great Depression, she opened the first soup kitchens in the Bowery and the 
Lower East Side of New York. They were for homeless people who had lost their 
jobs and were desperate. These were educated people, but like today there were 
no jobs.The New Yorker has called her “a saint for the Occupy era” 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/day-by-day-a-saint-for-the-occupy-era> 
and she was deeply radical: the church she believed in was “the church of 
immigrants, the church of the poor”. It wasn’t enough to give someone a meal, 
she said, you had to give them a sense of what it is to feel whole. Jesus, she 
said, was not on Earth to be with the “decent poor”. He was here to be with the 
deranged, the drunken, the degraded, the difficult.
 The director Peter Sellars. Photograph: Karen Robinson 
Adams and I responded strongly to this idea. Today, on both sides of the 
Atlantic, we have abandoned the poor and openly attacked the most vulnerable in 
society. But what also appealed to us was Day’s rawness and honesty about the 
struggle of trying to actually live your convictions, and not just have them as 
nice ideas. She was arrested many times, the first occasion at the age of 20 
for picketing the White House on behalf of women’s suffrage. The last arrest 
came when she was in her 70s, protesting for the rights of farm workers. This 
felt telling: in the US, the next generation’s struggle will be over food, who 
grows it and how.

It was important for us to connect the opera to the plight of migrant workers 
in California and across the US, still the poorest and worst-treated employees 
in the country. The immigration law is used to provide a workforce of slave 
labour. The conditions they work under are obscene: the strawberries they pick 
are covered in pesticides, meaning the women have miscarriages and shorter 
lives. But if anybody complains, the immigration department is contacted and 
they’re deported.

For me, the point about sacred material is that it’s not something that 
happened 2,000 years ago. It’s contemporary. The great painters – Rembrandt, 
Rogier van der Weyden, Bruegel – depicted their own times. The events they 
portray ask us where we stand, who we are, what we’re doing right now. 
Bruegel’s religious scenes have people working in the fields, squabbling, 
eating, going about their daily business. I find the same sense of immediacy in 
the Bach passions. They’re about what we did this morning and what we’re doing 
tonight, and the values they represent are deeply attached to universal 
questions of justice, reconciliation, restoration, suffering, illness, recovery 
and resurrection. These are challenging issues, but if we’re not willing to be 
challenged, we’re missing out on what life is asking of us.

Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> can make such a challenge 
beautiful. Even if some of its truths are difficult, Adams’s music is 
ravishing, taking you deep into a place you would otherwise hesitate to go. 
Music is not about itself. It’s about everything else we think, feel and care 
about. What I get to do is put music on a stage, and thereby people’s lives and 
hopes, too. We all need these mirrors, though we don’t always appreciate what 
we see in them. In fact, the usual thing to do is blame the mirror. But it’s 
the artist’s job to reflect back to society things that don’t always get seen 
with sharpness or moral intensity.

This could not be more important today, which is a fragile time for free 
speech. Sometimes I think we know more about the fall of Rome than we do about 
what’s going on in, say, America right now. The news is just bits and pieces 
that float about everywhere. Very rarely is there a composite picture that puts 
all these bits together to provide a larger narrative – to explain that this 
demonstration or that bomb attack is part of a growing pattern, that it has a 
history and heralds a future.
 Dangerous topic … The Death of Klinghoffer at the Metropolitan Opera in New 
York. Photograph: Reuters 
Nearly 30 years ago, the passenger liner Achille Lauro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/apr/29/israel> was hijacked by 
Palestinians, who murdered and threw overboard an American Jew calledLeon 
Klinghoffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/21/the-death-of-klinghoffer-panel-art-censor>
. The story occupied the news for two weeks, then disappeared. What was the 
story of the century that preceded this? What was its aftermath in real terms? 
We need a more spacious medium than newspaper or television to address such 
questions.

John Adams took up this challenge in 1991 with his opera The Death of 
Klinghoffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/02/death-of-klinghoffer-protest-new-york-metropolitan-opera>
. Opera has always spoken to a cross-section of society. Its roots lie in Greek 
dramas, which were about the most difficult and dangerous topics, recognising 
that we can only face them if we face them as one. Opera uses music, poetry, 
dance and visual art to draw the widest range of people together, people who 
are wired in different ways. It then puts them inside rather than outside the 
experience.

Looking at something does not mean you’re endorsing it. One can abhor an 
event, yes, but one also needs to understand it. Yet the US today is coming 
close to censorship. Nobody is allowed to discuss Palestine. Nobody is allowed 
to mention Palestinians, much less depict them. Most Americans have no idea 
about thehistory of Palestinians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/flash/0,,720353,00.html>, or what their situation 
is now. WhenThe Death of Klinghoffer was staged at New York’s Metropolitan Opera
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/21/protest-death-of-klinghoffer-opera-new-york-antisemitic>
 last month, it was picketed – and exploited – by extreme special-interest 
groups who had no interest in the actual opera, or indeed any opera.
 Protesters outside the Lincoln Centre in New York, where the Death of 
Klinghoffer was being staged. Photograph: Mike Segar/Reuters 
Will The Gospel According to the Other Mary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/17/gospel-according-to-other-mary-review>
 prove as controversial? Art and artists need to put forward things that are 
challenging, to not let any one argument dominate, to give a platform to voices 
society doesn’t want to hear. As Klinghoffer’s librettist, Alice Goodman, says, 
we must try to make every character equally eloquent – so we can begin to 
listen to their voices.

Peter Sellars was talking to Imogen Tilden

• English National Opera’s world stage premiere of The Gospel According to the 
Other Mary is at theColiseum <http://www.eno.org/gospel>, London WC2, from 21 
November to 5 December. Box office: 020-7845 9300.
 