
“I feel like I’m on trial,” says Peter Maxwell Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/peter-maxwell-davies>, seated in the Royal 
Academy of Music’s penthouse flat for visiting professors. Davies, one of our 
greatest living composers, is about to celebrate his 80th birthday, is being 
feted up and down the country with a cluster of concerts at the Proms in London 
and in Glasgow on and around the big day. But here he is, feeling as if this 
epic encounter with his own music is something he’d rather not deal with.

“Seriously,” he says, with a glint in his eye, “all these celebrations are 
wonderful, but I did have to interrupt a piece I was thoroughly enjoying. I’m 
carrying it around with me in my brain – and I just want to get back to it.” By 
“back to it”, he doesn’t just mean composing. He also means his home on the 
island ofSanday in Orkney <http://www.sanday.co.uk/>, the archipelago where he 
has lived since the mid-1970s. Whatever happens, he will be back there to vote 
“Yes” in the forthcoming referendum.

“I would like to see Scotland go independent,” he says. “Here we are, ruled by 
a bunch of Bullingdon-club millionaire Tories who don’t understand anything 
about Scotland. It’s very capable of going its own way, and one would get away 
from these dreadful right-wing politicians from all three parties here in 
London.” He pauses. “Well, perhaps one might, perhaps one might not.”

This new piece is presenting Davies with the latest revelation in a lifetime 
of creative discoveries. “Just before I left to take the boat to come over to 
Kirkwall to take the boat to the mainland, to take the train to Inverness to 
come to London” – Orkney really is another world from where we sit in Baker 
Street – “I was composing this sequence of notes, and there was a series of 32 
four-part chords in straight minims [a regular, repeated rhythm]. And I 
thought: ‘I’ve never done anything like this before – what’s this all about? Go 
away and think about it, but I think you’re on to something – but I don’t know 
what, and I certainly can’t put it into words.’”

He’s lucky to be thinking at all. His is a musical odyssey that started in 
Salford in 1934, and that continued as a student when he was part of the 
influential Manchester School, alongside composer Harrison Birtwistle, their 
colleague Alexander Goehr, pianist John Ogdon, and conductor and composer Elgar 
Howarth. Last year he was given six weeks to live by doctors at University 
College Hospital in London, where he was treated for leukemia. “I’m on borrowed 
time,” he says, matter-of-factly. There was “absolutely revolting 
chemotherapy”, when he was given doses that would not normally be allowed for 
anyone over 60, because of his overall physical fitness, and a blood clot that 
nearly killed him. “I remember going under, and I couldn’t breathe, and it was 
horrible, and I thought: ‘Oh well, tough!’ I was quite prepared to go. They 
fought like crazy through the night to get rid of that.”

Music was a factor in his fight for life. One of the pieces the Scottish 
Chamber Orchestra will play on 8 September – his birthday – at theProms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms> is Ebb of Winter, written just before 
his leukemia diagnosis. “I find that piece quite disturbing. I was so pleased 
that spring was coming, and I wanted to celebrate that in the music. I didn’t 
realise when I wrote it what I was about to go through, but this piece seems to 
anticipate some of that experience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Fpeter-maxwell-davies-at-80-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F19%2F1408467151789%2F076cc160-b736-48df-943a-093cb20a83ce-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%C2%A0Maxwell%20Davies%20at%2080%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20music%20knows%20things%20that%20I%C2%A0don%E2%80%99t%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Fpeter-maxwell-davies-at-80-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%C2%A0Maxwell%20Davies%20at%2080%3A%20%E2%80%98The%20music%20knows%20things%20that%20I%C2%A0don%E2%80%99t%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2014%2Faug%2F19%2Fpeter-maxwell-davies-at-80-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F19%2F1408467151789%2F076cc160-b736-48df-943a-093cb20a83ce-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Nature doesn’t concern itself with meaning: it just is’ … Peter Maxwell 
Davies on Sanday in Orkney in 2004. Photograph: Murdo Macleod 
“I’ve often said that music knows something you don’t. Like my 6th Symphony: 
it knew that George Mackay Brown [the great Orcadian poet, a close friend of 
Davies’s] was very ill and was going to die. He died at the very moment I 
completed the piece. And I think that listening to something like Mahler’s 6th 
or 9th symphonies, you realise that the music knows what the author doesn’t. 
You can hear the jackboots of the first world war in Mahler 9, even though 
Mahler died in 1911, and you can hear all sorts of things, if you’re that way 
inclined – which I am – in the music that Schoenberg and Stravinsky were 
writing before the first world war, like the Rite of Spring.”

Throughout his treatment, Davies was at a desk in the hospital at 7am, 
composing his 10th Symphony for the London Symphony Orchestra. “And I knew that 
if I really did go in six weeks, I wouldn’t finish the bloody symphony. In the 
end it took much longer than that. The work was quite slow.” That’s hardly 
surprising, but Davies says that writing the music helped him through. Are 
there traces of his ordeal in the symphony, and in the music he’s written 
since? “I’m sure it’s there,” he says, “but I don’t think it’s a negative 
influence.”

Davies’s death would have been felt far beyond the LSO. His chaotic yet 
coherent masterpieces of the late 1960s, such as his Eight Songs for a Mad 
King, in which a violin is smashed to pieces every time the work is played – a 
moment that still draws gasps from any audience – through to his later cycles 
of concertos, symphonies, string quartets and music-theatre pieces,, as well as 
the dozens of pieces he has written for communities and amateur musicians to 
perform, make his a unique achievement in 20th and 21st century music. Yet his 
assessment of his life’s work is astonishingly, heartbreakingly modest. “I 
realise when I look at these people like Tom Adès or Jimmy MacMillan that 
they’re far cleverer and more brilliant than I could ever be, as conductors and 
in many other ways – but I kept my corner. And nobody else could write the 
music that I write.”

There are more important things than critical acclaim, he says. “My little 
piano pieceFarewell to Stromness <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gf7gjBKao-I> 
has almost become a folk tune. People just say, ‘I like that piece,’ and they 
don’t know who wrote it. It gets played an awful lot at funerals these days. 
And that’s very unusual, for a so-called serious composer, to write a piece 
that people like so much, and they don’t care who it’s by.” Anonymity in your 
own lifetime – the ultimate accolade for a contemporary classical composer.

Meanwhile, Davies’s thinking about his music seems to have acquired a new, 
mystical dimension. “My religious attitudes are very open indeed, but I do feel 
that for human beings to make a God in our own image is a terrible affront, 
because we’re so limited in our understanding.”

Of what? “Of everything: what goes on at a black hole or beyond, or what 
happens in the inside of a cell, or an atom. This is all so far beyond our 
comprehension that it can only be tapped through rigorous science, and we can 
only goggle at it because we don’t really understand how subatomic science 
works, and what meaning it has –if it has any meaning. Nature doesn’t concern 
itself with meaning: it justis. And it has been a huge joy and great privilege 
to have in some way tapped into that energy.”

So music, his music, is a shard of that bigger, mysterious creative force? “I 
think in any composer worth their salt, you feel that come through the music – 
you feel something that is absolutely transcendental.” That life-force is 
always present in Davies’s work, in everything from the grand populism ofOrkney 
Wedding, With Sunrise <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bnnkL1t7PXY>, with its 
bagpipe-festooned finale, to the intense drama of the Fourth Strathclyde 
Concerto, two of the pieces the Proms will present. And it will be there, too, 
in the music he will continue to write on Sanday, in that house next to the 
beach on the island’s north coast, in his ninth decade.

• Prom 70: Sir Peter Maxwell Davies Birthday Concert 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/september-08/15132>, Royal Albert 
Hall, London SW7 (0845 401 5040), 8 September;Max at 80: A Celebration 
<http://www.glasgowconcerthalls.com/events/max-at-80-a-celebration-scottish-chamber-orchestra/>
, various venues, Glasgow (0141 353 8000), 14 September.
 