
Petra Kvitova could return to tennis within six months following a knife attack
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/petra-kvitova-attacked-intruder-home-czech-republic-tennis>
 that could have been career-ending and which the two-times Wimbledon champion 
admitted had her fearing for her life.

Doctors optimistic Petra Kvitova will play tennis again after knife attack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/petra-kvitova-attacked-intruder-home-czech-republic-tennis>
Radek Kebrle, the surgeon who operated on the world No11, said on Wednesday 
afternoon the operation to repair tendons and nerves in her left hand – her 
main playing hand – went “very well, with no complications”. A spokesman for 
the player earlier said: “The end of her career did not even cross her mind.”

Kebrle added: “Petra will be on bed-rest for 14 days, she will begin slow 
rehabilitation at around six to eight weeks post-operation. If that 
rehabilitation process goes well, Petra should be able to grip a racket for the 
first time [but not play tennis] at three months.

“The best case scenario is Petra will be able to return to the court after six 
months. It is too soon to specify when precisely she can return to competition 
but Petra is ready to do everything she can to get back competing at the 
highest level. Petra is happy with how the operation went and is in good 
spirits.”

Kvitova’s manager, Katie Spellman, earlier tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/Spellman_Katie/status/811311727103057925>: “Petra has 
undergone surgery for three hours and 45 minutes. Considering the extent of the 
damage, the surgery went very well. Doctors repaired damage to tendons in all 
five digits of the left hand, as well as two nerves. Petra will wear a cast on 
her hand for six to eight weeks and will be unable to bear weight for three 
months.”

Separately, a spokesman for the Czech Federation Cup team told local 
television Kvitova was focused on resuming training and playing, however long 
her recovery may take. Karel Tejkal, her spokesman, added: “She kept saying: 
‘Let them put me together fast, no matter if it takes months or years.’ She is 
looking forward to training again.”

It seems inconceivable the 26-year-old could return to the Tour before 
Wimbledon, the major where she made her breakthroughin 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/jul/03/wimbledon-2011-petra-kvitova-champion>
, and whereshe won again in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/05/petra-kvitova-crushes-eugenie-bouchard-second-wimbledon-title>
. Given the severity of the injuries and the length of the operation, it seems 
certain she will face a long period of rehabilitation before beginning even 
light practice.

“The start of 2017 won’t be the same without her unique power and competitive 
spirit,” the WTA said, reflecting the shock caused by at the assault on one of 
the game’s most popular players.

The attacker gained entry to Kvitova’s building in Prostejov, Czech Republic, 
posing as a worker reading utility meters and was unaware who the occupant was 
until he was inside the front door of her flat. He forced her into her bathroom 
holding a knife to her throat and in the ensuing struggle slashed deep knife 
wounds to the four fingers and thumb on her left hand. He fled and she called 
the police before being taken to hospital.

The player remained upbeat in a posting on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/petrakvitovaofficial/> on Tuesday. “Today I was 
attacked in my apartment by an individual with a knife. In my attempt to defend 
myself, I was badly injured on my left hand. I am shaken, but fortunate to be 
alive. The injury is severe and I will need to see specialists, but if you know 
anything about me I am strong and I will fight this. Thank you all again for 
your love and support and now I would appreciate some privacy while I focus on 
my recovery.”

Kvitova was already in doubt for the Australian Open in January because of a 
foot injury that flared towards the end of one of her toughest seasons. She 
began the year ranked No6 in the world and tumbled out of the top 10 for the 
first time since 2013. She changed coaches twice and separated from her 
long-time fiance, the Czech ice hockey player Radek Meidl.
 