
On July 4 1776, the founding fathers of America gathered in Philadelphia to 
declare their independence from (no offence, English readers) the tyranny of 
English rule. You can still visit the site of this pivotal moment in American 
history:Independence Hall <http://www.nps.gov/inde/index.htm>, a colonial 
building in the Old City neighbourhood, where Benjamin Franklin impersonators 
direct chattering tour groups, and carriage-hitched horses clickety-clack down 
the cobblestoned streets. It is the second most interesting thing in this 
handsomely preserved district. The first is a restaurant calledFork 
<http://www.forkrestaurant.com/>.

Businesses like Fork jump-started the area's renaissance. Many of us who grew 
up in Philadelphia remember the Old City of the not-too-distant past, when 
derelict buildings formed a coal necklace around the city's historical gems. 
But Fork – a light-filled, amber enclave with high ceilings and an open kitchen 
– changed how Philadelphians dined when it opened in 1997. It is doing so 
again, with a new chef, Eli Kulp, who is currently cooking some of the city's 
most fascinating food.

Kulp infuses gnudi (gnocchi made from ricotta cheese and a little bit of 
flour) with lavender, turns whole Muscovy ducks into feasts worthy of a Peking 
dynasty, and bakes incredible sponge-like, squid-ink bread that looks like 
something you'd find while scuba diving in the Seychelles. His big goal this 
year is to start a snail farm, but first he'll replace Fork's adjacent grocery 
with High Street on Market, a cafe serving gutsy sandwiches by day and 
hyper-creative dinners at night.
 Vernick Food + Drink 
Formerly the chef of the trendsetting Torrisi Italian Specialties in 
Manhattan, Kulp is part of a recent wave of acclaimed chefs who've moved from 
New York to start a new life in the city that has long lived in the Big Apple's 
shadow. His fellow expats can be found captaining Philly's hottest restaurants:
Serpico <http://serpicoonsouth.com/>, former Momofuku chief Peter Serpico's 
solo smash, andVernick Food + Drink <http://vernickphilly.com/>, a two-storey 
dining room in ritzy Rittenhouse Square from Gregory Vernick, a veteran of 
Jean-Georges Vongerichten.

The new cooks on the block are discovering what homegrown chefs such as Marc 
Vetri, authority on Italian cooking and owner of five restaurants, including
Pizzeria Vetri <http://instagram.com/marcvetri/#>have known for a long time: 
Philly's easy-going pace, small-town vibe and affordability make it a great 
place to live – and eat. Immigrants, whether from New York or much further 
afield, have always been the reason for this.
 Fried cauliflower at Zahav 
Follow the hypnotic perfume of star anise and roasted beef bones down to 
Washington Avenue in South Philly, a thoroughfare that should be renamed Pho 
Boulevard. People from Vietnam settled here in the 1980s and 90s, an influx 
that gave rise to hybrid French bakeries such asBa Le (606 Washington Avenue) 
and noodle parlours like Pho 75 (1122 Washington Avenue). These are places 
where you might bump into Michael Solomonov, chef of the sterling Israeli 
restaurantZahav <http://www.zahavrestaurant.com/>). The Vietnamese community 
has made the strongest and most delicious mark on the local food scene since 
the Italians of the 1920s.

Thousands traded southern Italy for South Philly, and established businesses 
along 9th Street (now known as the Italian Market) and Passyunk Avenue (always 
known as "Pa-shunk" Avenue) in the early 1900s. Some linger on the latter: 
pungent delis such asMancuso's (1902 East Passyunk Avenue), where mozzarella 
balls bob in bins of cloudy saltwater, andMarra's <http://www.marrasone.com/>, 
whose 90-year-old pizza ovens are said to be built with bricks of Vesuvian 
stone.
 Burrata at Le Virtu 
Today, the Avenue is less spaghetti and more taccozzelle and 'nduja, thanks to 
enterprising indie restaurants likeLe Virtu <http://www.levirtu.com/>, while 
the gelato, courtesy ofCapogiro <http://www.capogirogelato.com/>, comes in 
flavours like Dark & Stormy and Saigon cinnamon.

On the north side of town, near the Delaware river, the Irish pubs and Polish 
clubs of close-knit Fishtown and Port Richmond now co-exist with craft-beer 
oases likeMemphis Taproom <http://memphistaproom.com/> and cantinas like Loco 
Pez <http://www.locopez.com/>, beloved by residents for its frequent 
dollar-taco nights.

Recover at Mercer cafe 
<http://www.mercercafephilly.com/Mercer_Cafe_Philly/Home.html>, a sunny 
luncheonette that makes Philly's butteryest cream-chipped beef, a 
stick-to-your-ribs breakfast of creamy beef gravy heaped over toast. If you 
want to blend in with the local policemen and art school dropouts who hang 
here, ask for the dish by its affectionate nickname, SOS, or shit on a shingle.

Back in South Philly, fragrant coconut soups simmering at Sky Cafe 
<http://www.skycafe215.com/> sustain a burgeoning Indonesian population, while 
newcomers from the central Mexican state of Puebla continue to move here en 
masse, bringing tacos al pastor andagua de tamarindo 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tamarindo_%28drink%29>, working, like Luis 
Jimenez, anonymously in restaurant kitchens till they can afford spaces of 
their own.Los Gallos <http://losgallosphilly.com/>, a cheerful taqueria draped 
in banners and flags, like a beauty pageant contestant, is the fruit of 
Jimenez's labour, now three years old and serving the best Mexican food in 
town. It's the American dream, or at least the Philadelphia one.

Adam Erace, Philadelphia-based food and travel writer. He blogs at 
adamerace.tumblr.com <http://adamerace.tumblr.com/>.You can follow him on 
Twitter@adamerace <https://twitter.com/adamerace>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 