
The chancellor, Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, has attempted to pave 
the way for a smooth Brexit by assuring Germany that the UK has no desire to 
disrupt the EU during its divorce from Brussels.

Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> has stressed that a 
precondition for a successful split will be an understanding that Britain wants 
the European economy and the euro to thrive.


Hammond told a German business conference in Berlin on Wednesday: “The UK 
government is clear that a strong and successful EU, and a strong and 
successful euro, are very much in the UK’s interests … [these are] key 
objective[s] for us in the forthcoming negotiations. We will not do anything 
that would undermine the EU or risk its unravelling.”

Germans want Merkel to take tough line with UK over Brexit, poll finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/germans-want-merkel-to-take-tough-line-with-uk-over-brexit-poll-finds>
But in private talks with the German finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, on 
Tuesday night, Hammond made it clear that if there were to be a choice between 
UK access to the single market and the country’s ability to control its borders,
the latter would be the preference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
.

Germany’s chancellor, Angela Merkel, who will seek a fourth term in office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/angela-merkel-expected-stand-for-re-election-germany>
 in an election later this year, has insisted that Brexit talksmust not lead to 
a weakening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/germans-want-merkel-to-take-tough-line-with-uk-over-brexit-poll-finds>
 of the EU. This week, shedefended her willingness to admit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/28/merkel-rejects-calls-to-change-germanys-refugee-policy-after-attacks>
 as many as 800,000 Syrian refugees to Germany at a cost of €20bn (£17bn), 
saying it was vital to protect the integrity of Europe.

German sources emphasised that she would put the unity of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> first in Brexit talks, even if 
it meant a short-term financial cost for Germany.

On Wednesday, Malta’s prime minister, Joseph Muscat, said the UK’s deal must 
be worse than the terms of its membership, repeating aposition he expressed in 
October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/03/eu-commission-still-refuses-uk-talks-before-article-50-triggered>
.

“We can see no situation where whatever is negotiated ends up being better 
than the current situation that the United Kingdom has,” he told a press 
conference in Valletta. Malta took on the six-month presidency of the council 
of the EU on 1 January.

Muscat rejected suggestions that Britain may be able to play on divisions 
among theother 27 EU member states 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/brexit-rising-frustration-across-eu-at-britains-unclear-exit-strategy>
 to extract concessions, saying they were unusually unified.

“I have rarely been at a discussion on any other subject where the 27 member 
states have basically the same position,” he said.

Berlin is thought to regard Hammond as one of the most sympathetic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/19/philip-hammond-attempts-to-ease-concerns-over-hard-brexit>
 Conservative politicians, but the German government said it would not 
necessarily support hiscall for a lengthy transitional period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
 until more was knownabout the UK’s fundamental negotiating objectives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/05/give-us-brexit-detail-or-risk-losing-support-tory-moderates-tell-may>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-says-wrong-to-claim-hard-brexit-is-inevitable-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20says%20it%20is%20wrong%20to%20claim%20hard%20Brexit%20inevitable%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-says-wrong-to-claim-hard-brexit-is-inevitable-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20says%20it%20is%20wrong%20to%20claim%20hard%20Brexit%20inevitable%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-says-wrong-to-claim-hard-brexit-is-inevitable-video&media=>
Theresa May says it is wrong to claim hard Brexit inevitable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/09/theresa-may-says-wrong-to-claim-hard-brexit-is-inevitable-video>
The German view is that Britain has not internally settled its negotiating 
position, but the more controls on free movement the UK seeks, the less access 
to the single market it will get.

In his remarks in Berlin, Hammond sought to disabuse any notion that the UK 
may pull back from Brexit.

“The referendum decision is irreversible,” he said. “People like me who 
believed that it was better to remain inside the EU, and to campaign for reform 
from within, have moved on. The debate is now about what kind of Brexit. I 
understand Germany will approach the challenge with the priority of protecting 
the integrity and unity of the EU. But this does not have to be a negative-sum 
game.”

Why Europe will drive a hard Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/19/brexit-eu-theresa-may-angela-merkel>
He pointed out that the UK and Germany combined had accounted for more than 
half the economic growth in the EU since 2010, and three-quarters of employment 
growth. “That is no coincidence,” he said. “It is due to the philosophies that 
guide the economic management of our two countries. We need to find a solution 
that recognises the constraints on both sides, but delivers an outcome that 
supports continued economic growth.”

Germany does not quite share Hammond’s perspective. It has noted that the UK 
deficit is still relatively high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/philip-hammond-brexit-vote-borrowing-autumn-statement>
 and some British reporting of the state of the European economy underplays the 
extent to which European growth, if not employment, has reached levels 
compatible with controlling inflation.

Berlin has also said it will not break from the unified support that the EU 
will show to the lead commission negotiators. It does not expect the German 
elections to impinge on Brexit negotiations.

The German government expects euro clearing activity to transfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/25/uk-banks-financial-firms-moving-ireland>
 to the eurozone, and some financial services totransfer from the City of London
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/100000-clearing-jobs-at-risk-from-brexit-vote-stock-exchange-chief>
 to New York. A simplified UK free trade agreement with the US is feasible, in 
Berlin’s view, but the true value of such a deal would need to be scrutinised.

 