
THE ONLY WAY IS (BIG) CUP, BABY!

Watch out Europe, here come Tottenham Hotspur! OK, Europe, maybe you can come 
out from behind the sofa and have a look. It seems there’s no need to be afraid 
because Tottenham have so far been about as comfortable as an iceskating hippo 
during their Big Cup outings this season, unlike Leicester City, who can 
guarantee qualification to the last 16 if they draw with Group G stragglers 
Club Brugge. Leicester sunk further towards a relegation battle when they lost 
at Watford at the weekend, but don’t let that fool you, they’ll probably beat 
the Belgians 6-0, Robert Huth and Wes Morgan scoring hat-tricks. The champions 
can be forgiven for giving themselves every weekend off so far this season, 
they are nursing the mother of all hangovers after all, and clearly they’ve 
decided to save themselves for Big Cup by adopting a maverick approach to 
domestic football.

Alternatively Leicester’s dramatic loss of form is down to their players 
confusing themselves by trying to work out exactly what Claudio Ranieri’s 
trademark “dilly-ding dilly-dong” catchphrase means, since when they’ve stopped 
being good at football because their brains have exploded. If that’s the case, 
their likely progress hasn’t done Tottenham any favours. Lobotomised Leicester 
are treating their opponents in Europe with all the disdain of a Brexiteer 
telling his Italian counterpart that he once took a prosecco-making course, so 
everything’s absolutely fine, bugger off. Tottenham, meanwhile, are challenging 
at the top of the Premier League and still haven’t lost a league game. But look 
at the state of them in Europe. Life’s not fair, is it?

Mauricio Pochettino’s young side need to be careful. After one win from their 
first four matches in Group E, they’re on the brink of not being allowed to 
play with the big boys any more. Defeat at Monaco,who gave them a bit of a 
lesson at Wembley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-monaco-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 in September, could see Tottenham drop into the less demanding Big Vase 
environment, where they’ll see Wayne Rooney trying to play the piano if they 
look to their right and Phil Jones gurning at himself in a mirror if they look 
to their left.

In order to avoid that fate, Tottenham need a positive result against Leonardo 
Jardim’s talented side. “We need to believe in ourselves and be ready for any 
eventuality,” Tottenham goalkeeper Hugo Lloris reckons, but Monaco are second 
in Ligue 1, are scoring goals for fun and have former Manchester United and 
Chelsea disappointment in Radamel Falcao in red-hot form up front. Then again, 
Tottenham are feeling good about themselves after their stirring comeback 
victory against West Ham on Saturday and Harry Kane has scored three goals in 
two matches since recovering from his ankle knack. The great escape could be 
on, although the Fiver’s faith in Tottenham’s chances lowers significantly 
whenever it reminds itself that Jardim won’t be chucking on Havard Nordtveit 
for Dimitri Payet with five minutes to go.


LIVE BIG CUP ON BIG WEBSITE TONIGHT!

Join Paul Doyle for Monaco 1-2 Spurs and Simon Burnton for Leicester 1-0 Club 
Brugge at 7.45pm GMT. <https://www.theguardian.com/football>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“Lots of people stay in one place throughout their career, but I’ve travelled 
around like Napoleon, and conquered every new country where I’ve set foot. So 
perhaps I should do what Napoleon didn’t and cross the Atlantic and conquer the 
States as well” –Zlatan Ibrahimovic puts Donald Trump on alert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/zlatan-ibrahimovic-i-can-conquer-america-manchester-united>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphil-jones-gurning-at-himself-in-a-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f0d9eb9fc876f09a0031bc3be6e45acd48af13b%2F0_375_5542_3326%2F5542.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phil%20Jones%20gurning%20at%20himself%20in%20a%20mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphil-jones-gurning-at-himself-in-a-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phil%20Jones%20gurning%20at%20himself%20in%20a%20mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphil-jones-gurning-at-himself-in-a-mirror%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f0d9eb9fc876f09a0031bc3be6e45acd48af13b%2F0_375_5542_3326%2F5542.jpg>
 Humility, earlier. 
QUOTE OF THE DAY II

“What’s more believable: Loch Ness Monster or Messi being human?” – a Spanish 
hack goes to depths even the Fiver would steer clear of when asking Brendan 
Rodgers a question in the press conference for Barça’s visit to the Queen’s 
Celtic.

FIVER LETTERS

“Re Baggies v Burnley: nil-nil eh? Hi foot say hello to mouth. Lol as the kids 
say” – Tony Clewes (and loads of others readers who should really be acting 
their age).

“If I wasn’t reading The Fiver on my phone I’d have thrown it down in disgust 
that James Treacy’s letter didn’t win Letter o’ the Day in Monday’s Fiver. A 
man who actually remembers Bobby Moore playing relays a story that links 
relevantly to the Wayne Rooney drinking shambles – journalistic gold surely. In 
this post-truth world I rushed to write this before I could be bothered 
following the links in the actual letter of the day but I’m sure it wasn’t any 
good” – Mark Harwood.

“I was at that game when the Tangerines stuffed Taxpayers FC after Sir Bobby’s 
alleged night on the sauce. Somebody must have noticed his pre-match deneanour 
(or maybe heard it through the dressing room walls) because Blackpool adopted 
the unusual tactic of having a nippy forward- the wonderful Tony Green, mark a 
defender, the saintly Bobby - rather than the other way round. Tony was under 
his feet when Blackpool didn’t have the ball and nowhere to be seen when they 
got it, dragging England’s captain from the Pleasure Beach to North Pier in a 
forlorn attemp to catch up with him. Magical. Football lost a great prospect 
when injury cut short Tony’s career at Newcastle” – Steve Murphy.

“Who says drinking and football don’t mix? Many years ago our end of season 
dinner proudly presented none other than Ludo Miklosko as guest speaker (yeah, 
I know). With the West Ham keeper apparently too polite to turn down the offer 
of a drink, he had a whale of a time – even accompanying a group of us to a 
local night club (the long-lost Charlie Chan’s) for ‘afters’. The date of this 
little event? 13 May, 1995. The next day Ludo almost single-handedly denied Man 
Utd the title and, ultimately, the double with a virtuoso performance between 
the sticks!” – David Chapple.

“After Herr Klinsmann’s perfectly timed call-to-arms that he is 1000% sure of 
USA! USA!! USA!!! qualification (yesterday’s bits and bobs), may I be the first 
of 1,057 bored lurkers to suggest there is now only one way to make America 
great again – Big Sam for Uncle Sam” – Rion Barker.

“Could I be the first of 1,057 panic-stricken, perennial 
writer’s-block-suffering Letters section pedants to notice that the supply 
levels of Football Manager 2017 have suddenly moved from ‘plenty’ to ‘a few 
more’. Considering I’m now hunched over a laptop, Purple Tin in hand forlornly 
hoping for inspiration to strike with very little journalistic nous to work 
with, this makes me just like the Fiver. Now we’re best friends, could I have 
my copy now?” – Chris McHugh.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
letter o’the day isDavid Chapple, who receives a copy of Football Manager 2017 
<http://www.footballmanager.com/games/football-manager-2017> from those good 
people at Football Manager Towers, and it’s out now! We’ve still got a few 
copies left, so if you want one, keep the letters coming.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.




RECOMMENDED LOOKING!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphil-jones-gurning-at-himself-in-a-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f51f4d14c58946e9a30d80b0d94b3aa02e7e962%2F0_54_2070_1242%2F2070.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phil%20Jones%20gurning%20at%20himself%20in%20a%20mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphil-jones-gurning-at-himself-in-a-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phil%20Jones%20gurning%20at%20himself%20in%20a%20mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphil-jones-gurning-at-himself-in-a-mirror%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f51f4d14c58946e9a30d80b0d94b3aa02e7e962%2F0_54_2070_1242%2F2070.jpg>
 It’s Squires! Illustration: David Squires 
David Squires on … Caretaker Gareth’s England job interview. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/nov/22/david-squires-on-gareth-southgates-england-job-interview>

BITS AND BOBS


Serge Aurier has been denied entry to Britain for PSG’s Big Cup clash with 
Arsenal tomorrow due to an assault charge hanging over him in France. “Paris 
Saint-Germain is stunned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/psg-stunned-as-serge-aurier-barred-from-entering-britain-for-arsenal-clash>
 by this incomprehensible situation that attacks the very integrity of the [Big 
Cup],” blared a PSG suit.

Stadium sleepover part one: Manchester United have opened an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/manchester-united-investigation-fans-sleepover-old-trafford>
 after two supporters stayed the night at Old Trafford last Friday having 
broken off from a stadium tour, before 75,000 others snoozed through the first 
half of their draw with Arsenal on Saturday lunchtime.

Stadium sleepover part two: Everton’s Under-23s have been signed up by David 
Unsworth to spend the night at Goodison Park to raise funds for a homeless 
charity. “Everyone deserves a chance in life and at times we don’t realise just 
how lucky we are so it’ll be great for us to get involved and give back,”
cheered captain Jonjoe Kenny. <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/everton-under-23s-to-sleep-rough-at-goodison-park-for-homeless-charity>

Bruce Arena is tipped to take charge of USA! USA!! USA!!! for a second time 
after Jürgen Klinsmann was thrown through the door marked Do One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/jurgen-klinsmann-fired-coach-us-national-team>
.

$tevie Mbe has turned down a chance to work in Milton Keynes. “I don’t think 
he is fully ready yet,” trilled Jamie Carragher.“Maybe he wants to see if he 
can get more experience.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steven-gerrard-turns-down-mk-dons-liverpool-coaching-role>

Arsène Wenger insists that he didn’t put Alexis Sánchez’s hamstring at risk of 
twanging into a thousand different bits by playing him at Manchester United. “I 
have never forced anyone to play in my life,” sniffed Wenger. “I’ve never 
demanded anyone should be injected to play.”

And Storm Angus has tried to revive the STOP FOOTBALL campaign by dumping so 
much water on Huish Park that Yeovil v Crawley has been called off. “Somerset 
has bore the brunt of Storm Angus over the last few days, resulting in standing 
water on the centre circle and at the far end of the pitch towards the Radio 
Cabs Away End,” sniffed a soggy Yeovil suit.

RECOMMENDED VIEWING

A Jon Dahl Tomasson <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QSY8hbmsNFM> tribute from 
the Serbian fourth tier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/nov/22/fk-lokomotiv-djuricic-serbian-open-goal-video>
.

STILL WANT MORE?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphil-jones-gurning-at-himself-in-a-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92a34b08ffaa88fcab36d691cba38e76b75ee992%2F0_78_906_544%2F906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Phil%20Jones%20gurning%20at%20himself%20in%20a%20mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphil-jones-gurning-at-himself-in-a-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Phil%20Jones%20gurning%20at%20himself%20in%20a%20mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fphil-jones-gurning-at-himself-in-a-mirror%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92a34b08ffaa88fcab36d691cba38e76b75ee992%2F0_78_906_544%2F906.jpg>
 Ali Dia doing his thing. 
“What’s this geezer doing? He’s hopeless!” Football’s biggest phoney isn’t The 
Fiver, no, it’s Ali Dia.And here’s his story 20 years on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/ali-dia-story-20-years-on-southampton-souness>
.

Radamel Falcao has remembered how to play football again – and Spurs must stop 
him to keep their Big Cup hopes alive,warns Paul Doyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/monaco-radamel-falcao-tottenham-champions-league>
.

Tony Cowards reckons listening to football on the radio is better than 
watching it on TV.Unless Robbie Savage is involved, obviously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/when-saturday-comes-blog/2016/nov/22/radio-football-tv-political-comedy-tony-cowards>
.

“Antonio Conte is obsessed with the fitness and physicality of his players, 
brooding over sprockets and hinges like an F1 pit boss, shifting his team on 
reports of twinges and twangs.”Barney Ronay on how Chelsea’s manager has 
stamped his personality all over his team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/chelsea->.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


CONGRATULATIONS JAUNTY!
 