
I first met David when I was in my mid-thirties and he was in his early 20s, 
just a kid out of art school turning from being a painter into being a 
composer. We lived close to each other in New York. There were periods when we 
saw each other a lot and other periods when we didn’t – I never knew exactly 
where he was or where he was going to be and sometimes we didn’t see each other 
for years, but we were always in touch and talked about how things were going . 
He was an extremely gifted and interesting person and musician. We had both a 
friendship and a working relationship. We did several concerts and projects 
together, and of course I wrote two symphonies based on his work, No 1 (the Low 
symphony) in 1992 and No 4 (Heroes) in 1996.

David liked the idea that I was doing the symphonies. And he was very pleased 
with them, as was Brian Eno. They even had their pictures taken to feature 
alongside mine on the first edition of theLow symphony album cover. 
<https://images-na.ssl-images-amazon.com/images/I/71tHEaTSIdL._SX355_.jpg>

My favourite Bowie track? Like everybody else, I like the hits!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fphilip-glass-on-david-bowie-he-was-a-master-unto-himself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ce6a30b4c224bdc6fa354d6e8470685ec42d756%2F0_259_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philip%20Glass%20on%20David%20Bowie%3A%20'He%20was%20a%20master%20unto%20himself'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fphilip-glass-on-david-bowie-he-was-a-master-unto-himself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philip%20Glass%20on%20David%20Bowie%3A%20%27He%20was%20a%20master%20unto%20himself%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fphilip-glass-on-david-bowie-he-was-a-master-unto-himself%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ce6a30b4c224bdc6fa354d6e8470685ec42d756%2F0_259_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Philip Glass … ‘it will be an event’. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the 
Guardian 
Of the two works, David preferred No 4 (Heroes) because he thought it was more 
original. But I had to disagree with him: I thought No 1 (Low) was! Soon after 
its composition he began using the Heroes symphony for his walk-in music for 
some of his concerts. And, even more surprising, is that there’s a version 
around in which he superimposed his voice singing Heroes on to the symphonic 
recording. Somewhere in his archive there’s that recording – ofDavid Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> singing his own version of 
Heroes over my symphony. It would be amazing to find it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fphilip-glass-on-david-bowie-he-was-a-master-unto-himself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F072f92fc4d09a6e0cae5063a69a363c9411759ef%2F0_2_1296_1297%2F1296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philip%20Glass%20on%20David%20Bowie%3A%20'He%20was%20a%20master%20unto%20himself'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fphilip-glass-on-david-bowie-he-was-a-master-unto-himself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philip%20Glass%20on%20David%20Bowie%3A%20%27He%20was%20a%20master%20unto%20himself%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fphilip-glass-on-david-bowie-he-was-a-master-unto-himself%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F072f92fc4d09a6e0cae5063a69a363c9411759ef%2F0_2_1296_1297%2F1296.jpg>
 David Bowie - Heroes, 1977 Photograph: Publicity image 
I don’t think I could name my favourite Bowie album, or track. Changes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pl3vxEudif8>? I don’t know. Like everybody 
else, I like the hits!

He and Brian had an amazing creative partnership. I actually never knew who 
did what. Both were so gifted in their ability to write lyrical music. They 
told me though that they never worked together at the same time. They worked in 
the same studio, but one of them had the day hours, the other the evening 
hours. I don’t even know how well they knew each other – I never actually saw 
them together! But there was always a lot of mystery around David as to what 
was going on. You never knew what he was up to. No one told him what to do, and 
he did what he wanted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fphilip-glass-on-david-bowie-he-was-a-master-unto-himself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd68e9ae7f6f6e73bbec3ce113a8e901316f74fdc%2F0_66_2048_1313%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philip%20Glass%20on%20David%20Bowie%3A%20'He%20was%20a%20master%20unto%20himself'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fphilip-glass-on-david-bowie-he-was-a-master-unto-himself%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philip%20Glass%20on%20David%20Bowie%3A%20%27He%20was%20a%20master%20unto%20himself%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fphilip-glass-on-david-bowie-he-was-a-master-unto-himself%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd68e9ae7f6f6e73bbec3ce113a8e901316f74fdc%2F0_66_2048_1313%2F2048.jpg>
 David Bowie headlining the 2000 Glastonbury festival. Photograph: Dan Chung 
for the Guardian 
Within days of his death there were performances of my two symphonies among 
many other tributes. In fact I was kind of surprised there are so few full 
orchestrated versions of David’s compositions – given what an admired and 
talented composer he was. But I seem to have been the only person who’s ever 
written symphonies based on his work.

The two symphonies were of course originally intended to be part of a trilogy, 
just as Bowie and Eno’s Berlin albums are 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berlin_Trilogy>. We talked, years ago, about 
doing the third symphony based onLodger 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W6U791t-Qkc>, and the idea has not totally 
disappeared.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHepf31JoBNo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHepf31JoBNo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHepf31JoBNo&media=>
Listen to Philip Glass’s Heroes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hepf31JoBNo> 
Glastonbury tributes to Bowie, Prince and Lemmy revealed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/glastonbury-tributes-to-bowie-prince-and-lemmy-revealed>
The Glastonbury performance of Heroes on Saturday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/16/glastonbury-tributes-to-bowie-prince-and-lemmy-revealed>
 was [conductor] Charles Hazlewood’s idea. I’m just so sorry I can’t be there 
myself. It’s one of those crazy scheduling things – I wish I could be in two 
places at one time. Although I confess I’m not really much of a festival-goer 
myself. I tend to end up seeing most performances from the backstage point of 
view – sometimes I never get to see the front of theatres or halls. But, rain 
or shine, it will be an event. A huge one. It’s such an honour that this music 
is the first classical work to headline Glastonbury. Musical borders are 
melting away today. I’ve worked with all kinds of people, from Bowie, to Ravi 
Shankar, to Paul Simon, to griots from west Africa, and everything I’ve done 
has always expanded my own personal musical language and has always been 
enjoyable and interesting. You don’t need to have been to a conservatoire to be 
a composer today. You don’t even necessarily need to be able to read or write 
music. Things feel very open. I like that.


As to what David would have made of the Glastonbury tribute, I really have no 
idea! He might have showed up and not even told you he was coming, or he might 
have enjoyed it from afar but not come. You never knew with David. He was a 
master unto himself.


Philip Glass was talking to Imogen Tilden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/imogentilden>
 