
Consumers want manufacturers to release fewer mobile phone models and do more 
to help them recycle, according to a newstudy 
<http://www.greenpeace.org/international/Global/international/briefings/toxics/2016/Fact%20Sheet%20-%20Survey%20Summary.pdf>
 by Greenpeace.

A survey of approximately 6,000 people across the US, Mexico, Russia, Germany, 
China and South Korea has found they have an average of at least three phones 
sitting at home (and more than five in Russia and Mexico). But more than half 
think manufacturers release too many models, and almost half feel phone makers 
should be “most responsible” for making recycling accessible.

Turning old smartphones into anti-burglary devices and baby monitors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/07/old-smartphones-security-cameras-baby-monitors-e-waste>
Greenpeace’s study, released today, marks the start of a campaign 
<http://detox.greenpeace.org/en/trueinnovation/> to challenge the IT industry 
to reduce energy and toxic chemical use.

According to the research, almost three in 10 people got a new phone because 
their previous one was broken or lost. Slightly more bought new phones wanting 
“a more up-to-date device”, but more than half would be okay with changing 
phones less often.

Relatively few have sought manufacturer repairs – from 9% in Germany to 36% in 
China – and fewer than 4% had tried to repair phones themselves. About 
two-thirds of people in China and South Korea had got their phones repaired, 
but only around a quarter did in the US and Germany.

Chih An Lee, global detox campaigner from Greenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace>, says: “The recycling rate 
of mobile phones is particularly low compared to other electronic goods, and 
people don’t know if they can contact recycling companies, the government or 
the brand. Most don’t know how to wipe data, but that’s the first thing 
certified recycling should provide.

“Recycling isn’t the solution to the problem, but it is an essential step. In 
the future, companies need to reshape their business model to move towards a 
circular economy. They should make profit from good recycling, recovering 
materials and producing long-lasting batteries. Consumers need to make their 
demands heard.”

She added that in Asian countries people seemed more likely to get phones 
repaired – potentially due to a less throwaway culture and a larger number of 
independent repair shops – although more than 80% of those surveyed wanted 
smartphones to be designed to last and easy to fix.

A 2015 report 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032115005808> on 
recycling e-waste noted that people tend to maintain old phones in their desk 
drawers but recycling lithium ion batteries could be a lucrative revenue stream 
for phone companies. It estimated cell phones would be worth €25 (£21) per kilo 
if recycled, with smart phones not far behind at €19 (£16) per kilo.

Innovation or e-waste? Apple's rumoured plan to ditch headphone jack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/22/innovation-e-waste-apple-iphone-7-ditch-headphone-jack>
Some organisations are already working on recovering phone materials. IBM has 
invented <https://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/50060.wss> a way to 
make old smartphones into plastics for water purification and medical devices. 
Meanwhile professor Boucar Diouf from Kyung Hee University in South Korea
proposed recycling unspent lithium ion batteries 
<http://scitation.aip.org/content/aip/journal/jrse/8/2/10.1063/1.4944967> from 
smartphones into solar-powered LED lamps for rural communities – storing energy 
to light them through the night.

Diouf says: “1.2 billion people in the world live without electricity and 2bn 
smartphones are currently in use. If half of those phone batteries were 
recycled, we estimate more than 200m households without electricity could 
access a recycled mobile battery-based lighting system ... We [have not had 
much] connection with manufacturers so far but we are planning to work with 
Samsung.”

Apple, producer of the iPhone, will not release figures for the number of 
phones it has recycled <https://www.apple.com/uk/recycling/> but does offer 
vouchers to encourage certain models to be handed in, and its UK retail stores 
will also take phones from other manufacturers.

From this year, EU laws 
<http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/weee/history_en.htm> on recycling 
require member states to collect 45% of the weight of electronic equipment 
sold. Targets in the EU will rise to 85% of e-waste weight (including phones) 
by 2019.
 