
Simon Rattle’s inclusion of Boulez’s Rituel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-k7EXNZqIUg> at his first concert as City of 
Birmingham Symphony Orchestra music director in September 1980 was the first 
performance of any of his works by a UK orchestra outside London. And Pierre 
Boulez (Obituary, 7 January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/06/pierre-boulez>) was already a 
well-established 55-year-old at that stage. Boulez came to conduct the CBSO for 
a couple of weeks of concerts in Birmingham in 1993. One of the programmes was 
performed on two successive evenings. After the enthusiastic audience response 
to the performance of the latest version of hisNotations 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mZJuqLQ9V6I> on the first night, I suggested 
to him that he should give an encore of the last movement at the second concert 
– he was surprised, but agreed. The audience were ecstatic. Was this the first 
Boulez  encore?
Edward Smith
CBSO chief executive 1978-99, London

• So farewell, then, Pierre Boulez. Early on, Boulez was a sort of bovver-boy, 
slaughtering mediocre French musical life, its slovenly performance standards 
and lazy indifference to the new. Accepted later in the UK, USA and elsewhere, 
he relaxed, became quite charming and witty. Once, rehearsing the BBC Symphony 
Orchestra, the East End-born percussion virtuoso,Gary Kettel 
<http://www.allmusic.com/artist/gary-kettel-mn0000752905>, called out: “Er, Mr 
Boulez, bar 178 has five beats, and bar 179 has four: but you conducted them 
both in four.” Boulez responded: “Oh really, let me check.” And after a few 
minutes: “Sorry Gary, you’re quite right.” Kettel: “That’s all right, Pierre. 
But don’t let it happen again, or you’ll be in real trouble.” And Boulez joined 
in the laughter. He will certainly be missed.
Meirion Bowen
London

• Boulez may have advocated burning down the world’s opera houses, but the 
Paris Opera Ballet devoted 17 performances throughout December to a programme 
in his honour, in the Palais Garnier opera house. This included a ballet 
choreographed on his Anthèmes 2 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TMYDgwNALY8>, 
plus a mesmerising performance of Pina Bausch’s choreography to Stravinsky’s 
Rite of Spring, which Boulez had so memorably conducted on his return to Paris 
in 1963.
Sheila Cross
Northallerton, North Yorkshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 