
“Schoenberg is dead”; “Blow up the opera houses 
<http://opera.archive.netcopy.co.uk/article/june-1968/10/opera-houses-blow-them-up->
”; “Authenticity is a nightmare”; Henze? “rubbish”. Verdi? “dum de dum, nothing 
more”. Shostakovich? “the second or even third pressing of Mahler”: all the 
typically outspoken views of the great musical iconoclast of the late 20th 
century, composer, conductor, writer, theorist and thinkerPierre Boulez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pierre-boulez>, who died last week after a 
long illness at the age of 90.

This strident figure, who emerged from the postwar years as a turbulently 
individual pupil ofMessiaen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/07/olivier-messiaen-steven-osborne-beyond-time-and-space>
, was ready to rubbish most of history in the search for the one new path of 
the music of the future. He cast a huge shadow over the decades that followed, 
and as both creator and interpreter was surely the single most influential 
person in the musical life of our time. ForgetKarajan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/dec/04/herbert-von-karajan-film-john-bridcut-controversy-continues>
; this was the man who moved our culture decisively forward and changed our 
taste for ever.

Yet that rebarbative Pierre Boulez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pierre-boulez> was, oddly, not quite the 
same Boulez who those of us who worked with him across the years recognised. 
For us he was an effortlessly polite, gentle, very funny and totally absorbing 
maker of music: a supreme professional who led orchestras with a minimum of 
fuss and a maximum of effectiveness. His requests were always reasonable and 
perfectly measured; his relationships with his players warm and based on total 
mutual respect. He never craved adulation, but after a concert he always 
enjoyed a good meal, preferably accompanied by a piece of new gossip and 
anecdotes of musical disasters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpierre-boulez-appreciation-nicholas-kenyon-agent-provocateur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F048d5526c079a14d9e789993bb2433c66cda91d8%2F0_129_3286_1972%2F3286.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pierre%20Boulez%20appreciation%3A%20he%20transformed%20our%20musical%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpierre-boulez-appreciation-nicholas-kenyon-agent-provocateur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pierre%20Boulez%20appreciation%3A%20he%20transformed%20our%20musical%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpierre-boulez-appreciation-nicholas-kenyon-agent-provocateur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F048d5526c079a14d9e789993bb2433c66cda91d8%2F0_129_3286_1972%2F3286.jpg>
 ‘His relationships with his players was warm and based on total mutual 
respect’: Boulez with members of the Ensemble Intercontemporain in New York in 
1986. Photograph: Bernard Bisson/Sygma/ Corbis 
For more than 40 years, from 1965 to 2008, he appeared at the BBC Proms. Proms 
controller (and formerObserver music critic) William Glock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2000/jun/29/bbc.guardianobituaries> 
encouraged him to come to this country in an extraordinary act of faith, since 
Boulez was then a composer of the avant garde who conducted his own music 
(since few then understood it) but not much else. He had been the musical 
director of Jean-Louis Barrault’s theatre company in Paris, and the BBC Third 
Programme had very grudgingly broadcast a chamber music concert in the 1950s. 
But, bizarrely, his first date with the BBC Symphony Orchestra, in 1964, was in 
Worthing, where they had to accompany a young Vladimir Ashkenazy in a Chopin 
piano concerto. “I felt like a waiter who keeps dropping the plates,” Boulez 
said.

After a concert he always enjoyed a good meal, preferably accompanied by 
anecdotes of musical disasters

To the Proms he then brought his own core repertory – Webern, Berg, 
Stravinsky, Debussy – and the clarity and transparency of his performances made 
an immediate impact. Boulez triumphed as a programmer and conductor of genius 
because he made 20th-century music, so baffling to many, make sense for 
audiences. In one 1967 Prom he conducted fragments from Berg’sWozzeck, 
Stockhausen’sGruppen for three orchestras and Stravinsky’s The Rite of Spring. 
The hall was overflowing: how pleased Boulez would have been, one suspects, in 
spite of the many rivalries with his contemporary, to hear that Stockhausen was 
at last Radio 3’scomposer of the week 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06tkgvs#play> in the network’s current New 
Year New Music season.

The Boulez revolution in this country rolled forward: the events of 1968 in 
Paris halted his ambitious plans to reform musical and operatic life there, and 
Boulez was free to accept a rapid offer from Glock for him to become chief 
conductor of the BBC Symphony Orchestra. TheObserver’s then music critic, Peter 
Heyworth 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1991/10/04/arts/peter-heyworth-music-critic-70-a-biographer-of-otto-klemperer.html>
, was Boulez’s closest supporter and advocate in the press. Boulez said to him: 
“I want to create conditions in which the music of our own time is once again 
an integral part of concert life… There are plenty of conductors as good as me 
and some who are much better in parts of repertory. But it’s the ideas I want 
to put into practice that count.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpierre-boulez-appreciation-nicholas-kenyon-agent-provocateur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f47f79b5936a5d8dea9c670fedd2e276f28ed17%2F0_0_3210_1928%2F3210.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pierre%20Boulez%20appreciation%3A%20he%20transformed%20our%20musical%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpierre-boulez-appreciation-nicholas-kenyon-agent-provocateur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pierre%20Boulez%20appreciation%3A%20he%20transformed%20our%20musical%20experience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpierre-boulez-appreciation-nicholas-kenyon-agent-provocateur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f47f79b5936a5d8dea9c670fedd2e276f28ed17%2F0_0_3210_1928%2F3210.jpg>
 Boulez conducting the SWR Symphony Orchestra in Germany in 2008: 
‘undemonstrative to a fault’. Photograph: Rolf Haid/AFP/Getty Images 
His views became much less outspoken, but he would never conduct Shostakovich 
(let alone Sibelius)

In that thrilling period in the 1970s, Boulez’s ideas were fertile rain on the 
parched ground of London concert life: themed seasons at the Royal Festival 
Hall, built around forms and composers: Haydn and Stravinsky in his opening 
season. He used varying venues: the famous, informal Roundhouse concerts in 
Camden where Boulez gave premieres and led rambling audience conversations 
about the new pieces; and at St John’s Smith Square, where Glock’s beloved 
Haydn sounded so well. For those of us new to London at the time, these events 
were a revelation, and perhaps against the odds they drew large crowds.

What gave Boulez’s interpretations their wholly distinctive sound? Accuracy, 
fluidity, rhythmic sharpness and an acute sensitivity to different orchestral 
sonorities – all of which put him strangely alongside the sound of the 
historical performance movement whose principles he so despised. He did not use 
a baton, and his gestures were undemonstrative to a fault. He liked to say “too 
much outer energy uses up inner energy”, and the concentration of his 
conducting was amazing, since he could hear and observe every note in the 
orchestra. His were surely the finest ears in the musical world.

Pierre Boulez, classical music's modern maverick: in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2016/jan/06/pierre-boulez-classical-musics-maverick-in-pictures>
Yes, he mellowed. He never found the single path of new music, and accepted 
diversity. When I got to know him better his views were much less outspoken but 
still firm. He would never conduct Shostakovich (let alone Sibelius), though 
his sympathies expanded to includeSzymanowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/15/karol-szymanowsky-piotr-anderszewski>
 and then Janácek. An Indian summer of superb concerts with the LSO at the 
Barbican and around the world raised orchestral performance to new heights. A 
large collection of his early Columbia recordings has some stunning if low-fi 
performances showing his range from Handel (!) and Beethoven onwards; later 
recordings with the world’s great orchestras for Deutsche Grammophon gave us a
superb hi-fi legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/26/pierre-boulez-60-years-on-record-cd-review>
.

And what of his own path-breaking music? That is another paradox: that this 
supposedly severe serialist gave us some of the most gorgeously voluptuous, 
colouristically French sounds of our time: dazzlingly virtuosic inSur incises 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qj2PU37rlW4>, innovatively electronic in Répons
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NK3YoFSQp08>, sensually languorous in Le 
Visage nuptial <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=981fDLeqkQ8>, and massively 
complex yet inviting inPli selon pli 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mn8iI7Qdo0U>. Through his own radical music 
and his profound understanding of the music of others, he transformed our 
experience; we can only be deeply grateful for his influence, as our musical 
life looks for the next revolution.

• Nicholas Kenyon <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nicholas-kenyon>, music 
critic of the Observer from 1986-1992, was director of the BBC Proms 1996-2007 
and is now managing director of theBarbican Centre <http://www.barbican.org.uk/>
 in London
 