
When Uber <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> chose to test its 
robot-driven taxis in Pittsburgh, some may have wondered why the tech company 
had chosen America’s former capital of steel for its road test into the future. 
But for those in the know, Pennsylvania’s second city is well on its way to 
establishing itself as the Silicon Valley of the east – and even its roads are 
helping.


Unlike many American cities, Pittsburgh road system is literally off the grid, 
its origins dating back to twisty, pre-revolution forest trails. Then there are 
the city’s 446 bridges to navigate. More importantly Pittsburgh boasts the 
robotics department at Carnegie-Mellon University, recognized as the leading 
academic institution in the field.


Uber’s first self-driving car spotted in Pittsburgh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/22/uber-self-driving-car-pittsburgh>
 It was here last month that Pittsburgh opened its doors to show the world why 
it is so well positioned to be a new tech hub. The city is now in a position to 
capitalize on the infrastructure of the past in ways that could not have been 
anticipated at the depths of its post-industrial depression two decades ago, 
when the city’s population was half its industry peak and the unemployment rate 
was worse than in Detroit.

Last week, the city hosted Thrival, a three-day showcase of panel discussions 
and exhibitions designed to show off the city’s post-industrial charms. From 
robotics to biotech, performing arts to healthcare, the city’s premier boosters 
– many locals or returning natives – sought to describe the city’s upswing.

The twin keys to the city’s current success, says the festival’s executive 
producer, Dan Law, are education and medicine – eds and meds – that helped 
bridge the gap between old industrial Pittsburgh and a new Pittsburgh that’s 
about innovation and technology. Now, instead of leaving, students from 
Pittsburgh’s tech university departments have more options to stay.

“Eds and meds are the bedrock of the economic transition,” says Law. “UPMC – 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center – alone is a $13bn health system and 
there are dozens of ancillary industries that began to innovate. So young 
people started to get jobs here and economic growing around the core economic 
pillars.”

Correspondingly, the city’s arts and culture are thriving. “The City of 
Bridges is in the throes of a full-on nose-to-tail, barrel-aged, small-plates 
culinary renaissance,” according toBon Appetit  
<http://www.bonappetit.com/restaurants-travel/navigator/article/pittsburgh-navigator>
magazine. It rated one Spanish restaurant, Morcilla, the fourth best restaurant 
in the US. There’s a trendy Ace Hotel that was originally a YMCA and, of 
course, the Warhol Museum, dedicated to its most famous artist, and the 
Carnegie Museums of Art.

How community-led renovation is helping a rundown Pittsburgh neighbourhood 
fight crime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/08/rundown-pittsburgh-neighbourhood-crime-social-housing>
“At the centre of it all, Pittsburgh is becoming a diversified innovation 
economy,” say Luke Skurman, founder ofNiche.com <https://niche.com/> and one of 
the founders of Thrill Mill, a not-for-profit organization providing mentorship 
and collaborative workspace to early-stage startups. “When I graduated Carnegie 
Mellon and stayed, people thought I was bananas. Now it’s becoming fashionable 
to do so.”

Among the attendees at Thrival were Bennet Omalu, the Nigerian American 
neuropathologist who was the first to discover and publish findings of chronic 
traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) in football players, and Jennifer Krusius, 
general manager at Uber.


The transportation firm has about 500 employees in the city’s tech Strip 
district and plans to start testing as many as 100 Volvo sport utility vehicles 
on the city’s streets. Many of Uber’s employees were hired directly from 
Carnegie-Mellon’s computer labs and the state’s approach to the technology – 
called greenlight governing – effectively encouraged investment in the field. 
Uber estimates its investment will reach $1bn over the next few years.

“It’s not just about self-driving cars,” says Law. “It’s about the future of 
urban mobility. How do you create smarter and more efficient cities.” 
Pittsburgh is ideal, he says, “because if you are going to design a car that 
needs to navigate some of the most complex road networks and systems, you’re 
not going to get a bigger challenge than here. It’s old, it was planned poorly, 
it’s built around hills and valleys, and the roads are windy and steep. If it 
works in Pittsburgh, it can work anywhere.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fpittsburgh-thriving-tech-sector-new-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F164ec31645f248515d3d0e8f1e6809989d9abad6%2F0_137_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pittsburgh's%20thriving%20tech%20sector%20brings%20new%20life%20to%20post-industrial%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fpittsburgh-thriving-tech-sector-new-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pittsburgh%27s%20thriving%20tech%20sector%20brings%20new%20life%20to%20post-industrial%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fpittsburgh-thriving-tech-sector-new-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F164ec31645f248515d3d0e8f1e6809989d9abad6%2F0_137_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 A self-driving Uber car drives navigates one of Pittsburgh’s many bridges. 
Photograph: Gene J Puskar/AP 
The firm is not alone: General Motors, Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> – which has centered its 
engineering facilities here and employs 600 – and Intel have also come to 
Pittsburgh. While Apple, which employs 500 here, has not stated the reason for 
its interest, it is known to have already developed a prototype vehicle. But 
the city’s easy-going regulatory approach and an intelligent workforce is not 
the only reason Pittsburgh is becoming ground zero for auto-automation, widely 
regarded as one of the largest untapped economies.

 Google’s Mike Capsambelis explains the company’s explicit interest in 
Pittsburgh is machine learning, a sub-field of computer science that evolved 
from the study of pattern recognition and computational learning theory in 
artificial intelligence. In other words, learning without needing to be 
explicitly programmed.

“It’s uniquely a collaborative place. We tend to work together even when 
there’s actual competition,” says Capsambelis.

Pittsburgh water: expensive, rust-colored, corrosive, and high in lead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/12/pittsburgh-water-expensive-rust-colored-corrosive>
Rasu Shrestha, chief innovation officer at UPMC, says healthcare is a natural 
fit for machine learning. Healthcare, he says, is so muchabout billing and 
book-keeping. “We want to free the data, to empower patients and consumers to 
take charge of their own data with the right sets of systems,” says Shrestha.

“So the question is, how do we do a better job of precision medicine, not just 
do a better job of billing and documentation? The entrepreneurial knack is not 
just to create incremental innovation but to change the entire dynamic of 
healthcare innovation.”

Tech companies, including Google, eye healthcare’s copious resources of data – 
UPMC’s nine petabytes of data is doubling every 18 months – with some envy. And 
vice versa. Says Shrestha: “Let’s create solutions that leverage machine 
learning and big-data-type technologies to create products we can then 
commercialize.”

 There may also be a natural symbiosis between healthcare advances and tech’s 
interest in transport. An ageing population suggests more will need assistance 
in terms of mobility. “There’s a ton of connections and overlap,” says 
Capsambelis. “A lot of people will still need cars, but there won’t be as many 
drivers.”

The spirit of entrepreneurship suffuses the robotics lab at Carnegie-Mellon. 
Not only has tech become a major employer of the university’s graduates, but 
much of the computational power that was once available only to universities or 
government laboratories is now available to research.

“Having machine learning has really changed the way we do research because the 
things we used to do at the university, companies can do much better because of 
their access to huge computing power and big data,” says professor of computer 
science Lenore Blum.

But the city and its promoters at Thrival and Thrill Mill are keen to show off 
the small entrepreneurs along with the grand-scale technology behemoths that 
are beginning to occupy the same psychic space in the culture that the robber 
barons Carnegie and Frick did here in the late 19th century.

An app for artists to find spaces, for instance, or a machine-learning ECG 
device for early stroke detection. Another involves cooking recipes for the 
sight-impaired. They may not or ever be Google or Uber but they are nonetheless 
imbibing Pittsburgh’s spirit of innovation. “It looks more like a continuum to 
us,” says Thrill Mill’s Stephan Mueller, “because we all have this fatal love 
for Pittsburgh and want to do something for it.”
 