
Zavodovski Island, Southern Ocean 


Chosen by Elizabeth White, producer, Islands


I can vividly remember the knot in my stomach as we approached the steaming, 
malevolent-looking crater of Zavodovski Island, 1,300 miles east of the 
Falklands in the Southern Ocean. The trip had taken more than a year of 
planning and caused many sleepless nights (even before the seven-day rough sea 
crossing), and my first impression was, “Gosh, I hope this is worth it!” But 
sometimes the things that push you out of your comfort zone become the most 
poignant.

As we boarded the inflatable and took our first steps on the island, I knew I 
was going to fall in love with the place. Zavodovski Island is home to the 
largest penguin colony in the world; it’s a wave-battered volcano covered in 
penguins. To many people, the rawness of this land of mud, smoke and penguin 
carcasses would be anything but beautiful (and yes, the place does stink) but 
there is something exciting about being in a place where so few humans have set 
foot. Places that are truly wild and untouched are very hard to find.

Watching the penguins going about their daily lives in this rugged and brutal 
landscape was a humbling experience. It’s a strange vision of paradise, but to 
me – and to the 1.5 million penguins that nest there – there’s nowhere like it 
on Earth.

• There are no commercial trips to Zavodovski Island, but several operators 
offer cruises that take in South Georgia. Discover the World has an18-21-night 
Antarctic, Falklands and South Georgia 
<https://www.discover-the-world.co.uk/destinations/antarctica-holidays/peninsula-falklands-and-south-georgia>
tour from £6,700pp

Gokyo Valley, Khumbu Himalaya, Nepal

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2c84716cbd1594e3696b333b87aca0a046b3a92%2F1832_0_7166_4300%2F7166.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Planet%20Earth%20II%3A%20the%20most%20amazing%20places%2C%20chosen%20by%20producers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Planet%20Earth%20II%3A%20the%20most%20amazing%20places%2C%20chosen%20by%20producers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2c84716cbd1594e3696b333b87aca0a046b3a92%2F1832_0_7166_4300%2F7166.jpg>
 Peak experience … Gokyo Valley, in the Khumbu region of the Nepal Himalayas. 
Photograph: JKboy Jatenipat/Getty Images 
Chosen by Justin Anderson, producer, Mountains
The Gokyo Valley is beautiful. It has sweeping glaciers and Cho Oyu – the 
sixth-highest mountain in the world – at its end. It’s home to the sherpa 
people, some of the warmest and most hospitable you will meet, anywhere. It 
took six days to trek there, carrying all our kit, so to arrive was an 
incredible feeling. We saw lots of wildlife, from Himalayan tahr to the 
exquisite monal pheasant, Nepal’s national bird – and one of the most colourful 
you can find.

The area is not famous for its snow leopards but in the last 10 years there is 
evidence that their numbers here may be growing. We filmed jumping spiders 
there: the world’s smallest but highest-living animal mountaineer. The valley 
has some famous viewpoints: Gokyo Ri at 5,360m is the highest point any of the 
Planet Earth crew reached in filming mountains. It’s a peak that towers over 
the Ngozumba glacier. You have to start the climb early in order to see the 
sunrise over Everest and, depending on your fitness, it can take several hours.

We had a wonderful time with our sherpa crew. On our last night they invited 
us to a cultural exchange. We listened to our head guide Nima sing and dance a 
traditional sherpa story about a spider. After the applause died down it was 
our turn but we got embarrassed and passed on the opportunity. After several 
more attempts to get us to perform (and a fair amount of home brewed “chang”) 
our cameraman Jonathan Jones burst into a rendition of You’ve lost that lovin’ 
feeling, and the rest of us had little choice but to join in. The sherpas 
seemed pleased with our efforts and soon were demanding we teach them a 
“traditional dance” of our own. So, we ended up with the whole room doing the 
hokey cokey. I like to think we did something to spread British culture to the 
remote Himalaya.

Other encounters weren’t so pleasant. We were camping and without fail every 
night a large yak would try and come into my tent. The first night was like a 
scene from a horror film with me screaming as I had no idea what this heavy 
breathing, snorting, hairy visitor was. I sat bolt upright and for a second 
thought it might have even have been a yeti. I have no idea why the animal was 
so attracted to my tent.

• KE Adventure Travel’s 20-day Ultimate Everest Trek 
<https://www.keadventure.com/holidays/khumbu-trekking-himalayas-gokyo-everest> 
takes in the Gokyo and other Khumbu valleys, climbing the Gokyo Ri and Kala 
Patar peaks and Everest Base Camp, via the Cho La pass from £2,545pp, including 
international and internal flights, guide, porters and all meals

Madagascar

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1efbafd2d2e78dd2c55d7a86d2782e0c0516e9c%2F0_199_3416_3416%2F3416.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Planet%20Earth%20II%3A%20the%20most%20amazing%20places%2C%20chosen%20by%20producers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Planet%20Earth%20II%3A%20the%20most%20amazing%20places%2C%20chosen%20by%20producers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1efbafd2d2e78dd2c55d7a86d2782e0c0516e9c%2F0_199_3416_3416%2F3416.jpg>
 Hear my song … Indri are the largest of all Madagascar lemurs. Photograph: Tom 
Hugh-Jones/BBC Natural History Unit 
Chosen by Emma Napper, producer, Jungles 
Working in Madagascar was a real highlight for me. We went to film indri, the 
biggest and the most-engaging of the lemur family. Each day we trekked through 
hilly jungle before dawn to find the indri, accompanied by our expert Malagasy 
guide. Indri are not too hard to find because, as the sun rises, they sing, to 
tell rival indri families that this istheir patch of forest. It’s a beautiful 
and plaintive sound and incredibly loud.

However the jungle is dense and the trees tall, and while indri can dance 
effortlessly through the trees, we can’t. So we had to wait patiently for the 
family to come to areas where we could film. Luckily, waiting in the forest in 
Madagascar is a treat. The jungle is full of strange insects, reptiles and 
birds; they are hard to spot at first, but having the friendly, knowledgeable 
guides meant we could find and film some unexpected jungle gems.

There is a satanic leaf gecko that lives there. It is disguised as dead leaves 
with a face like Dragon from the movie Shrek. There’s another leaf-tailed gecko 
that is so beautifully disguised – to look like the green and gold of tree bark 
– that you can be standing 10cm away from it and still not be able to see it. 
Eventually, it will lift a leg or blink and then you start to see it! The 
guides love showing this to tourists and seeing how long it will take them to 
spot. We also filmed a stick insect that looked like a green twig but revealed 
bright red patterned wings when it walked, presumable to scare away predators. 
None of the guides had seen that before.

• Naturetrek’s 14-day Madagascar’s Lemurs 
<https://www.naturetrek.co.uk/tour.aspx?id=295> tour includes a visit to the 
Perinet park to hear the cry of the indri. From £3,395 full-board, including 
flights and all meals

Skeleton Coast, Namibia 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9856e153ae9de6247f65b1b7999f11e997d7070%2F264_0_2800_1681%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Planet%20Earth%20II%3A%20the%20most%20amazing%20places%2C%20chosen%20by%20producers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Planet%20Earth%20II%3A%20the%20most%20amazing%20places%2C%20chosen%20by%20producers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9856e153ae9de6247f65b1b7999f11e997d7070%2F264_0_2800_1681%2F2800.jpg>
 Empty promise … Namibia’s Skeleton Coast. Photograph: Stefano Gentile/Getty 
Images 
Chosen by Ed Charles, producer, Deserts
This has to be one of the wildest and most undisturbed places I have ever 
been: you could drive for days and not see another human being. The vastness of 
the landscape and its stark beauty were breathtaking, and although it was 
largely empty, there were pockets of life, usually around dry riverbeds, where 
there was just enough water beneath the ground to support life.

Here you’d see elephants, oryx and lions right in the heart of the desert, but 
our best moment was when we saw a cheetah. Cheetahs in the heart of the desert 
are incredibly rare, but one day we rounded a corner and came face to face with 
a beautiful female in mid-hunt. I’m not sure who was more astonished, us or the 
cheetah, but there followed an incredible moment where neither party dared 
move. It probably only lasted a few seconds but it seems to stretch on for 
minutes. Unfortunately, the spell broke when we went to get our camera: the 
movement caused her to run off into the desert. We never saw her again, but 
knowing she was out there was an incredible privilege.

• Reef and Rainforest’s Wonderful Wildlife and Nature of Namibia 
<http://reefandrainforest.co.uk/tours/the-wonderful-wildlife-and-nature-of-namibia>
 trip is a 15-day self-drive tour taking in the dunes of Sossusvlei, Damaraland 
and its desert- adapted elephants, Etosha national park and Okonjima game 
reserve, home of conservation and rehabilitation foundation AfriCat. It costs 
£2,757pp including flights

Kaziranga national park, Assam, north-east India
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6afaf83c8bc644e428df62bdc6fc75b0aa2c618%2F0_36_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Planet%20Earth%20II%3A%20the%20most%20amazing%20places%2C%20chosen%20by%20producers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Planet%20Earth%20II%3A%20the%20most%20amazing%20places%2C%20chosen%20by%20producers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6afaf83c8bc644e428df62bdc6fc75b0aa2c618%2F0_36_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Pond life … a rhinoceros in Kaziranga national park, India. Photograph: 
Chadden Hunter 
Çhosen by Chadden Hunter, producer, Grasslands 
Walking beneath the towering elephant grass of Kaziranga national park, it’s 
hard not to feel as small as an insect. The grass, the tallest in the world, is 
more than three times the height of a human. The dense green blades arch high 
over the path, creating a tunnel kept open by animals that also dwarf us – 
generations of elephants and buffalo. Their secretive labyrinth is shared by 
more than 2,000 rhinoceros, more than all other Asian rhino put together. If 
you include the swamp deer, wild boar, hornbills, gibbons and sloth bears, you 
can see why they call it the Serengeti of Asia. Looking from one watchtower 
with my binoculars I counted 25 rhino – there’s nowhere in Africa you can do 
that.

Most magical are the Kaziranga dawn safaris, taken sitting with a blanket over 
your lap in the back of an open-top jeep, a crimson disc sitting low in the sky 
as you sip sweet local Assam tea. The prize for most visitors is spotting a 
Bengal tiger, found here in higher densities than in any other protected site 
in the world. Their stripes evolved to camouflage them brilliantly in the tall 
grass, and as they slink off into the labyrinth, it’s nice to be reminded, in 
age of ever-more-intimate wildlife filming, there are magical places where 
creatures keep their secrets.

• TransIndus’s 16-day tour of Assam  
<http://www.transindus.co.uk/tour/assam-nagaland-and-one-horned-rhino>includes 
three days in Kaziranga national park and costs from £2,845pp, including 
flights to Kolkata and breakfast

Harar, Ethiopia

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bdb4418227bc49da4061becdc670e811e37c2e7%2F0_260_3940_2364%2F3940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Planet%20Earth%20II%3A%20the%20most%20amazing%20places%2C%20chosen%20by%20producers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Planet%20Earth%20II%3A%20the%20most%20amazing%20places%2C%20chosen%20by%20producers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fplanet-earth-ii-david-attenborough-bbc-amazing-places%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bdb4418227bc49da4061becdc670e811e37c2e7%2F0_260_3940_2364%2F3940.jpg>
 No laughing matter … Spotted hyenas on the streets of Harar, Ethiopia. 
Photograph: Paul Thompson/BBC Natural History Unit 
Chosen by Fredi Devas, producer, Cities
Travelling to Harar was like travelling back in time. It’s a beautiful city, 
and the warren of cobbled streets are so narrow that cars can’t go down them, 
so food is brought in on donkeys. It’s considered Islam’s fourth holy city, and 
the old town has 99 mosques. It’s a place where you feel history exuding from 
the walls.

I had heard about spotted hyenas roaming the streets at night but it was not 
until a group of eight of them brushed passed my leg on a narrow cobbled street 
at 1am, that I realised exactly how true this was. Spotted hyenas are the 
second largest land predator in Africa: they’ve been known to kill people. It 
was at first frightening to be encountering them on small dark streets in the 
middle of the night, but after seeing how comfortable the locals are with their 
company, I soon became accustomed.

A few nights later, I was surrounded by more than 100 fighting hyenas as two 
clans battled for access to the city. My lack of fear in this scenario is 
testament to the extraordinary peaceful pact that exists between man and beast 
in this city. The locals welcome them into their city, and have done for 
centuries. It’s an astonishing coexistence between people and perhaps the most 
vilified animal in our planet … and it shows us just how possible it is for us 
to share our streets with wild animals.


• Harar is not included in recent warning by the FCO 
<https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/ethiopia> against certain parts of 
Ethiopia butmany UK tour operators have cancelled all trips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/nov/06/ethiopia-unrest-tourists-addis-ababa-foreign-office>
 to the country in light of the changed advice


Planet Earth is on BBC1 on Sundays at 8pm until 11 December. Episode one is 
now available onBBC iPlayer <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer>
 