
The idea of AFC Wimbledon winning promotion, which they will do with victory 
in the League Two play-off final on Monday, is almost irresistible. Even those 
who avoid sentimentality will appreciate the appeal of this story: a club 
formed from the essence of another, which was (at least in their view) stolen 
from its true home 14 years ago, elevating itselfto play alongside those who 
stole it <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2004/jun/21/newsstory.mkdons>. 
Should they prevail, AFC Wimbledon vs MK Dons will be a league fixture for the 
first time next season. A delicious prospect.

Neal Ardley seeks Hollywood finale for AFC Wimbledon’s remarkable rise | David 
Conn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/29/afc-wimbledon-league-two-playoff-plymouth>
But the team they are facing at Wembley have a story to tell, too. Three years 
ago,Plymouth Argyle <https://www.theguardian.com/football/plymouthargyle> 
survived relegation from the Football League on the last day of the season, 
relying on results elsewhere to save them after defeat to Rochdale. That was 
their second successive finish of 21st in the bottom division, the lowest in 
their history, but in the scheme of things mere poor results on the pitch and 
the threat of relegation were small fry compared with what had come before.

The club very nearly disappeared entirely in 2011, after debts of around £17m 
led to administrators being appointed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-conn-inside-sport-blog/2011/mar/02/plymouth-argyle-hmrc-administration-gardner>
, their bank account frozen and players sold off for a fraction of their value. 
During those straitened times, wages went unpaid and the manager Peter Reid
dipped into his own pocket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2011/apr/07/peter-reid-plymouth-argyle-hero>
 to pay heating bills, even auctioning his FA Cup runners-up medal to raise 
funds.

One man who has been there throughout is club captain Curtis Nelson. The 
defender became Argyle’s youngest skipper since 1967 when he was given the 
armband in 2013, aged just 19. Having only just turned 23, through circumstance 
he has been forced into a position of authority when most his age might be 
gently learning the game, but now he has experience well beyond his years: the 
play-off final will be his 246th appearance.

“I think it’ll be a fitting ending to the dark times at the club,” Nelson says 
about the prospect of promotion. “We can put Plymouth back on the map, at least 
closer to where it should be. I’ve thought about what we’ve been through. 
Everyone has different reasons behind wanting to be successful, and for me one 
of the reasons is what I’ve been through with the club.”

Plymouth could feel aggrieved that most of the attention could centre on their 
opponents’ romantic story, but that might turn out to be a benefit. The more 
focus on Wimbledon, the more pressure they could be under; thus, the reverse 
could be true for Plymouth. “If that’s how the neutrals are going to look at it 
I suppose the onus is on them a little bit,” says Nelson, whose team looked set 
for automatic promotion until around April. “Obviously they’re expected to do 
big things. But we know we’ve got a lot of support from our fans, and within 
the club. We’ve sold nearly 35,000 tickets – that’s a hell of a lot, and the 
atmosphere is going to be unbelievable.”

One curious element to preparing for a play-off final must be the gap between 
it and the semi. Plymouthsecured their place at Wembley on 15 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/plymouth-argyle-portsmouth-league-two-semi-final-match-report>
, meaning they’ve been waiting, like green and white coiled springs, for more 
than two weeks before the big day. That is in stark contrast to how frantic the 
rest of the season is; even with early exits from three cup competitions, 
Plymouth played 53 games over the season, an average of roughly one every five 
days. Quite a change of pace.

With more than a fortnight to kill, it must be tough to get the right balance 
between ensuring the players get enough rest but preventing rustiness, and by 
now there must be a sense of wanting to get things started. “It’s kind of like 
that,” says Nelson. “The gaffer’s looked after us with days off so we’ve not 
been coming in and wearing ourselves down, giving us a chance to recharge the 
batteries a bit, mentally and physically.”

The AFC Wimbledon film seems like a curveball – actually it's an open goal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/apr/01/the-afc-wimbledon-film-might-seem-like-a-curveball-actually-its-an-open-goal>
Not that Nelson has been allowed to put his feet up too much during the break. 
A few days before the final, he has spent a busy day training, before dealing 
with the media, collecting club suits for Wembley (“the lads look good” is his 
quick sartorial review) plus myriad other responsibilities he has as captain. 
It is not the sort of thing a 23-year-old usually has to deal with, but given 
the travails he has endured in his time at Home Park, you get the impression 
Nelson, like most at Argyle, is grateful they are even around to deal with 
little problems like this.

Of course, the Wimbledon story is seductive, but it is difficult not to side 
with a man who has been with his club at their absolute nadir and could be on 
the verge of leading them back to prosperity. “It will mean more to me,” says 
Nelson. “It’s important to win regardless, but for me there’s something 
personal as well.”
 