
Plymouth wears a label it could do without and it is all Argyle’s fault. 
Football, as everyone is led by its hype to believe, is the most important 
thing in the world. And since Hull got into the Premier League in 2008 Plymouth 
is the largest city in England never to have played the game in the top flight. 
Happily they play the game in top spirit and, withOxford United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/oxford-united> of like mind, Home Park 
hosted a fourth-tier 2-2 draw to gladden the heart at the end of another week 
in which the game’s governance and responsibility had been called into public 
question.

It took two referees to keep up but neither had need of cards. James Adcock 
retired at half-time, notthreatened with stabbing by a parent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shortcuts/2016/feb/24/referee-a-kids-football-match-you-couldnt-pay-me-enough>
 but lame. The fourth official, Devon’s own Andrew Quin, took over without 
Oxford concern.

The clubs lie second and third in League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball> and Plymouth can do 
them both a favour on Saturday when they go to Accrington, who are eight points 
behind in fourth but with two games in hand. Before then Portsmouth, Bristol 
Rovers and Wimbledon, the other three in the play-off positions and with only 
one game in hand, plus Accrington play on Tuesday in two matches that will 
clarify just how comfortable Plymouth and Oxford can feel.

Football League: your thoughts | Niall McVeigh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/mar/05/football-league-your-thoughts-charlton-rotherham>
For the moment the Pilgrims are more comfortable with themselves than they 
have been at any point since Hull passed them the buck. That season they too 
finished in the top half of the Championship, the tier where they have spent 
most of their time. Four seasons later, after successive relegations – the 
second propelled by a points deduction for administration – they were fighting 
twice consecutively against falling into the Conference, whence Oxford were 
scrambling back. They were not the first to discover that parachutes need 
personal operation – the static line does not always work – and thatPeter 
Ridsdale and Far Eastern promises are not the answer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/aug/10/peter-ridsdale-test-suitability-plymouth>
.

They had found their answer in the autumn of 2011 in James Brent, a Devon 
businessman, who has said: “I’m not a football person but I think I’m a 
competent chairman.” Essentially he appreciated the club’s importance in the 
community and the priority of football over grandstanding when things come to 
the pinch, which they had. Home Park had been earmarked for World Cup 2018 with 
associated development, though its prevailing state was not responsible for the 
bid’s failure. At present three stands are good with the main one waiting.

After a sequence of tried-and-tested managers and a climb from the depths to 
play-offs Brent may have struck gold in Derek Adams, whosucceeded John Sheridan 
last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/11/plymouth-argyle-appoint-derek-adams-manager>
. Adams, now 40 and a midfielder of over 100 games for both Motherwell and Ross 
County, took the latter into the Scottish Premiership for the first time in 
2012. Brent described him as “passionate and with significant ambition” and 
said: “It feels as if it’s going to be more open and exciting. A well-run 
Championship club is where we should aspire to be.”

'First place is where I like to be': Shaquille O'Neal is a Northampton Town fan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/16/first-place-is-where-i-like-to-be-shaquille-oneal-is-a-northampton-town-fan>
Open and exciting it was on Saturday, when Oxford came on an away run of five 
successive wins and Plymouth, beaten midweek at Barnet, had shown resilience 
after their seven previous defeats with six wins and a draw. But such are their 
resources that, with Jordan Forster and Ryan Brunt added to their injured list 
last week, they could name only six substitutes.

One of them, Craig Tanner, scored Plymouth’s second equaliser having started 
the second half in place of the centre-back Peter Hartley, who damaged a hip, 
though the outstanding left-back, Gary Sawyer, moved to the middle. Hartley had 
opened the scoring for Oxford with an unchallenged header into his own goal 
from a corner, reflecting perhaps the programme’s quirk of Adams’ welcome notes 
inside the back page, as if an afterthought.

The other centre-back, Curtis Nelson, equalised in kind on the quarter-hour 
but before the interval Kemar Roofe blasted in his 13th league goal after 
Kelvin Mellor lost the ball to Jordan Bowery. A minute before Tanner’s goal 
Danny Hylton, later to graze the bar from 12 yards, dallied in a one-on-one 
with Luke McCormick and let Nelson rob him.

Michael Appleton, Oxford’s manager, conceded the sloppiness at set plays but 
said, “We are not the type of side to hold on to leads,” meaning they will look 
to increase them. Adams was proud of his team’s spirit and felt the “game was 
played in the right manner by players that wanted to win it”. At present he is 
bending Plymouth’s yearning curve to his will. League One will be lucky if it 
gets either club or both.
 