
Mauricio Pochettino has previous when it comes to Europa League-bashing. The 
Tottenham Hotspur managerreferred to it in February 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/09/southampton-mauricio-pochettino-stoke-city>
 as a “competition that kills you” and one in which he had “no interest” when 
he was at Southampton and it looked as though they had the chance to qualify 
for it.

Dele Alli’s dive leads Mauricio Pochettino to recall brush with Owen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/04/dele-alli-dive-spurs-mauricio-pochettino-michael-owen-tottenham-england-football>
And how about this from April 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/apr/23/tottenham-mauricio-pochettino-europa-league>
, after his first taste of the tournament with Tottenham? The club’s 
participation had ended withdefeat against Fiorentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/26/tottenham-fiorentina-europa-league-match-report>
 in the last 32. “It affects your domestic league,” Pochettino said. “It was my 
opinion when I was at Southampton and, having had a Europa League season, I can 
now confirm that it is very difficult to manage the Europa League with the 
Premier League and both cups.”

It is possible to portray Pochettino as being in something of a pickle. On the 
one hand, he wants his Tottenham team to achieve a positive result against CSKA 
Moscow on Wednesday night in their final Champions League Group E tie – 
largely, in order to prove they can excel at Wembley. They will go no further 
in this season’s tournament because of their defeats at the national stadium
against Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/14/tottenham-hotspur-monaco-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 andBayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/tottenham-bayer-leverkusen-champions-league-match-report>
 and next season Spurs are set to play their home programme in all competitions 
there.

As the defender Jan Vertonghen made clear, they sorely need to lay the Wembley 
ghost to rest. “We want to show everyone it’s not Wembley that’s bothering us,” 
Vertonghen said. “We know it’s not a Wembley thing and we want to show that to 
the world.”

On the other hand, a win or draw against CSKA would lead to Spurs entering 
into the last 32 of the Europa League and we all know how Pochettino has felt 
about that in the past. Last season, Tottenhamexited the competition in the 
last 16 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/17/tottenham-borussia-dortmund-europa-league-match-report>
 after Pochettino had played a weakened team at Borussia Dortmund; Spurs were 
well beaten.

At the very least, the merits of the Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> were a tough sell for 
Pochettino and there was a revealing moment when he struggled to describe the 
Thursday night-Sunday afternoon cycle that comes with it as being anything 
other than a “psychological” problem.

“It’s harder to play Thursday and Sunday,” Pochettino said. “It’s 
psychological because you wait for Sunday. Our habit now is [to play] Saturday 
three o’clock – that’s the best time to play. Thursday you travel, you’re back 
late, Friday is difficult. It’s tough. It’s not a factor we can prove. It’s 
more psychological.”

Pochettino admitted “maybe, it’s an advantage for Chelsea and Liverpool” to 
have no European football this season but, in the next breath, he made the 
point that he was desperate to return to theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>. He did his best to talk 
the talk and, like Vertonghen, he brought up the need to beat CSKA to “make 
Wembley our home – it’s not fair to blame Wembley”.

Pochettino noted how it was impossible to want to lose a game and that the 
Europa League could provide European experience for the squad’s younger 
players. There is little doubt that it is easier to rotate key personnel in the 
Europa League; they tend to take a dimmer view of being left out of Champions 
League lineups.

Pochettino also sought to stress the opportunity that the Europa League stood 
to provide, not only for silverware but to give an alternative route back into 
the Champions League. The winners qualify automatically. Yet it was easy to 
wonder whether Pochettino would reserve the right to prioritise other 
competitions over the final months of the season, as circumstances dictated. 
“Now is not the moment to say only Premier League or FA Cup,” he said. Might it 
be in February or March?

Pochettino has been boosted by the return to fitness of Toby Alderweireld 
after theknee injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/16/tottenham-optimistic-toby-alderweireld-injury-harry-kane>
 he sustainedat West Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/west-bromwich-albion-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 in mid-October, although the defender is likely to be eased back as a 
substitute. Ben Davies is still out with ankle damage while Érik Lamela has 
been allowed to return to Argentina because his brother is in hospital. Lamela 
is unavailable as he continues to struggle with a hip problem.

“Maybe, it’s important to tell our supporters that Lamela has a problem with a 
family member in Argentina and he travelled to Argentina last night,” 
Pochettino said. “We want to send him our support. He has a problem with his 
brother. We hope it’s not too serious but it’s an issue and he needed to go to 
Argentina now.”
 