
Dozens of riot police stormed a Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> youth detention centre 
overnight as prisoners tried to break out of a secure area.

Staff were evacuated and more than 35 police were brought in, including the 
public order response team and the dog squad, to bring a riot under control at 
the Parkville Youth Justice Centre.

It is understood seven young people accessed the roof cavity of a single unit, 
and the Victorian Department of Health and Human Services said there was never 
any threat to the security of the facility’s perimeter.

News Corp reported a greater number of inmates were involved, and that they 
had broken out of the centre’s southern unit.

The group have now been moved to Malmsbury, a separate youth justice facility 
in central Victoria, and theGrevillea unit in Barwon adult prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/part-of-barwon-prison-reclassified-as-juvenile-detention-unit-after-court-ruling>
.

The incident began at 7.45pm and Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> police said on Sunday 
morning that all those involved in the disturbance were located and accounted 
for by about 1.20am.


Teenager denied bail despite judge conceding his human rights have been 
contravened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/teenager-denied-bail-despite-judge-conceding-his-human-rights-have-been-contravened>
Several prisoners were removed from the centre and will be assisting police 
with their inquiries.

A Department of Health and Human Services spokesman said there were no 
injuries during the incident and damage to the facility would be assessed.

“There were no injuries to young people, staff or police and at no point was 
there a threat to the security of the perimeter of the facility,” the spokesman 
said.

“Damage to the facility will be assessed with repair work to start as soon as 
this is completed,” he said.


The latest disturbance follows a series of incidents at Victorian youth 
justice centres, including a riot at Parkville in mid-November in which about 
30 inmates trashed their cells, and another disturbance at the Malmsbury 
detention centre.

Some of the youths involved in those disturbances were transferred to the 
state’s highest security adult prison, Barwon.

The youths remain in the prison’s Grevillea unit in single cells despite two 
courts ordering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/21/keeping-juveniles-in-adult-jail-is-unlawful-victorian-judge-rules>
 they be moved to more suitable facilities.

Lawyers challenged the transfer in the Supreme Court, which found the 
government had acted unlawfully.

The government appealed and lost, and the Court of Appeal ordered them to move 
the teenagers, but the government instead rebranded the Grevillea unit as a 
youth facility.
Georgie Crozier MP (@georgiecrozier) 
More riots. Victorians deserve better than this ongoing mayhem. Jenny Mikakos 
must resign.#springst <https://twitter.com/hashtag/springst?src=hash> 
https://t.co/08SDfHnGbG <https://t.co/08SDfHnGbG>
 <https://twitter.com/georgiecrozier/status/817827418593296385> January 7, 2017
 <https://twitter.com/georgiecrozier/status/817827418593296385> 
The oppositon spokesman for families and children, Georgie Crozier, tweeted on 
Sunday morning that Victorians “deserve better than this ongoing mayhem”.

Crozier called for Labor’s youth affairs minister, Jenny Mikakos, to resign. 

–Australian Associated Press contributed to this report
 