
Eighty-three potential suspects have been identified in connection with 
allegations of historical child sexual abuse in football, police chiefs have 
said, as the scale of the scandal continues to escalate.

The shock disclosure from the National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) comes 
three weeks after the former Crewe defender Andy Woodward waived his right to 
anonymity to reveal in an interview with the Guardian that he had been a victim 
of sexual abuse.

Woodward’s account of the horrific abuse he suffered from the age of 11 by one 
of his coaches triggered an avalanche of allegations from other players. The 
NPCC revealed on Friday that 98 clubs had been named in information handed to 
the body in its role coordinating historical sexual abuse claims.


In its update, the NPCC said the previously released figure of 350 potential 
victims still stood and it further revealed their age range at the time of the 
alleged abuse ranges from seven to 20. The body said 98% of them were males.

The figure of 83 suspects comes from data collated by police forces and from 
639 referrals from the NSPCC children’s helpline.

“These shocking numbers now identified by police reveal the deeply disturbing 
extent of abuse that has been going on within football,” a spokesperson for the 
charity said.

After Woodward spoke out, ex-Crewe player Steve Walters alleged he was abused, 
also in an interview with the Guardian. Other players, including Paul Stewart 
and David White, then came forward to the newspaper and other media outlets.

The Guardian subsequently reported that an unnamed former Newcastle United 
player had contacted police with allegations against coach George Ormond, who 
was jailed for six years in 2002 for numerous assaults over 24 years.

The Football Association appointed Kate Gallafent QC at the end of November to 
help with its internal review into historical child sexual abuse allegations. 
And 21 police forces have launched investigations into the claims.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%3A%20how%20the%20story%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%3A%20how%20the%20story%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video&media=>
Football sexual abuse scandal: how the story unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/08/football-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video>
“Allegations received by police forces across the country are being swiftly 
acted upon,” said Simon Bailey, the chief constable of Norfolk and the lead for 
the NPCC.


“We are ensuring an efficient and effective service-wide approach to 
investigating allegations, removing the potential for duplication and enabling 
the timely and effective sharing of intelligence and information between 
forces. We are also liaising closely with the Football Association to ensure 
all relevant information they hold is shared to inform investigations moving 
forward.”


He added: “As the number of calls being received across the service is higher 
than usual, it may take longer than normal for an officer from a local force to 
make contact to follow up from the initial call. Please be assured that the 
information provided will be taken seriously and acted upon.”

 