
No news, they say, is good news. Either that or it’s the result of a 
government blackout. The draw for theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> will be held in 
Libreville,Gabon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabon>, on Wednesday but 
yet again the buildup to a tournament has been dominated by doubts over where 
it will be staged as the aftershocks ofGabonese presidential elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/gabon-election-results-disputed-incumbent-ali-bongo-victor-jean-ping>
 continue to be reverberate.

At the moment it seems the tournament will go ahead in Gabon, beginning on 14 
January, but no one is confident. Even by the standards of the Cup of Nations, 
the 2017 edition has seemed ill-starred. In 2006, hosting rights were given to 
South Africa but because of the war in Libya, which was scheduled to host in 
2013, the two nations swapped. As the conflict in Libya continued, it became 
apparent they would have to be replaced altogether as hosts, leading to another 
round of bidding in 2015 in whichGabon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabon>
 beat Algeria and Ghana; Nigeria, who had initially been named as a reserve 
host, declined to be considered.

Gabon army deployed before result of fraught election is announced
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/gabon-army-deployed-before-official-result-election>
After elections in August gave the incumbent president, Ali Bongo, a narrow 
victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/gabon-election-results-disputed-incumbent-ali-bongo-victor-jean-ping>
 over his veteran challenger Jean Ping, Gabon descended into violence. Initial 
results suggested he had won by only 5,594 votes but there were widespread 
allegations of corruption. Bongo has ruled Gabon since 2009 when he succeeded 
his father Omar, who had been the president since 1967.

The parliament building and the national television station were attacked by 
Ping supporters and there were several days of clashes on the streets between 
the opposition and police. The government acknowledged three people were killed 
in the protests but the opposition has said the figure could be as high as 50. 
There were also several hundred arrests. Social media was suspended and a 
moratorium imposed on the issuing of visas to foreign journalists. The 
Confederation of African Football discussed the unrest and sounded out Morocco 
as a replacement host; it had been supposed to host the 2015 tournament before
withdrawing at the last minute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/06/morocco-banned-and-fined-africa-cup-of-nations>
 because of fears over Ebola.

The Gabonese supreme court investigated the election result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/24/gabon-court-rules-president-ali-bongo-rightful-winner-of-september-election>
 and concluded Bongo had won by 11,000 votes. Bongo has sworn in a new cabinet 
and, for now, everything appears relatively calm, although the state budget for 
2017 has been cut by 5% because of the falling oil price. The possibility 
remains the tournament could be used as a platform for dissent by the 
opposition, particularly in Oyem and Port Gentil, host cities in areas that 
strongly backed Ping.

The tournament looks fascinatingly open and, as has been the recent way of 
things, is missing a number of big names. Most strikingly, for the third time 
in four tournaments, there is noNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/nigeria-football-team>. They were perhaps 
a little unfortunate Chad’s withdrawal denied them the chance to qualify as a 
best runner-up, but they took only a point from two games with Egypt and could 
only draw away to Tanzania.South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southafrica> miss out for the third time 
in five tournaments after finishing third in their group behind not only 
Cameroon but also Mauritania. Angola complete the set of recent World Cup 
qualifiers not to make it, and there is no place either for the2012 champions 
Zambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/feb/12/zambia-ivory-coast-africa-cup-nations-final>
 or for Cape Verde, Congo or Ethiopia, all of whom have enlivened recent 
tournaments.

There is a welcome return for the most successful side in the competition’s 
history,Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt>, who under the 
former Valencia manager Héctor Cúper have qualified for the first time since 
competinga hat-trick of successive titles in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/31/egypt-africa-cup-nations-ghana>
. They lurk ominously in seeding pot three which also comprises Cameroon, 
Senegal and Morocco and, as such, looks rather more likely to produce a winner 
than pot two, where Tunisia, Mali, Burkina Faso and DR Congo have benefitted 
from decent runs at recent tournaments.

Another side making a long-awaited comeback are Uganda who have qualified for 
the first time since being beaten in the final by Ghana in 1978. They are 
joined in Pot four by Togo, Zimbabwe and the debutants Guinea-Bissau, who 
finished top of a qualifying group comprising Congo, Zambia and Kenya with a 
goal difference of zero.

Desert fire: the world cup rebels of Kurdistan – video
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/oct/14/desert-fire-the-world-cup-rebels-of-kurdistan-video>
Last time they (co-) hosted the tournament, in 2012, Gabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gabon> reached the quarter-final where 
they lost on penalties to Mali. Borussia Dortmund’s Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang, 
who missed the decisive kick, is more experienced and a more rounded player now 
and it’s not impossible, with home support and a solid midfield, that they 
could go further.

Ghana have a squad based around the side who won the Under-20 World Cup in 
2009, Algeria have a fine crop of attacking players but are looking for a coach 
after Milovan Rajevac walked out after two games in charge andIvory Coast, the 
defending champions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/08/ivory-coast-ghana-africa-cup-of-nations-final-match-report>
, have paradoxically blossomed as the so-called golden generation have begun to 
retire.

The first decade of the 21st century witnessed the domination of two great 
sides, Cameroon and Egypt, but since 2010, no side has been on top. Two of the 
last three winners have not qualified. It feels as though any of about 10 sides 
could win in Gabon. Whether that is the result of a general lifting of 
standards, or whether the absence of a great team is evidence of a general lack 
of quality is open to debate but what is certain is how competitive and 
unpredictable the 2017 Cup of Nations will be. We are not even entirely certain 
where it’s going to be.
 