
Pop-up dinners seem to be popping up everywhere – in secret 
<https://www.mainstreet.com/article/how-to-score-a-seat-at-your-citys-secret-pop-up-dinners>
,en masse, 
<http://www.usnews.com/news/offbeat/articles/2015/07/28/diner-en-blanc-new-york-leads-worlds-biggest-popup-picnic>
 in thedark 
<http://www.7x7.com/culture/new-pop-offers-couples-therapy-dinner-dark> and even
in the sky. 
<http://www.eater.com/2014/9/18/6574461/pop-up-restaurant-takes-diners-to-new-heights>
 In Crown Heights, Brooklyn, I tried a Provençal pop-up dinner.

Once a month, Betty Kalin of Betty Brooklyn Catering Co 
<http://bettybrooklyn.com/> invites about 20 guests to enjoy a multi-course 
meal inspired by her favorite parts of the world. Last month it wassouthern 
Italy <http://bettybrooklyn.com/pop-up-dinner-july-22nd>, and next month the 
American south <http://bettybrooklyn.com/tastings/>.

Her small storefront and kitchen is squeezed between a Pentecostal church and 
an injury lawyer’s office. As I stepped inside, the sunny office space looked 
like a Provençal picnic, minus a Cézanne painting backdrop: sprigs of lavender, 
fresh fruit and checkered napkins decorated the two farmhouse style dinner 
tables.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fpop-up-dinners-brooklyn-provence-french-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1440010449977%2F82b9a8b3-0f9a-4e35-abfe-d30ebe4446f9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop-up%20dinners%3A%20a%20taste%20of%20Provence%20in%20the%20heart%20of%20Brooklyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fpop-up-dinners-brooklyn-provence-french-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop-up%20dinners%3A%20a%20taste%20of%20Provence%20in%20the%20heart%20of%20Brooklyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fpop-up-dinners-brooklyn-provence-french-food%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1440010449977%2F82b9a8b3-0f9a-4e35-abfe-d30ebe4446f9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The second course featured a carrot and chickpea dish accompanied by 
ratatouille. Photograph: Stylish Hip Weddings 
A waitress greeted guests with an anise-infused lemonade. I was the first one 
there, so I plopped down in my assigned seat and waited for the other guests to 
arrive – among them my husband Bastien, who grew up in the small town 
Salon-de-Provence. He moved to New York in December, and Betty’s dinner is 
probably as close to Provence he will get this year.

Perhaps the hardest part of my husband’s immigration to the US, after the 
inane visa process, has been dinner time. Americans “eat with the hens”, he 
likes to say. Well, his loss, because while he arrived late to the dinner, I 
ate his appetiser – a single shrimp wrapped in phyllo dough and drizzled with 
pesto sauce.


Then, a multi-dish second course: braised rabbit in a red wine sauce; “loup de 
mer”, a Mediterranean seabass; ratatouille; a carrot and chickpea dish; and 
fettuccine in a roquefort sauce with artichoke hearts.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fpop-up-dinners-brooklyn-provence-french-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1440010350357%2Fdce29f30-fcd3-47df-b407-152ce10be1a0-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop-up%20dinners%3A%20a%20taste%20of%20Provence%20in%20the%20heart%20of%20Brooklyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fpop-up-dinners-brooklyn-provence-french-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop-up%20dinners%3A%20a%20taste%20of%20Provence%20in%20the%20heart%20of%20Brooklyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fpop-up-dinners-brooklyn-provence-french-food%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1440010350357%2Fdce29f30-fcd3-47df-b407-152ce10be1a0-1020x612.jpeg>
 Braised rabbit in red wine sauce was among the evening’s highlights. 
Photograph: Stylish Hip Weddings 
It was the course I’d been waiting for. In five years spent with Bastien, I’ve 
successfully dodged eating horse, frog legs, andouille sausage and a few other 
delicacies I’m still not sure how to pronounce. But here, in my very own 
neighborhood, I tried rabbit.

Verdict: I helped myself to seconds. (We were told later by a representative 
fromLocal Bushel, <http://localbushel.com/> which sourced a lot of the 
ingredients, that the meat was “fresh”. The rabbits had been slaughtered on 
Monday, he said. It was Wednesday.)

The family-style setting gave way to easy conversation. Or maybe it was the 
wine, which was paired with each course.

One of the young women seated at our table told us the recipe for hummus. Then 
she gave us a lesson in kebabs. Her parents had immigrated to New York from 
Syria several decades ago, she explained. And in case there was any doubt, she 
told us: “I’m basically the queen the of kebab.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fpop-up-dinners-brooklyn-provence-french-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1440010633247%2F704a2392-d424-45a4-8329-7c0f96b5b519-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pop-up%20dinners%3A%20a%20taste%20of%20Provence%20in%20the%20heart%20of%20Brooklyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fpop-up-dinners-brooklyn-provence-french-food%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pop-up%20dinners%3A%20a%20taste%20of%20Provence%20in%20the%20heart%20of%20Brooklyn&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fpop-up-dinners-brooklyn-provence-french-food%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F19%2F1440010633247%2F704a2392-d424-45a4-8329-7c0f96b5b519-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The cheese course. Photograph: Stylish Hip Weddings 
We learned that everyone else at the table had been born and raised in New 
York. Bastien had so many questions.

“So when you say ‘the city’,” my husband asked, “do you mean Manhattan or do 
you mean New York?” Manhattan, they all agreed.

“Do you say you’re from Brooklyn or New York?” he asked the Kebab Queen. The 
New Yorkers giggled. Her accent answered the question. “Brooklyn,” she told 
him. “Definitely Brooklyn.”

Then she gave him some real talk. “When you live here, you’ve got to know a 
guy for everything,” she advised him, as the waiters brought around a honey 
saffron cake that was syrupy, rich and spongy.

After dinner, I asked Betty why she had started the pop-up dinner series. As a 
caterer, she said, she spends most of her time preparing meals that mean the 
most to her clients, but the pop-up dinner series allows her to experiment with 
her own favorite foods.

“All of these dinners are a little bit personal,” she said, “which is the fun 
part – that they can be individual and unique and fun and expressive for me as 
a chef.”

As the guests filed out, we said goodbye to our fellow diners, and thanked the 
host for what Bastien and I agreed was a truly enjoyable evening escape to 
Provence. But as soon as we stepped outside, the blare of car horns and 
screeching of tires snapped us right back to Brooklyn.

 * Betty Brooklyn Catering Co provided the dinner. $100 per guest. 455 Utica 
Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203
 