
The Portsmouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portsmouth> manager Paul 
Cook was furious with Jamille Matt after the Plymouth striker appeared to 
head-butt Michael Doyle during the 2-2 play-off semi-final first-leg draw at 
Fratton Park.

A fuming Cook was sent to the stands along with the Argyle assistant manager 
Paul Wotton in the immediate aftermath to the incident.

Gary Roberts’ penalty earned Pompey a draw after Matt had scored two, 
cancelling out Marc McNulty’s opener.

Everton prepare to lure Ronald Koeman with lure of record transfer budget
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/12/everton-ronald-koeman-roberto-martinez-goodison-park->
Cook said: “There were some big calls by the referee, whether he got them 
right or wrong is irrelevant. When we have watched it four times on telly we’ll 
know whether he got them right or wrong.

“We feel we should have got decisions we never got but there you go, we are 
used to that at home. I’m not bothered where I watch the game from on Sunday.

“If the referee gets the head-butt wrong and the lad has head-butted him, he 
should have been sent off. If the lad hasn’t head-butted then I should be sent 
to the stands. We feel we don’t get the big decisions at Fratton Park. It was a 
great game, it was a great spectacle forLeague Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leaguetwofootball>. It had everything you 
want from a football game.”

The Plymouth boss Derek Adams felt his team should have won the game. He said: 
“It was an excellent game and we thoroughly deserved to go 2-1 ahead and we 
probably should have won the game on the night. We had plenty of opportunities 
and it was a very good performance from us.

“I haven’t seen anything watching the game. Jamille has scored two very good 
goals for us. I haven’t had time to speak to him. We had to deal with a load of 
Portsmouth pressure because we are here and the fans are very vocal, but we 
dealt with it very well.

“In the home leg you have your own fans and we showed here what home fans can 
do and I’m sure our fans will do exactly the same on Sunday evening.”
 