
The city council of Portland <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/portland> in 
Oregon will vote on Wednesday whether to impose a tax on companies whose CEO’s 
pay exceeds the median salary of their workers by a ratio of more than 
100-to-one.


The measure, which was proposed by Portland city commissioner and former 
environmental lawyer Steve Novick, will take advantage of the fact thatnew 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) rules 
<http://paygovernance.com/sec-adopts-final-rules-regarding-ceo-pay-ratio-disclosure/>
 will require companies to disclose their executive pay ratios for the first 
time beginning in 2017.


If it passes, experts said the tax would be the first of its kind.

Novick said that he was inspired by a similar measure 
<http://www.latimes.com/opinion/opinion-la/la-ol-income-inequality-tax-20140425-story.html>
 proposed by the California state senate in 2014, which failed to reach the 
supermajority needed to make changes to the state tax code. He was also 
inspired by reading French economist Thomas Piketty’s book Capital.

“To me, after global warming, income inequality is the biggest challenge we 
face in our society,” Novick said. “It’s been absolutely frightful to see the 
divide between regular folks and the richest-of-the-rich. It’s economically 
destabilizing, it’s politically destabilizing, it’s unhealthy.”

The Great Recession: are you better off now than in 2008?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/great-recession-recovery-stories>
The measure could gain support from both sides of the political spectrum. As 
candidates, Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders – diametrically opposed on many 
issues – both pointed to the “rigged system” that supported the wealthiest one 
percent as a problem, Novick said.

The disparity between workers’ and CEOs’ pay has been rising sharply since the 
1960s, when the average ratio was around 20-1. It now stands atabove 200-1 
<https://www.glassdoor.com/research/ceo-pay-ratio/>. 

Novick’s proposal would increase current corporate income taxes by 10% if a 
company CEO had a salary ratio of above 100-1, and by 25% for CEOs with a ratio 
of 250-1 or higher.

He said that he was “95% confident” that he had the three votes needed to pass 
the measure through the five-person council.

“What I find quite interesting is that it seems [to be] the first tax that 
targets inequality as such,” said Branko Milanović, a former lead economist at 
the World Bank and a professor at New York University who specializes in income 
inequality.

For Milanović, the idea was novel because “it treats inequality as having a 
negative externality like taxing carbon emissions”.

Steve Seelig, a senior regulatory advisor for the corporate risk management 
advisory firm Willis Towers Watson, said that “this isn’t the first place and 
won’t be the last place” to try to impose such a scheme.

“Unlike current CEO pay disclosures that don’t really get a lot of attention 
from the rank-and-file, this one will,” Seelig said, referring to the new SEC 
disclosure rule. “It’ll be in the local newspapers, talked about at the water 
cooler, and companies need to be poised to deal with their workforce.”

Seelig said that workers were in some cases likely to go through “the stages 
of grief” upon finding out how much their CEOs are being paid. “Shock; then 
when they wake up the next day they’ll be angry, they’ll say how does this 
affect how much I am paid?”

“That’s going to present a lot of challenges to companies that don’t do a 
great job of explaining that proposition,” he added. Of Portland’s move, Seelig 
said it probably wouldn’t meaningfully affect companies’ bottom lines, but that 
it was “a matter of raising awareness”.
 