
The Portland, Oregon, city council has voted to pass a first-of-its-kind 
measure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/portland-ceo-salary-tax-vote-wealth-inequality?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 that would levy a tax on public companies whose CEO-to-workers pay ratio is 
more than 100-1.

Portland to vote on taxing companies if CEO earns 100 times more than staff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/portland-ceo-salary-tax-vote-wealth-inequality>
The new tax, which seeks to address income inequality, was voted in 3-1 by the 
council on Wednesday. It increases corporate income tax by 10% if a company’s 
CEO has a salary ratio of above 100-1, and by 25% if the CEO has a ratio of 
250-1 or more.

Officials expect that the measure will raise $2.5m a year from January 2018, 
with former environmental lawyer Steve Novick, the city commissioner who 
proposed the measure, saying that the revenue is intended to be used to pay for 
programs for homeless people.

There are around 540 publicly traded companies that do enough business in 
Portland <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/portland> to be subject to the 
business income tax under current law, Novick said. It is unclear how many of 
those have CEO-to-worker pay ratios that would make them subject to the 
increased surcharge.

Novick said he had decided to come up with a measure to address the problems 
of income inequality while reading French economist Thomas Piketty’s book 
Capital.

He was also inspired by a similar measure that was proposed in 2015 in the 
California senate, which did not receive enough votes to make a change in the 
state tax code.

“I’m hoping we start getting calls from cities, counties and states,” Novick 
said, “and a year from now many other jurisdictions will have done the same 
thing.”

Sandra McDonough, the president and CEO of the Portland Business Alliance, a 
pro-business group, said that she felt there was “a bit of a media stunt going 
on”.

“We think it’s going to do very little to address the issue they claim they 
are trying to have an impact on, which is income inequality,” she said. “Our 
belief is that if the city truly wanted to address that issue then they should 
be focusing on working with businesses to grow quality jobs that will improve 
family income.”

“I don’t really think you’re going to see actions by corporations based on 
this,” she added.
 