
The pound has closed at its highest level against the euro in three months 
after nervous currency traders adopted a cautious approach ahead ofItaly’s 
constitutional referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/italy-referendum-all-you-need-to-know-about-renzis-crunch-vote>
 on Sunday.

With the poll in the eurozone’s third-biggest economy too close to call 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/the-guardian-view-on-european-politics-italys-turn-on-the-brink>
, fears that a no vote would risk a fresheconomic and political crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/year-of-electoral-tests-may-end-european-union-as-we-know-it>
 pushed sterling to a fifth successive week of gains against the single 
currency, the pound’s best run in nine weeks.

The pound was up by more than half a cent against the euro to trade at just 
under €1.19 and was also up against the US dollar, despite a fall in 
unemployment.

Investor sentiment towards the pound has strengthened in recent days after the 
Brexit secretary, David Davis, said the UK might pay tosecure future access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/brexit-secretary-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access>
 to the European single market and nervousness grew about the outcome of the 
Italian vote.

Fallout from Italy's referendum will be both financial and political
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/dec/01/italy-referendum-matteo-renzi-fallout-eurozone-banking-crisis-asos-glencore>
Tsvetoslav Tsonev, an economist at Fathom Consulting, said: “Concerns about 
Italy’s constitutional referendum and its implications are weighing on markets. 
They are right to be concerned.

“If the outcome results in another economic downturn, causing sovereign bond 
yields to spike, it could prove to be the straw that broke the camel’s back, 
triggering a banking crisis and eventually Italy’s exit from the euro area.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fpound-gains-dollar-euro-fears-italy-referendum-matteo-renzi-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46d894931839668e9d5cd462ac25fac403cb8298%2F0_0_4304_2582%2F4304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pound%20gains%20against%20the%20euro%20amid%20fears%20over%20Italy's%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fpound-gains-dollar-euro-fears-italy-referendum-matteo-renzi-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pound%20gains%20against%20the%20euro%20amid%20fears%20over%20Italy%27s%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fpound-gains-dollar-euro-fears-italy-referendum-matteo-renzi-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46d894931839668e9d5cd462ac25fac403cb8298%2F0_0_4304_2582%2F4304.jpg>
 The Italian prime minister, Matteo Renzi, has said he will resign if the 
referendum yields a no vote. Photograph: Minichiello/AGF/REX/Shutterstock 
Investors in shares and bonds preferred to adopt a wait-and-see approach ahead 
ofthe Italian referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/06/could-italys-renzi-be-next-victim-of-an-unwanted-referendum>
, which supporters hope will simplify the country’s lawmaking system by 
reducing the authority of one of its parliamentary chambers.

Matteo Renzi, the prime minister, has said he will resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/matteo-renzi-repeats-vow-quit-italian-pm-loses-referendum>
 if he loses the vote, but hard evidence of public opinion has been hard to 
gauge because opinion polls are banned in the final two weeks before the 
referendum.

Shares on Milan’s stock market were barely changed on the day, with bourses in 
Paris and Frankfurt showing small losses. London’s FTSE 100 closed 22 points 
lower at 6730.72.

 