
The pound has continued to fall against the US dollar as worries persist over 
the UK’s economic prospects outside the EU.

Sterling suffered sharp losses last week as ministers at the Conservative 
party conferencesignalled they would opt for a “hard Brexit” settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/may-on-collision-course-with-backbenchers-seeking-soft-brexit>
 that sacrifices access to the single market and prioritises stricter 
immigration controls.

Sterling <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sterling> was under pressure 
again at the beginning of this week but some calm had returned to markets. The 
pound fell 0.3% against the US dollar to $1.2395 on Monday. It was flat against 
the euro at €1.11.

However, the pound’s weakness boosted the UK’s FTSE 100 share index – which 
features companies that make a significant proportion of their profits in 
dollars – as it closed at 7,097.5, near its record closing high of 7,104 last 
year.

Investor nerves were strained on Friday when the pound slumped more than 8% in 
a “flash crash” in overnight trading in Asia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/theories-emerge-for-pounds-flash-crash-against-dollar>
. It dropped from $1.26 to $1.1491 in just eight minutes – a huge plunge in a 
market where a single cent is a big change – and recovered only some of those 
losses during London trading hours. Sterling still ended the week about 4% 
lower against the euro and US dollar.

One market watcher said the currency was stabilising after the events of 
Friday morning. “The dust has started to settle after the flash crash overnight 
on Thursday saw the pound briefly trade below €1.10 and $1.20,” said Chris 
Saint, senior analyst at City firm Hargreaves Lansdown’s currency service.

With a quiet week ahead on the economic indicator front, he expected the pound 
to continue to take its cues from politics. “There is little on the domestic 
calendar this week to draw attentions away from ongoing worries over how 
politicians will handle Britain’s withdrawal from the EU, although Friday’s 
construction output data will garner some interest,” said Saint.

David Davis, the Brexit secretary, claimed that the “major part of the fall” 
in the pound to a 31-year-low had been down to a “flash crash”. He told 
parliament on Monday: “There will be lots of speculative comments in the next 
two-and-a-half-years that will drive the pound down and up and down and up and 
there is little we can do about that.”

The pound’s sharp fall has raised pressure on those UK firms that rely on 
imports, such as retailers and those manufacturers who need raw materials like 
plastics and metals. A weaker currency makes imports more expensive. On the 
other hand, it makes UK exports more competitive and some companies have 
reported a pick-up in overseas sales since the British vote to leave the EU in 
June knocked sterling.

For consumers, the weak pound makes overseas holidays more expensive. There 
are also worries that sterling’s fall will be felt at the tills as retailers 
pass on their higher costs. The British Retail Consortium warned on Monday that
a failure to get a good trade deal would push prices up further still 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/prices-will-shoot-up-if-uk-fails-to-get-eu-single-market-access-retailers-warn>
 as shops adjust to higher trade tariffs.

Currency experts expect the pound to remain under pressure against the dollar 
on continued fears about the UK economic outlook. Another key factor keeping 
the pound low against the dollar is the prospect of US interest rates being 
raised while the Bank of England has hinted that with economic growth weak 
interest rates in the UK have further to fall from their already record low of 
0.25%.

The dollar and US stocks were also boosted on Monday by a market view that 
Hillary Clinton had won thelatest US presidential debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/debate-donald-trump-threatens-to-jail-hillary-clinton>
 against Donald Trump.

Jasper Lawler, analyst at online trading company CMC Markets, said the 
“fascinating presidential debate left markets’ favourite Hillary Clinton with a 
firm lead in the polls. Donald Trump was more measured in the debate but the 
damage had already been done after his‘lewd comments’ video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-forced-into-apology-as-sex-boast-tape-horrifies-republicans>
 was leaked two days earlier.”
 