
Premier Foods <https://www.theguardian.com/business/premierfoods> said rising 
sales were a sign it had a strong future as an independent company afterUS 
company McCormick abandoned a proposed takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/bidder-for-mr-kipling-owner-premier-foods-walks-away-mccormick>
 last month.

The company behind Bisto gravy and Mr Kipling cakes reported a 0.6% rise in 
annual sales to £772m, with sales for six of its major brands growing by an 
average of 3.4%.

“These six brands have received more focus on innovation and marketing 
investment over the last two years and this result clearly demonstrates that 
the group’s innovation and brand marketing strategy is working,” the company 
said.

Gavin Darby, chief executive, said it was an achievement against a backdrop of 
falling food prices. Food deflation has been running at a rate of about 1.5% to 
2% over the past year, Premier said, partly driven by heightened competition in 
the grocery market andgenerally weak inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/17/uk-inflation-falls-more-than-expected-air-fares-clothes-cars>
.

Premier Foods lays out ambitious growth plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/06/premier-foods-lays-out-ambitious-growth-plans>
Darby said: “We are very pleased to report sales growth both in the year and 
the fourth quarter in what continues to be a deflationary market. Our strategy 
of investing behind our brands and bringing new innovative products to market 
continues to deliver very positive results.

“The board is focused on delivering shareholder value and we see a strong 
future forPremier Foods <https://www.theguardian.com/business/premierfoods> 
with its leading category positions, great brands and strong operational cash 
flows.”

Premier made pre-tax losses of £13m, partly associated with its stake in Hovis 
bread, as well as another joint venture. Adjusted profit before tax in the year 
to 2 April increased by 3.5% to £86.1m.

Last month Premier managed to shake off the advances of US company McCormick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/bidder-for-mr-kipling-owner-premier-foods-walks-away-mccormick>
 after it made three attempts to buy the food company. The maker of Schwartz 
dried spices and sauces abandoned its takeover approach, conceding it would not 
be able to offer a price acceptable to Premier.

Premier Foods has however strengthened its ties with Nissin,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/06/premier-foods-lays-out-ambitious-growth-plans>
a Japanese instant noodles company that has built a 19.9% stake in the UK 
company. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/06/premier-foods-lays-out-ambitious-growth-plans>
 Premier is hoping to benefit from Nissin’s strength in key markets such as the 
US, China and Brazil through co-operation on branding and distribution. It also 
hopes to boost sales of existing products by using Nissin’s portfolio of 
patents to improve them.

Premier announced on Tuesday it had appointed Nissin’s managing director, 
Tsunao Kijima, as a non-executive director.
 