
The FA Cup traditionally inserts a much-needed break into the giddy rush of 
league fixtures at this time of year, though on this occasion thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> appears to have arrived at 
a sort of mid-season crux all by itself.

The teams have now played 20 games, just over halfway. Three near or at the 
bottom have just changed managers. Chelsea’s impressive run of victorieshas 
come to an end at a record-equalling 13 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, giving hope to a chasing pack who were beginning to despair, though the 
realisation is now setting in that there are six title contenders this season 
and all are in top form.

Pep Guardiola <https://www.theguardian.com/football/pep-guardiola> has just 
made that point, though he would, wouldn’t he, with his side down to fourth and 
facing a fight to ensure Champions League qualification for next season. It 
seems to be a valid one, however, for the top six already seems settled and the 
leading sides are standing up for themselves instead of standing aside as 
happened last season.

It is traditional for the English league to regard itself as a little more 
competitive than others around the globe, with three or four genuine title 
aspirants instead of the more usual two or three, but this season is set to go 
beyond the standard hype. Not only are six of the best managers in the world 
operating at the top end of the Premier League, all their teams are currently 
playing well.

It might be a stretch to say all six could win the title, but only because of 
the laughter such a remark would provoke at the Emirates.Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> do not win titles any more, 
surely they at least can be discounted, especially as they have the familiar 
albatross of Bayern Munich in the Champions League waiting for them next month.

Manchester City’s Pep Guardiola prefers concern to calm in fight for top four
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/manchester-city-pep-guardiola-west-ham-fa-cup>
For most of this season Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> would not have been 
taken much more seriously either, but look at them now. Under cover of 
Chelsea’s attention-grabbing exploits, José Mourinho has supervised six wins in 
a row to turn transitional, this‑is‑going‑to-take-time United – copyright: 
Louis van Gaal – into something much more like the original dashing brand of 
entertainment. There have been spectacular goals at Old Trafford in recent 
weeks, star players, late recoveries and even evidence that the manager is 
beginning to enjoy life in Manchester. Mourinho certainly seems to be enjoying 
himself more than Guardiola right now, possibly because with the gap between 
the clubs down to three points, City are in his sights.

The reason City are down to fourth and Arsenal out of the Champions League 
positions is an even better‑timed run from Tottenham, whose deserved victory 
overChelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> was their own fifth 
in a row. It cannot be entirely an accident that Spurs’ best form of the season 
has come after their Champions League exit and there is a strong temptation to 
suggest that if they wish to continue their ascent of the Premier League table 
the best plan might be to ditch the Europa League as early as is 
feasibly possible.

United are in a similar position. Yes, the Europa League offers the carrot of 
a Champions League place, but it is a long old road around Europe and Spurs and 
United appear to be capable of securing a top-four finish by themselves as long 
as they keep their domestic focus.

Should they bale out of the Europa League early there is a real possibility of 
the top four places at the end of the season being filled by teams free of 
Champions League commitments. Goodness knows how unhappy Guardiola would be 
then. He has spent much of his first season in England emphasising what an 
advantage it is to Chelsea andLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> not to have to play in Europe 
and should Spurs and United streamline their fixture lists it would place an 
almost intolerable pressure on Guardiola, who would be virtually alone in the 
country in seeking or expecting Champions League progress.

Already it is clear that two big teams are going to finish outside the top 
four this season. Already it is obvious, as Guardiola has pointed out, that 
games between top-six clubs are going to be crucial. City hired Guardiola 
because they wanted to make bigger waves in Europe and it would be a shame were 
that legitimate ambition prove their domestic undoing. This is not a situation 
he will have encountered when winning titles in Germany and Spain.

Pep Guardiola’s winter of discontent is nothing new in Premier League circus | 
Paul Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/03/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-liverpool-jurgen-klopp-christmas-fixtures>
Turning away from Europe, although not in the case of the singular Leicester 
City,the opinion here at the start of the season was that Hull and Burnley 
would go down, and that Watford might be vulnerable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/aug/06/leicester-city-premier-league-predictions-manchester-united>
. Watford have looked in good shape for much of the season but have started to 
wobble of late, with Walter Mazzarri declaring a state of “total emergency”. 
Burnley have been impressively solid, especially at home, and with 23 points in 
the bag and eight games at Turf Moor to come they have given themselves every 
chance of staying up.

Hull still appear on course to go down, for bringing in a manager with no 
Premier League experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/hull-city-appoint-marco-silva-as-new-manager>
 and a limited grasp of English will not strike many as a viable survival 
strategy for a team at the bottom of the table.

Missing from the early-season calculations was recognition that Crystal Palace 
and Swansea would find life so hard. Sunderland were expected to struggle but 
find salvation in at least three other teams proving less defensively 
organised, which has not proved to be the case either. Palace and Swansea have 
changed managers and, leaving aside the consideration that the latter would 
probably have gone for Sam Allardyce had their relegation rivals not nipped in 
first, the two appointments make an interesting contrast.

As an experienced firefighter Allardyce is widely expected to keep Palace out 
of trouble, even causing despondency in Sunderland when it became clear a 
catchable side might be put out of reach, though he is without a win in three 
games anddonating three points to Swansea was out of character 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/crystal-palace-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
. Paul Clement cannot take full credit for that victory, though perhaps his 
employers deserve some for going fora young English manager who appears capable 
of keeping up the club’s traditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/04/paul-clement-diligence-pragmatism-patience-swansea>
. Maybe that is being too kind to Swansea, who probably felt they had nowhere 
else to turn after gambling unwisely on Francesco Guidolin and then Bob 
Bradley, but if they can follow their managerial appointment with a defensive 
leader to replace Ashley Williams they still have a chance of escape.

The present bottom three will be clinging to the hope that another team or two 
drop in before the end of the season. Palace and Middlesbrough look the most 
likely candidates, though keep an eye on Leicester, who still need a couple of 
good wins to avoid being sucked into a scrap. Supporters of Watford and West 
Ham would say the same thing but evidence is required that any club in the 
relegation zone is capable of climbing out.
 