
1) Southampton really miss Austin’s power


This time last year Southampton paid £4m to sign Charlie Austin  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/16/charlie-austin-joins-southampton-4m-qpr>
from Queens Park Rangers. It was a while before he made an impact, but he 
certainly made an impact during the early part of this season, scoring nine 
goals in 19 games. But Southampton’s form has tailed off sinceAustin suffered a 
shoulder injury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/charlie-austin-claude-puel-southampton>
last month. They have lacked a cutting edge and have won only three of their 
past nine games in all competitions, sinking into the bottom half of the league 
in the process. Shane Long has rarely been prolific, Jay Rodriguez is still 
regaining his sharpness after his injury problems and Nathan Redmond is 
maturing. While Claude Puel’s side dominated for long spells against Burnley, a 
shortage of ruthlessness left them vulnerable and Joey Barton scored a late 
winner for the hosts. The outcome might have been different had Austin been 
available, but he is likely to be out until March. They may have to buy again. 
Jacob Steinberg

• Match report: Burnley 1-0 Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/burnley-southampton-premier-league-match-report>

Related: Eden Hazard and Pedro provide answers for Chelsea in Diego Costa’s 
absence | Jacob Steinberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/15/eden-hazard-pedro-diego-costa-chelsea-leicester>

2) City cannot afford to be this meek again

Manchester City remain wildly inconsistent, with even Pep Guardiola seemingly 
unable to bring calm instead of chaos. Going from a5-0 FA Cup win at West Ham  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/pep-guardiola-bigger-london-stadium-helped-manchester-city>
 to a 4-0 defeat at Everton in just over a week represents what election 
pundits would term a nine-goal swing. It appeared Guardiola’s problems were 
over when City’s performance at the London Stadium had everyone reaching for 
the superlatives once again, yet at Goodison they all came flooding back. 
Everton were good, well worth their win, though it was City’s ineffectiveness 
that proved the greater surprise. They did not respond to going a goal down as 
they hadagainst Arsenal in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/18/manchester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
, this was a performance more in keeping with theirmeek display at Anfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/liverpool-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 on New Year’s Eve. and City cannot afford to be meek at this stage of the 
season.They are now 10 points behind Chelsea, and thoughGuardiola has conceded 
defeat in the title race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/pep-guardiola-manchester-city-rules-out-title-race>
, he must be sick of being asked the question. A more pressing concern is 
whether City will even make the top four. Right now it could be said that of 
all the top six they appear most likely to miss out, were it not for the 
uncertainty over which version of City will turn up next week at home against 
Tottenham. Guardiola is in charge of the Premier League version of the girl 
with a curl in the middle of her forehead. Everyone knows City can be very, 
very good, but when they are bad, they are horrid.Paul Wilson 

• Match report: Everton 4-0 Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/everton-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Guardiola and Koeman speak after Everton thrash Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/15/guardiola-and-koeman-speak-after-everton-thrash-manchester-city-video>
3) Signings required to keep Hull above relegation dotted line

Hull City’s victory against Bournemouth was their first in the league since 6 
November and one that ensured a move off the bottom of the Premier League table 
above Swansea City and Sunderland.Marco Silva’s appointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/marco-silva-hull-city-planning-miracle>
 was greeted by much scepticism, but the Portuguese coach has proven pedigree 
in Europe and has already galvanised support among supporters previously 
preoccupied with singing against the Allam family. Silva has spoken of a desire 
to bring players in during the January window and if Hull can sign one or two 
quality additions then an escape from relegation is certainly not beyond them. 
However, those signings are crucial. Hull cannot rely only on Robert Snodgrass 
and Abel Hernández to provide an attacking spark. If Silva is to be successful 
at Hull he needs boardroom backing in the next two weeks.James Riach

• Match report: Hull City 3-1 Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/hull-city-bournemouth-premier-league-match-report>

Related: Jürgen Klopp’s diamond surprise tires under Manchester United 
pressure | Michael Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/15/jose-mourinho-jurgen-klopp-manchester-united-liverpool-tactics>

4) Kanté’s return shows Ndidi what needs to be done

Signed to improve Leicester City’s midfield solidity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/wilfred-ndidi-joins-leicester-city-genk>
, Wilfred Ndidi enjoyed a promising debut in theFA Cup win against Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/everton-leicester-city-fa-cup-match-report>
 last week and the visit of Chelsea provided the perfect opportunity to compare 
him with the player Claudio Ranieri hopes he can replace, N’Golo Kanté. But 
Kanté’s excellence in Chelsea’s 3-0 win against Leicester on Saturday merely 
underlined how much the champions have missed him since his move to Stamford 
Bridge in the summer. While Antonio Conte’s side have benefited from the 
Frenchman’s snappy interceptions and astute passing Leicester have slid towards 
the bottom three. Ranieri selected three central midfielders in an attempt to 
win the midfield but Nemanja Matic and Kanté were dominant despite the 
potential for them to be outnumbered. That was partly down to Conte’s tactical 
excellence – Chelsea’s 3-4-3 system means they often swamp the middle – but 
also Kanté’s brilliance. Although Ndidi clearly has potential he has big shoes 
to fill.Jacob Steinberg

• Match report: Leicester City 0-3 Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/leicester-city-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 N’Golo Kanté keeps one step ahead of Nampalys Mendy in his return to 
Leicester City. Photograph: Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images 
5) Ibrahimovic shows Rooney age cannot wither him

In March Zlatan Ibrahimovic, then 34, stated: “I’m only just warming up,” 
regarding one of the current era’s most successful careers. Fast forward to 
January 2017 and, now 35, the Swede slotted a 14th Premier League goal of his 
inauguralManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> season against their 
fiercest rivals to place his tally second only to the 15 of Ruud van Nistelrooy 
and Dwight Yorke after 20 outings in the competition. On the evidence so far 
Ibrahimovic is walking the “warming up” talk and who knows how many more he may 
finish with before the season’s end. Free transfers do not come much better 
than his from Paris Saint-Germain. Wayne Rooney, four years younger than 
Ibrahimovic, hustled and bustled after coming on at halftime – as James Milner 
can painfully testify – but it was as provider, not goalscorer, that he made 
his mark, helping to set up Ibrahimovic’s late goal. Jamie Jackson

• Match report: Manchester United 1-1 Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/15/manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Klopp happier than Mourinho after Manchester United and Liverpool draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/15/klopp-happier-than-mourinho-after-manchester-united-and-liverpool-draw-video>
6) Moyes regrets catching bullet dodged by Hughes

When Ellis Short sacked Steve Bruce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2011/nov/30/steve-bruce-sunderland-sacked>
 in November 2011, Sunderland’s owner was torn between making Mark Hughes or 
Martin O’Neill his next manager. Ultimately he chose O’Neill, so we will never 
know how Sunderland’s recent history might have unfolded had that “sliding 
doors” moment been reversed. Hughes has since built an attractive Stoke side 
who cantered to victory here and, noting David Moyes’s despairing body 
language, quite possibly suspects he dodged a north-east bullet. With money now 
too tight to mention on Wearside all the indications are that Moyes deeply 
regrets accepting Short’s invitation to become Sunderland’s fifth manager 
post-O’Neill. Lacking 11 senior players, eight injured and three at the Africa 
Cup of Nations, his bench was staffed by youngsters; sending the absent owner a 
pointed message, he did not use a single substitute as thousands of 
disillusioned fans streamed towards the exits mid-match. Relegation beckons.
Louise Taylor

• Match report: Sunderland 1-3 Stoke City  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/sunderland-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>

Related: Arsène Wenger aims to save Alexis Sánchez’s energy for tougher 
battles | Nick Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/15/arsene-wenger-alexis-sanchez-arsenal-swansea>

7) Swansea must improve defence if drop to be avoided

There were actually moments of encouragement for Paul Clement in Swansea’s 
defeat against Arsenal: if you like this sort of thing, the rainbow that 
appeared above the Liberty Stadium as they purposefully passed the ball in the 
first half might have been symbolic. Still, despite some fine work done in the 
middle of the pitch, Swansea’s problems lie at either end of the pitch. “We 
didn’t show any real quality in the attacking third,” Clement said after the 
game, which was a kind way of saying they created virtually nothing despite 
having a good amount of meaningful possession. And at the other end, while two 
of Arsenal’s goals arrived via extreme fortune, the other two came about after 
Olivier Giroud and Alexis Sánchez were allowed space on the edge of the 
six-yard box. The defence is the more pressing concern: Swansea have conceded 
the most goals in the division and the last time the team with the outright 
worst defensive record in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> survived was in 1996. 
Arsène Wenger claimed Swansea have enough quality to survive, but it is clear 
Clement has much work to do. Nick Miller

• Match report: Swansea City 0-4 Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/swansea-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 A rainbow over the Liberty Stadium was about the only enjoyable sight for 
Swansea fans on Saturday. Photograph: Nick Potts/PA 
8) Pulis wants good players, not just reinforcements, this month

Tony Pulis did not pull his punches. West Bromwich Albion need a boost and it 
has to come from the club’s Chinese owners in the form of a signing or two 
during the transfer window this month. The manager has spoken before along 
these lines and he did so with gusto after the thumping at Tottenham Hotspur. 
Pulis mentioned how he was “desperately disappointed” to havemissed out on the 
midfielder Morgan Schneiderlin, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/morgan-schneiderlin-manchester-united-west-brom-jose-mourinho-anthony-martial>
 who has moved toEverton from Southampton for an initial £20m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/morgan-schneiderlin-joins-everton-manchester-united>
, and he does not want West Brom’s budget – which he described as being “pretty 
tight and rigid and strict” – to be an obstacle. “We need to bring players in,” 
the West Brom manager said. “We need a lift and it’s not just the players – 
it’s everybody around the place. It’s not just signing players, it’s signing 
good players. There’s a big difference in that.”David Hytner

• Match report: Tottenham 4-0 West Brom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/tottenham-hotspur-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>

We need a lift and it's not just the players – it's everybody around the place
Tony Pulis 
9) Watford faithful would welcome broken English

The many and effusive tributes paid to Graham Taylor before this match with 
Middlesbrough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> may or may 
not have had an effect on Watford’s performance. Either way they weren’t very 
good. That’s now five points from eight matches for Walter Mazzarri’s side who 
look like they need a good shaking up and, especially, an injection of pace. 
Injuries and African absences are playing their part but it’s clear the Hornets 
need a different way of playing beyond deep crosses that look for the head of 
Troy Deeney, as willing and as capable as their skipper is. Tom Cleverley, who 
came closest to scoring on his debut on Saturday, may help break the lines but 
real pace either out wide or up front is very much lacking. And it may also be 
time for Mazzarri to ditch his translator and start speaking to the media, in 
English. A fear of being misunderstood is understandable but as Watford sink 
down the table and discontent becomes vocal, a more direct engagement with 
supporters may help.Paul MacInnes

• Match report: Watford 0-0 Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/watford-middlesbrough-premier-league-match-report>

If you've got less points than games you're going to get relegated so you've 
got to start catching up
Sam Allardyce 
10) Allardyce holds out little hope unless existing team plays better

The turn of phrase Slaven Bilic used was “crucial moments” to reflect on those 
pivotal games that have that extra impact to potentially change the course of a 
season; West Ham delivered on that front. But concern was etched all over Sam 
Allardyce’s face after the game.Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> have barely given him a 
moment, let alone a crucial one, to convince him they are ready to relaunch 
themselves. So chastened was he by the way his team capitulated he gave the 
impression that the job he took on has turned out to be harder than he 
anticipated – and he did not exactly arrive sporting rose-tinted spectacles. “I 
was fully aware of it when I got in,” he said. “It’s a long time things haven’t 
been going well results-wise. Every game where they don’t achieve a result 
means the gap between points and games played tells you the whole story. If 
you’ve got less points than games you’re going to get relegated so you’ve got 
to start catching up.” The question of whether Palace have enough in their 
squad to save themselves was not one Allardyce answered with enthusiasm. “I 
don’t know yet,” he said. “It’s hard to tell. I certainly think when Wilfried 
[Zaha] and Bakary Saka come back it will make a difference, and keeping 
McArthur fit and Loïc Rémy fit too. The rest have just got to get better 
individually and collectively, and if there’s any more to bring in we’ll try 
our best to do it. That’s the hard part – well, the whole job’s very difficult 
at the minute – but eventually by the time the window shuts it’ll be us working 
with them tirelessly to make them better at getting results.”Amy Lawrence

• Match report: West Ham 3-0 Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/west-ham-united-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>

Pos Team P GD Pts 
1 Chelsea 21 30 52 
2 Tottenham Hotspur 21 29 45 
3 Liverpool 21 25 45 
4 Arsenal 21 26 44 
5 Man City 21 15 42 
6 Man Utd 21 12 40 
7 Everton 21 9 33 
8 West Brom 21 0 29 
9 Stoke 21 -6 27 
10 Burnley 21 -8 26 
11 AFC Bournemouth 21 -7 25 
12 West Ham 21 -9 25 
13 Southampton 21 -7 24 
14 Watford 21 -13 23 
15 Leicester 21 -10 21 
16 Middlesbrough 21 -5 20 
17 Crystal Palace 21 -10 16 
18 Hull 21 -25 16 
19 Sunderland 21 -20 15 
20 Swansea 21 -26 15  