
Economic forecasts for 2017 project continued frailty in the global economy, 
and subpar growth for most countries and regions. Obvious economic problems 
include Europe’s weak banks, China’s distorted property market, political 
uncertainty in the west, historically high private and public debt – 225% of 
GDP, according to theInternational Monetary Fund 
<https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fm/2016/02/pdf/fm1602.pdf> – and the 
reluctance of heavily indebted Greece and Portugal to comply with IMF 
programmes.

Additional global economic risks, such as a major oil-market disruption that 
could drive prices up, are not as obvious, and thus receive less attention. 
Economists call such events “shocks” precisely because they come unexpectedly 
and can have far-reaching consequences.

Unprecedented long-term monetary stimulus and massive spikes in public-debt 
burdens have left governments poorly equipped to manage the next economic 
downturn when – not if – it arrives. The next recession probably will not be as 
bad as the last one, but advanced economies will be far better prepared for it 
if they undergo gradual monetary-policy normalisation and fiscal consolidation 
in the meantime.

With respect to monetary policy, the United States’ unemployment rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/us-economy-september-jobs-report>
, at about 5%, is close to what most economists consider full employment, and 
the Federal Reserve is widely expected to raise its target interest rate again 
in December. But the Fed is moving at a very slow pace.

The European Central Bank will likely extend its bond-purchasing programme; 
but it has reason to question the results of its quantitative-easing policy, 
given that eurozone unemployment still averages about 10%, indicating a 
sizeable output gap. Meanwhile,the Japanese economy continues to limp along 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/japan-pm-shinzo-abe-launches-spending-programme-to-boost-economy>
, with the Bank of Japan now “managing the yield curve” in yet another attempt 
to raise inflation and growth from their current low levels.

In terms of fiscal policy, most advanced economies’ public finances are 
suffering because policymakers have failed to implement sufficient supply-side 
structural reforms to control public-pension growth, reform growth-inhibiting 
taxes, and liberalise labour markets. These fiscal-policy failures have put too 
much of the burden on central banks, even though growth would more likely 
accelerate with productivity-enhancing supply-side measures.

Lately, the economists who are most influential with left-leaning politicians 
seem hopeful that growth, employment, and incomes will rise if policymakers 
embrace massive new deficit-financed spending to create demand for goods and 
services. They argue that with borrowing costs so low, deficit spending is 
virtually free, and we need not worry about high debt levels.

But this argument ignores the typically large gap between what economists 
devise and what politicians promise, and what public-spending programmes 
deliver. As ECB presidentMario Draghi 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/columnist/mario-draghi> has put it 
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2015/html/sp151031.en.html>: “There 
aren’t many public investments with a high rate of return.” Governments should 
certainly cut taxes and fund initiatives that pass rigorous cost-benefit tests; 
but new spending programmes usually do not yield a significant or immediate 
economic boost.

Spending generally occurs well into the future, when economic conditions are 
projected to be better. As President Barack Obama, referring to his signature 
2009 stimulus bill, eventually admitted, “the shovels weren’t ready.” 
Similarly, Japan has attempted government spending stimulus for decades, with 
little to show for it in terms of overall economic growth.

Large deficits can be benign or even desirable during recessions and wars, or 
when used to finance productive public investments; and in a deep, long-lasting 
downturn, with interest rates at or near zero, a well-timed, sensible fiscal 
response can theoretically help in the short term. Butstudies 
<http://home.uchicago.edu/~huhlig/papers/uhlig.aer.pp.2010.pdf> show that the 
multiplier effect of government spending – when it may increase GDP by more 
than the expenditure – shrinks rapidly after a few quarters, and then turns 
negative. In fact, the multiplier effect can even be negative during economic 
expansions whencentral banks maintain zero-interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/08/ecb-keeps-interest-rates-at-0>
 and households expect taxes to rise when interest rates do.

Because new government purchases can devolve into counterproductive political 
boondoggles that spur little economic growth, another proposal one often hears 
is to expand government transfer payments. Leaving aside the fact that transfer 
payments are already fiscally unsustainable in most countries (because they 
were adopted and expanded under better economic and demographic conditions), 
could they lift the economy?

A recent study <https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/mac.20140348> 
addresses this question. According to former Obama administration chief 
economist Christina Romer and David Romer of the University of California, 
Berkeley, even permanent transfer-payment increases provide stimulus for only a 
few months, and the effect does not spread to employment. The study concludes 
that the benefits from transfers are “much less persistent, and much smaller 
overall, than those of tax changes.”

In economies where stimulus programmes are carefully vetted and can be 
implemented quickly, any temporary government spending should be coupled with 
gradual fiscal consolidation, to minimise economic risk and long-term costs. As 
history and theory indicate, this fiscal consolidation should happen through 
reduced future spending growth, especially on transfer payments. Economic 
policymakers should heed this lesson so that they can gradually re-arm 
themselves; otherwise, they could be left with no firepower when they most need 
it.

 * Michael J Boskin is professor of economics at Stanford University and 
senior fellow at the Hoover Institution.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>
 