
The retail industry has issued a stark warning that prices of consumer staples 
such as food and clothes will shoot up if the UK government fails to negotiate 
a goodtrading deal with the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/12/brexit-talks-may-be-most-complicated-negotiation-ever-says-minister>
.

Business leaders urge Theresa May to avoid hard Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/07/business-leaders-urge-theresa-may-to-avoid-hard-brexit>
Retailers are already facing rising costs that may have to be passed on to 
consumers because of the pound’s sharp fall since the Brexit vote, which has 
raised the price of imports. The British Retail Consortium (BRC) says prices 
will be increased further if the UK fails to negotiate access toEurope’s single 
market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/hard-brexit-risks-destroying-uks-open-economy-says-cbi-chief>
 and has to fall back on World Trade Organisation rules.

The BRC says under such rules, the new tariff on imports from the EU would be 
highest for food and clothing.

“For example, the average duty on meat imports could be as high as 27%, while 
clothing and footwear would attract tariffs of 11-16% versus the current 
zero-rating for all EU imports,” the trade group said as it launched its “A 
Fair Brexit for Consumers” campaign on Monday.

Falling back on to WTO rules would also increase the cost of sourcing from 
beyond the EU, according to the BRC. The import cost of women’s clothing from 
Bangladesh would be 12% higher, while Chilean wine would be 14% dearer for 
importers.

The group has written to secretary of state for international trade, Liam Fox, 
calling for the government strike a deal with other EU countries that does not 
squeeze household budgets and to focus on lowering import costs and avoiding 
any increase in tariffs.

Hard Brexit risks destroying UK's open economy, says CBI chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/hard-brexit-risks-destroying-uks-open-economy-says-cbi-chief>
“We will be supporting the government through this complex and difficult 
process, helping them analyse how increased cost pressures on retailers could 
mean higher shop prices and identifying any opportunities for new trade deals 
that could benefit individuals and families,” said BRC chairman Richard Baker.

“The retail industry is the UK’s biggest importer, and has huge experience of 
importing from every corner of the world. We will be engaged in a constructive 
dialogue with government that will bring our experience to bear on the Brexit 
talks to the benefit of everyone in the UK.”

The BRC is the latest business group to call on the government to strike a 
favourable trade deal afterworries grew over the last week that ministers would 
sacrifice access to the single market in return for stricter controls on 
immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/07/business-leaders-urge-theresa-may-to-avoid-hard-brexit>
 – a settlement that has become known as “hard Brexit”. Those concerns have
pushed the pound to new 31-year lows against the dollar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/theories-emerge-for-pounds-flash-crash-against-dollar>
.

The CBI director general, Carolyn Fairbairn, has said Theresa May’s lurch to a 
hard Brexit stancerisks destroying Britain’s hopes of remaining an open economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/hard-brexit-risks-destroying-uks-open-economy-says-cbi-chief>
.
 