
Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> has been told 
by a group of private investors that it will be taken to court over a £1.25bn 
claim related to its 2008 cash call.

Clydesdale Bank makes offer for 300 RBS branches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/clydesdale-bank-offer-rbs-royal-bank-scotland-branches>
The RBoS Shareholder Action Group <http://www.rbosaction.org/>, which 
represents 27,000 retail investors, issued its warning after a report that 
other shareholders were considering settling out of court.

The group, one of at least three bringing claims related to the rights issue 
in 2008, said: “We look forward to seeing Fred Goodwin and RBS in court in 
March.”


The group said it was the only one suing Goodwin, who was chief executive of 
RBS at the time of its £45bn taxpayer bailout, and three of the bank’s former 
executives.

The legal action is said to be “on behalf of thousands of investors, both 
private and institutional, who lost money by subscribing for shares during the 
2008 RBS rights issue”.

The announcement was made ahead of RBS’s third-quarter results, which will be 
scrutinised for any further provisions relating to the case. In August,RBS set 
aside £700m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/05/rbs-blames-2bn-half-year-loss-on-string-of-legal-challenges>
 for the case after an attempt at mediation talks in July failed to reach a 
settlement.

The total claim by all the investors involved comes to £4bn. 

The court action by disgruntled investors is one of many factors that could 
feature in the bank’s results on Friday,when it is expected to pile up more 
losses on top of £52bn already incurred since the bailout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/22/can-rbs-ever-be-privatised-eight-years-52bn-loss>
.

An update on the potential spin-out of 300 branches – which were going to be 
rebranded Williams & Glyn – is expected, while the bank is also likely to face 
questions about the alleged mistreatment of small-business customers.

RBS has also told investors it faces a hard-to-quantify settlement with the US 
Department of Justice (DoJ) over the way mortgage bonds were sold in the run-up 
to the 2008 financial crisis.

Philip Hammond, the chancellor, said earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/philip-hammond-drops-plan-to-sell-cut-price-lloyds-shares-to-public>
 that he could not sell off any of the 73% taxpayer stake for now. “It’s clear 
that the disposal of RBS shares at a price that recovers taxpayers’ investment 
is not practical at the moment,” he said at the time, citing the problems over 
the spin-out of Williams & Glyn and the ongoing case with the DoJ.

RBS shares trade at about 190p, below the 502p average price paid by taxpayers 
during the financial crisis.
 