
The brothers

Paul Watkins <http://paulwatkinsmusic.com/> is giving his brother Huw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/26/huw-watkins-composer-portrait-review-his-versatility-knows-no-bounds>
’s cello concerto its world premiere with theBBC National Orchestra of Wales.

Paul: When I got married, I thought it would be nice if Huw wrote a little 
organ piece for us going down the aisle. I was 23, so he would have been 16 or 
17. He came up with this piece and played it to my wife-to-be. She really 
didn’t like it at all. She said: “I’m not walking down the aisle to that.” It 
was slightly spicy, in terms of dissonance.

Huw: It might have scared the congregation.

Paul: I quietly asked him if he’d write something that sounded a bit more like 
Aaron Copland. He said: “All right, but only if you give me some money for it.”

Huw: It was my first commission. I think you paid me £20.

Paul: No, it was £40.

Huw’s got a music degree – but I’ve still got all my hair

Huw: I think it was more like £20. Still, it was very generous. It was a 
completely new piece. It sounded more like the Dynasty theme tune.

Paul: Our parents weren’t pushy at all when we were growing up. There was a 
piano in the house, and we both messed around with it as soon as we could climb 
up on to the stool and reach the keys. We also had the advantage of my mother’s 
mother living with us until she died, when I was 14 or 15. She was brought up 
in that great Welsh church organist tradition, so she taught us how to play 
piano and read music.

Huw: Paul was the trailblazer. He went away to the Yehudi Menuhin school when 
he was 13, so the amount of time when we were both at home together was quite 
short. We played duets together, and when I was just about good enough I could 
play with him on the cello. He was the cellist though – I just played the piano.

Paul: That was a family bone of contention. We wanted to give Huw the chance 
to play an orchestral instrument, rather than just the piano, which is a bit of 
lonely existence. We tried him on all sorts of things, but he never really took 
to them. Our dad was keen for him to play the violin, just so he could play a 
little bit of chamber music with us and his friends at the weekend. When he 
went off to the sixth form at Chetham’s [school of music] in Manchester, he put 
his foot on the accelerator. Every time I’d come back from the Menuhin school 
I’d see this massive improvement in his playing. It was really exciting. I 
don’t think I’ve ever told him that.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWbYApMwGhn8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWbYApMwGhn8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWbYApMwGhn8&media=>
Listen to Huw Watkins’s Piano Quartet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WbYApMwGhn8> 
Huw: That’s very nice. We should do these interviews more often! The fact that 
Paul could have a career in classical music, which is a fairly niche thing, 
meant I knew that after university it would be possible for me, too.

Paul: I ducked out of university to join the BBC Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bbc-symphony-orchestra>. That’s the one 
thing our parents love to bring up: the fact that Huw does, in fact, have a 
university degree, whereas I dropped out after a year.

Huw: Definitely mention that in the article. He does make a bucketload of 
money, though. For pianists, everything is a zero-hours contract.

The BBC Proms 2016: few surprises, but a solid programme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/13/bbc-proms-2016-programme-preview-boulez-berlioz-david-bowie>
Paul: Huw couldn’t pass the room without going in and playing the piano. 
Whether he was practising in a disciplined way was debatable, but there was 
something about being in contact with that instrument that he couldn’t stop.

Huw: You should call our parents to ask which of us was the more gifted. I 
don’t play a stringed instrument, and perhaps the whole jealousy thing was at 
the back of my mind when I was learning to play. Maybe I thought strings were 
too big a mountain to climb after seeing Paul play. I probably always sensed I 
wasn’t going to be gifted in that way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fproms-musical-families-watkins-bbc-symphony-chorus-payare-weilerstein-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40778d9e507e13787cd0880938d633368ca66a7a%2F0_268_4332_2600%2F4332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Proms%20musical%20families%3A%20'She%20takes%20a%20lot%20more%20liberties%20when%20she%E2%80%99s%20playing%20with%20me!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fproms-musical-families-watkins-bbc-symphony-chorus-payare-weilerstein-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Proms%20musical%20families%3A%20%27She%20takes%20a%20lot%20more%20liberties%20when%20she%E2%80%99s%20playing%20with%20me%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fproms-musical-families-watkins-bbc-symphony-chorus-payare-weilerstein-interviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40778d9e507e13787cd0880938d633368ca66a7a%2F0_268_4332_2600%2F4332.jpg>
 ‘Huw’s got an analytical mind – but at least I’ve got all my hair’ … Paul 
Watkins in 2007. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Paul: I think we’re gifted in different areas. What Huw has, which I’m 
terribly jealous of, is the ability to listen to a piece of music in any style, 
reproduce it at the piano and understand the inner workings of harmony and that 
sort of thing. He’s got that analytical mind, which annoyingly seems to come 
naturally. But at least I’ve still got my hair!

Huw: I started composing very young. Our mother was a music teacher, so she 
always had reams of manuscript paper around the house and I just filled it up. 
I was nine or 10.

Paul: This will be the first time I’ve worked with Huw in a big symphonic 
capacity. If you’re lucky enough to be playing pieces by composers you know, 
like or respect, you feel a responsibility. Sometimes, if the composer’s a 
complete twat, you don’t care as much.

Huw: It does happen.

Paul: And the practice I’ve been doing on Huw’s piece, it’s been very intense 
– the most intense practice I’ve done for a while. Partly because the little 
bastard was late with the thing.

Huw: I was a little later than I would have liked to have been. But Paul is 
quick to learn things, so I thought: “I don’t need to worry so much.” Without 
getting soppy or sentimental, it’s a really nice thing. It makes me sound a bit 
cheesier than I am, but the piece is dedicated to our parents. It was their 
golden wedding anniversary, and this whole piece is a real family thing. I’ve 
written lots of pieces Paul has played, so he knows my voice, my language. I 
know he will not fuck up.

• Prom 37 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e6bhn3> is on 12 August.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fproms-musical-families-watkins-bbc-symphony-chorus-payare-weilerstein-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb45f3e612d3cf6600f2f5120fd6f70e44980adc%2F0_144_5184_3283%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Proms%20musical%20families%3A%20'She%20takes%20a%20lot%20more%20liberties%20when%20she%E2%80%99s%20playing%20with%20me!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fproms-musical-families-watkins-bbc-symphony-chorus-payare-weilerstein-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Proms%20musical%20families%3A%20%27She%20takes%20a%20lot%20more%20liberties%20when%20she%E2%80%99s%20playing%20with%20me%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fproms-musical-families-watkins-bbc-symphony-chorus-payare-weilerstein-interviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb45f3e612d3cf6600f2f5120fd6f70e44980adc%2F0_144_5184_3283%2F5184.jpg>
 ‘Rafael and I bounce ideas off each other’ … cellist Alisa Weilerstein. 
Photograph: Robin Thomson/Decca 
The married couple

 Venezuelan conductor Rafael Payare makes his Proms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms-2016> debut at Prom 47, leading the 
Ulster Orchestra. Cellist Alisa Weilerstein joins the BBC Scottish Symphony 
Orchestra atProm 48 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e3bhn3>.


Rafael: We met in Gothenburg. Alisa was there to audition for Gustavo Dudamel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/18/from-bolivar-to-super-bowl-how-gustavo-dudamel-is-reaching-out-to-the-99-untouched-by-classical-music->
 and I was playing with the Gothenburg Symphony as an extra. It was February 
2009, and we just shook hands and said hello. Then she came to Venezuela that 
December, and the rest is history. We’ve been together since.

Alisa: When I went to Venezuela, it happened very fast.

Rafael: In Gothenburg, we didn’t have time to talk. Venezuela was completely 
different. Now we’ve been married for almost three years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fproms-musical-families-watkins-bbc-symphony-chorus-payare-weilerstein-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10cb60c122ffcb88c972a6ccf8b3ab1f1686aa14%2F125_168_4375_5469%2F4375.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Proms%20musical%20families%3A%20'She%20takes%20a%20lot%20more%20liberties%20when%20she%E2%80%99s%20playing%20with%20me!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fproms-musical-families-watkins-bbc-symphony-chorus-payare-weilerstein-interviews%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Proms%20musical%20families%3A%20%27She%20takes%20a%20lot%20more%20liberties%20when%20she%E2%80%99s%20playing%20with%20me%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fproms-musical-families-watkins-bbc-symphony-chorus-payare-weilerstein-interviews%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10cb60c122ffcb88c972a6ccf8b3ab1f1686aa14%2F125_168_4375_5469%2F4375.jpg>
 ‘The hardest part is that we need to be organised’ … conductor Rafael Payare. 
Photograph: J Henry Fair 
Alisa: Technology was extraordinarily helpful. We were constantly on Skype or 
WhatsApp. But the first couple of years we were together we saw each other 
maybe every month – and that was when we were lucky. It shows how strong our 
relationship was.

Rafael: We love making music together and try to do it as much as possible. 
She’s a cellist and I’m a conductor, so there’s nothing for us to be 
competitive about. Music is not done by yourself; we all need to interact with 
others.

Alisa: We work together fairly often, but we also do separate things. We both 
travel so much: if one of us is free and the other is working, then the free 
one will go to the city where the other is working. I love attending his 
concerts and I know it’s the same the other way. We’re very supportive of each 
other. I think it’s important for a musical couple to root for each other. I 
play as a soloist when we work together, so it’s very collaborative. I don’t 
think of it as “I’m being conducted,” which implies being bossed around or 
being led. We think of each other as equals, and we learn from each other, 
bounce ideas off each other.

Rafael: I’ve seen her in concert with other people – she takes a lot more 
liberties when she’s playing with me!

Alisa: Of course! You know me much better!

Rafael: This might sound cliched, but music is a big part of our lives. Even 
when we’re at home, it is always in the subconscious, and sometimes in the 
physical. When you go home, you don’t think about how you’re going to take off 
your shoes – it’s just part of what you do.

Alisa: It’s very natural, very integrated into our lives. We’re constantly 
studying, practising or listening. When we go to each other’s concerts, we give 
each other comments in a positive way.

Rafael: We can say: “It would be great if you could play this,” or “You should 
hear this. You should play this because it would fit you very well.” One 
beautiful thing about music is that you never stop learning: you are always 
adding different palettes and colours to your life.

Alisa: I might even say: “What do you think about the timing? Would you 
consider doing it in a slightly different way? Why did you interpret it this 
way?”

Rafael: The hardest part is that we need to be organised. I am Venezuelan, and 
before this I was never organised. Just to see each other we have to be 
organised. We have a rule that we don’t go more than two weeks without seeing 
each other – and that rule was in place before our daughter, Ariadna, was born. 
We try to make it even less. But with what we do, it’s almost impossible to see 
each other every single day.

Alisa: We’re really grateful for having the relationship we have and doing the 
artistic projects we really want to do. But that means we have to spend more 
time apart. We try to make our schedule six months at a time so we can say: 
“You’re free, come to me. Let’s do this together.”

• Proms 47 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ebw2mb> and 48 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e3bhn3> are on 21 August.

The mother and daughter

Bev and Lizzie Howard are members of the BBC Symphony Chorus, which performs 
regularly at theProms <https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms>. Lizzie studies 
songwriting at the London Centre of Contemporary Music.


Bev: I’ve been performing since I was seven or eight. My husband also plays 
instruments, so we liked to assume our children would be interested, though you 
don’t want to force.


Lizzie: I supposedly embraced it fully. When I was very small, just five, I 
had violin lessons, because that’s my mum’s instrument. But she couldn’t bear 
the sound of me butchering it, so clearly I didn’t take to that. Then, a year 
later, it was: “Let’s give her piano lessons. You can’t go too far wrong with 
piano.” And I seemed to take to it.

Bev: Lizzie is her own worst critic. I’m the other way. I say: “You’re being 
too hard on yourself! You just need to take a step back.” She’s very motivated.

If Summer Nights comes on the radio, I’m John Travolta and Mum’s Olivia 
Newton-John
Lizzie Howard 
Lizzie: Support at home wasn’t being told to practise, it was being told: 
“Lizzie, stop practising – you’re only making yourself upset.” I needed 
reassurance that I was doing a good job, rather than a push to work harder.

Bev: We do tend to burst into song, me and you, which makes my other daughter 
moan. But she’s only joking. We automatically go into harmonies.

Lizzie: If Summer Nights comes on in the car, I’m John Travolta and you’re 
Olivia Newton-John. We don’t even have to discuss it.

Bev: You have to follow your passion. I do bookkeeping and accountancy, but 
they’re not my passion. Who knows? Lizzie might write the Christmas No 1 song 
and we can retire.

Lizzie: Mum always says the Christmas No 1 will be both her and my pension 
fund.

Bev: I know it’s not as lucrative as if you go into …

Both: Computing!

Bev: I suppose I’m quite envious of Lizzie following her dream. It wasn’t the 
right thing for me at the time, so I kept music as a hobby. Before I was in the 
BBC I mainly sang in local operatic societies and musical theatre.

Lizzie: I’d done a couple of shows at school and drama groups, but I didn’t 
really think I could sing. There was an operatic society summer concert when I 
was 13, and they were doing a Wicked medley. And at the time, Wicked was my 
favourite thing, so you said: “Why don’t you come along?” Then you did the BBC 
before me. You’d been in for a few years, and it was only when I moved to 
London you said I should come and audition. I was: “No … There’s no way!”

Bev: I’ve always loved the Proms, so I put my name down for the chorus. I was 
blown away when they said yes. It has been fantastic. Just fantastic. I’ve been 
in for four years. Lizzie has a really lovely soprano voice, and I knew she 
missed singing in a choir, so I suggested she have a go.

Lizzie: I was definitely encouraged by you and my father to give it a go. It 
was terrifying. I was convinced they were going to say: “Go and have some 
singing lessons, develop your voice and come back in a couple of years.” And 
then when they said: “Would you like to join as a first soprano?” I said: “You 
mean now? Right now?” I still feel as if I might get kicked out at any moment.

The best classical concerts and opera of summer 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/may/05/classical-concerts-opera-summer-2016-john-luther-adams-iain-banks>
Bev: It’s a treat to sing something like Belshazzar’s Feast. Other people are 
saying: “Oh, not another Belshazzar’s.” No! It’s my first. And I feel my voice 
has changed and improved in the last four years, singing with other people who 
are good.

Lizzie: We stood next to each other at my first concert. We both love the 
harmonies, so when it splits a lot between first and second sopranos we like to 
be together, because we get to hear all of the different lines. And it’s nice: 
although I’m at uni and living away from home, I still get to see my mum every 
few weeks. There’s been more than one rehearsal, with the stress of uni, when 
I’ve gone over and said: “Mummy, I need a cuddle.”

Bev: Need a lift home, more like!

• Performing throughout the season, including the last night, 10 September.
 