
The world is edging toward a major conservation target for protected land and 
oceans, but there are concerns over how safeguarded areas are managed and 
whether they are effectively protecting endangered species, according to a new 
report.

Nearly 15% of the Earth’s land, covering around 20m sq km, is contained in 
national parks or other protected areas. This figure has flatlined over the 
past year, largely because of improved data collection, but is close to an
internationally agreed goal 
<https://www.cbd.int/sp/targets/rationale/target-11/> to protect 17% of the 
land surface by 2020.

There has been a faster rate of progress in ocean conservation, albeit of a 
low base. Around 4% of the total surface of the ocean, covering 15m sq km, is 
now protected. This area, roughly the size of Russia, has quadrupled in size 
over the past decade.

Climate change will mean the end of national parks as we know them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/22/climate-change-national-parks-threat>
But the progress report 
<https://wdpa.s3.amazonaws.com/Protected_Planet_Reports/2445%20Global%20Protected%20Planet%202016_WEB.pdf>
 by the UN Environment and the International Union for Conservation of Nature 
(IUCN) warns that some of the most biodiverse ecosystems are not being 
protected and that the management of many protected areas is deficient.

Less than 20% of areas considered crucial hubs for species are fully 
protected, the report states, with countries routinely failing to assess the 
effectiveness of their national parks nor provide wildlife corridors that allow 
animals to roam between protected areas.

Restricting hunting, mining and other development helps species’ overall 
survival chances, with the report stating that global populations of 
terrestrial species in protected areas suffered an average decline of 18% from 
1970 to 2010, compared to a 39% loss for species when unprotected areas are 
included.

“Ecological factors such as park size, fragmentation and connectivity are 
fundamentally important in the long term, but are often superseded by 
short-term social and economic factors,” the report, presented at theIUCN 
congress in Hawaii <http://www.iucnworldconservationcongress.org/>, found.

“Protected areas can have positive impacts on species extinction risk and 
population trends, but they need to be properly sited and managed to realize 
their full potential.”

 Erik Solheim, head of UN environment, said that “huge gains” have been made 
in the quantity of protected areas, but this had to be matched by their quality.

 “The world needs to do more to effectively protect our most biologically 
diverse spaces,” he said. “Protected areas need to be better connected, to 
allow populations of animals and plants to mix and spread. Also important is 
ensuring local communities are involved in protection efforts. Their support is 
fundamental to long-term conservation.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fus-national-parks-timelapse-centennial-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sunrise%20to%20sunset%3A%20stunning%20timelapse%20video%20of%20America's%20national%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fus-national-parks-timelapse-centennial-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sunrise%20to%20sunset%3A%20stunning%20timelapse%20video%20of%20America%27s%20national%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fus-national-parks-timelapse-centennial-video&media=>
Sunrise to sunset: stunning timelapse video of America’s national parks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/aug/23/us-national-parks-timelapse-centennial-video>
 Countries in South America and the Caribbean protect the largest portion of 
their land, with Brazil accounting for the world’s largest safeguarded system, 
spanning 2.47m sq km. Countries in the Middle East, by contrast, protect just 
119,000 sq km, or around 3% of the area’s landmass.

 Some nations are moving towards including biodiversity values in their 
national accounts, such as the UK, which has accounted for the value of air 
quality and recreation in areas such as the Lake District. But other nations 
continue to subsidize ecologically harmful practices, such as Thailand’s 
support for a shrimp farming industry that is resulting in the destruction of 
mangroves.

 Marine reserves have grown thanks to new measures taken by countries 
including Australia, New Zealand, the UK and Spain. The report does not include 
the recent creation of theworld’s largest ocean reserve by the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/26/obama-to-create-worlds-largest-protected-marine-area-off-coast-of-hawaii-papahanaumokuakea>
, off the north-western islands of Hawaii.

 Conservationists are pushing for far greater efforts to protect marine life, 
with a resolution put to the IUCN congress that nations aim for 30% of the 
oceans to be protected. While terrestrial ecosystems are affected by climate 
change, poaching and mass land conversion for agriculture, the warming, 
acidifying oceans are possibly faring even worse with less protected area.

 Dan Laffoley, a marine adviser for the IUCN, said the 30% target is 
“important, absolutely critical, but we need to think beyond those targets. We 
need to protect much more of the ocean, only about 1% is strictly protected.

 “With the knowledge we have, we need more than that. We need a far more 
strategic, connected approach if we are going to get out of this mess.”
 