
Pupils at the Simon Langton grammar school for boys in Canterbury have written 
an open letter, 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/milo-yiannopoulos-breitbart-cancel-simon-langton-grammar-school-a7437196.html>
 complaining about the decision to ban former pupil, Breitbart’s Milo 
Yiannopoulos, from giving a talk at the school, owing to his “reputational 
issues”.

Yiannopoulos, who was banned after pressure from the Department for Education, 
clearly fancies himself to be quite the shock-jock, with his racist and sexist 
views (“America has a Muslim problem”; feminism is “like cancer”).Proper little 
charmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/milo-yiannopoulos-nero-permanently-banned-twitter>
, isn’t he? However, the Canterbury pupils say they don’t need to be protected 
from “indoctrination” and have been denied the right to “interrogate rhetoric”. 
They said that silencing Yiannopoulos vindicated him, “reinforcing his 
accusation that our society is against free speech”. Bravo. Give those pupils a 
merit mark.

What a lesson for all those organisations and groups that have called for 
speakers to be banned, sometimes on the most spurious grounds, in the eternal 
quest for the “safe space”.

But couldn’t we ban Yiannopoulos – just a little bit? After all, does anyone 
really benefit from standing downwind of such pathetic attention-seeking?

However, Yiannopoulos shouldn’t be banned, not just because he enjoys it too 
much, or even because it’s wrong, but mainly because it’s dangerous.

It is also nonsensical. Have recent times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/brexit-will-blow-59bn-hole-in-public-finances-admits-hammond>
 taught us nothing? There are no safe spaces, it was all a mirage. Or, if you 
like, a mirage wrapped in a delusion inside an echo chamber. While the 
anguished central casting liberal “we should have listened to people more” 
rhetoric is becoming somewhat overplayed, there’s no doubt that, if 2016 has 
been anything, it’s been the year of “you can run but you can’t hide”. A year 
that’s demonstrated that however smart, decent and switched-on you think you 
and your mates are, there’s abig, bad, increasingly powerful counter-reality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
 out there that vehemently disagrees, and the very last thing that people 
should do is ignore it.

Of course, it’s jarring sometimes. Andrew Marr interviewing Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/13/andrew-marr-defends-remembrance-sunday-marine-le-pen-interview-french-far-right-bbc>
 sent me screaming back into the shower for a good scrub. Then there’s Nigel 
Farage… everywhere. Let’s be clear: I’m not in the market for normalising 
certain beliefs, giving prejudice a comfy perch in the national and 
international conversation or making media darlings or “amusing” circus turns 
out of the likes of Farage.

While it’s possible to be angered by some no-platforms, and more instinctively 
sympatico with others, the fact remains that it’s all unworkable. However 
odious people’s views are, they must be smoked out, challenged, ridiculed, 
exposed, rather than allowed to fester in the shadows and in the darkest, 
smelliest pockets of the internet, all the time preening as martyrs.

Above all, it is time to grasp, just as the Canterbury pupils did, that 
there’s no such thing as “free-ish speech”. Free speech is either truly free, 
for everybody, or it is the worthless joke that democracy’s enemies want it to 
be. Nor are there any “safe spaces” – it was all just a lovely dream.

What was called “safe” was just intellectual suffocation, with everyone 
pleading and cajoling: “Come on world, play nice!” Increasingly, what’s more 
dangerous than that?

Punk a brand? Corré is flaming mad
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fpupils-stand-for-free-speech-punk-catherine-zeta-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fc6026cf70891ba9b25bc115cf60eaab991baa3%2F0_238_5240_3145%2F5240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pupils%E2%80%99%20stand%20for%20free%20speech%20is%20a%20lesson%20to%20us%20all%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fpupils-stand-for-free-speech-punk-catherine-zeta-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pupils%E2%80%99%20stand%20for%20free%20speech%20is%20a%20lesson%20to%20us%20all%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fpupils-stand-for-free-speech-punk-catherine-zeta-jones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fc6026cf70891ba9b25bc115cf60eaab991baa3%2F0_238_5240_3145%2F5240.jpg>
 Going for the burn: Joe Corré. Photograph: Ki Price/Getty Images 
When Joe Corré, co-founder of lingerie label Agent Provocateur, announced his 
plans (with mother/ designer Vivienne Westwood’s blessing) toceremonially burn 
£5m of rare punk memorabilia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/16/malcolm-mclaren-son-joe-corre-burn-punk-memorabilia-punk-london-queen>
 inherited from his late father, former Sex Pistols manager, Malcolm McLaren, 
this ex-music hack’s first thought (without swearing) was: “I’ll have it.” 
There then followed more swearing.

I understood Corré’s rationale. Following the Punk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/punk> London 40th anniversary event, he 
considered that the establishment had “privatised, packaged and castrated” punk 
and it was time to stop “conning a younger generation”. Corré added that punk 
has become a “McDonald’s brand”, which is where he lost me.

Of course, Corré was always entitled to do what he wanted with his 
possessions. However, punk was never a brand or even simply a musical genre – 
it was primarily an attitude and, however much the corporate world tried to own 
it, it never quite managed to do so. Moreover, while the punk period was 
documented, it was a far cry from our selfie-obsessed, over-documented times 
and such items (rare recordings and merchandise) were priceless in ways that 
couldn’t be measured in mere cash value.

If the goal was to make a bold statement, Corré could have planned to, say, 
symbolically burn the most and least valuable items, sold the rest and given 
the money to charity.

Even better, he could have used the money to start a trust to enable 
struggling, skint artists (of whom there are many). By contrast, this felt less 
about artistic defiance, in the style of the group KLF’s burning of £1m in 1994 
(a lot of money, but still just money), and more of a wasted opportunity, not 
to mention an act of heartbreaking cultural vandalism.

Oh Catherine Zeta-Jones, learn to turn the other cheek…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fpupils-stand-for-free-speech-punk-catherine-zeta-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9066e7be7cbb448f9388d124357b7b0cb46683f9%2F0_105_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pupils%E2%80%99%20stand%20for%20free%20speech%20is%20a%20lesson%20to%20us%20all%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fpupils-stand-for-free-speech-punk-catherine-zeta-jones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pupils%E2%80%99%20stand%20for%20free%20speech%20is%20a%20lesson%20to%20us%20all%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fpupils-stand-for-free-speech-punk-catherine-zeta-jones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9066e7be7cbb448f9388d124357b7b0cb46683f9%2F0_105_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Catherine Zeta-Jones: “ invasion-of-privacy tantrum”. Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA
Catherine Zeta-Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/film/catherinezetajones> has 
reacted angrily to paparazzi beach shots of herself and her husband, Michael 
Douglas, looking less than lithe. Fair enough. Few of us would enjoy the world 
gazing upon unflattering photographs of ourselves in beach gear and I say that 
as someone for whom a top-to-toe kaftan would be the height of daring. However, 
Zeta-Jones’s riposte was to get Douglas to take better, slinkier photographs of 
her in her bikini, including a lovely and, dare I say, provocative photo of her 
derriere.

Zeta-Jones and Douglas famously had “dealings” (tense and legal) with the 
media over invasion of privacy before and few people would wish to deny them 
the right to have fun on the beach without pap interference. However, their 
photographic response makes the issue more muddled. The suggestion is that 
their displeasure was more a matter of aesthetics than privacy and that they 
would have been fine if the snatched images had been more flattering.

Call me a stickler, but I’m not sure an invasion-of-privacy tantrum should 
involve more bikini photos, showing the subject’s arse off to superb advantage. 
The post Leveson confusion continues…

 * This article was amended on 29 November 2016 to remove an incorrect 
reference that suggested Germaine Greer and Peter Tatchell had been banned from 
public speaking engagements.
 