
World Cup 2022 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2022> labourers 
in Qatar are to be given “cooling” hard hats which reduce their body 
temperature as they build football stadiums in the fierce desert heat.


The innovative technology uses a solar-powered fan to reduce the skin 
temperature by up to 10 degrees, said the Supreme Committee for Delivery and 
Legacy, the body overseeing the controversial tournament’s organisation.

Fifa faces legal challenge over Qatar migrant workers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/fifa-faces-legal-challenge-over-qatar-migrant-workers-world-cup-2022>
“We are confident that this technology will create more comfortable and safer 
working conditions,” said Saud Abdul-Aziz Abdul-Ghani, an engineering professor 
atQatar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/qatar> University, where the hat has 
been developed.

The cooling hat scheme could be rolled out by next summer, officials said.

Summertime temperatures in Qatar regularly approach 50C (122F).

“Our objective was to reduce heat stress and heat strokes for workers in Qatar 
and the region during the summer months,” said Abdul-Ghani.

“Our concept is to use a solar-powered fan to blow air over a cooled material 
at the top of the helmet, which will then come down over the front of the 
person’s face and provide a cooler micro-climate for the worker.”

It would provide “cooling in hot conditions for up to four hours straight”, he 
added and could “revolutionise” the construction industry in the hottest parts 
of the world.

Workers in Qatar will be the first to use the helmet, which has been two years 
in the making, said Hilal Jeham al-Kuwari, an engineer with the supreme 
committee.

Migrant workers in Qatar still at risk despite reforms, warns Amnesty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/13/migrant-workers-in-qatar-still-at-risk-despite-reforms-warns-amnesty>
Since 2007, labourers have been banned from working outside in Qatar for 
several hours during the day at the height of the summer, due to temperatures.

There are currently more than 5,000 construction workers helping build World 
Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> stadiums in 
Qatar. That number is set to increase to 36,000 within the next two years.

Qatar has come under huge international criticism  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/qatar-world-cup-2022-amnesty-hits-out-at-uk-silence-on-human-rights-during-visit-greg-hands>
for the treatment of its migrant labour force ever since being chosen to host 
the 2022 World Cup.

Earlier this year, Amnesty International accused Qatar of using “forced 
labour” at a World Cup site, the Khalifa International Stadium.

In October, it was revealed that Anil Kumar Pasman, a 29-year-old Nepalese 
labourer, had died after being struck by a lorry at Al-Wakrah stadium, the 
first “work-related” fatality announced by Qatar’s World Cup organisers.
 