
It is an increasingly sad sight to see Rafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> leave a big tournament ahead of 
schedule. His ambition to add to his 14 majors remains strong but his exit in 
the first round on day two was the third time in as many slams the Spaniard has 
failed to reach the second week.

After winning a major every year for a decade, he failed to get past the 
quarter-finals of his virtually franchised French Open last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/03/french-open-novak-djokovic-rafael-nadal>
 then suffered further indignity:Dustin Brown dusted him up in the second round 
at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/02/dustin-brown-rafael-nadal-wimbledon>
, andFabio Fognini put him out of the US Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/05/sdfsdf>. On Tuesday, his friend 
Fernando Verdasco delivered the blade.

Andy Murray cruises past Zverev for loss of just six games at Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/19/andy-murray-downs-zverev-could-be-a-force-again-in-australian-open>
Seven years after their epic semi-final here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jan/30/rafaelnadal-federer>, he got 
revenge on Nadal, again over five tortuous sets, except not nearly as long. As 
Verdasco said: “I thought many times about that semi-final. It was my longest 
match ever, my first time in semis. It was a tough match to lose after five 
hours and 40 minutes [to that point the tournament’s longest ever match].”

Nadal was awesome in that match. He was in his pomp, so full of energy and 
unrestrained passion. Now, after injuries, he is looking older than his 29 
years, his trademark furrowed brow sitting under a thinning thatch, the bandana 
not so rakishly piratical as it once was, the muscular top-spin forehand 
falling a little shorter inside the court, the fierce gaze not so intimidating.

His removal from the field gives incidental strength to Andy Murray’s campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/19/andy-murray-downs-zverev-could-be-a-force-again-in-australian-open>
 as they were on the same side of the draw, although such niceties did not play 
on Nadal’s musings later.

None of this seems right, but the world No5, who has been magnificent for so 
long and whose steady improvement towards the end of last season encouraged the 
view he had a chance, at least, of restoring some of his aura, constantly 
reminds us that sport was not meant to be fair.

So the Spanish left-hander to progress to the second round is not Nadal but 
the erratic Verdasco, who won 7-6, 4-6, 3-6, 7-6, 6-2. He is impossible to 
follow sometimes; in the first half of last year he won the first set 16 times 
and lost it 13 times; thereafter his tally was 5-24. Here he took the first 
stanza to create anxiety on the other side of the net, before finishing 
strongly and closing it out after four hours and 43 minutes.

Verdasco hit 90 winners and 20 aces to bamboozle and frustrate Nadal, who 
said: “He played better than me. He played more aggressive than me. He took 
more risks than me – and he won. He was playing amazing tennis in the last set. 
If your opponent is ready to hit all the balls at 100%, then you are in 
trouble. He had a lot of success hitting all the balls full power in the fifth. 
I have to congratulate him.

“But I am not happy about the way I played the first set. I had my chances in 
the fourth. It’s tough but, at the same time, I know I did everything I can to 
be ready for this tournament. It was not my day. Let’s keep going. That’s the 
only thing. I was competitive but, in terms of creating damage to the opponent 
with my forehand, I didn’t.”

He added: “The game is changing. Everybody now tries to hit all the balls 
[hard], to go for the winners in any position. The game become a little bit 
crazy in this aspect.”
 