
The Spanish conductor Rafael Frühbeck de Burgos, who has died aged 80, was 
held in affection and respect by audiences and musicians alike. In Britain he 
was particularly identified with the New Philharmonia Orchestra (later the
Philharmonia Orchestra <http://www.philharmonia.co.uk/>) and its chorus in the 
late 1960s and early 70s. With it, he made some of his finest recordings: 
Orff's Carmina Burana, Mendelssohn's Elijah, Haydn's Creation and Mozart's 
Requiem. His recording of Carmen was one of the first to restore the original 
spoken dialogue, though delivered by actors, and he was credited with 
conducting the first performance in Spain of Bach's St Matthew Passion. He also 
recorded the complete orchestral and stage works of Manuel de Falla and many
zarzuelas.

Other associations included those with the Philadelphia Orchestra 
<http://www.philorch.org/>, with which he made many guest appearances over four 
decades, the National Symphony Orchestra of Washington (1980-90), the Deutsche 
Oper <http://www.deutscheoperberlin.de/#> in Berlin, where he was music 
director (1992-97), and the Italian RAI National Symphony Orchestra (principal 
conductor, 2001-07). Throughout his career, he guest-conducted top orchestras, 
including theBoston Symphony Orchestra <http://www.bso.org/>, the Los Angeles 
Philharmonic <http://www.laphil.com/>, the London Symphony Orchestra 
<http://lso.co.uk/> and the Yomiuri Nippon Symphony Orchestra 
<http://yomikyo.or.jp/e/info/about.php> of Tokyo, but he was not rewarded with 
the top posts a conductor of his calibre might have deserved.

Born Rafael Frühbeck, of German-Spanish parentage, he took the additional name 
of his birthplace, Burgos, to identify himself as Spanish when conducting 
abroad. After training at the Bilbao and Madrid conservatories, he entered 
military service as an army director of music (1953-56). He then studied 
conducting in Munich, returning toSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> as conductor of the Bilbao Symphony 
Orchestra (1958-62), following which he was appointed music director of the 
Spanish National Orchestra (1962-78). He was a keen proselytiser for Spanish 
music, including contemporary repertoire.

He became musical director of the Düsseldorf Symphony Orchestra (1966-71), 
where he focused on symphonic rather than operatic music, before moving on to 
the Montreal Symphony Orchestra in 1974. His tenure there was short-lived: he 
was forced to step down after making disparaging off-the-record comments about 
the orchestra's brass section, which appeared in a local newspaper.

After leaving Canada, he enjoyed his greatest successes in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, the US, Israel and Japan. His 
appointment as chief conductor and artistic director of the Dresden 
Philharmonic (2004-11) was one of several in which he achieved high standards 
with orchestras that were not in the very highest league. He also held a post 
with the Vienna Symphony Orchestra. His last appointment was as chief conductor 
of the Danish National Orchestra (2012).

His conducting was often described by musicians as "old school", but in the 
most complimentary way. His Brahms and Bruckner with the Dresden Philharmonic, 
for example, and his Dvořák Eighth with the Swedish Radio Orchestra had a sense 
of space and rhetoric that were never allowed to weigh the music down. The 
lyrical warmth he brought to his classic Carmina Burana recording, combined 
with an obvious affection for the work, set it apart from more prosaically 
high-octane performances. His conducting of De Falla andJoaquín Rodrigo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/jul/08/guardianobituaries1> not 
surprisingly sounded idiomatic – Rimsky-Korsakov's Scheherazade was also 
particularly convincing – but he was successful, too, in Ottorino Respighi's 
tone poems. The Carmen recording benefited not only from an empathy for local 
colour but also from a top-level cast, including Grace Bumbry and Jon Vickers. 
The decision to return to the work'sopéra comique origins, while welcome, was 
vitiated by the placing of a largely separate cast of actors in a different 
spatial ambience.

Frühbeck, as he was familiarly known, was a man of great charm and elegance. 
Both choral and orchestral musicians relished the way he invited them to make 
music with him, often extending his hand, with a smile, at their entry.

In March of this year he collapsed on the podium while conducting in 
Washington. He recovered and continued to the end of the concert, but earlier 
this month announced that he was retiring forthwith from the concert platform, 
having been diagnosed with cancer.

His wife, María Carmen Martínez, whom he married in 1959, survives him, as do 
a son and a daughter.

• Rafael Frühbeck de Burgos, conductor, born 15 September 1933; died 11 June 
2014
 