
Rafael Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> has confirmed he 
will compete in all three tennis events at the Rio Olympics despite being not 
at his best after being sidelined with a wrist injury since May.

Andy Murray disappointed he will not face Wawrinka or Federer at Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/03/andy-murray-rio-olympics-disappointed-wawrinka-federer-withdrawals>
There were doubts whether the 2008 gold medallist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/aug/17/nadalwinsgold>, who withdrew 
from the French Open and missed Wimbledon, would recover in time to compete at 
the Games.

After two days of training in Rio alongside his compatriot David Ferrer, Nadal 
told Spanish radio station Cadena Cope on Wednesday: “It’s evident that the 
condition of my wrist is not ideal and if it wasn’t the Olympics, I would not 
take this risk. However, having spoken to my team and with Conchita [Martínez], 
I’ve decided to play the singles and everything else.

“There is always a risk but I trained six hours between Monday and Tuesday and 
although the wrist still bothers me, at least it hasn’t worsened and that is 
great news. I already missed London [2012].”

The 30-year-old 14-times grand slam champion missed the Olympics four years ago
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/19/london-2012-rafael-nadal-olympic-games>
 with a knee injury. The world No5, who is Spain’s flag bearer, will compete in 
the men’s singles and also take part with Marc López in the doubles and Garbiñe 
Muguruza in the mixed doubles.

“I’m going to do as best as possible in every event I play in,” Nadal said. 
“The doubles might be a better option for me considering how I arrive to the 
Olympics but you never know. The only thing I can say is that I will give my 
best and no one is going to take away my enthusiasm to compete at the Olympics 
in whatever way I can and to try to win a medal.”

Nadal’s recovery would come as a significant boost for tennis at the Games 
with several other high-profile players missing. The Swiss players Roger 
Federer and Stan Wawrinka have pulled out through injury problems while the 
Wimbledon finalist Milos Raonic withdrew citing fears over the Zika virus.

Martínez, captain of the Spain Fed Cup and the Davis Cup team, is optimistic 
Nadal will deliver. “We needed time to see how the wrist will respond to 
intense training before confirming that he would play in all three events,” 
Martínez told Cope. “It was a joint decision and it was an easy one to take. 
It’s obvious that he is lacking playing time but when we talk about Nadal, we 
know how competitive he is and what a great level he has.

“Nadal is the best option we have to win a medal. Rafa can do great things.”
 