
Rafael Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> is convinced none 
of his rivals are taking performance-enhancing drugs and believes that people 
who have accused him of doping have “personal problems”.

Andy Murray defeats Rafael Nadal on clay to reach Madrid Open final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/07/andy-murray-rafael-nadal-madrid-open-final>
The Spaniard is suing the former French minister Roselyne Bachelot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/25/rafael-nadal-sue-french-cabinet-minister-doping-allegations>
 after she alleged he had failed a drugs test. He used an interview withEl 
Mundo, published on Saturday, to defend himself and other top players. “I have 
total confidence that all my rivals are totally clean,” he said. “I have no 
doubt about that, first of all because I believe in the anti-doping programme 
and secondly because I believe in people until they show you otherwise.”

The 14-times grand slam winner said people who have accused him of doping are 
unhappy with their own lives and do not like his style of play. “They do it 
because evidently they have a personal problem and are unhappy with themselves 
and then they look further, at the technical aspect, perhaps only because of my 
way of fighting for every point, my style of play, which I’ve had throughout my 
career.”

The former world No1, who will attempt to win a 10th French Open title this 
year but wasbeaten on clay by Andy Murray at the Madrid Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/07/andy-murray-rafael-nadal-madrid-open-final>
 on Saturday, strenuously denies having taken performance-enhancing substances 
and has never failed a drug test. He is taking legal action against Bachelot 
after she said on French television in March that his seven-month absence from 
the Tour through injury in 2012 was “probably due to a positive doping test”.

Nadal said he had resisted the urge to take legal action against people who 
have accused him of doping in the past, but was compelled to act following 
Bachelot’s comments. “When these things keep being repeated, and someone who is 
supposed to be in a serious position says something and people start to think 
that person has privileged information, then it is more serious,” he said.

“When someone like that makes gratuitous and false comments with no 
information, there comes a time when you have to stop and you have to fight 
because of who you are and what you have been all your life.”

Failed drug tests at the elite level are rare, but doping has been in the 
spotlight since the former women’s world No1Maria Sharapova announced in March 
she had tested positive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/07/maria-sharapova-failed-drugs-test-australian-open-2016-tennis>
for the banned substance meldonium.
 