
When he reached the quarter-finals of Wimbledon this year, many tipped the 
22-year-old Lucas Pouille as a star of the future. After his victory overRafael 
Nadal <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> in the fourth round of 
the US Open on Sunday evening, he looked a lot like a star for the present.

Pouille outlasted the two-time champion over five gruelling sets 6-1, 2-6, 
6-4, 3-6, 7-6 to reach the quarter-finals, where he will play his countryman 
Gaël Monfilswho had earlier beaten Marcos Baghdatis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/marcos-baghdatis-texting-wife-warning-us-open-tennis>
.

Marcos Baghdatis warned for texting wife during US Open loss to Gaël Monfils
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/marcos-baghdatis-texting-wife-warning-us-open-tennis>
The match lasted four hours and seven minutes, and was decided by a fifth set 
tie-break – an appropriate end to a match in which the players ended up with 
156 points each. At 6-6 in the breaker, Nadal had a brilliant opportunity to 
bring up a match point but dumped his forehand into the net with the court wide 
open. Pouille pulled off a winner down the line the next point to seal victory. 
“I was very aggressive all the match and at 6-6 [in the tiebreak] I didn’t want 
to miss,” he said after the match.

“I played the right point. I put [myself] in a position to have the winner, 
and I had the mistake. That’s it,” Nadal said. “You cannot go crazy thinking 
about these kind of things, no?”

Pouille has had plenty of experience in five setters at this year’s 
tournament: Sunday’s victory was his third in a row a factor that may come into 
play as legs and bodies tire in the later rounds of the competition. “I’m very, 
very tired,” said Pouille, reflecting on his victory. “I played three hours in 
the first match and three hours thirty minutes in the second match.”

For Nadal, it was another disappointing end to a major. He had dropped just 20 
games in the first three rounds of the tournament and looked like he was 
somewhere close to his best after an early exit at the Australian Open and 
being forced to drop out of the French Open and Wimbledon through injury. But 
the Spaniard wasted a number of chances in the final set, which he led with a 
break at 1-0 and 4-2. He has now failed to make it beyond the fourth round of a 
major since the 2015 French Open, his last victory in a grand slam final came 
in 2014 at Roland Garros.

“There were things I could do better. Had the right attitude. I [fought] right 
up to the last ball,” said Nadal. “But I need something else. I need something 
more that was not there today.” He was, however, confident he was working his 
way back to fitness: “My wrist is improving a lot. The injury is at the end of 
the process. I am ready to keep playing. That’s what my body is asking me now.”

For Pouille, it was a monumental victory for a player he grew up admiring. 
“Last time I played him it was 6-1, 6-2,” said Pouille. “When I was younger I 
used to watch all his matches on [Arthur Ashe Stadium] and now it’s me so I 
wanted to take full pleasure and enjoy it.”


Jo-Wilfried Tsonga also reached the last eight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/jo-wilfried-tsonga-jack-sock-us-open-tennis>
 on Sunday, beating Jack Sock to make it three Frenchmen in the quarter-final 
of a grand slam for the first time in the Open era. “If I can recover well, it 
can be a great match,” said Pouille of his match with Monfils.
 