
Rafael Nadal’s shock withdrawal from the 2016 French Open, virtually his 
personal property since he won the first of his nine titles here on hisdebut 11 
years ago <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2005/jun/05/tennis.frenchopen2005>
, not only cast a cloud over Roland Garros on Friday but brought into question 
the Spaniard’s immediate and perhaps long-term future.

Although he hopes the torn tendons in his left wrist will heal in time for 
Wimbledon – an injury which has troubled him since the day beforeAndy Murray 
beat him in the semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/07/andy-murray-rafael-nadal-madrid-open-final>
 in Madrid this month – his demeanour during an emotional press conference was 
downbeat to the point of resignation.

Murray, who trained with Nadal in Mallorca before Madrid, and again in the 
lead-up to this tournament, said, “Surprised? Yeah, but I knew he’d been 
struggling with his wrist. I practised with him earlier and he had it heavily 
strapped, grimacing a little bit. But I didn’t know it was bad enough for him 
to pull out of the event.”

Nadal said he played with the first signs of the problem when he lost in 
Madrid. “I felt something against [João] Sousa in Madrid. Next day against Andy 
I played with mesotherapy [small injections under the skin] to [anaesthetise] a 
little bit the place and to have less pain. It worked because I could play.”

If Murray suspected something was wrong, others did not. Marion Bartoli, the 
2013 Wimbledon champion working here as a commentator, said: “I saw Rafa having 
lunch with Toni [his uncle and trainer] and I couldn’t tell at all he would 
pull out. Nobody could possibly have seen this kind of news, an absolute 
shocker.”

It was, Nadal said in one of the most sombre press conferences most observers 
could remember, “a tough moment but not the end.”

Apologising for struggling to describe the injury in English, he said it was 
“not broken” but, “if I keep playing gonna be broked next couple of days.

“I arrived here with a little bit of pain but something that I think I was 
able to manage. Every day was a little bit worse. Every single day we spent a 
lot of hours here working so hard to try to play. Yesterday [when he beat 
Facundo Bagnis 6-3, 6-0, 6-3] I played with an injection on the wrist with 
anaesthetic.”

As for Wimbledon, where he has had a horrible time of it in recent years, he 
said: “We’re gonna work hard to be ready for Wimbledon. For the moment I need a 
couple of weeks with... the immobilisation. Then we’re gonna do the treatment 
and we hope the treatment works well.

“We expect to recover quick, to be ready for Wimbledon, no? But at this 
moment, you know, it’s not a moment to talk about that. It’s just a moment to 
go day by day, to work hard. I hope to have a fast recovery.”

Asked if the injury was serious enough for him to consider surgery, he said: 
“Not surgery at all at the moment. If I keep playing? Yes.”

After he had played with all his old brilliance to lose only nine games in his 
first two matches here, his departure struck the tournament with even more 
dramatic impact and he did his best to raise spirits in front of the media.

However, given his injury history – he has missed the equivalent of an entire 
year since 2003 – and the uncompromising physicality of his play, Nadal, who 
turns 30 next week, must wonder how long he can subject his body to such 
stress. This is the third time he has pulled out of theFrench Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/frenchopen>. He missed 2003 with a sore 
shoulder and the following year a fractured bone in his foot kept him out for 
two months.

Thereafter he has coped with a string of complaints all over his body. His 
most worrying absence was in 2014, the last time he won the French Open.

After the then unheard of Nick Kyrgios beat him in the fourth round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/01/nick-kyrgios-rafael-nadal-wimbledon-2014>
 at Wimbledon, the Spaniard withdrew from the Tour for the rest of the year.

Last season was mediocre but he looked to be well on the mend this summer, 
winning Monte Carlo again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/17/rafael-nadal-gael-monfils-monte-carlo-masters-final-tennis>
, and he arrived here with every intention of lifting his 10th title.

Now he is gone from the place that embraces him most fully, along with the 
injured Roger Federer, his main rival until Novak Djokovic arrived. It feels as 
if the final power shift in the game is very much under way.

Djokovic, who plays Britain’s Aljaz Bedene in the third round on Saturday, 
should have that half of the schedule pretty much to himself and, as Murray 
observed: “It certainly opens up [Nadal’s] part of the draw. There’s a big 
opportunity for guys in that side, [Dominic] Thiem, Marcel Granollers.”

Nadal, meanwhile, has to cope with the heavy mental fatigue this injury will 
induce. In the past such setbacks have driven him to the edge of despair. He 
looked and sounded like a beaten man on Friday.

French Open 2016: Rafael Nadal pulls out with wrist injury – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/27/french-open-2016-andy-murray-v-ivo-karlovic-live> 