
Rafael Nadal’s career edged perilously closer to an uncertain future on 
Thursday when he confirmed what many had feared: his damaged left wrist, the 
sharpest arrow in his quiver, is not up to the rigours ofWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon>, which begins in three weeks.

Solving a problem like Maria’s will take more than a tsunami of schmooze | 
Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/08/maria-sharapova-mildronate> 
The Spaniard, who turned 30 during the French Open, has not swung a racket 
sincequitting his favourite tournament  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/27/rafael-nadal-pulls-out-french-open-wrist-injury>
after two quick and deceptively excellent wins. His wrist is still encased, to 
calm the effects of shredded tendons, and his ambitions for the rest of the 
season must be similarly restricted. As to his medium and long-term future, no 
one can be certain, although his team remain upbeat.

His publicist and long-time friend, Benito Pérez-Barbadillo, said on Thursday: 
“His left wrist will continue with the immobilised treatment for a maximum of 
two weeks. After that, he will start an anti-inflammatory rehabilitation and 
physiotherapy … once the cast is removed.”

Nadal said on his Facebook page: “I’m sad to announce that, after talking to 
my doctors and receiving the results of my last medical revision, I won’t be 
able to play at Wimbledon. As you can all imagine it’s a very tough decision 
but the injury I suffered at Roland Garros needs time to heal. Thank you all 
for your support, especially my fans. Your kind messages mean so much.”

Nadal has been here so many times before. He has missed the equivalent of a 
year through injuries from his feet, up to his knees, his back and now the one 
joint he depends on more than any other.

Maria Sharapova maintains support of major sponsors despite two-year ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/09/maria-sharapova-gets-support-of-nike-head-despite-two-year-ban-tennis>
He has won all his 14 majors from 20 finals, 28 Masters titles, an Olympic 
gold medal and a total of 69 trophies across the board with the most lethal, 
top-spun, left-handed forehand in history. Without that wicked point-finisher, 
it is difficult to imagine Nadal recapturing his finest days. He was returning 
to something like his best form but detected worrying signs afterlosing to Andy 
Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/07/andy-murray-rafael-nadal-madrid-open-final>
 on the clay of Madrid. He won Monte Carlo but lost in Rome – both on clay, his 
beloved surface.

Then at Roland Garros, where he has won a record nine titles, he started with 
such brio it seemed he could defy all doubters. He beat Sam Groth for the loss 
of three games, then allowed the world No95 Facundo Bagnis a mere six games, 
before announcing his retirement from the tournament at an emotional press 
conference.

The player who has been alongside him – or usually just a little above – in 
the record books for most of his career, Roger Federer, would seem to be giving 
himself a good chance of being competitive at Wimbledon after pulling out of 
the French to guard a back injury. He beat the rising young American Taylor 
Fritz in his comeback match in Stuttgart – although it took him three sets. 
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, however, remains doubtful. He, too, had to quit the French 
Open and has also pulled out of Queens.
 