
Roland Garros will feel a little different to Rafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> this year but no less special. 
For the second time since his French Open debut in 2005, the Spaniard arrived 
here without the tag of defending champion.

Nadal finally released his grip on the title when he was beaten by Novak 
Djokovic <https://www.theguardian.com/international> in the quarter-finals last 
year, with the Serbian going on to lose toStanislas Wawrinka in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/jun/07/french-open-2015-final-wawrinka-shocks-djokovic-in-pictures>
. “It’s better to be here defending your title than not,” said Nadal. “But at 
the same time, it’s obvious that it’s impossible to have the same feeling every 
year. I had that feeling a lot of times in my career, but I’m not arriving with 
this feeling this year.

“At the same time, I am excited. The goal still is always the same if you are 
defending or you are not defending. It doesn’t make a big difference on what 
you want to do.”

Andy Murray relaxed for French Open with a little help from his friend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/20/andy-murray-relaxed-french-open-tennis-jamie-delgado-coach>
Nine times the champion on the red clay of Paris, Nadal will look to become 
the first player to win the same grand slam singles title 10 times. The 
29-year-old Spaniard describes Roland Garros as the most important place of his 
career. “I feel a little bit like home because I have a great relationship with 
all of them [Roland Garros staff], and that makes the event even more special 
for me. The only thing that I need is to play well.”

Playing well has been far from guaranteed for Nadal over the past couple of 
years but, after a sticky start to 2016, the signs have been more encouraging. 
Hewon his first Masters title for two years  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/17/rafael-nadal-gael-monfils-monte-carlo-masters-final-tennis>
in Monte Carlo in April and followed that withvictory in Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/24/rafael-nadal-beats-kei-nishikori-ninth-barcelona-open>
. There were somegood signs in Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/03/rafael-nadal-andrey-kuznetsov-madrid-open>
 and Rome, too, although he was beatenby Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/07/andy-murray-rafael-nadal-madrid-open-final>
 and Djokovic. Getting past Djokovic, whom he is scheduled to meet in the 
semi-finals, will be a huge task given he has lost his last seven meetings 
against the world No1.

But Nadal, seeded fourth following the withdrawal of Roger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/19/roger-federer-pulls-out-french-open>
, is clearly playing much better than he was 12 months ago and is happy with 
his consistency. He said: “I played a few good events in a row. So I hope to 
continue playing well here. That’s my goal – keep going the same way that I am 
playing, and if it’s possible to play even a little bit better and better.” 
 