
“You came on the train?”

The way the taxi driver spoke these words suggested I might, equally, claim to 
have arrived in San Francisco on a time-travellingDeLorean 
<http://www.topgear.com/uk/car-news/Back-to-the-Future-DeLorean-is-restored-2013-02-18>
. Americans, as a rule, do not travel by rail. They drive, or they fly. When 
they’re saving the dollars, they take the Greyhound bus, which has its own 
iconic place in the culture. But you don’t see action heros emerging through a 
miasma of smoke at a train station, or romcoms that end with a climactic dash 
to stop someone leaving on the 10.42.

So the cabbie was surprised when I told him I had made my way 1,500km down the 
coast from Vancouver in a manner that most of his countrymen would consider a 
form of corporal punishment. Amtrak, the company that runs the rails, has not 
always enjoyed the public’s confidence. It cannot offer speed of travel, as its 
passenger trains share the same lines (and delays) as the country’s rumbling 
freight network; nor has it had much of a reputation for comfort.

How strange and wondrous, then, is its West Coast service. And how perfect an 
introduction to one of the less-visited parts of the United States, at least by 
Europeans.

The Pacific Northwest is an amorphous term that refers to the coastal region 
joining the US and Canada, via the states of Oregon, Washington and British 
Columbia. It’s bounded on one side by the surf of the Pacific Ocean, and on the 
other by a long ridge of mountains known asthe Cascades 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cascade_Range>, which makes it the kind of place 
that brave, outdoorsy types love. I am not one of those, so a train journey 
that connected me between the region’s cities, and gave me a chance to see the 
scenery without actually having to engage with it on any strenuous level, was 
ideal.

Depending on your view, the cities of the Pacific Northwest are models of 
progressive urbanity, or hippy towns. I began my journey in Vancouver, whose 
standing as one of the cleanest cities in North America must partly be down to 
the fact it is also one of the emptiest. Why did the town planners build such 
broad sidewalks – had they been anticipating a lot more folk? Or do Canadians 
just require more personal space than the rest of us?
 Emma John on board the Coast Starlight en route to San Francisco. Photograph: 
Courtesy of Emma John 
Either way, 24 hours of inhaling its wholesome air had me utterly relaxed by 
the time I boarded my first train. This was fortunate, as it was 6am and the 
brusque US immigration officials at the station did not foster a holiday 
spirit. Dawn had barely broken when we reached the 49th parallel, and our steel 
cage squealed to a halt outside the town ofWhite Rock 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/White_Rock,_British_Columbia> so that the customs 
men could speed down the aisles with sniffer dogs. We shunted slowly along 
through industrial and mining towns connected by the Great Northern Railway 
since the 1890s, and commuters began to fill what had been an all-but-empty 
carriage. No one spoke; at the table next to mine, a young couple slept, 
propped up against each other. Almost everyone disembarked at Seattle, me 
included.

It was mid-morning, and the bustle of the city came as a shock, but the people 
ofPuget Sound <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Puget_Sound> revealed themselves to 
be an easygoing bunch. I first noticed it in the trendy Belltown area, where 
the city’s young congregate in speakeasies and secret bars.The Spur Gastropub 
<http://www.mccrackentough.com/spur/>, a small, darkly wooded joint, had drawn 
me in with its happy-hour bar snacks, which included a Wagyu beef slider. When 
the barman saw me poring over a street map, he began impassioned 
recommendations of, and directions to, other local bars. “Aren’t these your 
rivals?” I asked. “It doesn’t matter,” he laughed. “You don’t get hung up on 
anything when you live somewhere it rains 363 days a year.”

Spur served three local ales on draught, and that is but a drop in the ocean 
of Seattle’s thriving microbrewing industry, which is becoming as famous as its 
near-perpetual drizzle. Downtown, having lost myself in the labyrinth of 
streets around the fish market, I stumbled across the Pike Pub and Brewery 
<http://pikebrewing.com/pub-and-brewery/the-pike-pub/>, which invites you in 
via a lift in an alleyway; inside, the place is a multi-floored shrine to the 
brown stuff, its steel brew-tank installed at the core of the building, like 
the heart of the Tardis. Drinking a golden ale called Naughty Nellie, I started 
chatting to a workman fixing a picture to a wall, only to discover he was the 
owner,Charles Finkel <http://www.pikebrewing.com/history.shtml>, the man 
responsible for Nellie and her dozen cousins (including the wonderfully named 
Kilt Lifter).

Charles had insisted that I taste a glass of everything on tap, and I left 
Seattle the next day with a hangover that gave the three-and-a-half hour trip 
to Portland a hallucinatory sensation.Mount Rainier 
<http://www.nps.gov/mora/index.htm>, America’s most dangerous volcano, 
flickered briefly in my vision, and the mountains of the Olympic peninsula were 
a mirage on the horizon, transforming effortlessly into a sequence of navy 
warships. Amtrak’s morning journeys were, I was discovering, quiet affairs – 
the soft, capacious seating engendering a sort of lull – but while there wasn’t 
much chat to be had, there were always plenty of announcements to keep you 
company, whether they were detailed instructions on how to keep your balance on 
a moving train (bend your knees), or words of wisdom to accompany the opening 
of the buffet car (“Remember, folks, Bud does not make you wiser”). I have no 
idea what prompted the stern warning as we crossed the state line into Oregon: 
“It is illegal to interfere with the conductors!”
 Get the message: graffiti in Portland, Oregon. Photograph: Ian Patrick/Alamy 
If there’s one city in the States that wouldn’t be surprised you travelled by 
train, it’s Portland. Defiantly alternative, eco-loving, anti-commercial, this 
is the place that sports a famous piece of graffiti demanding “KEEP PORTLAND 
WEIRD”. Its citizens pioneered the food-cart scene, invented egg-and-bacon ice 
cream, spurn cars for bicycles and treat the coffee bean with cultish devotion. 
Yes, it’s ripe for satire – as evidenced by TV showPortlandia 
<http://www.ifc.com/shows/portlandia>, which spoofs their earnest efforts – but 
there are people who like that sort of thing, and one of them is me.

I fell in love with the city in the 20 minutes it took me to wheel my suitcase 
from the station to the hotel, during which I passed two vintage shops, an arts 
cinema andPowell’s <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Powell%27s_Books>, the largest 
independent bookstore in America. The cocktail scene in the evening sealed the 
deal – from flaming Negronis at theDriftwood Room 
<http://www.hoteldeluxeportland.com/hotel-deluxe-restaurant-bar/> to G&Ts at the
Teardrop Lounge <http://teardroplounge.com/>, where they make their own tonic 
water that looks like theBFG <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_BFG>’s magic 
potion. I could have stayed in Portland for ever.

Except I couldn’t. Because the last leg of my train journey was before me, and 
it was the big one: Portland to San Francisco, overnight, on theCoast Starlight 
<http://www.amtrak.com/coast-starlight-train> – a route whose very name evokes 
romance. And I would have my own sleeping berth, meals in the dining car, and 
an armchair-style seat in the observation car from which to watch the scenery 
slide by.

There’s nowhere quite like America for rapidly changing landscapes. We pulled 
out of Portland past an immense Christmas tree plantation, the suburbs 
dwindling quickly into pumpkin fields and old-fashioned farmsteads. There were 
vineyards, fish farms and frontier towns laid out flat and low, as if John 
Wayne had only just ridden away. Every sight seemed to take on an epic 
significance: a bulbous water tower, like a huge opium poppy head, surrounded 
by bullet-shaped silos; a football crowd dressed in yellow and green, crossing 
a river while a plane tugged a “Rally Responsibly” banner overhead.

Onboard, the mood became increasingly sociable; I could hear a 15-year-old in 
the observation car teaching his grandfather video games and explaining to him 
that “war is human nature”. The steward gathered us for a wine tasting and I 
met Julia, a volcanologist, on her way home to San José with her parents. We 
sat together, admiring sweeping lakes and the golden glow on the mountainsides 
as we climbed through the Cascades. “You’ve seen Mount Rainier?” she asked. 
“That’s one of mine. I did my dissertation on that volcano, and I tell you 
something: the people round here do not have proper emergency response if that 
blows.”

After six hours of travel, during which I hadn’t picked up my book once, the 
light was dying, and it was time for dinner. Reservations are taken for the 
dining car, and you’re seated with other travelling parties, immersing you in a 
bygone era when conversation was the only entertainment, and the tales of your 
trip were shared by word of mouth, not by tweet. And so to a comfortable bed, 
and a sleep broken only by the sound of the brakes, and a reverse manoeuvre 
into Sacramento.

Dawn broke over Northern California; for the last few hours of the journey the 
landscape was, frankly, having a laugh, lurching wildly from long flat plains 
to ruched, camel-coloured, furry grasses to marshland. I felt I’d crossed an 
entire continent. And, sure enough, here came the sea again, and the hint of a 
city on a hill, far away, across a bridge. Five days after leaving Vancouver, I 
was reaching San Francisco – and it hadn’t taken a second too long.

Essentials 

Emma’s Virgin Atlantic flight was provided by netflights 
<http://www.netflights.com/>, which has flights from London to Vancouver from 
£617 including taxes. A one-way fare from Vancouver to San Francisco viaAmtrak 
<http://www.amtrak.com/home> costs from $136; a two-person roomette on the 
Coast Starlight between Portland and San Francisco costs from $299. Emma stayed 
at the Loden Hotel, Vancouver, which has rooms from CA $160 (theloden.com 
<http://theloden.com/>; britishcolumbia.travel 
<http://uk.britishcolumbia.travel/?CC=UK>); the Hotel Five in Seattle, with 
rooms from $135 (hotelfiveseattle.com <http://www.hotelfiveseattle.com/>; 
visitseattle.org <http://www.visitseattle.org/Home.aspx>); and the Ace Hotel in 
Portland, where a single room with shared bathroom costs from $125 + tax (
acehotel.com/portland <http://www.acehotel.com/portland>; traveloregon.com 
<http://traveloregon.com/>)
 