
The world premiere of Ravi Shankar’s only opera will be presented next May in 
a production at Leicester’s Curve theatre. The world-famous musician, first to 
bring Indian music to a global audience, began work on the composition in the 
final few years of his life, leaving the project almost finished at his death 
in December 2012. Days before what was to be his final surgery, Shankar 
outlined his vision for the complete opera to his longtime collaborator David 
Murphy, who, with the help ofShankar’s daughter Anoushka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/20/anoushka-shankar-alchemy-festival>
 has since brought the opera to fruition.


Ravi Shankar obituary
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/dec/12/ravi-shankar-dies> 
“He’d written the whole piece in outline – the entire raga structure and 
almost all the melodies so [after Shankar’s death] it was just a matter of 
filling in the gaps, which were small,” explained Murphy, who will conduct the 
new work.


Named Sukanya, after his second wife, the opera tells the tale of her mythical 
namesake, the princess Sukanya, dutiful daughter and faithful wife of Hindu 
ancient legend. Author, academic and musicianAmit Chaudhuri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/14/amit-chaudhuri-i-use-real-memoirists-throw-out>
 has written the libretto;Suba Das 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/jul/23/suba-das-curve-theatre-leicester>
, associate director ofCurve 
<http://www.curveonline.co.uk/?gclid=CKeGnaTcoM8CFYky0wod_ywIxw>, will direct 
the semi-staged production that will also tour to Salford, Birmingham and 
London.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fravi-shankar-opera-sukanya-world-premiere-curve-leicester-anoushka-shankar-lpo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00eef4f14d37ac3e79044d6f43d154d51291118d%2F299_306_4257_2555%2F4257.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ravi%20Shankar%20opera%20to%20get%20posthumous%20world%20premiere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fravi-shankar-opera-sukanya-world-premiere-curve-leicester-anoushka-shankar-lpo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ravi%20Shankar%20opera%20to%20get%20posthumous%20world%20premiere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fravi-shankar-opera-sukanya-world-premiere-curve-leicester-anoushka-shankar-lpo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00eef4f14d37ac3e79044d6f43d154d51291118d%2F299_306_4257_2555%2F4257.jpg>
 Ravi Shankar’s wife Sukanya, and conductor David Murphy announce the opera’s 
world premiere production. Photograph: Sim Cannetty-Clarke 
Over an extraordinary 70-year career, Shankar wrote many hundreds of pieces 
that spanned both Indian and western musical traditions. His most famous 
collaborators includedPhilip Glass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/dec/03/contemporary-music-guide-philip-glass>
, theBeatles <https://www.theguardian.com/music/thebeatles> and Yehudi Menuhin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/05/yehudi-menuhin-boy-violinist-archive-review-1932>
 – who likened his gift for melody to that of Mozart and Beethoven. In the 
later years of his life, the pioneering musician composed two sitar concertos 
and a symphony which explored Indian music through the prism of western 
traditions. The idea for the opera was first aired in the 1990s, but work was 
not begun until 2004, then forced to sit on the backburner until 2010.


“At the beginning I laughed when my father, aged 90, said he was writing an 
opera,” said Anoushka Shankar. “But he never was content to sit still. He 
always wanted to push even more boundaries, and bring Indian classical music to 
the context of opera.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fravi-shankar-opera-sukanya-world-premiere-curve-leicester-anoushka-shankar-lpo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd3614bdb9baa9c506f2c8dbb0858e8bad9b19d0%2F0_0_2900_2400%2F2900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ravi%20Shankar%20opera%20to%20get%20posthumous%20world%20premiere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fravi-shankar-opera-sukanya-world-premiere-curve-leicester-anoushka-shankar-lpo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ravi%20Shankar%20opera%20to%20get%20posthumous%20world%20premiere&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fravi-shankar-opera-sukanya-world-premiere-curve-leicester-anoushka-shankar-lpo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd3614bdb9baa9c506f2c8dbb0858e8bad9b19d0%2F0_0_2900_2400%2F2900.jpg>
 Gift for melody … Ravi Shankar. Photograph: Michael Collopy 
The work reaches down to the roots of both traditions, and is thus an 
amalgamation rather than fusion. “It sees western and Indian music through a 
different perspective, but Raviji wanted people to see them both as aspects of 
one whole,” said Murphy.


Soprano Susanna Hurrell <http://www.susannahurrell.com/> will sing the title 
role. Five further soloists, 100 actors and dancers and 60 musicians from the 
London Philharmonic Orchestra, their numbers supplemented with Indian classical 
instruments including the sitar, shehnai, tabla and ghatam will bring the work 
to life in a co-production between the Royal Opera, Curve and the London 
Philharmonic Orchestra.

 