
George Osborne has tried to justify a £1bn loss on the first sale of shares in 
Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> in the face of 
criticism from politicians and City analysts by saying it was the right thing 
to do for the British taxpayer.

The chancellor sanctioned the first sale of the stake in RBS, announced on 
Monday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/uk-government-starts-royal-bank-of-scotland-sell-off-rbs>
, to cut the taxpayer shareholding from 79% to just below 73%. Slightlymore 
shares than expected 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/uk-financial-inv-ld/rns/disposal-of-approximately-5-4--of-rbs/201508040700580005V/>
 were sold after the stock market closed on Monday, crystallising a loss for 
the taxpayer after £45bn was ploughed into the bank to rescue it amid the 
financial crisis of 2008-2009.
RBS share price graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/08/rbs-zip/giv-30080AIchS6TiN6nF/>
 RBS share price graph 
Around 60% of the shares were bought by hedge funds.

Royal Bank of Scotland: from bailout to sell-off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/royal-bank-of-scotland-from-bailout-to-sell-off-rbs>
The £2.1bn of shares were sold at 330p – below the 337p at which they closed 
on Monday and less than the average 502p that the taxpayer paid for them. If 
all the shares were sold at this price, the loss would be £15bn. The bank’s 
shares ticked higher to close at 339p on Tuesday.

UK Financial Investments, the body which looks after the taxpayer stakes in 
the bailed out banks, is likely to be called to give evidence to the Treasury 
select committee before the end of the year. Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP 
who chairs the committee, said: “The sooner the banks are put back in the 
private sector the better. RBS is our biggest small business lender and very 
important to the sustainability of the recovery.”

Shadow chancellor Chris Leslie said the sale had been rushed, especially as 
the bank is awaiting a penalty in the US over the way it sold mortgage bonds 
before the crisis. That bill could reach as much as £8bn, according to some 
estimates.

“Getting back the taxpayers’ money is not an impossible objective and the 
chancellor is dismissing this too lightly,” said Leslie.

Osborne issued a statement in which he said: “This is an important first step 
in returning the bank to private ownership, which is the right thing to do for 
the taxpayer and for British businesses: it will promote financial stability, 
lead to a more competitive banking sector, and support the interests of the 
wider economy. Now is the time for RBS to rebuild itself as a commercial bank, 
no longer reliant on the state, but serving the working people of Britain.”

He did not speak publicly, leaving Treasury minister Harriett Baldwin to try 
to explain the sale at a time when shares were at a low for the year. Among the 
reasons she gave was the encouragement of Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of 
England, who wrote tothe chancellor in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/10/george-osborne-signals-rbs-sell-off-at-mansion-house-speech>
 to encourage a sale.

John Mann, the Labour MP who sits on the Treasury select committee, said that 
rather than use the proceeds to pay down the national debt, the government 
should have used it for public spending, such as infrastructure projects. “It’s 
a political move. Osborne is trying to sell off both [RBS and LloydsBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group] before the Tory 
leadership battle, which he will enter,” said Mann, who also expressed concern 
about Carney’s intervention in the sales process.

Ian Gordon, a banking analyst at the stockbroker Investec, said he was 
“perplexed” by the timing of the sale: “[Monday] night’s disposal at 330p 
achieved a new 2015 low and arguably sold the taxpayer short.”

“This will likely be a subject of controversy for a while akin to the Gordon 
Brown sale of UK gold reserves 15 years ago,” said Brenda Kelly, head analyst, 
at brokers London Capital Group.

The Treasury published letters from UK FI and John Kingman, the second 
permanent secretary 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/letters-to-the-chancellor-regarding-the-decision-to-execute-an-initial-sale-of-the-governments-shares-in-rbs-group>
, who both recommended to the chancellor that the sale should begin. Kingman 
signed the letter in the absence of the most senior civil servant in the 
Treasury,Nick Macpherson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/03/senior-tory-financial-crash-was-purely-a-banking-crisis-not-labour-overspend>
.

Bankers working for the government sold 5.4% of the taxpayer stake – around 
630m shares – rather than the expected 5.2% but could have sold more than 
double that amount because of the demand from institutions. Just under half 
were bought by investors in the UK and around 40% by US investors.

 Osborne had signalled the sale after taking advice from bankers at Rothschild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/10/george-osborne-signals-rbs-sell-off-at-mansion-house-speech>
, who have calculated that the loss on RBS can be outweighed by profits on 
other bailed-out banks, such as the Lloyds Banking Group and Northern Rock.

Around three-quarters of the RBS stake is earmarked for sale during the five 
years of this parliament.

The winners and losers in Osborne’s RBS sell-off | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/05/the-winners-and-losers-in-osbornes-rbs-sell-off>
Ross McEwan, chief executive of RBS, said the sale was “an important moment” 
for the bank “and reflects the progress we are making to become a stronger, 
simpler and fairer bank”.

He added: “There is more work to be done but we’re determined to build a bank 
that the country can be proud of.”

The share sale has taken place just weeks before Sir Philip Hampton, who was 
appointed chairman at the height of the financial crisis, leaves to chair 
GlaxoSmithKline.

The shares were sold at a 2.3% discount on the market price, a tighter range 
than the 3.1% discount at which the first tranche of Lloyds Banking Group 
shares were sold in September 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/17/lloyds-share-sale-makes-60m-pounds-for-government>
.

 The government’s stake has now fallen from 42% to just under 14% following the
latest disposal earlier this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/government-sells-stake-lloyds>
.
 