
About 160 investors are calling for the Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> to shore up 
corporate governance by creating a shareholder committee to sniff out “poor 
stewardship”.

The aim is said to be to avoid a rerun of the bank’s near-collapse in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/royal-bank-of-scotland-from-bailout-to-sell-off-rbs>
.


The change would prevent a repeat of the chain of events that triggered the 
RBS’s crash during the financial crisis, according to the investor groups 
ShareSoc and the UK Shareholders’ Association (UKSA).

Mark Northway, chairman of ShareSoc, said shareholders deserved a new approach 
that gave more effective input. “One objective is to stop the events that took 
place at RBS from ever happening again,” he said.

“A dominant CEO, concealing the true financial position of the company from 
investors, proceeding with a reckless acquisition, and then publishing a rights 
prospectus which concealed the problems faced by the company. These are not 
examples of good governance.”

In April 2008, RBS asked existing shareholders to inject £12bn into the company
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/jun/06/royalbankofscotlandgroup.banking>
 to strengthen its reserves after the bank had splurged £49bn to acquire the 
Dutch bank ABN Amro. The deal proved toxic and, just months later, the value of 
RBS shares plunged 90% and the government stepped in with a £45bn bailout. RBS 
remains 73% owned by the UK taxpayer.

John Hunter, the UKSA chairman, said there was a need for companies to step up 
and make capitalism work for everyone.

“Most large shareholders are intermediaries who tend to act in their own 
interests and not those of the ultimate beneficial owners,” he added. “This 
needs to change and this proposal is a step towards that. Transparency and 
formal engagement will help to prevent poor stewardship.”

ShareSoc and UKSA said poor management at RBS had caused shareholders to lose 
95% of the value of their investment since the bank’s share price peaked in 
2007.

The groups’ proposal was developed with Gavin Palmer, an outspoken RBS 
shareholder who interrupted the bank’s 2013 AGM to hand out a petition calling 
for a committee on the board.

Related: RBS pays chief executive Ross McEwan £3.8m as it reports £2bn loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/rbs-chief-executive-ross-mcewan-pay-2bn-loss-results-royal-bank-of-scotland>

It comes after reports that the RBS remuneration committee was discussing 
plans to cut the maximum amount chief executive Ross McEwan could earn under 
his long-term incentive planfrom £3m  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/rbs-chief-executive-ross-mcewan-pay-2bn-loss-results-royal-bank-of-scotland>
 to £1.75m as part of a review of executive pay.

The business secretary, Greg Clark, in November announced a new package of 
corporate governance reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/government-business-shareholders-executive-pay-greg-clark>
, which could require firms to make public the ratio between the pay of chief 
executives and ordinary workers, and provide seats for workers on company 
boards.

RBS must now decide whether the proposal meets the correct requirements to 
face a vote at its annual meeting on 4 May next year. A spokesman for the bank 
said: “We have not yet received the final draft resolution. Once it has been 
delivered we will look closely to ensure that it complies with all corporate 
governance and listing guidelines.”
 