
More than 300 years ago a masterpiece was created. A masterpiece that lay 
buried like a river of magma for over two centuries before erupting into the 
modern musical landscape when it was rediscovered in 1919. Not only has
Pachelbel’s Canon in D become a staple of the classical orchestra, pop music 
producer Pete Waterman described its simple melody and simmering build as 
“almost the godfather of pop music because we’ve all used that in our own ways 
for the past 30 years”.

To reverse this perspective, we move next to two classical musicians who 
sought inspiration from rock’n’roll.2Cellos’ rendition of AC/DC’s Thunderstruck 
is nothing short of stunning.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433413692132%2F9dcfc49d-8ed7-444e-8986-6381d3043973-1894x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20that%20build%20-%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20that%20build%20-%20results&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fjun%2F04%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-results%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F4%2F1433413692132%2F9dcfc49d-8ed7-444e-8986-6381d3043973-1894x2040.jpeg>
 Built on rock’n’roll … the statue of original AC/DC frontman Bon Scott, in 
Fremantle, Australia. Photograph: Marco den Ouden 
Much of classical music was inspired by religion. Praise, joy, rapture! The 
Inspirational Choir’s version of Abide With Me is both moving, and pleasing to 
any rock aficionado with its flashy and stirring guitar work.


Speaking of religion, and indeed of rock, one of the most dynamic examples of 
build in the genre is undoubtedlyLed Zeppelin’s Stairway to Heaven. 


Some songs with build serve to inspire. Allison Moorer progresses from a dark 
cloud hanging over her to the surging power of the belief in the cleansing 
power of a thunderstorm in the dynamicThunderstorm/Hurricane. “Holy water make 
me clean,” she sings. “Everything is washed away.”Mumford and Sons come out of 
The Cave singing they “need freedom now and need to know how to live life as 
it’s meant to be”.The Divine Comedy find strength and joy in the coming Sunrise.

Some tunesmiths, when composing a climactic moment in song, think of sex. 
That’s certainly the case with Russia’st.A.T.u. and their Prostye Dvizhen’ya 
(Simple Motions). “The simplest stroke is the swell of the ocean,” they sing. “ 
A simple motion, over and over.” There is an English version but it lacks the 
orgasmic intensity of the Russian.

The sorrow of love lost developed its own niche, the torch song, as the singer 
tries to rekindle the embers in a swelling of emotion. One classic of the genre 
and maybe one of the finest songs ever recorded isThe Righteous Brothers’ 
Unchained Melody. Another is Ruby Turner’s Stay With Me Baby. 

One popular form of build in pop music is the introduction of the band members 
alternatively playing solos with increasing flourish. The best has to beBruce 
Springsteen and the Seeger Sessions Band’s live version of Open All Night. It 
rocks, baby!

Not a fan of thrash metal, I dutifully clicked on the link to Metallica’s One 
expecting to reject it pretty quickly. Was I surprised! It starts with battle 
scenes as a mellow guitar starts to play. Doctors wheel in a patient, a man 
with his head wrapped up. The scene cuts to a boy asking his dad, “When it 
becomes my turn, will you want me to go?”

“For democracy, any man would give his only begotten son,” he replies.

 I was hooked. The song is the soliloquy in thought of a soldier who is 
limbless and can’t hear, see, or speak. He must find a way to communicate with 
his doctors, asking them to mercifully kill him. The black-and-white footage 
shot for the video is augmented by scenes from the similarly themed movie, 
Johnny Got His Gun. Metallica’sOne is a masterpiece. 

We started with a canon and end with cannon. In the early 1970s, my buddy 
Ralph and I took off in my ’66 Chevy Biscayne, a big white boat of a car, to go 
camping. We barrelled down the highway, windows cranked down, volume cranked 
up, the1812 Overture plugged into the eight-track. Two twentysomething 
rock’n’rollers air conducting the climactic finale. It was the1970 Ormandy 
version <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r3ZMpv9CnZk>. Still the best, with 
real cannon. The piece ends with the reverberation of the carillon celebrating 
the victory of Moscow’s defenders over Napoleon’s army. Whew!

The Playlist
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhOA-2hl1Vbc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhOA-2hl1Vbc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhOA-2hl1Vbc&media=>
 A-list for songs that build 
 * Johann Pachelbel – Canon in D 
 * 2Cellos – Thunderstruck 
 * The Inspirational Choir – Abide With Me 
 * Led Zeppelin – Stairway to Heaven 
 * Allison Moorer – Thunderstruck/Hurricane 
 * Mumford and Sons – The Cave 
 * The Divine Comedy – Sunrise 
 * t.A.T.u. – Prostye Dvizhen’ya (Simple Motions) 
 * The Righteous Brothers – Unchained Melody

 * Ruby Turner – Stay With Me Baby 
 *  Bruce Springsteen and the Seeger Sessions Band – Open All Night 
 * Metallica – One 
 * Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky – 1812 Overture  