
Call them siren songs ... The stories of Los Angeles make people want to come 
here. “Los Angeles is like the rest of the country, but more so,” in the words 
of journalist and author Patt Morrison. The Southern California dream is like 
the American dream, but better. Not simply wife, kids, yard, but palm trees, 
oranges in winter, beaches and more sin, drugs and fun than the rest of the 
country can imagine. It has glorious sunshine and apocalyptic events, fires, 
floods, earthquakes, riots. People move to California to reinvent themselves. 
That clichéd dream is perfectly reflected in Carolyn See’sGolden Days 
<http://www.npr.org/2012/08/06/156969670/an-apocalyptic-romp-through-the-golden-state>
, which also follows a tradition of California phonies likeAimee Semple 
McPherson <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-30148022>: it features a lunatic 
with followers and then nuclear apocalypse.

There are many Los Angeles in literature – and all feel vaguely familiar 
thanks to countless celluloid adaptations. Hollywood itself is, no doubt, the 
setting for much of the town’s literature. LA stories like F Scott Fitzgerald’s 
unfinished novelThe Love of the Last Tycoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/jan/29/classics.film> place films as a 
major character in the city, a backdrop for everything. Nathaniel West’sDay of 
the Locust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/dec/28/day-of-the-locust-nathanael-west-comfort-reading>
, set in the Great Depression era, describes piles of houses with a strange 
mixture of architecture from everywhere, as if a child God were playing with 
stacking toys between the freeways. One of its minor characters, Homer Simpson 
– whichinspired the Simpsons TV character 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/matt-groening-reveals-the-location-of-the-real-springfield-60583379/>
 – walks out into what he thinks is a mob but turns out to be people in a film. 
And that is the essence of all LA stories: nothing is as it seems. The beach, 
the house, the hair, the intangible wealth, nothing is real.

I’ve always liked the idea that Los Angeles writers think they’re making up a 
new language

LA Noir, the sub-genre encompassing tales of crime set in the shadows of the 
streets, is impossible to imagine without Raymond Chandler. WithThe Big Sleep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/24/100-best-novels-the-big-sleep-raymond-chandler>
, he began the stories of Philip Marlowe, the hard-boiled detective who finds 
that Los Angeles is full of liars, cheats and dirty deals. Women jump into bed 
with you, but sometimes they have a gun. The distance between rich and poor, 
between the grime of the streets and the clean swimming pools, threads through 
LA noir stories:James Ellroy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesellroy>’s 
LA Confidential, Walter Mosley’sDevil in a Blue Dress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/sep/04/featuresreviews.guardianreview22>
, also follow LA detectives through its mean streets. In Los Angeles, of 
course, the movies stick with us as much as the books do. Devil in a Blue Dress 
is hard to think about without remembering Denzel Washington walking through 
mid-Wilshire and LA Confidential is one of the most enduring films about Los 
Angeles, crudely introducing us to street hustling.

But lovers of Los Angeles stories would say: don’t stop. What about drug 
stories? Among many others,Lithium for Medea 
<http://www.laweekly.com/arts/best-la-novel-ever-janet-fitchs-white-oleander-vs-kate-bravermans-lithium-for-medea-round-1-2373665>
 is a tale of addiction and of LA as an anti-paradise: “The deformed sun 
dissolving above me and spitting sick orange blood on the pavement,” writes 
Kate Braverman. Incidentally, she once told me that she invented “tropicalizing 
the language.” I’ve always liked the idea that Los Angeles writers think 
they’re making up a new language.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F20%2F1424455709158%2Fcc14a2f2-1e05-49db-a412-795fd9b1c6cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F12%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F20%2F1424455709158%2Fcc14a2f2-1e05-49db-a412-795fd9b1c6cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A must-read southern California chronicler ... Joan Didion sitting inside 
white Stingray car, with cigarette, pictured in Hollywood in 1970. Photograph: 
Julian Wasser/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images 
Contemporary authors capture this bittersweet character of Los Angeles 
perfectly. In Janet Fitch’s White Oleander, we have the absent father, the 
mother in prison and the young woman inventing herself over and over, learning 
about drugs and sex too early. In Paint it Black, Fitch takes the story 
further: a young woman falls in love with a wealthy young man, but they cannot 
find happiness because they are both so damaged. Mona Simpson’s Anywhere but 
Here has a mother and daughter coming toLos Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> to be happy together. But 
happiness is out of reach. It seems real like the huge gloating sunshine, the 
palm trees and the freeways against the skyline, but it’s not. Happiness is in 
movies that you didn’t get a part in. You tried out, you seemed perfect, but 
everyone else got into that movie except you.

For many readers of Los Angeles, the crime fiction and the inequality come 
together withCharles Bukowski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/sep/05/bukowski>. However, 
once you read John Fante’sAsk the Dust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/jan/14/john-fante-ask-dust>, 
you realise who Bukowski was reading as he fell asleep. Fante’s Los Angeles is 
colder and crueler than we’d like it to be, and it’s far dirtier. Mike Davis’ 
elegiac City of Quartz, depicting a metropolis destroyed by corporate greed and 
short-term civic thinking, is a must read for anyone who wants to understand 
how Los Angeles evolved. Wanda Coleman, Luis Rodriguez, Eloise Klein Healy and 
Laurel Ann Bogen are the poets you’d read to hear the music of the city. Of 
course, that music is all encompassing in Joan Didion’s Play It As It Lays, the 
Los Angeles novel we’ve all been trying to write ever since. It’s about the 
desire to have it all matter, to have it all amount to something. To have the 
story hold up against the world:

There was silence. Something real was happening: this was, as it were, her 
life. If she could keep that in mind she would be able to play it through, do 
the right thing, whatever that meant.
 