
The version of Las Vegas that pop culture broadcasts to the world is, for the 
most part, confined to a narrow slice of the city, a couple of miles of Las 
Vegas Boulevard known as the Strip. Sometimes the view stretches to include 
downtownLas Vegas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/las-vegas>, home to the 
oldest casinos. This doesn’t reflect what it’s like to live here – we have 
schools, and grocery stores, and jobs, and we don’t all live in hotels. Both 
versions of the city are real and inseparable. The reality supports the image, 
and vice versa.

Reaching for euphoric highs and wallowing in existential lows are equal parts 
of the popular appeal

The idea of Las Vegas is woven out of our personal histories and contradictory 
narratives – winning in Vegas makes a good story, but losing big here sometimes 
makes an even better one. It’s the perennial American boom-town, sustained by 
optimism, hit hard by the financial crisis, where empty acres of desert sit 
beside glamorous hotels with azure swimming pools and fountains on some of the 
most expensive commercial real estate in the country. Playing and losing here 
does not make you a loser: it just makes you a player. It’s a glitzy, exciting, 
unapologetic place devoted to conspicuous, even grotesque consumption. People 
come here to play hard, others to work just as hard. Reaching for euphoric 
highs and wallowing in existential lows are equal parts of the popular appeal, 
and visitors are encouraged to feel like they’re getting away with something – 
eating too much, drinking too much, spending too much, gambling too much. In 
the words of Hunter S Thompson, inFear and Loathing in Las Vegas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/dec/16/politics.huntersthompson>:


When you bring an act into this town, you want to bring it in heavy. Don’t 
waste any time with cheap shucks and misdemeanors. Go straight for the jugular. 
Get right into felonies. The mentality of Las Vegas is so grossly atavistic 
that a really massive crime often slips by unrecognized.”

Rumors of the riskiness and unlimited opportunity of Las Vegas are somewhat 
exaggerated, but that doesn’t change the feel of the place. The Strip, 
downtown, vintage neighborhoods, the suburbs – the whole city is an unlikely 
feat, an illusion, a cement mirage in the desert, and that tension of 
possibility is the point. “Vegas is a nice town – plain as a biscuit in the 
sunshine, pastel and haunted in the morning and in the evening when the glow of 
the sky matches the glow of the neon. Under the stars, it is the absolute, 
incarnate, dazzled heart of earthly promise,” writes art critic, essayist, 
certified MacArthur Foundation Genius and erstwhile longtime Las Vegan Dave 
Hickey in his recent bookPirates and Farmers: Essays on Taste 
<http://ridinghouse.co.uk/publications/85>. The words “earthly promise” sum up 
pretty well the tantalising charms of the Vegas construct.


The words “earthly promise” sum up pretty well the tantalizing charms of the 
Vegas construct

The late author Susan Berman (whose murder investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/14/susan-berman-murder-hbo-the-jinx-robert-durst-letter>
, back in the public eye, now points to real estate heir Robert Durst) wrote 
about growing up on the Las Vegas strip, where her father, the mobster Davie 
Berman, ran the Flamingo Hotel after the murder of his infamous business 
partner,Bugsy Siegel <http://www.lamag.com/longform/mobster-murder-moll-secret/>
. InLady Las Vegas: The Inside Story Behind America’s Neon Oasis 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Lady_Las_Vegas.html?id=L-MJAQAAMAAJ&hl=en>
, she describes a vista of unlimited opportunity, in a city she saw as a rival 
for her father’s attention:

All things were possible when you were part of her; all risks were worth 
taking, because they turned out okay. It was right to be unstoppable: tenacity 
paid off; go for it! I didn’t know that my father and his friends were refugees 
from small, poor, cluttered cities; I didn’t know that Las Vegas opened a 
window for their claustrophobic souls and let in the first fresh air. This is 
all I have ever known: big, airy, open, unlimited, make your mark, stake your 
turf, don’t hold back!”

The history of how this desert outpost bloomed into the bright dreamscape of 
Sin City involves ambitious men with big personalities, and no shortage of vice 
and viciousness, corruption, ruthlessness, greed and violence. InThe Money and 
the Power: The Making of Las Vegas and Its Hold on America 
<http://www.amazon.com/The-Money-Power-Making-America/dp/0375701265>, Sally 
Denton and Roger Morris reveal deep, sinister connections to Wall Street, the 
CIA and beyond, a network of corruption that makes Las Vegas seem inevitable as 
a product of capitalism. Doug J Swanson’sBlood Aces: The Wild Ride of Benny 
Binion, the Texas Gangster Who Created Vegas Poker 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/306477/> is a 
fascinating look at the cowboy/murderer/philanthropist who invented the annual 
World Series of Poker (happening right now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/14/poker-player-wins-accident-card-game-world-series>
, incidentally).Positively Fifth Street: Murderers, Cheetahs and Binion’s World 
Series of Poker <http://us.macmillan.com/positivelyfifthstreet/jamesmcmanus>, 
by James McManus, began as an assignment from Harper’s Magazine to cover women 
poker players as well as the trial of the ex-stripper girlfriend accused of 
murderingTed Binion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/apr/16/theobserver1>
, former host of the WSOP (a very Vegas assignment to begin with), but turned 
into a memoir of playing in the tournament just a block away from the 
courthouse as the trial unfolded. (Not all big Vegas personalities come to 
shocking ends: billionaire casino mogul Kirk Kerkorian, the son of Armenian 
immigrants, died earlier this month at age 98. He’s one of three contemporary 
tycoons profiled inWinner Takes All: Steve Wynn, Kirk Kerkorian, Gary Loveman 
and the Race to Own Las Vegas 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Winner_Takes_All.html?id=JN1fPdEnqkcC&redir_esc=y>
, by Christina Binkley.)

Visitors are encouraged to feel like they’re getting away with something – too 
much eating, drinking, spending, gambling

Works of fiction turn to other areas of the city, paradoxically closer to what 
real life is like here, where risk is a constant for anyone balancing the 
American dream of a bigger and better future with the consequences of cold 
reality. Vu Tran’s forthcoming novel,Dragonfish 
<http://books.wwnorton.com/books/detail.aspx?ID=4294987162>, is a haunting work 
of noir literary suspense about a cop blackmailed into trying to find his 
Vietnamese ex-wife after she goes missing from the home she shares with her 
abusive new husband in Las Vegas. The novelBeautiful Children 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/02/03/books/review/Schillinger2-t.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
, by Charles Bock, is an unrelentingly brutal look at the miseries and 
pressures of growing up in the suburbs, while Laura McBride’sWe Are Called to 
Rise <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/we-are-called-to-rise-256790.html>, based 
on the real-life shooting by a police officer of an Albanian immigrant woman 
who worked in an ice-cream truck, traces the effects of tragedy on people 
struggling to find peace in the aftermath.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
The best Las Vegas stories – whether truth, fiction or something in between – 
reflect the paradoxical atmosphere of this city. Fortunes and livelihoods can 
and do rise and fall here, every day, meteorically and with apocalyptic effect, 
to nobody’s surprise. Half-meritocracy and half crap-shoot, Las Vegas is, as 
Dave Hickey has pointed out, the only city in America where the odds against 
you are all posted in plain sight, literally and metaphorically – which is why 
trusting to luck here is an act of such brazen and doomed optimism that it 
makes for a good story, even when you lose.

 * Maile Chapman is artistic director of the literary centre Beverly Rogers, 
Carol C. Harter Black Mountain Institute <http://blackmountaininstitute.org/> 
and assistant professor of English at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
 