
Welcome to the land of dreamy dreams and harsh realities that is New Orleans. 
Books and films have given readers a longtime familiarity with its great 
neighborhoods and its distinctive culture, which play out on city streets – 
especially in the elaborate costumes of Mardi Gras. Most New Orleanians, old 
line or recently arrived, know the drama of Stanley and Stella, the elegance of 
the Vampire Lestat and his friends, the aromatic hot dog cart of Ignatius 
Reilly, and the determined search of Binx Bolling. The streets beckon the 
flaneur in all of us. Writers like Richard Ford and Barry Gifford have drifted 
in and out ofNew Orleans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-orleans> over 
the years; natives Walter Isaacson, Michael Lewis and Anne Rice have become 
fixtures on the bestseller lists. And the literary heritage of one of the 
country’s great cities grows with new arrivals every year.

Stella, from A Streetcar Named Desire, seems to linger on every Quarter balcony

Tennessee Williams’ A Streetcar Named Desire 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/streetcar-named-desire-4.html> has made that 
green trolley 
<https://whereyat.files.wordpress.com/2011/01/new_orleans_streetcar-11873141_std.jpg>
 the city’s iconic visual image. A new biography,Tennessee Williams: Mad 
Pilgrimage of the Flesh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/oct/29/tennessee-williams-mad-pilgrimage-of-the-flesh-john-lahr-review>
, by theater critic John Lahr, illuminates the playwright’s life as never 
before. Every March, the city comes alive with literary energy as the Tennessee 
Williams/New Orleans literary festival takes place. Walking tours explore 
important sites in the playwright’s time here, and you can still ask for 
Tennessee’s table atGalatoire’s <http://www.galatoires.com/home> restaurant on 
Bourbon St. That triangle of Stanley, Stella and Blanche played out so much 
sexual tension and frustrated desire – it’s no wonder that New Orleans is a 
locus for all kinds of sensual fantasy and permissiveness! Stella seems to 
linger on every French Quarter balcony.

A gorgeous French Quarter byway is Pirate’s Alley off Jackson Square, where 
Faulkner House Books honours its former resident, William Faulkner. He came to 
the city to spend time with Sherwood Anderson, then in residence in Jackson 
Square’s Pontalba Buildings. Faulkner was only here for a brief period, but he 
found inspiration forSoldier’s Pay 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/soldier-s-pay.html>, Mosquitoes 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/mosquitoes.html> and the wicked satire 
Sherwood Anderson and Other Famous Creoles 
<http://utpress.utexas.edu/index.php/books/sprshe> as the city worked its 
transformative magic on the young writer.


French Quarter vagaries also feature in John Kennedy Toole’s rollicking comedy 
A Confederacy of Dunces 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/confederacy-of-dunces-4.html>, that tale of 
Ignatius J Reilly, a would-be medievalist and philosopher forced to tend a 
Paradise Vendor hot dog cart to earn his daily bread. Once you’ve read it, 
you’ll never look at those vendors the same way again. Speaking of which, Jerry 
Strahan – manager of a cart called Lucky Dogs – looked at the real men behind 
the carts inManaging Ignatius: The Lunacy of Lucky Dogs and Life in the Quarter 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Managing_Ignatius.html?id=0cWMQgAACAAJ>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-new-orleans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427296503792%2F80a32a66-d578-4a15-8187-04513a568456-1358x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-new-orleans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F26%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-new-orleans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F25%2F1427296503792%2F80a32a66-d578-4a15-8187-04513a568456-1358x2040.jpeg>
 Jazz haven ... A street musician plays on a foggy night. Photograph: Getty 
Images 
Fans of Walker Percy’s The Moviegoer 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/moviegoer.html> stroll the shopping mecca of 
Royal Street, where Binx had his sighting of William Holden – although these 
days, visitors are more likely to run into TV actors like Jessica Lange from
American Horror Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/jan/10/have-you-been-watching-american-horror-story>
 or Scott Bakula filmingNCIS New Orleans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/oct/22/quantum-leap-reunion-happening-ncis-new-orleans>
. Binx’s search for meaning struck a chord with an entire generation in one of 
the most frequently taught of New Orleans’s classic works, which depicts the 
city from the Carrollton neighborhood to the Garden District to peaceful 
Gentilly.

Take the streetcar up to the Garden District and you’ll find the mansion at 
First and Chestnut, one of Anne Rice’s most famous residences. There’s often a 
crowd outside this home of the Mayfairs, the family of witches at the heart of
The Witching Hour <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Witching_Hour_%28novel%29> 
and subsequent works. A few blocks away you’ll find the cemetery on Sixth 
street where the Vampire Lestat took his long sleep. Rice’sInterview with the 
Vampire <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/interview-with-the-vampire.html>, one 
of the most sensual of New Orleans novels, has made the city a Halloween 
destination. Her supernatural beings inhabit a shadowy, beautiful city that 
seems to shimmer beneath the real landscape.

However, not all streets in New Orleans are elegant or glamorous – mean and 
dangerous streets abound. James Lee Burke is the grand master of Louisiana 
crime fiction, and he writes about the post-Katrina city in the story collection
Jesus Out to Sea <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/jesus-out-to-sea.html>, and 
The Tin Roof Blowdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/dec/01/featuresreviews.guardianreview12>
, featuring his well-known protagonist Dave Robicheaux. Anyone who’s ever spent 
much time in the Quarter will sympathise with Dave’s white-knuckled struggle 
for sobriety and his cynical view of the city.

The recent anthology New Orleans Noir 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/New_Orleans_Noir.html?id=NsBlAAAAMAAJ&redir_esc=y>
, edited by Julie Smith, surveys the field, with a selection of pre- and 
post-Katrina stories by a variety of writers. Poverty, lack of opportunity and 
corruption – along with the vultures that descended on the wide-open city after 
the storm – provide considerable material for those who wish to explore the 
city’s dark side.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Images of the city’s flooded streets and homes from the summer of 2005 are 
still painful. Few have captured the Katrina experience as well asTimes-Picayune
 <http://www.nola.com/#/0> columnist Chris Rose in his collection of columns, 1 
Dead in Attic 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/1_Dead_in_Attic.html?id=b97lTVPYBCQC&redir_esc=y>
. John Barry’s bestseller,Rising Tide: The Great Mississippi Flood of 1927 and 
How It Changed America 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Rising_Tide.html?id=EVHLomGmlN0C&redir_esc=y>
, set the stage for that disaster with its history of flood control efforts. In 
addition, Tom Piazza’s passionate manifesto,Why New Orleans Matters 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Why_New_Orleans_Matters.html?id=rhJ1lwEACAAJ&redir_esc=y>
, rose to the city’s defence in the autumn of 2006.

Now, read. Come see for yourself. This beautiful city survives still, 
somewhere between lingering literary memory and undeniable present fact.

 * Susan Larson <http://wwno.org/people/susan-larson> is the author of The 
Booklover’s Guide to New Orleans 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Booklovers-Guide-New-Orleans/dp/0807153079>, hosts 
The Reading Life <http://wwno.org/programs/reading-life> radio programme on New 
Orleans Public Radio and was book editor for theThe New Orleans Times-Picayune 
<http://www.nola.com/t-p/> newspaper from 1988 to 2009 
 * The Tennessee Williams New Orleans Literary Festival 
<http://www.tennesseewilliams.net/> runs until 29 March. Find more information 
here <http://www.tennesseewilliams.net/>. From Larson: “A highlight is the 
Stanley and Stella Shouting contest in Jackson Square. T-shirt and slip-clad 
contestants vie for their objects of desire, and Stella even has some ardent 
female suitors! It’s literature come to life.”
 