
What a song.* It begins with nothing more than a hint of stillness, a tiny 
flick of wind through grass, a gnat’s heartbeat, a cricket’s wink, a cat hair’s 
whisper in the imagination. Then, emerging from beyond the frequency at which 
human biology can detect sound, an indeterminate buzzing, perhaps of an insect, 
a rhythmic crunching, and a rustling like the uncurling of forest foliage. 
Next, the low thrum of a distant double bass, a rumble of timpany, a bass drum 
thud, then a snare, repeating and rising like the approach of a far-off army. 
Is that an oboe or a clarinet through the trees? Joining out of nowhere, the 
sounds are reminiscent of industry, the pushing of pistons, the hiss of steam, 
the banging of hammers. These instruments quickly and indiscernibly align into 
the rhythm of a human heartbeat.


Suddenly, cracking like jagged sunlight across the sky, a guitar riff breaks 
out, and throws strange shadows. It does it again. Then cutting across, a piano 
plays a rhythmic counterpoint. The sounds intertwine. A string section joins. 
The energy rises, the pace quickens, and building, all the instruments quickly 
take a second’s breath, until a voice, at first soft but distinct in the verse, 
lets out a low howl, rising to a scream as it drives into the big corner of the 
chorus, joined by more voices and doubled guitars. The pattern repeats itself, 
each cycle building in intensity, the lyrics alternating between absolutely 
heart-wrenching and utterly joyous. Vocal phrases are echoed first with organ, 
then brass, then bells, until all hell breaks loose in a middle-eight section 
with the sound of a chainsaw. Somehow it cuts back to the verse, then into a 
chaotic final chorus where emotions are unleashed into a hurricane of the 
unspeakable, all instruments straining in anarchic energy at the edge of each 
register, out of which we hear, to an uproar and climax, a herd of elephants – 
trumpeting, thudding, tramping, triumphant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432758496497%2F1cb6c9fb-cda9-4230-8b12-1172759647a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20that%20build%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20that%20build%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432758496497%2F1cb6c9fb-cda9-4230-8b12-1172759647a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Beat building … James Murphy of LCD Soundsystem at London’s Brixton Academy in 
2005. Photograph: Jim Dyson/Getty 
Building is a process that happens in most songs, but this week we’re looking 
for the ones that do it in the most effective, interesting ways. Your approach 
may be less about the technicalities of song structure, perhaps even more all 
about how the song makes you feel and how it carries you. And song building 
doesn’t only have to be about increasing volume. It can come from more subtle 
multiple layers of sound and instruments. A song’s sense of crescendo, of 
whatever type, can, for example, build with suspense through the story it tells 
in lyrics or the delivery of the vocalist. The effect might be explicitly or 
otherwise sexual, or simply offer a physical release, and create moments of 
so-called “eargasm”. It can build slowly or fast, it can increase and develop 
to high level of joy, or anger, or other emotions, and the intensity doesn’t 
have to come at the very end, but at another point. Yet often the best building 
up songs move from a whisper to a scream, and finish with a climax that leaves 
your feelings and ears resonating.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432831483791%2F59eee6dc-a698-413d-a870-5ecf59e9930b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20that%20build%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20that%20build%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432831483791%2F59eee6dc-a698-413d-a870-5ecf59e9930b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Once they get started … the unstoppable Arcade Fire. Photograph: Tim 
Mosenfelder/Getty 
Songs or pieces of music that build can originate from many genres, from 
classical to dance, but don’t have to be lengthy to build successfully. Three 
minutes can be enough. They can spark emotions with careful pace of rhythm, 
structure and delivery. The standard 
intro-verse-chorus-middle-eight-verse-chorus or similar structure could seen be 
a hindrance to momentum, but there are songs that still use this sort of shape 
but build and increase intensity within it. Dance music often simplifies 
structure and builds from a constant beat and baseline, but there are many 
interesting crossbreeds that bring momentum in various forms, from New York’s 
indie-dance hybridLCD Soundsystem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lcd-soundsystem> to Sacramento’s 
guitar-based !!! (also known as Chk Chk Chk), and Montreal’s Arcade Fire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432812135961%2F105d0115-e408-47d9-9ff1-9cd0b2516cdb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20that%20build%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20that%20build%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432812135961%2F105d0115-e408-47d9-9ff1-9cd0b2516cdb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Master builder … Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky (1840-1893) Photograph: Hulton 
Archive/Getty 
The classical genre, with length at its disposal, may also bring many 
prominent examples, from the great composers – so Tchaikovsky, Beethoven or 
Wagner may be on some lists – to lesser known modern figures. Finland’s
Einojuhani Rautavaara <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G7NFuw8ORk4> is an 
unusual composer who uses sounds from nature and builds with a mystical quality 
and unusual stringed arrangements. Artists from Iceland, such as Sigur Ros, 
also build songs with their own otherworldly quality, and are equally inspired 
by the powerful forces of their landscape.

Folk, country and different forms of world music may also come frequently into 
the build-up category, with an emphasis on storytelling. Even if the language 
is not understood by western listeners, there is now shortage of infectious 
buildup momentum in African artists such as Tinariwen from the Saharan Desert 
of northern Mali. Combining folk and the passion of soul and Motown, of which 
there may well be many contenders,Van Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/van-morrison> is also an artist who can 
build, and uses unusual structures, evoking many mood changes, from the 
peaceful shores of Donegal to the fierce passion of his city of Belfast or 
Detroit.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432758625266%2Fc8747937-7a54-4424-9816-16c956bcb2a3-2060x1311.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20that%20build%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%3A%20songs%20that%20build%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Freaders-recommend-songs-that-build-energy-momentum-emotion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432758625266%2Fc8747937-7a54-4424-9816-16c956bcb2a3-2060x1311.jpeg>
 Stormy buildup … Jonsi Birgisson of Iceland’s Sigur Ros. Photograph: Andy 
Sheppard/Redferns via Getty Images 
Rock has no shortage of bulding ability either. So Smashing Pumpkins and 
Godspeed You! Black Emperor may be among your thoughts of many. Funk and soul 
is also an ideal genre for building up energy, and of course James Brown and in 
a different way, George Clinton, were also pioneers of the build, while Otis 
Redding was an outstanding star of emotional climax. But who whether these or 
others, has done it best, and in what songs?

Time then to briefly look at some other forms of building to help inspire your 
choices. These may express the feeling that your song inspires. Malcolm 
Gladwell’s book of philosophy, science and society,The Tipping Point: How 
Little Things Can Make a Big Difference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/apr/22/extract>, reached its own huge 
sales momentum with a fascinating read on how small things can start trends of 
accelerating energy. So let’s look at a quirky, musical example in the form of 
how one eccentric, lone dancer at the Sasquatch festival, Washington, in 2009 
helped build up a surprising about of momentum. Better watched, in my opinion, 
with the sound and commentary turned down ...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhO8MwBZl-Vc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhO8MwBZl-Vc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhO8MwBZl-Vc&media=>
 It only takes one … crazy Saquatch festival dancer. Watch what happens next. 
Far more enjoyable with the sound turned down... 

Nuclear fusion is perhaps the ultimate form of energy building up, a chain 
reaction speading rapidly into explosion. How then to illustrate, in a basic 
way, what happens? Ping pong balls and mouse traps, of course.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvjqIJW_Qr3c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvjqIJW_Qr3c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvjqIJW_Qr3c&media=>
 Chain reaction of fission seen in the form of ping pong balls on mousetraps 

Does your song suggestion do this in your mind? Finally, buildup doesn’t have 
to be explosive, but delicately determined and unstoppable. In 1987 two Swiss 
artists,Peter Fischli and David Weiss 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Fischli_and_David_Weiss> with an 
extraordinary talent for using old bits of scrap, as well as a great grasp of 
physics and chemistry, created an installation film, Der Lauf Der Dingen (The 
Way Things Go). There have been other versions since, not to mention 
controversy over an alleged copycat Honda car ad, but here’s the original, 
speeded up four times. Does it remind you of that feeling of playing the
Mousetrap game <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mouse_Trap_%28game%29> or watching 
dominoes fall?

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXniQwRFLTqc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXniQwRFLTqc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXniQwRFLTqc&media=>
 Der Lauf Der Dingen, by Fischli and Weiss 
This week’s brillant baron of buildup and master of momentum, not to mention 
the great keeper of all built-up records in Readers Recommend history, is the 
magnificantMarconius <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/marconius/public>. 
Perhaps mentioning how and particular points when they build, put your songs 
suggestions with links in comments below, and optionally in the Spotify 
playlist bylast orders (11pm BST) this Monday 1 June for the results to be 
published nextThursday 4 June.


Interested in compiling a list of songs from readers’ suggestions? We’re 
looking for writers for subjects starting from 18 June. Email 
peter.kimpton@theguardian.com to arrange.

* The identity of this song is to be revealed later …


To increase the likelihood of your nomination being considered, please:

• Tell us why it’s a worthy contender.
• Quote lyrics if helpful, but for copyright reasons no more than a third of a 
song’s words.
• Provide a link to the song. We prefer Muzu or YouTube, but Spotify, 
SoundCloud or Grooveshark are fine.
• Listen to others people’s suggestions and add yours to a collaborative 
Spotify playlist.
• If you have a good theme for Readers recommend, or if you’d like to 
volunteer to compile a playlist, please emailpeter.kimpton@theguardian.com 
<mailto:peter.kimpton@theguardian.com>
• There’s a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at the
Marconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning of 
“zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.
• Many RR regulars also congregate at the ‘Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.
 