
Humptulips <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humptulips,_Washington>! Skykomish 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Skykomish_River>! Yakima 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yakima,_Washington>! Duwamish 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duwamish_River>! Kitsap 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kitsap_County,_Washington>! These names of places 
are the legacy of a 10,000 year history of oral storytelling on the Pacific 
Northwest Coast and the foundation of Seattle’s literary identity. While many 
of these stories were lost in the final westward push ofManifest Destiny 
<http://www.history.com/topics/manifest-destiny>, the words born in the 
languages of First Peoples live on in the region’s novels, poems, and stories.

Vi Hilbert, a member of the Skagit Tribe, managed to rescue the language 
Lushootseed from oblivion before she died, publishing dictionaries and 
collections of stories. The works of Seattle’s most acclaimed writer, National 
Book Award winner Sherman Alexie, includingIndian Killer 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1996/11/24/books/skin-games.html> and The Lone Ranger 
and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lone-ranger-and-tonto-fistfight-in-heaven.html>
, remain some of the best introductions to the cloud-covered city onPuget Sound 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Puget_Sound>. Other Seattle writers who happen to 
claim Native heritage include popular novelist Garth Stein (The Art of Racing 
in the Rain <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/art-of-racing-in-the-rain.html>) 
and gutsy memoirist Elissa Washuta (My Body is a Book of Rules 
<http://www.seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/books/2024967713_bodyruleswashutaxml.html>
).

It’s the sense of community that’s most striking about Seattle’s literary life

When pioneers of European heritage first settled into the mud of this 
conifer-dense collection of seven hills, they came bearing America’s East Coast 
and Midwestern cultural identities on their backs. They decided that Seattle 
would be a city of the future, looking ever Eastward to the Pacific Rim. Murray 
Morgan’sSkid Road remains the go-to account of the city’s ribald founding by 
drunken, philandering visionaries determined to establish a city that could one 
day rival those of the East Coast. Nowadays that vision is manifest, with a 
skyline feasted upon by construction cranes, as Seattle endures its new status 
asAmerica’s fastest-growing city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/21/seattle-economy-worsening-inequality>
 – thanks in no small part to serving ashome to Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/may/22/amazon-futuristic-new-downtown-seattle-hq-microsoft-nintendo>
.

Seattle was a frequent hangout spot for the Beats, and the Blue Moon Tavern 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53981812e4b06713cee83f36/1017286>, 
where Kerouac spent time, still stands. When Allen Ginsberg wandered through 
town in February of 1956, he recorded his impressions of this maritime trading 
post flowing with five-cent beer and commerce in his poem Afternoon Seattle:


Seattle! - department stores full of fur coats and camping equipment, mad 
noontime businessmen in gabardine coats talking on street corners to keep up 
the structure, I float past, birds cry

Beyond the grid teeming with business deals, the mountains, islands, and 
rivers that hug the city practically demand to be immortalised in poetry. The 
young poets hunched over MacBooks in Capitol Hill’s cafes today belong to a 
tradition established by Seattle poets likeCarolyn Kizer 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/carolyn-kizer>, Theodore Roethke 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/theodore-roethke>, and Richard Hugo 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/richard-hugo>. The new generation of 
Seattle poets, includingSarah Galvin 
<http://cityartsonline.com/articles/funniest-book-poetry-world>, Karen 
Finneyfrock <http://www.karenfinneyfrock.com/>, and Rich Smith 
<http://richsmithpoetry.com/> (no longer based in the city), belong to a 
literary community accustomed to performing to word-stoned audiences on stages 
like the cabaret at Hugo House and the Fireside Room at the Sorrento Hotel, 
purported to be haunted by the ghost of one-time residentAlice B Toklas 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alice_B._Toklas>. Seattle is also home to one of 
America’s only bookstores devoted entirely to poetry,Open Books 
<http://www.openpoetrybooks.com/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F09%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-seattle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428571147576%2F3816089c-d8d2-4950-9cc4-45aec7052d35-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Seattle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F09%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-seattle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Seattle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F09%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-seattle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F9%2F1428571147576%2F3816089c-d8d2-4950-9cc4-45aec7052d35-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Where nature and technology coexist ... Photograph: Natalie Tepper/Corbis 
It’s the sense of community that’s most striking about Seattle’s literary 
life. With a population of around 650,000, it’s still small enough for book 
nerds to continually bump into each other, whether at the palatialElliott Bay 
Book Company <http://www.elliottbaybook.com/> or during riotous events like the 
APRIL Festival <http://aprilfestseattle.tumblr.com/> or LitCrawl 
<http://litcrawl.org/seattle/>. It’s also a city that welcomes recent arrivals, 
like Maria Semple, whose comic novelWhere’d You Go Bernadette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/29/whered-you-go-bernadette-review> 
skewers the pretentions of this tech-mad metropolis.

Nature and technology coexist in this mossy notch of the lower 48 more 
harmoniously than in other American cities. The next time you use Adobe Acrobat 
or Microsoft Excel, know that coho and chinook salmon spawned a few hundred 
yards from the offices where that software was hatched.

The region’s wilds continue to inspire memoirists and essayists. Jonathan Raban
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jonathan-raban>, a transplant from Norfolk, 
UK who has made the Northwest his subject and home, traverses both geography 
and an unraveling marriage in Passage to Juneau: A Sea and Its Meanings. Fellow 
Brit Lesley Hazelton, whose books on religion and culture includeThe First 
Muslim: 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/07/books/review/the-first-muslim-by-lesley-hazleton.html>
The Story of Muhammad 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/07/books/review/the-first-muslim-by-lesley-hazleton.html>
,writes from a classically Seattle setting, a houseboat on Lake Union. Tim Egan 
<http://www.nytimes.com/column/timothy-egan>, a New York Times columnist, 
meditates on the nature and history of the region in both fiction and 
nonfiction, includingThe Good Rain 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/The_Good_Rain.html?id=NoYP8NVOuNUC>. 

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
It makes sense that such a future-obsessed city would be fertile breeding 
ground for science fiction and fantasy.George RR Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/george-rr-martin> and Neil Gaiman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman> are among the big-hitters of 
speculative fiction who have led sessions atClarion West 
<http://www.clarionwest.org/about/> writers’ workshop, which counts among its 
alumniOctavia Butler <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Octavia_E._Butler>, Kij 
Johnson <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kij_Johnson>, and Cat Rambo 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cat_Rambo>. Frank Herbert, who lived in nearby 
Port Angeles, established himself as a giant in the genre withDune 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/30/frank-herbert-dune-at-50-sci-fi-masterpiece>
 and its sequels. From nearby Vashon Island, Neal Stephenson continues to 
deliver post-cyberpunk doorstoppers like Cryptonomicon, Anatheum, and the 
Baroque Cycle.


If Seattle were said to have a literary grandfather, that figure would most 
certainly be Tom Robbins, the verbal acrobat whose novels speak to the 
psychedelic, mystical sensibilities that find a perfect home in the Northwest. 
As Robbins once remarked, “to some extent,Seattle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/seattle> remains a frontier metropolis, a 
place where people can experiment with their lives, and change and grow and 
make things happen.”
 