
Below is this week’s playlist – the theme and tunes picked by a reader from 
the comments onlast week’s callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/01/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-about-hope-and-resilience>
. Thanks for your suggestions. Read more about the format of the weekly Readers 
recommend series at the end of the piece.

What a week it’s been. I have been bowled over by the number of nominations 
and the depth of RR readers’ knowledge. There are so many excellent songs to 
choose from that whittling them down was hard, if pleasurable work.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyS-KOJHhRirqUyB5vnFS3iB&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyS-KOJHhRirqUyB5vnFS3iB>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fplaylist%3Flist%3DPL3Yv36aUktyS-KOJHhRirqUyB5vnFS3iB&media=>
Listen to Chris Wheatley RR playlist: hope and resilience on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL3Yv36aUktyS-KOJHhRirqUyB5vnFS3iB> 
Straight into it then with No Love Dying 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w0cwxyr6ejQ> by Gregory Porter. “Hope. 
Resilience. Compassion. Defiance,”says untergunther 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/82545052>. “And what a 
voice!” I can’t argue with that – this is a wonderful ballad with top-flight 
musicians and an arrangement that pulls you in. It harks back to jazz’s glory 
days in the 1950s and 60s, but with a modern twist. Really, though, it is 
timeless. A great start for this theme.

Which brings us to Rosana and Sin Miedo 
<https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=tKiTgW8BBDI&vidve=5727&autoplay=1>.

“Everything sounds better in Spanish,” says deborahwilson 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/82470650>, who kindly 
providesthe following translation 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/82470650>: 

Living without fear, the bad becomes good
The streets melt into the sky and 
We become birds flying above them

“Just listen and watch and feel happy,” says Deborah. A wonderful reggae-style 
rhythm and subtle keyboard-work adds up to a whole lot of fun. It’s tropical 
pop with a Spanish twist.

How many songs about toilet gods do you get to hear?” asks Pairubu. Not nearly 
enough, is the answer. However, for my third choice, I decided to overlook Kana 
Uemura’s Toire no Kamisama (God of Toilet) in favour of another excellent 
nomination from the same reader:Leslie Sarony’s Ain’t it Grand to be Bloomin’ 
Sell Dead <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NcAieB-2kC0>. “Perhaps the ultimate 
‘every cloud has a silver lining’ song,”says Pairubu 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/82588105>. “Though a bit 
ancient …” As if being ancient is a bad thing. I’m a bit of a sucker for 
old-time music hall, and this is a new one to me. I’m delighted to make its 
acquaintance. I hope you will be, too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-songs-about-hope-and-resilience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94bdbce939a14a3780033ebe81198a8380c8c208%2F0_156_3008_1805%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%20playlist%3A%20songs%20about%20hope%20and%20resilience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-songs-about-hope-and-resilience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%20playlist%3A%20songs%20about%20hope%20and%20resilience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-songs-about-hope-and-resilience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94bdbce939a14a3780033ebe81198a8380c8c208%2F0_156_3008_1805%2F3008.jpg>
 The Go! Team, who make the list, perform in 2007. Photograph: Rachel Bevis/Rex 
Features 
“Songs to combat the prevailing sense of impending doom?” asks misterbadexample
 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/82462941>. “In that case, 
what we probably need is theSheepdogs, who are Feelin’ Good 
<https://youtu.be/EMcue9QA4vE>.” Well, I didn’t know that I needed them before, 
but I do now. There is a real 70s vibe going on here, in a good way. Fuzzed-up 
guitar, an anthemic chorus and stomping drums. A bit of sleuthing reveals that 
the Sheepdogs were the first unsigned band to make the cover of Rolling Stone. 
Utterly deserved, if this song is anything to judge by. Go round ’em up! My 
choice at No 4.

“I’m new to this,” writes NoMoreMrNice 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/82368760>, earning a huge 
pat on the back for making the A-list at the first attempt, with the wonderful 
suggestion ofBeethoven’s Ode to Joy 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xBlQZyTF_LY>. Something wonderful happens when 
you hear that famous run of 32 notes. They conjure up a palpable air of 
delicious expectation, like standing on the edge of a cliff wearing a wingsuit. 
It is “a triumphant celebration of the human spirit”, says the nominator. 
Indeed it is, and this particular RR guru will never forget listening to 
electronic maestro Philip Jeck’s deconstructed version as an opener for Jah 
Wobble’s magnificent Fly tour. They don’t come much more positive than this. 
Five down almost too soon.

Ah, Marconius, how can I ever repay you for introducing me to Three Suns’ 
version of Michael Nesmith’sBeyond the Blue Horizon 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T_c1aAHA-rg>? A leg maybe? An arm? If you ever 
need a new kidney, I’m your man. “I love the enthusiasm ...”says Marconius 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/82566123>. “Especially the 
solo at 1:33 <https://youtu.be/T_c1aAHA-rg?t=1m33s>.” Guitar-piano-accordion 
trios are hard to come by, and this one offers about as cheesy a slice of 
light-hearted pop as you can get – scoring very highly in my book. Ideally, 
while listening to this, you should be sat in a 1940s cinema, waiting for the 
attendant to come round with ice creams. No 6 with a smile.

Ravi Raman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/01/readers-recommend-share-your-songs-about-hope-and-resilience#comment-82443617>
 provided some great nominations, none better thanLouis Armstrong’s On the 
Sunny Side of the Street <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nn3soYbSpS4>. There 
is no need to justify its inclusion – the music speaks for itself, but let’s 
have crack at it anyway. Armstrong elevated traditional jazz to a new level 
with his Hot Five and Hot Seven sessions, but he never lost that New Orleans 
feel. Even when he isn’t singing, you can sense him smiling. A wonderful 
walking bassline, magnificent interplay of brass, softly swinging drums … and 
that trumpet. Glorious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-songs-about-hope-and-resilience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfb594e4ff9d35e14ceeb2149e3aa8ddd0529bd7%2F0_43_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readers%20recommend%20playlist%3A%20songs%20about%20hope%20and%20resilience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-songs-about-hope-and-resilience%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readers%20recommend%20playlist%3A%20songs%20about%20hope%20and%20resilience&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Freaders-recommend-playlist-songs-about-hope-and-resilience%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfb594e4ff9d35e14ceeb2149e3aa8ddd0529bd7%2F0_43_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Nelson Mandela, right, with South African singer Johnny Clegg during a concert 
in Frankfurt in 1999. Photograph: Oliver Berg/EPA 
So we come to No 8: Johnny Clegg and Savuka – Asimbonanga (Mandela) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UJujyzA2Q1E> – an excellent nomination from 
RR’s wonderwife <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/82372568>, 
who says: “If it’s resilience and hope you’re talking about, this is the 
greatest song ever written.” I picked up a couple of Johnny Clegg albums a 
while back and they are a delight. Clegg is a white South African, and his 
mixed-race bands in the 1970s and 80s tested the country’s apartheid laws to 
breaking point. This protest song, dedicated to Nelson Mandela, perfectly sums 
up this week’s theme.

At No 9 I choose the Go! Team with We Just Won’t Be Defeated 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ss_kBsevJbA>, nominated by SweetHomeAlabama 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/82363871>. They are 
another great band who combine old and new to come up with something entirely 
different. Is it Motown? Seventies funk? Nineties hip-hop? It’s all that and 
more, with a big smile on its rocket-fuelled face.

What more fitting song could there be to end with than the Traveling Wilburys’ 
End of the Line <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cwqhdRs4jyA>. “The most 
positive song I know,”says nominator PatLux 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/82365017>. “I hope the 
people who attend my funeral will enjoy it.” Let’s hope that’s a long time off, 
PatLux. Supergroups don’t always succeed, but this one – with Roy Orbison, 
George Harrison, Bob Dylan, Jeff Lynne and Tom Petty – certainly did. With so 
much talent in one place I’m surprised they didn’t rupture the space-time 
continuum. Or maybe they did, and that explains the whole of 2016. By the end 
of the first four bars, you’re hooked. Listen to that beautiful train-track 
rhythm, sliding guitar and infectious bassline. It is three-and-a-half minutes 
of musical heaven.

All that remains is to say a big thank you to every one of you for your 
fantastic nominations and kind comments. It’s been a blast!

New theme

The theme for next week’s playlist will be announced at 8pm (UK time) on 8 
September. You haveuntil 11pm on 12 September to submit nominations.

Here’s a reminder of some of the guidelines for RR:

 * If you have a good theme idea, or if you’d like to volunteer to compile a 
playlist from readers’ suggestions and write a blog about it, please email
matthew.holmes@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.holmes@theguardian.com>.

 * There is a wealth of data on RR, including the songs that are “zedded”, at 
theMarconium <http://www.rrindex.com/index.htm>. It also tells you the meaning 
of “zedded”, “donds” and otherstrange words used by RR regulars 
<http://www.rrindex.com/glossary.htm>.

 * Many RR regulars also congregate at the ’Spill blog 
<http://thespillblog.co.uk/>.  