
Miami literature and Miami as literature are two completely different things, 
a tale of two novels, as it were: one a gritty, dystopian thriller where 
poverty and violence are swallowing the populace, and the other a bildungsroman 
of eternal optimism. These two fictional states not only co-exist but are 
mutually dependent upon one another. For there to beprogress, after all, there 
must be something to progressfrom, and Miami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/miami> has always evaluated itself in the 
hypothetical, in what itwill be, not what it actually is. So living here 
sometimes feels like living in the first third of a novel, in which the plucky 
protagonist is suffering setback after setback, but something must change, 
right, or why would there be so many pages left?

Miami has always evaluated itself in the hypothetical, in what it will be, not 
what it actually is

Inside this funhouse of possibilities, writers have always thrived. We’re 
liars after all, and Miami is where lies go to become the truth. The city was 
only incorporated in 1896, and before the first world war, it operated more like
Deadwood <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/mar/20/2> than a real city. 
“The sailors who docked in Miami said that Hell’s Kitchen could not compare 
with North Miami … ” writes historian Helen Muir in her 1953 book,Miami: USA 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Miami_U_S_A.html?id=xYJoQgAACAAJ&hl=en>
. “Roulette wheels ran in the middle of Miami Avenue … Three reported killings 
a night were about average.” Muir was one of the first writers to mythologize 
Miami, but her instinct came from the founders themselves. Carl Fisher, who was 
laughed at when he bought a glorified sandbar and named it Miami Beach, was a 
natural showman, importing birds when he couldn’t find them and using elephants 
as valets; he even hired Italian singers to serenade his workers as they built 
his hotels. George Merrick, the founder ofCoral Gables 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coral_Gables,_Florida>, once paid William 
Jennings Bryan $100,000 to orate for prospective land buyers. These people were 
authors who wrote with gold, and the promise of paradise inspired many 
copycats. In 1925, when Miami was still smaller than Key West, the city issued 
7,500 real estate licenses.

Miami has always needed a corrective to this wild and ebullient optimism. 
Talking back to the powerful is one of the city’s great literary traditions, 
pioneered by Marjory Stoneman Douglas. Like Muir, she cut her teeth as a 
reporter atThe Miami Herald <http://www.miamiherald.com/>. Her book Everglades: 
River of Grass <https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=yymmDQhYmzgC&redir_esc=y> 
(1947) launched the movement to save the Everglades from relentless 
development. One of the most unique and threatened ecosystems in the world, the 
Everglades is a big national park in southern Florida. Bordering the city to 
the west, it continues to exert a powerful influence on literature, from 
Michael Grunwald’sThe Swamp 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2006/03/08/books/08grim.html> to Karen Russell’s 
Swamplandia! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/apr/09/karen-russell-swamplandia-review>
 to Steve Gerber’s 1970s Marvel ComicThe Man-Thing 
<http://www.popmatters.com/feature/129849-swamp-monsters-and-stoners-when-mainstream-comics-tuned-in-turned-on/>
.

There’s an old saying that a quarter of every building in downtown Miami was 
made with money from the cocaine trade

The Everglades has also served as a convenient place to lose a dead body. 
Akashic Books has published two different versions of their popularMiami Noir 
<http://www.akashicbooks.com/catalog/miami-noir/> anthology, probably because 
there’s very little Miami literature that couldn’t, on some level, be described 
as noir. The crime family tree begins with John D MacDonald and Charles 
Willeford, and quickly spreads like a virus to Elmore Leonard, Edna Buchanen, 
Les Standiford, James Allen Hall, Vicki Hendricks, Lynne Barrett, Joe Clifford, 
and many more. Carl Hiassen blends noir with satire, and Dave Barry’s sense of 
humor comes from a Bogart-esque ability to smile as he surrenders to the 
worse-case scenario. Even adopted Miamians, like Edwidge Danticat and Russell 
Banks, skip the sunlight to investigate the darkness. Both novelists explore 
how immigrants respond to the power structures they inherit, and, in the case 
of Banks’sContinental Drift 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/26919.Continental_Drift>, how they are 
literally swallowed whole. In Diana Abu-Jaber’sBirds of Paradise 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/11/books/review/birds-of-paradise-by-diana-abu-jaber-book-review.html>
, crime is the atmosphere around the protagonists. There’s an old saying that a 
quarter of every single building in downtown Miami was made with money from the 
cocaine trade. In other words, if you live here, you’re implicated.

Many of Miami’s crime writers got their start as Miami Herald employees, where 
they were bombarded every day with stories too strange to be fiction. The 
weekly paper across town,The Miami New Times <http://www.miaminewtimes.com/>, 
also has a great track record for grooming talent. Steve Almond worked there, 
as didThe New Yorker <http://www.newyorker.com/> editor and novelist Ben 
Greenman <http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/ben-greenman>. Newer New Times 
blood includesn+1 <https://nplusonemag.com/> contributor Emily Witt 
<http://emilywitt.net/> and nonfiction writer Gus Garcia-Roberts 
<http://www.penguin.com/author/gus-garcia-roberts/245841>.

The Cuban experience

When favorite son Richard Blanco 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/richard-blanco> read a poem at the 
re-opening of the US embassy in Havana 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/08/13/432122602/poet-richard-blanco-on-u-s-cuba-we-all-belong-to-the-sea-between-us>
, the divide between generations of Cuban-Americans was obvious. Those for whom 
the brutality of the Castros will always be fresh in their minds held up 
protest signs on Calle Ocho. For most second- and third-generation immigrants, 
though, it was a sign that perhaps things might improve, and they could soon 
travel back to Cuba and visit relatives with a clean conscience.

Vega rejected his literary reception and instead worked as a bag boy at a 
local supermarket until he died at 86

That first generation is well-represented in Miami literature. Among that 
group, my favorites are Guillermo Rosales and Lorenzo García Vega. Rosales, who 
had already made a name for himself in Cuba with brilliant short novel El Juego 
de la Viola (published in English asLeapfrog 
<http://www.ndbooks.com/author/guillermo-rosales/>), fled Cuba in the 70s and 
within a couple of days, found himself living in a corrupt Miami boarding 
house. His satirical portrait of living there becameLa casa de los náufragos 
<http://www.casadellibro.com/libro-la-casa-de-los-naufragos/9788478447046/918609>
 (1987), perhaps the best book ever written about what locals like to call “the 
real Miami,” the onewhere more than a quarter of the population lives below the 
poverty line <http://www.city-data.com/poverty/poverty-Miami-Florida.html>. 
Vega too was famous in Cuba. As one of the original contributors toJosé Lezama 
Lima <http://www.britannica.com/biography/Jose-Lezama-Lima>’s Orígenes – a 
literary vanguard group – Vega was a major literary figure in his home country. 
He fled from there in the 1960s and lived all over the world before settling in 
Miami for the last ten years of his life. A born trouble-maker who never 
suffered fools, Vega rejected whatever literary reception he might have had 
here and instead worked as a bag boy at a local supermarket until he died in 
2012 at the age of 86. In poems such as By the Golf Course, Vega viciously 
pokes fun at Miami, though he refuses to call it by its name, rechristening it: 
Playa Albina, or Albino Beach. To date, the Chamber of Commerce has not caught 
on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-miami%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443175318602%2Ff28677e9-3c56-4386-aeac-3faa686f1230-1361x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Miami&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-miami%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Miami&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-miami%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443175318602%2Ff28677e9-3c56-4386-aeac-3faa686f1230-1361x2040.jpeg>
 A continuous influence for Miami literature ... A road in the Everglades 
National Park, which borders the city to the west. Photograph: Alamy 
The best representatives of the newest generation of Cuban-American Miami 
writers, those who were born here and forced to memorize José Martí poems as 
penance, areJennine Capó Crucet <http://jennine-crucet.squarespace.com/> and 
Marco Ramirez <https://twitter.com/marcoramirezmd>. Crucet’s debut collection 
of stories,How to Leave Hialeah 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/6411442-how-to-leave-hialeah>, is a 
hilarious guidebook to Miami culture. Her latest novel,Make Your Home Among 
Strangers 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/16/books/review/make-your-home-among-strangers-by-jennine-capo-crucet.html>
, builds upon the world of the stories by tackling theElián González affair 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eli%C3%A1n_Gonz%C3%A1lez_affair>. What was for 
many of us simply another 90s reality television event was for Miami a litmus 
test for your politics, and Crucet recreates the drama by replaying a fictional 
version of it inside a typical Cuban-American family.

Jennine Capó Crucet’s debut collection of stories, How to Leave Hialeah, is a 
hilarious guidebook to Miami culture

Ramirez is a Julliard-trained playwright who is better known as a writer and 
producer for TV shows like Daredevil andSons of Anarchy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2011/may/20/sons-of-anarchy-box-set>. 
When I was still getting accustomed to life in Miami, I went to see a musical 
he had created with his friends called Toners In Time, about two Miami kids who 
accidentally go back in time to the year 2002 after an accident at theTurkey 
Point nuclear facility <http://www.nrc.gov/info-finder/reactor/tp3.html>. Given 
the chance to reform history, what is their great contribution to the world? 
They restart the musical genre Reggaeton before anyone else has the chance. I 
only got about half the Miami-based inside jokes, and it was one of the 
funniest theater experiences I’ve ever had.


Ramirez is not the most well-known playwright mining his youth in Miami, 
though. That would beTarell Alvin McCraney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/nov/13/tarell-alvin-mccraney-playwright-portrait-artist>
, who grew up in the Overtown neighborhood and was trained by fellow Miami 
playwright Teo Castellanos. McCraney was the International Playwright in 
Residence at the Royal Shakespeare Company and has developed work for The 
Public Theater in New York and Chicago’s Steppenwolf Theater Ensemble.

I’ve barely mentioned my own favorite literary genre, which is poetry. It’s a 
little known fact thatRobert Frost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/robert-frost> lived in Miami for the last 
twenty years of his life and wrote his 1962 collectionIn the Clearing 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1429394.In_the_Clearing> inside the house 
he dubbed “Pencil Pines,” while the Spanish poet Juan Ramón Jiménez wrote a 
book about his time in Coral Gables.Reinaldo Arenas 
<http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-turner/the-literature-of-uprootedness-an-interview-with-reinaldo-arenas>
 published the literary journal Mariel here, andLangston Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/langston-hughes> gave several readings in 
Overtown, back before the construction of Interstate 95 decimated what had been 
an African-American-owned cultural mecca.

Sign up to our Bookmarks email
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
There are too many poets to name in Miami now. The most decorated is Kingsley 
Tufts-winnerCampbell McGrath 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/campbell-mcgrath>. Another recipient of 
that prize isChase Twichell <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/chase-twichell>
. The grandaddy of Miami poetry though, for me, is the lateDonald Justice 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/donald-justice>, winner of the Pulitzer 
and Bollingen Prizes. He was born and raised here and attended University of 
Miami, but then never settled down here again for any significant length of 
time. Instead, he took over for his mentorJohn Berryman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/24/happy-100th-birthday-john-berryman-poetry>
 as the instructor of note at University of Iowa’s MFA program, where he taught
Jorie Graham <http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/03/30/beautiful-lies>, 
John Irving <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnirving>, Rita Dove 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/rita-dove>, John Taggart 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/john-taggart>, Donald Hall 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/donald-hall>, and many, many others. Based 
on the success of his students, it can be argued that Justice was the most 
influential poetry teacher of the latter half of the 20th century, and so, by 
extension, that Miami is the birthplace of 21st Century American literature.

Or at least, that’s how my Miami novel ends.

 * P Scott Cunningham <http://cargocollective.com/pscott> is the co-founder 
and director of theO, Miami <http://www.omiami.org/> poetry festival, and the 
founder and executive editor ofJai-Alai Books <http://www.jai-alaibooks.com/>, 
a regional publishing imprint.
His work has appeared in The Awl, Harvard Review, Tupelo Quarterly, Court 
Green, PANK, The Rumpus, RHINO, and Columbia: a journal of art + literature, 
among others.He tweets at @ <https://twitter.com/cunningpscott>cunningpscott 
<https://twitter.com/cunningpscott>. He lives in Miami, FL.

Readers recommend

 * Miami by Joan Didion <https://www.theguardian.com/books/joan-didion>: “No 
love for Joan Didion’sMiami 
<http://www.latimes.com/la-bk-joan-didion-1987-09-27-story.html>?” lamented 
gmoker <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12443670>. “Read it recently 
and found it to be very prescient about the way the Miami Cuban community’s 
cultural politics has spread throughout the nation.”

 * Carl Hiassen <https://www.theguardian.com/books/carl-hiaasen>’s black 
comediesare well worth a read – Double Whammey or Skin Tight are a good place 
to start, saidwjelly <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1025532>. fairdos 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1843545> recommends Native Tongue 
<https://www.nytimes.com/books/97/11/16/home/hiaasen-tongue.html>. 
 * Elmore Leonard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/27/elmore-leonard-great-american-novelist>
’s Miami novels are a treat:La Brava 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/brava.html>, Pronto 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/pronto.html>, Maximum Bob, Glitz 
<http://www.harpercollins.com/9780062121585/glitz> are all as good as writing 
gets, saidfairdos <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1843545>. 

 * Charles Willeford’s late-in-life masterpieces featuring Hoke Moseley “are 
among my favourite crime novels of all time,” saidShawshank67 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12993111>: Miami Blues 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/216.Miami_Blues>, New Hope for the Dead 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/213.New_Hope_for_the_Dead>, Sideswipe 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/214.Sideswipe> and The Way We Die Now 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=L0eGBA_M1UsC&redir_esc=y>. :Throw in Shark 
Infected Custard 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/222.The_Shark_Infested_Custard> also and 
you have a great representation of Miami. Willeford was a true master of the 
downbeat!” 
 * Some of James Ellroy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/jamesellroy>’s 
Underworld USA <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Underworld_USA_Trilogy> trilogy 
goes through Miami and touches Cuba, aswjelly 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1025532> reminded us.  