
I started sketching out this post at the counter of a bar overlooking the San 
Francisco <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco> Bay, where ships 
flocked and docked during the Gold Rush of 1849, transforming the city from a 
peaceful place of fewer than a thousand people into a melee of wild‐eyed 
prospectors and raucous opportunism.

It’s true that people have often come to this place in a search of wealth, but 
many have also come to escape or reinvent themselves. No matter the purpose, it 
seems everyone comes to San Francisco on the heels of a whisper, with a sense 
of possibility. With a surface area of only about 49 square miles, it is is 
both younger and smaller than most American cities, yet it holds claims to some 
of America’s most important literature.

If New York is about “making it”, San Francisco is about making it in one’s 
own offbeat way. A storied safe haven for outcasts, a bedroom for bohemians, 
this city is about pursuing the dream – not the American dream, but the dream 
of the west, the limits of self‐expression and identity.

Many of the best observations about this city are from authors who were 
passing through, like Oscar Wilde

While some authors are natives – like Jack London, whose San Francisco Stories 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Jack_London.html?id=T8gdkgAACAAJ&redir_esc=y>
 chronicle early grittier times, including a rare first-hand account of the 
fire after the 1906 earthquake – it’s mostly a city of transplants and 
transients. Many of the best quotes about this city are from people passing 
through, like Oscar Wilde, who said: “It’s an odd thing, but anyone who 
disappears is said to be seen in San Francisco.”

In its early days San Francisco was the scene of fierce newspaper competition, 
and some of its earliest chroniclers were columnists - writers such asAmbrose 
Bierce <http://www.ambrosebierce.org/works.html>, Bret Harte 
<http://americanliterature.com/author/bret-harte/bio-books-stories> and Mark 
Twain <https://www.theguardian.com/books/marktwain>, who popularised, but 
didn’t coin, the famous line: “The coldest winter I ever spent was a summer in 
San Francisco.” That’s referring, of course, to the city’s famous fog (which, 
incidentally, even hasits own Twitter account <https://twitter.com/karlthefog>
). Over the years, the fog has found its way into many works, sometimes as 
sultry and other times sinister, as in Dashiell Hammett’s hard‐boiled hits, 
includingThe Maltese Falcon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/29/100-best-novels-the-maltese-falcon-dashiell-hammett-sam-spade-raymond-chandler>
, based in part on his time working at a local detective agency.

From naturalism to the Beat explosion

The city itself is a patchwork quilt of distinct neighbourhoods, studded with 
43 breath‐stealing hills. Atop one of those hills stand the “Big Four” mansions 
named for the famed railway barons who helped to complete the Transcontinental 
Railroad in 1869, making travel to San Francisco less arduous, and consequently 
rendering the city less isolated, both geographically and culturally.

During that time San Francisco writing was most closely associated with 
American naturalism, a genre focused on the relationship between socio‐economic 
forces and human behaviour. Frank Norris’sMcTeague 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/21/1000-novels-state-of-the-nation1>
, published in 1899, tells the depressing downward spiral of a Polk Street 
dentist and his obsession with gold. A gold molar hangs outside his shop, and 
the tale serves as a pointed critique of how the capitalist culture of the gold 
rush era affected the fate of individuals living in the city.

Journalist H L Mencken said of San Francisco in the 1920s: “What fetched me 
instantly – and thousands of other newcomers with me – was the subtle but 
unmistakable sense of escape from the United States.” Not only did people 
emigrate to escape, they also came to experiment and critique. Which brings us 
to the city’s most famous movement – the Beats:Jack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jackkerouac> and his seminal On the Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/aug/05/fiction.jackkerouac>, Allen 
Ginsberg, Gary Snyder, and Kenneth Rexroth. All were involved in the famous Six 
Point Gallery reading at which Ginsberg first performed his poemHOWL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/23/allen-ginsberg-howl-poem-film>, 
later the subject of an obscenity trial.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F20%2F1424456096669%2Fb9d445dc-d612-428f-9679-e5646daaecf1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20San%20Francisco&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-san-francisco%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20San%20Francisco&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F26%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-san-francisco%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F20%2F1424456096669%2Fb9d445dc-d612-428f-9679-e5646daaecf1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Beats, protagonists of an essential chapter in San Francisco’s literary 
history. From left to right: Bob Donlin, Neal Cassady, Allen Ginsberg, Robert 
LaVinge, and Lawrence Ferlinghetti stand in front of the City Lights bookshop, 
own by the latter then, andstill existing today <http://www.citylights.com/>. 
Photograph: Allen Ginsberg/Corbis 
The Beats existed alongside other hippie writers, who were pushed to the 
margins of the city’s literary history, such asRichard Brautigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/sep/23/prose-poetry-brilliance-of-richard-brautigan>
, whose surrealIn Watermelon Sugar <http://www.brautigan.net/watermelon.html> 
andTrout Fishing in America <http://www.brautigan.net/trout.html> poetically 
embody the childlike nature of San Francisco. During the Haight‐Ashbury days of 
the 60s, when experimentation, protest culture, and free love flourished, 
Brautigan gave away a poem,All Watched Over By Machines of Loving Grace 
<http://allpoetry.com/All-Watched-Over-By-Machines-Of-Loving-Grace>, to the 
Diggers, a group of radical anarchists who printed it and distributed it 
throughout the city. The poem predicts a time when “mammals and computers live 
together in mutual programing harmony”, aptly foreseeing the tech culture that 
flourishes today.

Of course, under the Technicolor blossoms of that counterculture movement 
lurked a darker more insidious undercurrent. David Talbot’sSeason of the Witch 
<http://www.sfgate.com/books/article/Season-of-the-Witch-by-David-Talbot-review-3536031.php#photo-2872573>
 chronicles the late 60s to the 80s, covering such moments as the assassination 
ofHarvey Milk <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/dec/06/harvey-milk>, the 
terror of theZodiac killer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/apr/15/usa.world>, and the kidnapping of 
Patty Hearst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/picture/2014/feb/04/patty-hearst-photography-us-crime>
.

Armistead Maupin’s celebrated series Tales of the City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/14/armistead-maupin-tales-of-the-city-guardian-book-club>
 captured the 80s, and his were among the first popular books to deal with 
Aids. Randy Shilts’sAnd The Band Played On 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/And_The_Band_Played_on.html?id=cGNetxKuLnMC>
 chronicles the early years of the Aids epidemic and the country’s response or 
lack thereof; Nan Boyd’sWide-Open Town 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Wide_Open_Town.html?id=JzwNGBRa8qcC> 
charts the history of queers in San Francisco through the early bar scene, 
where communities planted roots; and Michelle Tea’sValencia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Valencia_(novel)> is a vibrant chronicle of 
lesbian life in the early 1990s of the Mission District.

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
I would be remiss not to touch on the topography itself, which is such an 
integral part of San Francisco’s culture, both literary and otherwise. 
Salon.com co‐founder Gary Kamiya’sCool Grey City of Love 
<http://www.sfchronicle.com/books/article/Cool-Gray-City-of-Love-by-Gary-Kamiya-4721516.php#/0>
 offers “49 views of San Francisco”. This collection of historical vignettes 
and personal anecdotes can provide jumping-off points for intrepid explorers 
interested in learning more about the Farallon Egg Wars, the boozy founding of 
Yerba Buena, the dynamited rock arch which once protruded from the bay near 
Alcatraz or the night Jack Kerouac first arrived in town.

When walking through today’s Financial District, know that the streets were 
built upon the bones of those early ships that carried in those wide‐eyed 
opportunists. A city defined by booms and busts, resting on a volatile 
faultline, San Francisco embodies the feeling of impermanence. It’s a dream 
city as much as a real one, and there’s a whole boatload of literature to prove 
it.

 * Anisse Gross is a writer and editor based in San Francisco. Her website is 
anissegross.com <http://anissegross.com/>.

Is your favourite missing? Add it in the comment thread below. Next up: Los 
Angeles.
 