
For the past 24 years, Austin has called itself the Live Music Capital of the 
World, a title supported by festivals likeSXSW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sxsw> and Austin City Limits (ACL 
<http://www.aclfestival.com/>), musicians like Stevie Ray Vaughn, Willie Nelson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/willie-nelson>, Janis Joplin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/janis-joplin>, and Spoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/spoon>, and nightly shows on Sixth, Red 
River, and Rainey streets. Outside of music, Austin means The University of 
Texas (UT), tech and start-ups, hipsters, filmmaking and movies likeBoyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/boyhood>, Slacker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1992/dec/03/1>, and Office Space 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/aug/29/johnpatterson>, bats flying from 
the Congress Avenue Bridge, Formula One racing, Whole Foods, barbecue, Barton 
Springs, and where Jim and Pam decide to move at the conclusion ofThe Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/may/08/us-tv-the-office>.

But what of literary life? Don’t bearded bartenders read? Apparently they do, 
and Austin’s literary footprint has expanded as the city itself has grown. 
First settled in the 1830s – when it was named Waterloo –Austin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/austin> is currently experiencing another 
boom, marking a sharp rise in traffic, gentrification, downtown construction, 
and literature.

We are experiencing a new boom in traffic, gentrification, downtown 
construction, and literature

Running themes in the city’s literary life include over-the-top politics 
filled with sex scandals and betrayal, falls from economic grace, romantic 
bohemians, and thrilling crime sagas. So much for the realism of heat, coffee 
snobbery, and untimed traffic lights.

One of the works cited most often as representing Austin and its political 
heritage is Billy Lee Brammer’sThe Gay Place 
<http://utpress.utexas.edu/index.php/books/bragap> – a title drawn from F Scott 
Fitzgerald’s poem Thousand-and-First Ship 
<http://tumblr.austinkleon.com/post/55659882>. First published in 1961, this 
interlocking trio of short novels brings the brash politics of 1950s Texas to 
life. Most agree that the main character, Arthur Fenstemaker, is based on 
Lyndon B Johnson, whose presidential library sits on the campus of UT, and the 
plot indisputably covers staples of Texas politics: marital alienation, sex, 
drinking (at a fictionalized Scholz Garden, which still is an Austin favorite 
for the political crowd), gossip, and legislative manoeuvring. According to Jan 
Reid, “More than any other book or film, The Gay Place captures the spirit and 
verve of Austin.”

Karen Olsson’s novel Waterloo 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/16/books/review/waterloo-christian-adultery.html>
 opens with a quote from The Gay Place, but brings Austin and its politics up 
to date. In her version of Austin, citizens strive “not to have to work too 
hard, to be locally renowned, and to drink beer paid for by somebody else”. 
This era of Austin centers around alternative publications (think theTexas 
Observer <http://www.texasobserver.org/> or Austin Chronicle 
<http://www.austinchronicle.com/>), urban renewal, suburban politics, and 
conservative values masking the vices of musicians and politicians: more 
drinking, power struggles, and scandals. With frequent flashbacks to the 1950s 
and 60s readers can see how far Austin has come and what remains hidden under 
its surface.

The 1966 mass shooting from the clock tower of UT permanently scarred Austin 
and continues to be discussed to this day

In Monday, Monday 
<http://www.texasobserver.org/review-choice-chance-elizabeth-crooks-monday-monday/>
, Austin resident and author Elizabeth Crook provides more perspective about 
Austin in the 1960s, and decades later. Crook’s novel is set in motion by a 
real-life tragedy that permanently scarred Austin and that continues to be 
discussed to this day: the 1966 mass shooting from the clock tower of UT.

If we next skip to the tech boom, which still defines aspects of the city, we 
come to Austin novelist Sarah Bird’sHow Perfect Is That 
<http://www.austinchronicle.com/books/2008-06-06/632121/> where we witness the 
aftermath of the dotcom bubble. Set around 2003, Bird describes the economic 
downfall of main character Blythe Young. While the “Dellionaire” crowd feeds 
Young’s catering company for a while, it eventually falls back to earth, along 
with everyone else, during the era of George W Bush.

Austin author Mary Helen Specht gives another view of our tech recession in 
her debut novelMigratory Animals 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/15/books/review/mary-helen-spechts-migratory-animals.html>
. Set after the 2008 economic crash in both Austin and Nigeria (where Specht 
spent time as a Fulbright Scholar), main character Flannery is pulled between 
her scientific work in Nigeria and family obligations in the Texan city. Of her 
descriptions of Austin, The New York Times noted, “Specht perfectly captures 
the minute details of contemporary life in a certain social niche of 
culture-rich, cash-poor pseudo-bohemians – the ‘Portlandia’ class – as well as 
their narcissism, immaturity and sense of entitlement. These are people who 
consider themselves the center of the universe, eternal college freshmen in 
love with their own self-declared brilliance and singularity.”

Austin’s bohemian side features in Bird’s first novel, Alamo House 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/sarah-bird-2/alamo-house/>. 
Published in 1986, it recreates life at UT’s west campus, home of fraternities 
and housing cooperatives. The novel depicts the independent, often vegetarian, 
and often hippie women of a fictional co-op that is based on the actual Seneca 
House that remains on the outskirts of campus today.

Barbecue and bohemia don’t necessarily ensnare the same crowd, but both are 
current mainstays of the city

David Heymann explores gentrification with a collection of seven stories, My 
Beautiful City Austin 
<http://www.texasobserver.org/book-review-my-beautiful-city-austin/>, revolving 
around an architect who, to his dismay, designs the type of houses often blamed 
for ruining the city’s charm. Of course we now have this problem under control 
– all Austin happy meals now include aMcMansion law 
<http://www.austintexas.gov/department/residential-design-compatability-standards>
.


Crime stories based in Austin could probably fill a section of a bookstore, 
with just a few notable examples beingThe Devil Went Down to Austin 
<http://www.austinchronicle.com/books/2001-07-06/82255/>, the Dan Reles 
Mysteries <http://www.texasmonthly.com/articles/body-scissors/> (four novels), 
andThe Seventh Victim <http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1420125052>. The novel 
A Twist at the End: A Novel of O. Henry and the Texas Servant Girl Murders of 
1885 
<http://www.texasmonthly.com/articles/a-twist-at-the-end-a-novel-of-o-henry/> 
perhaps stands apart for its fictional portrayal of America’s supposed first 
recorded serial murders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-austin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441377904449%2F89a8c412-0992-4495-8225-c08e1d8ab2f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Austin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-austin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reading%20American%20cities%3A%20books%20about%20Austin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Freading-american-cities-books-about-austin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F4%2F1441377904449%2F89a8c412-0992-4495-8225-c08e1d8ab2f6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 East 6th Street in historic downtown Austin. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
It wouldn’t feel right to talk about our portrayal in novels without 
highlighting Austin’s overall role in literature. Our literary story starts 
with academic programs nurturing innovative writers, and Austin is home to one 
of the most prestigious writing programs in the country: theMichener Center for 
Writers <http://www.utexas.edu/academic/mcw/>. Only accepting 12 students per 
year, and granting each a generous fellowship, this school has generated more 
than its fair share of famous writers.Kevin Powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jun/23/kevin-powers-interview-yellow-birds>
,Domenica Ruta 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/28/books/domenica-rutas-memoir-with-or-without-you.html>
,Philipp Meyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/21/philipp-meyer-interview-the-son>,
Kelly Luce <http://kellyluce.com/>, Sarah Cornwell 
<http://www.sarahcornwell.com/>, Carrie Fountain 
<http://www.carriefountain.com/>, and Mary Miller 
<http://maryumiller.tumblr.com/> are a few Michener luminaries, and at any 
given time, its students are poised to join the ranks of their famous 
counterparts. A few blocks away on campus is theNew Writers Project 
<https://newwritersproject.org/>, and a short drive from the city is the renown 
MFAprogram <http://www.english.txstate.edu/mfa/> of Texas State University.

Austin is home to one of the most prestigious writing programs in the country 
and a thriving literature scene

The next link in Austin’s literary chain is reserved for its publishers. Like 
many other cities with a large student population, Austin produces its fair 
share of indie books, literary journals, comics, and zines every year. To name 
a few, Austin hostsA Strange Object <http://www.astrangeobject.com/aso/>, 
American Short Fiction <http://americanshortfiction.org/>, Austin Zine Fest 
<http://austinzinefest.com/>, Bat City Review <http://www.batcityreview.org/>, 
Host Publications <http://www.hostpublications.com/index.html>, fields 
<http://www.fieldsmagazine.com/>, The Austin Review 
<http://theaustinreview.org/>, and Write Bloody Publishing 
<http://writebloody.com/>. At the intersection of the comic/zine and literary 
magazine realms is a new arts and literature festival, theNew South Festival of 
Literary Arts & Cartooning <http://newsouthfest.tumblr.com/>, which started in 
2015 at the French Legation Museum on the city’s booming east side with plans 
to grow its curated list of vendors each year (while of course remaining a 
dog-friendly literary conference).

Completing the chain spanning from author to reader are reviewers, 
booksellers, and libraries. Austin is home toKirkus Reviews 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/>, a storied institution that has always been 
devoted to “integrity, honesty and accessible reviews written with an insider’s 
eye,” and smaller review organizations likeLone Star Literary Life 
<http://www.lonestarliterary.com/> continue to crop up. Since 1970, BookPeople 
<http://www.bookpeople.com/> has been Austin’s largest independent bookstore 
and remains one of the nation’s most famous indie booksellers, located downtown 
near the Whole Foods world headquarters. Nothing hones conversation skills like 
preparing a three-second greeting to the likes of Hillary Clinton, Jimmy 
Carter, Stephen King, and Neal Patrick Harris while they sign your book.

Sign up to our Bookmarks email
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Austin already has an extensive network of libraries, and soon it will include 
a $120 million flagship location downtown overlooking the Colorado River 
(called Lady Bird Lake) that will have reading porches, a rain harvesting 
system, car charging stations, and a landscaped roof. If they install nap pods, 
the entire city may move in.

Austin’s enthusiasm for literature has never been greater. On almost any given 
day, one of our literary organizations will be hosting a reading with beer, 
music, and art. And then, once a year, we celebrate books like the finale of a 
fireworks show with theTexas Book Festival <https://www.texasbookfestival.org/>
, started in 1995 by Laura Bush and Mary Margaret Farabee, which takes over the 
Texas Capitol and Congress Avenue with days of talks and readings with more 
than 250 authors, local food trucks, and the Lit Crawl.

Not too bad for a hippie music town.

 * Michael Barrett is a writer and the Editor of The Austin Review 
<http://theaustinreview.org/>. He tweets at @michaelcbarrett 
<https://twitter.com/michaelcbarrett>.
 