
Boston, the city that ignited the American war of independence, is 
inextricable from the work of New England writers. AsLinda Barnes 
<http://www.lindabarnes.com/booksDEVIL.html> joked in a recent detective novel, 
Lie Down With the Devil, these Massachusetts writers are interwoven into the 
fabric of the city:

"In the summer of 1960, Boston's West End was bulldozed to rubble … When the 
dust cleared, there was Charles River Park … The tall, pale buildings had no 
ties to New England, so to grab some local flavor, they named the towers after 
Hawthorne, Whittier, Emerson, Lowell, and Longfellow. I like to imagine those 
old dead white guys rolling in their graves. Not to mention stogie-smoking Amy 
Lowell."

You could easily add James Fenimore Cooper before them, Louisa May Alcott or 
Henry James after; indeed, it would be hard to visit Boston without a copy of
The Bostonians <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/sep/06/classics.asbyatt>
. Like The Europeans, this is a look at aristocratic Boston in the late 19th 
century, but The Bostonians is also James's most political novel, diving into 
the maelstrom of social and political activism emanating from the city. As 
Basil Ransom, a conservative, and Olive Chancellor, a pioneer in the feminist 
movement, quietly struggle for Verena Tarrant's intellectual and emotional 
commitment, Verena's predicament encapsulates the decision for women at the 
turn of the 20th century: marriage or independence. Those who have already 
ploughed their way through James and do not fancy a rematch, try William Dean 
Howells's contemporaneousThe Rise of Silas Lapham 
<https://librivox.org/the-rise-of-silas-lapham-by-william-dean-howells/>, or a 
modern perspective: the Pulitzer prize-winningThe Late George Apley by John 
Marquand <http://www.goodreads.com/work/quotes/1220530-the-late-george-apley> 
is a tragicomic satire of upper-class Boston life taking in the mid-19th 
century to the Great Depression. Disdainfully carry these while promenading 
through the Emerald Necklance, the string of parks running to the Public Garden.

In general, though, Boston seems to make many more cameo appearances than 
headline acts: part of William Faulkner'sThe Sound and the Fury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/20/sound-fury-william-faulkner-rereading>
 finds it setting in Boston, as does some of Infinite Jest by David Foster 
Wallace. Indeed, it is curious how often it the city appears in literature in 
an altered or dysmorphic state. A partially fictionalised, post-nuclear 
Cambridge and Boston are the settings for Atwood'sThe Handmaid's Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/20/handmaids-tale-margaret-atwood>; 
Shutter Island (Dennis Lehane's novel, rather than its more obscurely 
unlocatable film counterpart) takes place on a fictional island in Boston 
Harbour. My favourite though isLooking Backward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2007/jun/19/isitstillpossibleto>, 
a utopian science-fiction novel by Edward Bellamy written in 1887 and set in 
2000, in which Julian West falls into a deep sleep and wakes in a socialist 
Boston. Somnambulating the streets of this futurist Boston with his Virgilian 
guide Doctor Leete, Julian debates the merits of the "progress" he sees, most 
notably the nationalisation of all industry using an "industrial army" to 
co-ordinate supply and distribution. The book was much more popular than 
William Morris's now far better known News from Nowhere, but it must be said 
that 21st-century Boston isn't that different to the one Julian returns to:

"I reached Washington Street at the busiest point, and there I stood and 
laughed aloud … For my life I could not have helped it, with such a mad humor 
was I moved at the sight of the interminable rows of stores … Stores! stores! 
stores! miles of stores!"

Hmm – maybe don't go for the shopping if you've an ounce of literary pride!

But what trip to Boston would be complete without a pilgrimage to Fenway Park, 
the home of the Red Sox, "a lyric little bandbox of a ballpark", according to 
John Updike inHub Fans Bid Kid Adieu 
<http://www.baseball-almanac.com/articles/hub_fans_bid_kid_adieu_article.shtml>
: "Everything is painted green and seems in curiously sharp focus, like the 
inside of an old-fashioned peeping-type Easter egg. It was built in 1912 and 
rebuilt in 1934, and offers, as do most Boston artefacts, a compromise between 
Man's Euclidean determinations and Nature's beguiling irregularities".

Maybe the best guide to the essence of the city as a whole though is Robert 
Lowell's poemThe Public Garden 
<http://999poems.blogspot.co.uk/2009/07/941-public-garden-by-robert-lowell.html>
, a beautiful elegy to the emotional cadences of the city, a psychogeography 
before the concept became so irritatingly popular. Just don't walk to the 
waterfront at Back Bay and recite his friend Elizabeth Bishop, who moved to the 
city in 1974: "Should we have stayed at home, / wherever that may be?"
 