
For Democrats over the age of 40, a heartbreaking loss in a presidential 
election is an uncomfortably familiar feeling. Twice in the past two decades,
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> have won the popular 
vote but lost the presidency.

Each presidential loss brings three intertwined questions. What happened? 
What’s the best way to deal with thenew administration <http:>? And what’s the 
path back to power in the next midterm and presidential elections?

Trump cabinet picks: several key posts decided – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/18/donald-trump-cabinet-picks-live>
This year’s result is so different that each of those questions is perplexing. 
The underlying cause of the defeat might be that Democrats lost their 
connection towhite working-class voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/07/donald-trump-why-americans-support>
, particularly in the upper midwest. Or that Hillary Clinton, some time in 
early 2015, lost her longstanding base of popularity and trust and wasn’t 
equipped to get it back. There are a dozen or more demographic categories in 
which Clinton underformed Barack Obama in 2012, in addition to white people 
without college degrees, suggesting thatClinton’s broad unpopularity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/polls-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-unpopularity>
 was an inescapable problem.

On to a volatile base of distrust, cultural disconnect and raw dishonesty 
about what a president could achieve for people, Trump and his sometimes 
unwitting allies added relentless but baseless investigations, Russian 
cyber-meddling and, finally, FBI director James Comey’s letter 10 days before 
the election announcing that he wasreopening the investigation into Clinton’s 
email practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-fbi-director-comey-emails>
. (Nothing came of it, predictably.) These staggering interventions went well 
beyond the mild constitutional crisis that led to George W Bush’s presidency.

And yet Clinton won the popular vote and not by a little but by about 1.5% – 
more than the proportions enjoyed by several recent presidents. The Trump 
coalition is smaller than former Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney’s 
from 2012 and a minority of voters supported Republican House and Senate 
candidates, overall. These facts can’t change any results, but they have to be 
acknowledged in any big-picture analysis.

There is, then, no easy guidance for Democrats. And so we should not be 
surprised that they have started out on an uncertain footing on the second 
question, of how to relate to the administration.The norms that have been 
violated are so many and so profound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/18/donald-trump-cabinet-picks-live>
, and the risks so large, that the only moral reaction is to refuse to 
normalise (suddenly the most overused word in English) the abrupt arrival of 
reality-show kleptocracy, with a gold-plated sheen, in the democracy that 
anchors the world order. And yet, however correct that attitude, it is largely 
meaningless in action.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdemocrats-democratic-party-trump-incoming-administration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F441d2adafd7fb619b55e930d3defa23257cc1093%2F0_234_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Readying%20themselves%20for%20the%20unexpected%20must%20be%20the%20Democracts%E2%80%99%20priority%20%7C%20Mark%20Schmitt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdemocrats-democratic-party-trump-incoming-administration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Readying%20themselves%20for%20the%20unexpected%20must%20be%20the%20Democracts%E2%80%99%20priority%20%7C%20Mark%20Schmitt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdemocrats-democratic-party-trump-incoming-administration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F441d2adafd7fb619b55e930d3defa23257cc1093%2F0_234_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton in Washington last week: she won the popular vote by about 
1.5%. Photograph: Joshua Roberts/Reuters 
At other moments, though, Democrats realise that Trump has no fixed ideology 
or purpose other than bluffing his way through his biggest and most daring 
fraud ever. He did say “infrastructure”; he did say he would fix “inner cities” 
(places where “you get shot walking to the store”); he and his daughterIvanka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/ivanka-trump-iron-throne-america-politics>
 mentioned paid family leave. Perhaps these are opportunities. Maybe he’s as 
easily nudged in the direction of such progressive policy goals as he is 
towards the adamantine conservatism and racism reflected in his first three 
high-level nominations.

But those first moves on Trump’s part send two important messages to 
Democrats, which will also affect mainstream Republicans and conservatives. 
First, he doesn’t intend to or doesn’t know how to expand the coalition that 
supports him. Trump is aware only of his hardcore base, the people who came to 
his rallies and chanted “lock her up” when he mentioned his opponent.

Second, he’s unlikely to be a popular president in his first months in office, 
which is unprecedented. On election day, Trump’s favourable rating was 
comparable toRichard Nixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/21/trump-nixon-parallels-campaign-rnc-cleveland>
’s in May 1974. Nixon resigned in August 1974. Will Trump’s 2017 public support 
move up from Nixonian levels? It might, with the aura of the presidency, or it 
might not, in the absence of the distrusted Hillary Clinton as a foil. 
Democrats have to be prepared for it to move in either direction, but down is a 
safer bet.

Part of Trump’s subtle power is that he doesn’t fit into most of our mental 
templates for how human beings, much less public figures, should behave. He 
seems to have neither a forward or backward attention span, except for grudges. 
He now holds the ultimate public job and yet does not seem to have given 
thought to anything other than personal gain and attention in his entire life.

Jeff Sessions as attorney general: a terrifying prospect for black Americans | 
Bakari Sellers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/jeff-sessions-terrifying-prospect-black-americans>
The course of the presidency of a man like this, with so little public 
support, is not to be predicted by comparison with Ronald Reagan, a two-term 
governor of the largest state, in the 1980s orGeorge W Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/george-h-w-bush-voting-for-hillary-claims-member-of-kennedy-family>
 two decades later. Trump is a 70-year-old man, though one who often seems like 
a seven-year-old, embarking on one of the most arduous jobs in the world and 
one that has nothing to do with anything he’s ever done before. He will have to 
listen far more than talk, which seems unlikely.

This may seem a cop-out, but Democrats will have to look at the weeks and 
years ahead as a period of total uncertainty. Trump’s most trusted aides and 
nominees today might be exiled along withChris Christie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/chris-christie-dropped-trump-transition-team>
 by New Year’s Day. Republicans might ram through all his nominees or the 
process might be bogged down for months. Trump’s vague directives, combined 
with House speaker Paul Ryan’s pre-written agenda, might form legislation 
passed in the first year, with a massive tax cut for the very rich at the 
forefront. Or, more likely, that agenda might get mired in the simple 
complexity of legislative negotiation even within one party.

Prediction is impossible, but two facts remain: the US is the same country it 
was on 6 November, when it was moving roughly towards racial reconciliation and 
out of the long shadow of the Great Recession. And it is the same country that, 
the next day, supportedHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> by a wide margin. Those 
facts are cold comfort today, but should be Democrats’ only guidestar in the 
months ahead.

Mark Schmitt <https://www.newamerica.org/our-people/mark-schmitt/> runs the 
political reform programme at theNew America think tank 
<https://www.newamerica.org/>, and is ex-editor of American Prospect 
 