
What's happened to early music? Now we've got conductors such as Nikolaus 
Harnoncourt and John Eliot Gardiner conducting theBerlin 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=vSYQMtiGry0> and Vienna philharmonics, it seems 
like these radical musicians, who shook up how we hear and how we play music 
fromMonterverdi <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=tM3BcBUeK0I> to Mozart 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=9CpA7tlVqN4>, Bach 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=a6MMW-NJmt8> to Beethoven 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=n4niajGQbZ4>, have now become part of the 
establishment, as if the revolution has been won: it's no longer about "early 
music" as a separate category opposed to the mainstream, but about an 
essential, questioning approach to music we thought we knew.

But hold on a minute: where has the radicalism gone, the spirit of adventure 
and discovery that catalysed musicians' imaginations and scandalised audiences 
and scholars in the 60s and 70s? On Saturday, as part of theBath festival 
<http://www.bathmusicfest.org.uk/davidmunrow.aspx>, there's a celebration of 
the life and legacy of one of the true pioneers of early music:David Munrow 
<http://www.davidmunrow.org/>, who would have been 70 this year, had he not 
tragically taken his own life at the age of 33 in 1976. His career was one of 
scarcely believable energy and productivity: few musicians have ever played as 
many instruments as Munrow, frombassoon 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=eEVulzrjDqg> to shawm 
<http://www.davidmunrow.org/gallery.htm> to crumhorn 
<http://www.recorderhomepage.net/crumhorn.html> to recorder 
<http://www.davidmunrow.org/gallery.htm>; he brought medieval and renaissance 
music to a wider audience inbooks <http://www.davidmunrow.org>, on television 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=DKxdCSbAtOE>, and on radio; his Radio 3 show, 
Pied Piper, ran for five years, in which time he made an astonishing 655 
editions, and covered music from monody to prog rock..

Munrow's music-making is simultaneously radical and urbane, as you can see and 
hear from his work onYouTube <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=bG1m3KTR5G0>, or if 
you listen to any of the more than 50 albums he also managed to make. Born in 
Birmingham, Munrow's essential early-music inspiration came when he was at 
studying English at Cambridge, and discovered a crumhorn hanging on the wall of 
a friend's room. But Munrow's idea wasn't to create a dusty academic 
archaeology of early music, but rather to connect whatever he was playing to 
the world around him. The early woodwind instruments whose repertoires he 
revealed to the modern world sounded as modern, as new, and asstrange 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=Z1UkI_d0n7g>, as anything contemporary composers 
were up to at the time, and connected with the living traditions and 
instruments of Peruvian folk music that he had studied in Lima when he was 
still a teenager.

There's more to the Munrow legacy: music for film scores for movies by Ken 
Russell and John Boorman, his time working as a musician for the Royal 
Shakespeare Company; oh, and the fact that his recording, with theEarly Music 
Consort <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=8UUEz9KodOg> that he founded with 
Christopher Hogwood <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=fzQAqFK2rxk>, of Holborne's 
Fairie Round <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=ylacX3wzFMc>, was chosen to be put 
on thegolden disc <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=ylacX3wzFMc> that accompanied 
the Voyager spacecraft in 1977 as one of the crucial sounds that humanity has 
ever made. But more than any single recording or performance – but there are 
few better or more fun ways to experience centuries of musical history than in 
the company of Munrow and his musicians, performances whose sheer quality and 
passionate musicianship gives the lie to the idea that the pioneering years of 
the early music movement were all about out-of-tune instruments, the aural 
equivalent of a historically accurate hair-shirt – it's his example as 
populariser, proselytiser, and ceaselessly energetic explorer that makes him 
one of the greats of 20th century music. Music – early or late – needs more 
inspirational Munrows.
 