
Ask 17 (count ‘em) detailed questions about executive pay, the duties of 
directors and the composition of boards and you can expect to be overwhelmed by 
answers that cover little common ground. That is the experience of the business 
select committee as responses arrive to its corporate governance inquiry. The 
MPs may regret setting the terms of reference so widely.

The best advice: throw the technical tweaks in the bin and concentrate on the 
simple ideas. Here’s a proposal on pay that starts from admirably 
straightforward (and correct) premise that “the executive remuneration system 
is seriously discredited and needs substantial reform”.

So says the Institute of Business Ethics. It says cash should be restored as 
the essential currency of paying executives. In other words, abolish share 
options, performance share awards, deferred awards and most of the padding of 
modern remuneration schemes. The law should be changed to forbid payments that 
cannot be valued properly at the time of award.

Salaries would go up, naturally, but the institute proposes a few sub-clauses. 
First, executives would have to spend an agreed portion of their higher 
salaries on the company’s shares and then hold that stock for years, even 
beyond retirement. Second, any salary increase or cash bonus wouldn’t become 
effective until shareholders had voted. Third, if the executives still wanted 
big cash bonuses (more than 25% of salary, say), they’d have to give the same 
award in proportion to all employees, which would be fair.

The main advantage of this approach is that executives would build up a 
shareholding over time and receive dividends on those shares, which should 
encourage more long-term thinking in boardrooms. Bonuses, which the outside 
world rightly regards as a racket because zero is awarded only when catastrophe 
strikes, would become a side-show. And shareholders would be directly on the 
hook for what executives are paid.

The practical difficulty is that the public might not like the notion that a 
FTSE 100 chief executive’s £1m-a-year salary could become £2m-a-year or more 
once the share-based carrots are scrapped. But the virtues of the system would 
be simplicity and transparency, which are currently woefully under-supplied.

Indeed, as the institute did not say, there would be another benefit. The 
small industry of remuneration consultants, which has grown rich by peddling 
baffling pay schemes that produce perverse results, could be made redundant. 
Few would mourn its passing.

Beware the booze wars

It’s a bit rich for Tim Martin, the pro-Brexit chairman of pub chain JD 
Wetherspoon,to complain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/wetherspoon-boss-eu-leaders-brexit-talks-tim-martin>
 about how the result of the referendum has created uncertainties for his 
business, his customers and his suppliers. He might have considered the 
possibility before distributing beer mats promoting exit from the European 
Union.

But let’s not be too churlish about Martin’s lively rant about the “hectoring 
and bullying approach” adopted by Angela Merkel, François Hollande and the man 
he calls “the unelected EU ‘President’ Juncker”. Behind the rhetoric lies a 
serious point: British punters drink an awful lot of continental booze.

French wine, champagne and spirits, German beer and Swedish cider are “at 
extreme risk,” claims Martin, if UK consumers take offence at the Junckerist 
idea that the country must be punished for leaving the EU. He is surely 
over-stating matters in expecting a patriotic rebellion by consumers. But the 
EU tariff system on wine imports to the single market was designed to protect 
the French industry. Like Martin, the powerful French agricultural lobby will 
also be very keen for tariff-free trading in food and drink to continue.

Persimmon’s pessimism

Still on Brexit matters, housebuilder Persimmon says the referendum had no 
impact on its “encouraging” sales over the summer. But here’s the line that 
will annoy Theresa May as she attempts to boost the number of homes built in 
the UK: the country’s second biggest housebuilder says it is turning “cautious” 
on land purchases because of “the uncertainty surrounding the potential impact 
of the EU referendum result on the UK economy”.

Investment in land and house construction are not the same thing, of course, 
but nor are they unrelated. The government would rightly be miffed by any sign 
of a go-slow by a company that enjoyed a 22% profit margin last year, thanks in 
part to those Treasury-sponsored Help to Buy schemes, and is overflowing with 
cash. But what could May actually do to give Persimmon and its peers a kick? If 
she has the answer, she hasn’t shared it.
 