
The sole tenant of a cavernous, industrial building on a wide avenue, C 
Madeleine’s (named after owner Madeleine Kirsh) is a real treasure trove, with 
a century’s worth of vintage clothing – arranged by era and designer. There are 
plenty of pieces by major names: brightly patterned Emilio Pucci dresses from 
the 1960s, recent-ish Chanel bags, and (this being Miami) flashy 1980s wear by 
Versace. But there are also a wide selection of no-name period items, such as 
flowing dresses and pillbox hats.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fretro-miami-designer-vintage-clothing-c-madeleines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf3f3a642d5764e3aa15e39a069780d46d204c82%2F0_385_2856_3567%2F2856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Retro%20to%20go%3A%20Miami%E2%80%99s%20treasure%20trove%20of%20designer%20vintage%20clothing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fretro-miami-designer-vintage-clothing-c-madeleines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Retro%20to%20go%3A%20Miami%E2%80%99s%20treasure%20trove%20of%20designer%20vintage%20clothing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fretro-miami-designer-vintage-clothing-c-madeleines%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf3f3a642d5764e3aa15e39a069780d46d204c82%2F0_385_2856_3567%2F2856.jpg>
 Photograph: Rachel Felder 
The feel is more that of an eccentric aunt’s closet than a refined boutique. 
Mismatched vintage furniture is scattered around, full-size mannequins stand on 
top of kitchen tables and there are the sort of mid-century display cabinets 
you’d expect to find at a flea market. However, the homely vibe is part of the 
charm that attracts locals looking for a dress for a special occasion, tourists 
browsing, or fashion stylists prepping for a photoshoot on the beach.

The prices can be on the high side for vintagewear, but the condition of what 
is for sale is reliably pristine, thanks in part to a staff seamstress who 
spiffs up any buttons or hems that need mending. And despite the sheer volume 
of items – about 30,000 pieces at any given time – it’s all been selected with 
Madeleine’s eye.
• C Madeleine’s, 13702 Biscayne Boulevard, cmadeleines.com 
<https://cmadeleines.com/>

Rachel Felder is author of Insider Brooklyn: a curated guide to New York 
City’s most stylish borough (Harper Collins, £17.99). To order a copy for 
£14.75 including UK p&p visitthe guardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/insider-brooklyn.html> or call on 0330 333 
6846
 