
The most persistent and frequent polluters of England's rivers and beaches are 
the nation's 10 biggest water companies, anObserver investigation has revealed.

The companies, which are responsible for treating waste water and delivering 
clean supplies, have been punished for more than 1,000 incidents in the past 
nine years, but fined a total of only £3.5m.

The revelations have raised concern that the financial penalties are far too 
low to change the behaviour of an industry that generates billions of pounds in 
profits and shareholder dividends. The charge is backed by theSentencing 
Council for England and Wales, which is proposing major hikes 
<http://sentencingcouncil.judiciary.gov.uk/docs/Environmental_Consultation_web_final.pdf>
 in penalties.

Pollution <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/pollution> incidents, which 
have included sewage illegally pouring into a harbour for more than a year, and 
managers destroying records, show no sign of declining, according to data 
obtained from the Environment Agency (EA) under freedom of information rules. 
Only a third of the 1,000 incidents led to a fine (of an average of just 
£10,800); the rest resulted in cautions.

"In law, the 'polluter pays' principle is supposed to deter companies from 
damaging the environment, but in this case the penalties appear to be so 
pitiful that water companies seem to be accepting them as the price of doing 
business," Joan Walley MP, chair of the Environmental Audit Committee (EAC), 
told theObserver. "The sentencing council must ensure that courts take into 
account the profits made from environmental crimes, and that fines have a 
sufficient deterrent effect."

Simon Hughes MP, deputy leader of the Liberal Democrats, said: "These figures 
are another indictment of the failings of our privatised water companies in 
England. Many of them make large profits, pay huge dividends, increase prices 
and pay little tax. When, in addition, these figures show they don't deliver 
clean water, the public is entitled to say that our monopoly water providers 
are neither good corporate citizens nor good stewards of our precious 
environmental assets."

In November the Observer revealed that three of Britain's biggest water 
companies paid little or no tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/nov/10/utilities-water-bills> on 
their profits in 2012 while generously rewarding their executives and 
investors. The water industry was paid £10.5bn by customers in 2010-11, 
according to thelatest Ofwat figures 
<http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/regulating/reporting/rpt_los2012financial> available, 
while making pre-tax profits of £1.7bn and paying dividends of £2.2bn, a 42% 
year-on-year rise. In 2013-14, waterbills are rising by 3.5% 
<http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/mediacentre/pressnotices2008/prs_pn0313bills>, above 
both inflation andaverage pay rises 
<http://www.incomesdata.co.uk/news/press-releases/paysettlements1115.pdf>.

One in three of the pollution incidents involved sewage. Karen Gibbs of the 
Consumer Council forWater <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> said: 
"Sewer flooding is particularly distressing for customers, and something we 
have pressed the companies to address as a priority."

The cleanliness of England's beaches has declined 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jul/07/england-polluted-beaches-tide-of-filth>
 in recent years, after improvements in the decades before, and most water 
bodies currently fail higher-level European water regulations.

The EA data, obtained by the Request Initiative <http://requestinitiative.org/>
 and analysed by theObserver, showed the most heavily fined company in 
2005-2013 was Thames Water, which paid £842,500 for 87 incidents.

Thames Water also incurred the biggest single fine – £204,000 in 2011 for 15 
related incidents whenuntreated sewage burst from a sewer the company had 
failed to repair 
<http://www.utilityweek.co.uk/news/news_story.asp?id=195210&title=Thames+Water+fined+after+eight+year+prosecution+battle>
 into streets and gardens in the London borough of Bromley. The company 
accepted the fine after an eight-year legal fight, which reached the European 
court of justice.

A spokesman for Thames Water said its record should be seen in the context of 
its running 108,000km of sewer pipes and serving 24% of the UK population. It 
was investing £1bn a year to upgrade its network, he said.

United Utilities Water was the most frequently punished company, with 242 
incidents since 2005. It was fined £200,000 in 2012 forallowing sewage to pour 
into the river Keekle 
<http://www.newsandstar.co.uk/news/united-utilities-fined-200-000-for-polluting-cumbrian-river-1.942167?referrerPath=news>
 in Cumbria on 22 occasions.

Anglian Water was the third most heavily fined company, including £150,000 in 
2008 forthree incidents at Newmarket sewage treatment works 
<http://www.utilityweek.co.uk/news/news_story.asp?id=42920&title=Anglian+Water+fined+%A3150%2C000+for+pollution+incidents>
. In one, the works manager destroyed data and coerced colleagues to falsify 
records, while another caused a major fish kill.

A spokesman for Water UK, which represents the water companies, said: "We 
never want to see incidents of pollution. Water companies invest billions of 
pounds each year to safeguard the natural environment while providing people 
with high-quality water to drink and healthy rivers, beaches and bathing waters 
to enjoy. While it's widely accepted that there is still room for improvement, 
there is clear evidence of progress in many areas."

The sentencing council's draft guidelines direct that for deliberate pollution 
incidents 
<http://sentencingcouncil.judiciary.gov.uk/docs/Environmental_Consultation_web_final.pdf>
 by large companies and with the most serious environmental impacts, the 
standard fine should be £750,000 but could be varied between £250,000 and £2m 
depending on circumstances.
 