
Ninety-seven percent of all modern diesel cars emit more toxic nitrogen oxide 
(NOx) pollution on the road than the official limit, according to themost 
comprehensive set of data <http://equa.emissionsanalytics.com/> yet published, 
with a quarter producing at least six times more than the limit.

Diesel cars' emissions far higher on road than in lab, tests show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/21/all-top-selling-cars-break-emissions-limits-in-real-world-tests>
Surprisingly, the tiny number of models that did not exceed the standard were 
mostly Volkswagens, the carmaker whosecheating of diesel emissions tests 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volkswagen_emissions_scandal> which emerged last 
year sparked the scandal. Experts said the new results show that clean diesel 
cars can be made but that virtually all manufacturers have failed to do so.

The new data, from testing industry leader Emissions Analytics (EA), follows 
the publication this week by theDepartment for Transport of emissions results 
for 37 vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/21/all-top-selling-cars-break-emissions-limits-in-real-world-tests>
, all of which emitted more NOx on the road than the official limit. But the 
new data covers more than 250 vehicles in more stringently standardised road 
conditions. EA found that just one of 201 Euro 5 diesels, the EU standard from 
2009, did not exceed the limit, while only seven of 62 Euro 6 diesels, the 
stricter standard since 2014, did so.

Diesel cars must meet an official EU limit for NOx but are only tested in a 
laboratory under fixed conditions. All vehicles sold pass this regulation but, 
when taken out on to real roads, almost all emit far more pollution. There is 
no suggestion that any of the cars tested broke the law on emissions limits or 
used any cheat devices.

Mayoral candidates in London, the city with the worst air quality in Britain, 
haveseized on the DfT data to call for tighter controls on polluting traffic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/22/mayoral-candidates-tighter-controls-london-traffic-pollution>
 – including a ban on diesel cars.
Data from Emissions Analytics on vehicle emissions 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1be7MHIixHb5s5NKEvob-dsGqQwQ1GtWDS-FPpR4Vlog>
 Categories
A - Meets Euro 6 limit for diesels 
￼B - Up to 1.5 times Euro 6 limit 
C - 1.5 to 2.25 times Euro 6 limit 
D - 2.25 to 3 times Euro 6 limit 
E - 3 to 6 times Euro 6 limit 
F - 6-8 times the Euro 6 limit 
G - 8-12 times the Euro 6 limit 
H - More than 12 times the Euro 6 limit 
An ultra-low emission zone in central London from 2020 will levy charges on 
all but the cleanest vehicles. The Conservative candidate, Zac Goldsmith, said 
he would be immediately consulting on a more stringent zone which could be 
extended to outer boroughs. “Londoners are seeing their lives cut short because 
of the misleading emissions produced by some of the world’s biggest and most 
respected car brands.”

Goldsmith added that as mayor he would issue public smog alerts to give 
accurate information on air quality.

Caroline Pidgeon, the Lib Dem mayoral candidate, said: “The figures are 
exactly the reason why we need to speed up the introduction of the ultra-low 
emission zone so that it starts in 2018. Ultimately we will need to ban diesel 
vehicles from much of London and we need a mayor prepared to take these tough 
decisions and work with people to make these changes happen.”

NOx is at illegally high levels in many British cities and the government 
estimates thispollution is responsible for 23,500 premature deaths a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/13/government-passing-the-buck-air-pollution-campaigners>
. Thegovernment lost a supreme court challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/29/supreme-court-orders-uk-to-draw-up-air-pollution-cleanup-plan>
 in 2015 over the adequacy of its plans to tackle the crisis and isfacing a 
fresh challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/18/uk-faces-fresh-legal-challenge-over-weak-plans-to-tackle-air-pollution>
 over its new strategy.

“There is a growing worry about air pollution, but while some car 
manufacturers have been more proactive, others have done only the minimum,” 
said Nick Molden, the CEO of EA. “The point is diesels can be clean.”

Government passing the buck on air pollution, say campaigners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/13/government-passing-the-buck-air-pollution-campaigners>
EA claims to have tested the emissions of more cars driving on real roads than 
any other group in the world and has now published the NOx results for 263 
models. The good performance of the VW models, which did not have cheat devices 
fitted, was surprising, Molden said: “It is hugely ironic.”

The EA analysis found that just one of the 201 Euro 5 diesels tested – a Skoda 
Octavia – did not exceed the official limit on the road. Over a quarter of the 
Euro 5s pumped out at least five times the official limit, including models 
from BMW, Range Rover, Mercedes, Nissan, Renault andVauxhall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vauxhall>.

Of the 62 Euro 6 models tested by EA, seven did not exceed the official limit 
in real-world driving: four Volkswagens, a BMW, an Audi and a Skoda. However, 
an Audi A8 and a Fiat 500X were found to emit more than 12 times the official 
limit, while aBMW <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bmw> X3, a Volvo S60 
and a Vauxhall Zafira were among models emitting more than six times the 
official limit on the road.

The EA tests were all performed on the same route in south-west London, with 
the same drivers, at the same time of day and with the same load weight in the 
vehicles. Tests were only performed when the weather – temperature, rain and 
wind – was within certain parameters.

One leading respiratory expert said the emissions discrepancies shown in the 
DfT report released on Thursday amounted to “an unacceptable scandal”.


Sir Malcolm Green, a professor of respiratory medicine who founded the British 
Lung Foundation <https://www.blf.org.uk/>, said the revelations showed 
“appalling behaviour” by many major car firms. “This is a massive failure of 
public trust by these companies,” he said.

“It is well established that current levels of pollution are shortening 
people’s lives, on a population basis,” Green said. “This is a massive and 
deliberate deceit. It’s appalling behaviour by the car manufacturers involved.

“They were selling these cars on the basis that they were clean diesels. I 
find it shocking. The more we look into it, the more it looks like a widespread 
thing across many manufacturers. It’s outrageous and unacceptable.”

Asthma UK <https://www.asthma.org.uk/> said two-thirds of asthmatics reported 
their condition being exacerbated by high levels of emissions. “People with 
asthma need accurate information about asthma triggers, including air 
pollution, to help them manage their condition,” said Dan Murphy, the head of 
external affairs for Asthma UK.

“So if they’ve got this level of misinformation it’s going to affect the 
choices they make. That is a concern for us.”



Steve Gooding, the director of the RAC Foundation, said “The [EA data] 
demonstrates that diesel cars can score well in real-world driving conditions. 
However, the star performers in the diesel category are few in number and these 
figures send out a strong message to several auto makers that they need to up 
their game.”

The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, which represents the motor 
industry in the UK, said: “The differences between the results from official 
laboratory tests and those performed in the real world are well known, and 
industry acknowledges the need for fundamental reform of the current official 
test regime, which does it no favours.”

Emissions scandal: how the drive for diesel ran out of gas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/30/emissions-scandal-how-the-drive-for-diesel-ran-out-of-gas>
It was known before the VW scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/14/nine-out-of-10-new-diesel-cars-in-breach-of-eu-pollution-rules-report-finds>
 in September that many diesels produced more NOx emissions than the official 
limit when on the road, but the scandal led tospecific carmakers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/30/wide-range-of-cars-emit-more-pollution-in-real-driving-conditions-tests-show>
 andmodels being named 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/09/mercedes-honda-mazda-mitsubishi-diesel-emissions-row>
. The EU revised the regulations in February, including the introduction of an 
emissions test involving more realistic driving conditions. But the policy was
heavily criticised by campaigners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/03/eu-parliament-gives-green-light-for-loopholes-in-car-emissions-tests>
 for allowing new vehicles to continue toemit double the official limit until 
2021 
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2016/02/12-vehicle-emissions-in-real-driving-conditions-2nd-package/>
 and 50% more afterwards.

Unlike other parts of the world, European nations incentivised the use of 
diesel vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/30/emissions-scandal-how-the-drive-for-diesel-ran-out-of-gas>
 over the last 20 years because they emit less carbon dioxide per mile than 
petrol cars. Governments thought stricter regulation would sharply reduce NOx 
emissions, but carmakers found ways around the rules and governments failed to 
clamp down on the practices.

The EA data is available for free to the public as the EQUA index 
<http://equa.emissionsanalytics.com/>. Molden said there was understandably a 
great deal of confusion among car buyers: “But we’re able to deliver impartial 
and precise information to help them buy better.” He said future regulation, 
such as ultra-low emission zones, would mean people choosing the cleanest cars 
would avoid charges.

The index is overseen by a board of experts including Prof Helen ApSimon, at 
Imperial College London, and Dr Adam Boies, at the University of Cambridge. 
“The public can use it to avoid buying cars that are more harmful to human 
health,” said ApSimon. Boies added: “The index will enable us to track the 
industry’s effort to make meaningful reductions in noxious emissions.”
 