
Can Martina Hingis win a tournament without mum? It looks as if she has a good 
chance this weekend. Her first attempt last month, after Melanie Molitor 
stepped down as coach, ended in surprise defeat by Arantxa Sanchez Vicario, but 
yesterday the world No1 avenged that setback with a 6-3, 7-6 win to reach the 
German Open semi-finals.

There were also hints of an adolescent score being settled by the 20-year-old. 
Ever since the tantrums during the 1999 French Open final with Steffi Graf, 
crowds here have never been particularly fond of Hingis and last year the 
centre court at the Rot-Weiss club emptied conspicuously as the top seed 
arrived for a match.

Yesterday, with Hingis a set up, 4-2, 30-15 and almost home and dry, the 
spectators suddenly got behind Sanchez, and for 20 minutes it looked as though 
the match might be turned spectacularly around.

The Spaniard captured three games in a row and carved out two set points at 
5-4. Hingis dealt with both splendidly, and grittily hit back from a mini-break 
down in the tie-break. In those difficult moments some useful growing up was 
done.

"The schedule has been tough," she said. "It's the first time I'm playing 
alone and all that. I am glad that match is behind me." She now plays France's 
Amelie Mauresmo, the fourth seed.

Another player who has suffered more than her share of growing-up pains, 
Jennifer Capriati, also displayed commendable maturity. The Australian Open 
champion was within a point of going 0-3 in the final set and had to intercept 
several moon-balls from in front of a line judge's nose before prevailing 
against the clay-court skills of Conchita Martinez 2-6, 6-3, 6-4.

Today she plays Justine Henin, whose uninhibited approach may help her through 
the stresses of her developing years. The 18-year-old Belgian followed 
career-best victory over Venus Williams on Thursday by overcoming partisan 
support and Miriam Schnitzer, 6-4, 6-2.
 