
Rex Tillerson

Secretary of state

Russia and conflicts of interest: Rex Tillerson embodies quandaries for Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-quandaries-trump-russia-conflicts-of-interest>
Background

Rex Tillerson <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rex-tillerson> was a 
surprise pick for secretary of state, having had no previous government 
experience. He worked for more than 41 years for just one company, ExxonMobil, 
the last 10 years as chairman and chief executive officer. He emerged as an 
outside candidate only in the last few days of Donald Trump’s search for 
someone to fill the role of the country’s top diplomat.

That background, his actions and decisions while running ExxonMobil, will be 
the focus of scrutiny before the Senate foreign relations committee on 
Wednesday. Earlier this weekUSA Today reported 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2017/01/09/exxonmobil-and-iran-did-business-under-secretary-state-nominee-tillerson/96359776/>
 that a European subsidiary of ExxonMobil did business with Iran, Syria and 
Sudan when Tillerson was chief executive and when the three countries were 
under US sanctions as state sponsors of terrorism.

As ExxonMobil CEO, Tillerson also had extensive dealings with Vladimir Putin 
and one of his top lieutenants, Igor Sechin, aformer intelligence officer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/oct/18/igor-sechin-rosneft-kremlin-hard-man-shadows>
 now chairman of a state-owned oil company, Rosneft. In 2013, the Texas oil man 
was awarded Russia’s Medal of Friendship. Those links make him vulnerable at a 
time of deep apprehension among several leading Republicans that a Trump 
administration will be soft on Moscow.

“Tillerson’s whole confirmation will be about: do you know [the] difference 
between being CEO at Exxon and being secretary of state?,” Republican senator 
Lindsey Graham said on Tuesday.

Rex Tillerson: an appointment that confirms Putin's US election win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
In order to address conflict of interest questions, it was announced earlier 
this month that Tillerson would be sellingalmost a quarter of a billion dollars 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-01-04/exxon-says-tillerson-to-cut-company-ties-on-cabinet-confirmation>
 worth of ExxonMobil shares and putting the proceeds into an independently 
managed trust. However, he will still face scepticism over whether he can 
abandon the instincts and loyalties acquired in more than four decades in a 
tightly disciplined, giant but tight-knit corporation.

Democrats and traditionalists in Republican ranks will also probe him on 
foreign policy positions taken by the president-elect during the election 
campaign and subsequent tweets.

Bob Corker, the Republican chairman of the Senate committee, predicted that 
Tillerson’s would be a tough session but that he would win more than the 51 
votes needed for confirmation.

“Based on my conversation, we are going to have a long hearing. People are 
going to have plenty of time to ask questions,” Corker told journalists last 
week.

Key points to watch for 

 * Iran: Tillerson will be asked whether the US should walk out of the 2015 
nuclear agreement with Iran, as Trump has threatened. 
 * Sanctions on Russia: He will be asked his opinion on maintaining US 
sanctions on Russia for its military intervention in Ukraine, and whether he 
considers such sanctions to be effective. 
 * Syria: There will be questions on whether the US should find common cause 
with Russia in Syria against the Islamic State, thereby siding with the Assad 
regime. 
 * US embassy in Israel: He will face questions on whether the US embassy in 
Israel should be moved from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, as the Trump team has 
threatened despite the risk that it would trigger protests in the Arab and 
Islamic world. 
 * He will be pressed to offer some ideas about how to curtail North Korea’s 
drive to develop a nuclear-armed intercontinental ballistic missile capable of 
reaching the US west coast.  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frex-tillerson-senate-congressional-hearing-key-points-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3975accb99b01bc285dbad4989e29d1d63f29d7%2F0_336_5238_3144%2F5238.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rex%20Tillerson%20confirmation%20hearing%20for%20secretary%20of%20state%3A%20the%20key%20points&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frex-tillerson-senate-congressional-hearing-key-points-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rex%20Tillerson%20confirmation%20hearing%20for%20secretary%20of%20state%3A%20the%20key%20points&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frex-tillerson-senate-congressional-hearing-key-points-live%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3975accb99b01bc285dbad4989e29d1d63f29d7%2F0_336_5238_3144%2F5238.jpg>
 Rex Tillerson, Donald Trump’s nominee for secretary of state, has lobbied hard 
for sanctions on Russia to be lifted. Photograph: Zach Gibson/AFP/Getty Images  