
If only Riccardo Muti's season at the Chicago Symphony Orchestra 
<http://cso.org/res/Flipbooks/SeasonCatalog15/#/40/>, announced yesterday, were 
as adventurous as his press conference seems to have been. It will mostly be 
good solid Austro-German and Russian fun in Chicago in 2014-15, with a complete 
cycle of Tchaikovsky symphonies and a focus on Scriabin, and a season-opener of 
Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, but apart from world premieres fromAnna Clyne 
<http://www.annaclyne.com> and Mason Bates <http://www.masonbates.com>, 
Chicago's commitment to new music, something symbolised by their strong 
relationship withPierre Boulez 
<http://cso.org/about/performers/Performer.aspx?id=6614>, seems to be 
atrophying; even if there is a season-long focus on French music, including one 
of the CSO's brilliantly imaginativeBeyond the Score 
<http://csosoundsandstories.org/category/beyond-the-score/> projects on Boulez 
himself.

No matter. Here, thanks to Chicago Classical Review 
<http://chicagoclassicalreview.com/2014/02/muti-extends-cso-contract-through-2020/>
, are some prize Muti-isms from yesterday (where he also announced he will 
renew his contract as Music Director until 2020) some of which show that Muti's 
septuagenarian conservatism has become almost - almost - radical. Or at least a 
bit grumpy.

On Beethoven's Ninth:

I didn't conduct this music until I was 46, in Philadelphia. The third 
movement is maybe written by God. I felt too humble to conduct this 
metaphysical and spiritual music. I was so nervous, I was shaking. The 
concertmaster said to me, 'Coraggio!' Now, at the age of 22, people conduct not 
only the Ninth but the Missa Solemnis. Because of the food of today, conductors 
must be more intelligent.

Who could he possibly be thinking of?... But there is a serious point behind 
Muti's crankiness, the sense that as soon as a conductor has shot to fame, the 
world expects their Mahler and Beethoven cycles - and why not a Ring, too? - 
before they're even 30. It's not only the conductors' responsibility, but the 
way they're promoted and marketed. Talking of which...

Muti on classical music marketing:

Today all you see are violinists' legs and a conductor with hair like a 
forest. The future seems to be legs and hair.

This, to be fair, might be read as a just a little bit of the pot calling its 
fellow kitchen accoutrements black: Muti's own locks are some of the finest and 
mostlustrous <http://pixhost.me/avaxhome/07/bb/0011bb07_medium.jpeg> in the 
business. (Admittedly, his legs aresomewhat less exposed 
<http://image.nanopress.it/musica/fotogallery/628X0/91/riccardo-muti-musica-classica-per-beneficenza.jpg>
.) It may be thanks to his genes, but there's alot of hair 
<http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-oIt7DuvJrpA/TqAVm8py1UI/AAAAAAAAOoQ/u5ZYeE5uHOM/s400/Muti1.jpg>
 in the Muti-marketing portfolio over the years.

Muti on his future recording ideas:

I'd like to do all the Beethoven symphonies again, all the Brahms symphonies 
and some of the Bruckner symphonies. To do all the Bruckner symphonies, I would 
need another contract.

What price on Muti's ideas having undergone a seismic sea-change thanks to the 
developments and insights of the early music movement, or more recent attampts, 
like his fellow ItaliansRiccardo Chailly 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-The-Symphonies-Limited-Edition/dp/B005CYLSW8/ref=sr_1_fkmr2_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1391505066&sr=8-1-fkmr2&keywords=riccardo+muti+beethoven+cycle>
 andClaudio Abbado 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Symphonies-Claudio-Mattila-Euroarts/dp/B00BW7FHJY/ref=sr_1_fkmr0_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1391505649&sr=8-1-fkmr0&keywords=claudio+abbado+beethoven+cycle>
, to fuse aspects of period performance with the opulent traditions of the 
great European orchestras when he gets round to Beethoven again, after his last 
cycle with thePhiladelphians and the Philharmonia 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Complete-Symphonies-Riccardo-Muti/dp/B0052RUZ2O/ref=sr_1_fkmr0_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1391505674&sr=8-3-fkmr0&keywords=riccardo+muti+beethoven+cycle>
? Probably not much... but Muti has always stuck to his interpretative guns, 
and there's nothing wrong with that!
 