
The most trouble Richard Tognetti ever got into was for doing nothing.

It was 2011 and Slovenia’s Maribor festival <http://www.festivalmaribor.si/en/>
, where Tognetti is artistic director, had been forced to cancel a rather grand 
staging of The Magic Flute at short notice due to lack of funds. Tognetti was 
given three days to come up with a filler, and duly called the board with his 
suggestion: nothing. Or a musical exploration of it.

“How can you play a concert that has nothing in it?” reflects Tognetti now. 
“All we could do was sail as close to that as possible.” CueJohn Cage’s iconic 
4’33 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/feb/20/john-cage-4minutes33-seconds-silence-app>
 (nothing performed), Polish soprano Aleksandra Zamojska singing Handel, 
topless (nothing worn), and Barry Humphries reciting William Walton’s Façade 
(nothing implied).


“There was an element of dada. Of nonsense,” says Tognetti, who has long been 
inspired by Paris and the early 20th century avant-garde. But there was also 
mathematics (zero), astronomy (black holes) and the ultimate nothing: death.

I’m not saying the early music movement is always right. But it's exciting

“Our videographer Jon Frank  <http://blog.jonfrank.org/>went to a hospice on 
the banks of the river Ganges in India and filmed into the eyes of people 
dying. Right into their voids. He even filmed the funeral pyres afterwards. And 
it was frightening. The performances were frightening. And people were 
horrified. They were disgusted.”

Yet, to this day it’s the thing people remember most from Maribor, he says: 
“the year you did nothing”. Globally, of course, Tognetti is best known as the 
longstanding artistic director of the Australian Chamber Orchestra (ACO), which 
this season celebrates both its own 40th anniversary and Tognetti’s 25th..

Hard to believe he was just 24 when he took up the post. He must have been a 
gusty so-and-so. “They were gutsy offering me that opportunity,” he bats back. 
“Look, I’d always loved chamber orchestras – the proximity to all the players, 
that sense of a collective. You can be an anarchist. There is room for the 
individual voice – that was one attraction. And I had no desire at the time to 
conduct. And it wasSydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney>.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Frichard-tognetti-an-anarchist-with-a-chamber-orchestra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c084c3d9393ee9ab1228df6097611fbf000af05%2F0_0_2480_1655%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Tognetti%3A%20an%20anarchist%20with%20a%20chamber%20orchestra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Frichard-tognetti-an-anarchist-with-a-chamber-orchestra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Tognetti%3A%20an%20anarchist%20with%20a%20chamber%20orchestra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Frichard-tognetti-an-anarchist-with-a-chamber-orchestra%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c084c3d9393ee9ab1228df6097611fbf000af05%2F0_0_2480_1655%2F2480.jpg>
 Take a bow: Tognetti. Photograph: Simon van Boxtel/ACO 
Ah yes, his beloved Sydney. Born in Canberra and raised in Wollongong, 
Tognetti first moved to the city as a pupil of the Conservatorium High School, 
before finishing his musical studies in Bern, Switzerland. But where many 
contemporaries stayed in Europe, Tognetti was itching to get back to the beach 
and the surf. The Manly local still gets out into the water most mornings, even 
– as on the day we speak – in foul weather (“it was raining but very dramatic”).

Back to his return to Australia in 1989, though, when the ACO was in a “a bit 
of crisis”.

“The early music movement had taken hold and the orchestra’s playing style was 
already quite old-fashioned under its previous director who was strongly 
against the movement, especially [its progenitor]Christopher Hogwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/24/christopher-hogwood>,” recalls 
Tognetti. “And so you had a musical fight there.”

Australian Chamber Orchestra / Tognetti review – persuasive experiments with 
Jonny Greenwood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/08/australian-chamber-orchestra-tognetti-jonny-greenwood-radiohead-review>
For his part, Tognetti was energised by the early music gang, finding 
something new and dynamic in their reclamation of the past. “I embraced the 
revolutionary spirit of a scene which relished the idea of playing on Dutch 
strings and farting horns,” he says. “I’m not saying the early music movement 
is always right. But it was exciting. To ignore it is like trying to ignore the 
second Viennese school or electronica – it’s ignoring something on the basis of 
your own taste.”

And so he got the job (“they realised I suppose that they were running the 
risk of being left behind”) and has, in the quarter century since, brought his 
own revolution to an ensemble now synonymous with experimentation, 
collaboration and, above all, exquisite performance. The sight of Tognetti’s 
bow deftly conducting the orchestra before dipping back down to his own 1743 
Guarneri del Gesù violin is a familiar one. “If there’s a better chamber 
orchestra in the world,”wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/nov/28/australian-co-richard-tognetti-review>
 Guardian reviewer Andrew Clements in 2011, “I haven’t heard it.”

Tognetti points out that “the really experimental stuff” only began in 2000. 
“So much had to be sorted out before I started doing these projects. I didn’t 
have the support, morally or financially, to undertake such weird and wacky 
things.” But even before Nothing and the hook-ups with the likes of Neil Finn 
andJonny Greenwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/08/australian-chamber-orchestra-tognetti-jonny-greenwood-radiohead-review>
, he was already getting critics’ backs up with his chamber arrangements of the 
symphonic repertoire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Frichard-tognetti-an-anarchist-with-a-chamber-orchestra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42eecf30ea55a02946ac61cfc7c66779e446e087%2F0_0_1917_2880%2F1917.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Richard%20Tognetti%3A%20an%20anarchist%20with%20a%20chamber%20orchestra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Frichard-tognetti-an-anarchist-with-a-chamber-orchestra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Richard%20Tognetti%3A%20an%20anarchist%20with%20a%20chamber%20orchestra&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Frichard-tognetti-an-anarchist-with-a-chamber-orchestra%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42eecf30ea55a02946ac61cfc7c66779e446e087%2F0_0_1917_2880%2F1917.jpg>
 Richard Tognetti and his Guarneri del Gesu. Photograph: Mick Bruzzese/ACO 
“There’s a difference between adapting and arranging,” he says. “A lot of 
critics misunderstood. They are calm at the moment but in the past I’ve been 
pilloried.” What set him off on his composing course? “One, because I was stuck 
out here in Australia just like Haydn was stuck in the swamp of the Eszterháza 
– I was forced to be original. Also, because I realised the repertoire was so 
damn small for a chamber orchestra. I can name the pieces for a proper string 
orchestra on two hands.”

This forced some imaginative programming, says Tognetti, who believes at its 
best ACO can be something akin to an experimental art gallery. And yet, he 
insists, ideas should never overshadow performance. He “can’t help ... 
including the social sometimes” – Maribor’s line-up this year was entitled 
Woman and was programmed by Satu Vänskä, ACO’s principal violinist and 
Tognetti’s wife. “But just sometimes, we want to be left speechless. Or let me 
put it another way: one is quite relieved that you can’t find out much about 
the music.”

Such is the case with Mozart’s last symphonies, the music Tognetti is 
conducting and performing to mark his 25th year with the ACO. “We don’t really 
know why Mozart wrote the damn things and there’s beauty in that. We live in 
this postmodern world where everything has a social and political and cultural 
imperative. We can’t do anything without analysing it.”

Nostalgia comes like a sort of cut. It doesn’t hurt and all of a sudden you 
feel the pain and out of that comes beauty

Tognetti performed the symphonies in his first year with the ACO too – under 
the baton of Frans Brüggen. Does he feel like he is coming full circle? Nothing 
as neat as that. “Nostalgia comes like a sort of cut. Sometimes it doesn’t hurt 
and all of a sudden you feel the pain and out of that pain comes beauty. I 
don’t necessarily feel nostalgic as I talk to you. But something that appears 
ostensibly not to mean a lot can suddenly become filled with meaning.”

Instead, he is looking to the future and the ACO’s long-awaited move (touted 
for 2019) from its subterranean base at Circular Quay (“we are currently in the 
best and worst location in the world– 30 leagues under the sea”) to Pier 2/3 on 
the Wharf, next to Sydney Theatre Company and Sydney Dance Company.

The shift is about more than “bricks and mortar”, says Tognetti, who believes 
in the positive effects of “the cluster mentality” – like Chinese restaurants 
or Milanese shoe shops or, for that matter, 17th century violin makers. “It’s 
why Stradivarius was so amazing. He was working in this mentality.”

It’s also about public access, though Tognetti resists falling prey to the 
growing pressures of “audience development”. It’s who you reach that matters, 
he says, not always how many.

From Bondi to Beethoven: the Australian Chamber Orchestra
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/nov/24/australian-chamber-orchestra-richard-tognetti>
“I’ve always been very worried if we do crossover projects that people 
wouldn’t turn up to concerts – or wouldn’t come back. I’ve now realised that 
even if we get to four or five people that’s enough. People say that doesn’t 
mean a lot in this day and age when 50m isn’t a massive number of YouTube 
views. But when you listen to those beautiful old Miles Davis, Gil Evans and 
Chet Baker recordings from New York clubs, at the end of the piece, you hear 
about four people clapping. And they are classic recordings. The way I see it: 
how lucky were those four people?”

• The ACO performs Mozart’s Last Symphonies  
<https://www.aco.com.au/whats_on/event_detail/mozartslast>in Newcastle on 9 
October, Canberra on 10 October and Brisbane on 12 October

 