
A golden moon hung over the city, and as night deepened the crowd lounging off 
Hope Street grew giddy. People swigged beer, marijuana spiced the air, hip-hop 
streamed from a sound system. It felt like a gritty picnic, minus food.


A yell from a guy with a Hawaiian shirt and a clipboard signalled business, 
however, and the hundred-strong crowd promptly lined the sidewalk, expectant. 
The race was about to begin. About two dozen riders, many in Lycra, some in 
jeans, gathered at a traffic light with their eyes fixed on the race marshal, a 
ragged figure with a raised baton.

The contest that followed was noteworthy for several reasons. Some competitors 
had been among the boozers and smokers. The marshal was a homeless man who 
sleeps under a nearby bush. There were no traffic cones or markings delineating 
the route. And most striking of all: this guerrilla bicycle event unfolded in 
the heart of theworld’s car capital, Los Angeles 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/nobody-walks-in-la-the-rise-of-cars-and-the-monorails-that-never-were-43267593/?no-ist>
.

“You ride at your own risk,” said Angel Rodriguez, 21, a competitor awaiting 
the start signal. “Once you realise you’ve just missed a car you get an 
adrenaline rush.” Is near death a deterrent? He shook his head and grinned. 
“You use that. You convert that into more speed.” Moments later the cyclists 
swooshed off, legs like pistons, battling for dominance as they the hurtled 
past the darkened skyscrapers of downtown LA.

This was a real-life, two-wheeled version of The Fast and the Furious, a 
sub-culture of bicycle tribes that claims LA’s streets by night. Dozens of 
groups, big and small, with names like the Wolfpack Hustle, Ovarian Psycos 
Bicycle Brigade and Kushtown Society, hold races and mass rides on streets 
originally designed solely for cars. There are events most nights: some wild 
and illegal, others blessed by city authorities. And they go anywhere, 
improvising routes from Boyle Heights to Pasadena, Hollywood to Compton, up 
Mulholland Drive, down Griffith Park, through Beverly Hills, around Silver 
Lake, back down Sunset Boulevard.

What I saw was a lot of kids who might have gone the gang route getting into 
bicycling and racing
Gordon Helper, LAPD  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5023f5ddb5d8feb8604aa08b97a2b5f58a386653%2F0_380_5125_3076%2F5125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5023f5ddb5d8feb8604aa08b97a2b5f58a386653%2F0_380_5125_3076%2F5125.jpg>
 The Hope Street race. Photograph: Noah Smith for the Guardian 
“LA is being dragged kicking and screaming from car culture little, tiny bits 
at a time,” said Don Ward, AKA “Roadblock”, a 43-year-old organiser and 
figurehead. He got the nickname using his 6ft 8in bulk to block traffic in 
order to let fellow cyclists pass, and is the closest thing to a spokesman for 
this vibrant, fractious, leaderless movement. Although they have challenged the 
car-is-king mentality, they have a long way to go, said Ward. “Racing culture 
is still looking for its place in the mainstream.”

That quest for acceptance – and for safe bicycle lanes – has united an 
eclectic coalition that cuts across race and class lines. There are lawyers and 
janitors, hipsters and gang members, feminists and bros. Their success can be 
measured in the increasing number and visibility of officially sanctioned 
events, day and night.

“It was frowned upon a while ago but the LAPD are way more understanding now. 
And the whole Department of Transport is totally about bikes,” enthused Jungle, 
40, a founder of DTLA Messengers, the group that hosted the recent Hope Street 
race. Even with officialdom apparently onside, however, Jungle declined to give 
his real name.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfa69a4185530d9f08d99cbf0d9e84e6e82efc97%2F0_0_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfa69a4185530d9f08d99cbf0d9e84e6e82efc97%2F0_0_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
 Bike racers at the Hope Street event. Photograph: Noah Smith for the Guardian 
The movement originated about two decades ago as a spin-off from San 
Francisco’s Critical Mass community ride. LA cyclists, until then lonely, 
quixotic figures, felt emboldened to organise their own rides, using force of 
numbers to co-exist with traffic in mass rides, and for races acting like flash 
mobs, briefly sealing off an alley here, a boulevard there.

“They were taking over the streets, running red lights. The police were having 
a hard time controlling them,” recalled Gordon Helper, LAPD’s senior lead bike 
officer. “They were in and out so fast we didn’t know about it half the time.”

By 2006 an umbrella group, the Midnight Ridazz, had so many people flocking to 
its monthly rides that Wardcreated an online forum 
<http://www.midnightridazz.com/> to encourage people to form off-shoots with 
their own identities and rides.

A decade later, countless groups have formed: Sins and Sprockets, MOM Ridaz, 
Los Angelopes, Pier Pressure, Taco Tuesday, Westside Mosey. Some endure, others 
are fleeting. “There are so many different rides right now it’s not funny,” 
said Helper.

It’s an outlet, an escape from the ghetto. You’re hanging out with people from 
the hood, with architects, all sorts
Willo  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b83e93d642467e2dff37b0a099ee17c48265f4b%2F0_0_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b83e93d642467e2dff37b0a099ee17c48265f4b%2F0_0_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
 Female competitors are rare in the male-dominated groups, so they have formed 
their own Photograph: Noah Smith for the Guardian 
City authorities were initially suspicious. There were accidents and 
confrontations with motorists. A rowdy fringe took to raiding liquor stores, 
spraying graffiti and flaunting marijuana.

Helper, a triathlete, attended some rides off-duty and concluded that the 
riders were not, in fact, hooligans bent on anarchy. “They weren’t committing 
violent crimes. What I saw was a lot of kids who might have gone the gang route 
getting into bicycling and racing. Some have become really good. They got 
pushed in a different direction.”

The evolution of the Kushtown riders vindicated such faith. Formed mainly by 
latino teenagers, the name was a play on their Koreatown neighbourhood and 
passion for kush and other strains of marijuana. “It was about getting some 
beers and weed and hanging out on bikes,” said Hansel Echevarria, 25, a 
co-founder.

Rowdy elements used to steal booze and stir trouble, Echeverria recalled. “So 
I put my foot down. That’s not what we’re about. We rebranded ourselves as the 
Kushtown Society. Now we’re more civilised.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bddb238145f15200502bd04ed2a38cde8e24ce8%2F0_219_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3bddb238145f15200502bd04ed2a38cde8e24ce8%2F0_219_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
 A rider makes a turn at the end of the first downhill section. Photograph: 
Noah Smith for the Guardian 
Beer and pot were still welcome, he stressed, but the vibe is chilled, not 
chaotic, and participants are expected to be fit for fast rides of up to 60 
miles. “We want to show people we’re not your regular cannabis consumer. We’re 
active and athletic, not some lazy potheads lying on a sofa.”

Some former Kushtowners have graduated to sponsorship deals and professional 
racing, notably Edgar Juarez, AKA Willo, a former gang member who served time 
in jail and isnow a celebrity for his racing exploits 
<http://www.laweekly.com/news/street-tough-racers-fight-for-supremacy-in-las-underground-cycling-world-5368780>
. “It’s an outlet, a form of escape from the ghetto. You’re hanging out with 
people from the hood, with architects, all sorts,” said Willo. He smiled, 
revealing missing teeth, legacy of a nasty collision.

Willo was speaking at the race on Hope Street, the last of five races held 
downtown every summer by the DTLA Messengers. It was formed by couriers who 
work mainly for legal firms. Zipping through LA traffic on two wheels for a 
living renders them fearless. Or possibly a bit unhinged.

We’re active and athletic, not some lazy potheads lying on a sofa
Kushtown co-founder Hansel Echevarria  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2512ca6266ff9e81c5dc6924d62c6fb5c59b58ab%2F0_281_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2512ca6266ff9e81c5dc6924d62c6fb5c59b58ab%2F0_281_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
 Racers and couriers chat ahead of the Hope St event. Photograph: Noah Smith 
for the Guardian 
“They rebuilt my face,” said Ozzie, 39, indicating two holes and a scar across 
his skull, which he got after a bus collision that for a time put him on life 
support. He resumed biking as soon as he could. “You won’t make the big bucks 
but it’s like a big family, man. You’re not in an office, you’re out, free.”

The Messengers gather on the same corner at the end of the working week to 
share beers and joints and maybe race, depending how much they consume. “When I 
race I do it under the influence,” said Ozzie. “Liquid courage. It relaxes me.”

Another messenger, Animal, 31, regarded his Negra Modelo and shook his head. 
“I’m not racing tonight. I’m already a little drunk.” Charles Cetto, 37, 
sipping an IPA, said it would make no difference. “We get so drunk we don’t 
remember who won.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7116dcc49090d11532405f0204fef72226eb6b45%2F0_0_4797_2880%2F4797.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7116dcc49090d11532405f0204fef72226eb6b45%2F0_0_4797_2880%2F4797.jpg>
 One of the organisers, Ash, takes a drink before the action begins. 
Photograph: Noah Smith for the Guardian 
He was joking. Few got wasted and everybody was keen to watch the two races, 
comprised of 13 circuits of a downtown loop done on multi-speed and 
single-speed bicycles. A few years ago, contestants chugged beers and wore 
jeans; most are now abstemious and decked out with professional cycling 
equipment.

“I used to be about fast food but now I’m about salad,” said Manuel Barra, 22, 
a star member of the the Green Leaf Killer team (motto: Ride. Hustle. Kill. 
Repeat.) A restaurant and a trucking company sponsored the gear.

Barra’s main rivals in the single-speed category were Willo and a rider 
nicknamed Neu York, representing the Gorilla Smash Squad. Perils included Prius 
cars, which can be fatally quiet, and traffic lights, said Neu York. “Red 
lights are one of the dynamics. You have to strategise.”

The races passed in a blur: riders whipping down Hope Street, swerving on to 
Flower Street, belting through a tunnel of roaring traffic and blinding 
headlights and back up to the starting point. They did it 13 times, no one 
crashed, and everyone, save the two police officers monitoring from a distance, 
cheered.

It’s amazing. You truly experience your environment. It’s intimate. You smell, 
you hear, you see
Don 'Roadblock' Ward  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa438c7cb8ef18880056f7e9e2f42efee1e9318a6%2F562_685_4617_2771%2F4617.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ride%2C%20hustle%2C%20kill%2C%20repeat%3A%20the%20underground%20cycle%20gangs%20of%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fsep%2F04%2Fride-hustle-kill-repeat-the-underground-cycle-gangs-of-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa438c7cb8ef18880056f7e9e2f42efee1e9318a6%2F562_685_4617_2771%2F4617.jpg>
 Neu York, a racer with the Gorilla Smash Squad. Photograph: Noah Smith for the 
Guardian 
Barra pipped Neu York to claim first place. He received the $80 prize ($5 
entry fees paid by the 16 riders in his category) beneath a victory arch made 
of empty beer boxes. For the serious riders, this outing was a warm-up for the
Wolfpack Hustle race <http://wolfpackhustle.com/> on 15 August, which drew 
international contestants.

Most rides are male-dominated, so women have formed their own groups. “It’s 
intimidating to be just one or two women among 50 guys so we come together,” 
said Martha Mauricio, 29, of the She Wolf Attack Team (Swat). “It’s important 
because a lot of us feel empowered by riding a bike.”

The Ovarian Psycos Bicycle Brigade <http://ovarianpsycos.com/> combines 
feminist ideals (it refers to womxn, not women) with advocacy for immigrant, 
indigenous, gay, transgender, prisoner and other marginalised groups. “Ovaries 
so big we don’t need no balls!” boasts their motto.

Cycle couriers: my life as one of the dwindling band of urban cowboys
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/aug/06/-sp-cycle-courier-life-urban-cowboys-bike-messengers>
“Our hope is that thru cycling womxn can heal and become social agents,” said 
Adriana P, speaking on behalf of the collective. Some “cis-men” accused the 
“ovos” of exclusion, she said, but there were also male allies who supported 
them. “They understand that sometimes womxn just need a space and bike ride 
lead for and by womxn.”

The Passage of a Few People Through a Brief Moment in Time 
<http://blogs.kcrw.com/whichwayla/2013/07/exploring-los-angeles-at-night-by-bike>
, a group named after European avant-garde artists, is more philosophical and 
strives to “extract wonder from the city” by biking through storm drains, 
industrial wasteland and other less-obvious routes.

Roadblock commends LA for moving in the right direction: more than 100 miles 
of new bicycle lanes, sanctioned street races, community rides like CicLAvia 
and Critical Mass. But with two cyclists killed on average each month it 
remains perilous, he says. “You have to be completely defensive because you’re 
still taking a gamble.” He felt the same about London.

Over time, he hopes the rest of LA will recognise that the city is best 
appreciated from a saddle, not a car. “It’s amazing. You truly experience your 
environment. It’s intimate. You smell, you hear, you see.”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 