
My first real encounter with Wagner’s music happened not in an opera house but 
a sports hall in Florida. I was 19 and touring the United States as a piano 
player with theEuropean Union Youth Orchestra <http://www.euyo.eu>. The 
programme was conducted by the late Erich Leinsdorf and included orchestral 
excerpts fromThe Ring of the Nibelung. But what I really remember was the 
odious stink in the place. At the rehearsal Leinsdorf, who could be quite 
intimidating, was shouting “Elephants! Why can I can smell elephants?” It 
turned out that there had been a circus in there the night before.

The politics of Wagner's Ring
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/22/matthew-dancona-the-politics-of-wagners-ring-cycle-opera-north>
However, the music was so intoxicating that it inspired me to go and see my 
firstRing at Covent Garden when I returned. I stood at the back – it was like 
viewing the stage through a letterbox. But even though I was on my feet for 16 
hours during the four operas, time seemed to disappear, as if we were entering 
into another dimension. It never crossed my mind that 30 years later I would 
find myself standing through the whole work again, this time as a conductor.

Opera North’s “austerity Ring”, premiered an opera at a time over the last 
four years and now touring as a complete cycle, is performed in concert with 
lighting and video. Itspostive critical reception 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/15/gotterdammerung-opera-north-review-wagner-ring>
 might suggest we had set out to create a new paradigm for performing Wagner, 
but our approach was born of necessity.

No props, no staging and the most basic costumes. We even asked our Valkyries 
to provide their own black dresses

Shortly after I arrived as music director in 2004 I found there was no theatre 
to perform in. The Grand theatre in Leeds was scheduled to undergo a major 
renovation, but I was determined to make the most of our period in exile. So we 
began a series of concert performances concentrating on repertoire the company 
had never been able to attempt before – the big Strauss operas such asSalome and
Elektra, for example – because our orchestra pit simply wasn’t large enough.

We took these pieces 
<http://ttp://www.thejournal.co.uk/culture/culture-news/gallery/look-back-history-sage-gateshead-8233725>
 to Sage, Gateshead, which had recently opened, and afterwards the organisers 
approached us about collaborating on something even bigger. “Even bigger than
Elektra?” I asked. “Yes,” they said, “even bigger than that.” So it quickly 
became obvious that we were talking aboutThe Ring.

Originally it was advertised as a concert, but we wanted the audience to 
experience something more. This is where lighting and video designer Peter 
Mumford came in. A conventional theatre director would inevitably want to 
develop their own ideas. Peter, however, was very happy to go with a brief that 
included no props, no staging and the most basic costumes. We even asked our 
Valkyries to provide their own black dresses; we simply gave them some 
elbow-length gloves.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De-cHUkPxEzI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De-cHUkPxEzI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De-cHUkPxEzI&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Opera North’s Ring cycle 
But the response Peter had to these constraints turned out to be a 
masterstroke. I am sure that Wagner would have seized upon the potential of the 
PowerMac to produce his dreamed-ofGesamtkunstwerk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/apr/18/a-z-wagner-gesamtkunstwerk>
, the synthesis of all the arts. Above all, it enabled us to put the story 
across with the greatest clarity, unencumbered by directorial baggage, eye 
patches and breastplates.

I’m especially proud of the fact that almost 75% of our audience said they 
were experiencingThe Ring for the first time. That’s partly due to the fact 
that we were able to keep ticket prices well below what you’d expect to pay for 
a conventional staging. We have been able to show thatThe Ring is not as 
intimidating as many people think. Anyone who lovesThe Lord of the Rings 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rCZ3SN65kIs> will recognise its landscape. 
When I first started working on Wagner’s cycle I was reading theHarry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> books to my six-year-old son. 
Both demonstrate the power of storytelling within a world of magic and 
monsters, in which there’s a struggle between good and evil.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fring-the-changes-my-asuterity-wagner-with-opera-north%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F880e85f77d530d5a5a245c10d55855af6efc0c48%2F0_301_2124_2655%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ring%20the%20changes%3A%20my%20austerity%20Wagner%20with%20Opera%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fring-the-changes-my-asuterity-wagner-with-opera-north%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ring%20the%20changes%3A%20my%20austerity%20Wagner%20with%20Opera%20North&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmay%2F27%2Fring-the-changes-my-asuterity-wagner-with-opera-north%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F880e85f77d530d5a5a245c10d55855af6efc0c48%2F0_301_2124_2655%2F2124.jpg>
 Pulverising energy … Jo Pohlheim and Mats Almgren in Götterdämmerung. 
Photograph: Clive Barda 
You never stop making discoveries about a piece like this, and I’m already 
questioning the decisions I made first time around about how certain passages 
should be performed. But the great pay-off is that it is beginning to feel like 
one huge piece – almost as if it were an enormous symphony.Rhinegold forms the 
prelude, laying out the themes; thenThe Valkyrie follows as a kind of 
developmental slow movement. You could say thatSiegfried takes the place of a 
scherzo – at least, it has scherzo-like elements of comedy and fairytale. Then 
you get toGötterdämmerung, which has this pulverising, physical energy which 
puts me in mind of the way Beethoven finished a symphony.

I am standing down as Opera North’s music director at the conclusion of this 
project. People ask me how it will feel when it’s all over; and the answer is I 
don’t know, though I dare say it will feel a bit strange waking up on11 July in 
Gateshead 
<http://www.sagegateshead.com/event/opera-north-ring-cycle-2016-package-booking/>
, and realising I don’t have to conductThe Ring any more. As far as my 12 years 
at the company goes, there can hardly be a greater note to bow out on than the 
last note ofGötterdämmerung. But I’m looking forward to being a free agent and 
I thinkAleksandar Marković 
<https://www.operanorth.co.uk/news/opera-north-aleksandar-markovic> , who is 
taking over as music director, is an incredibly exciting young talent. I’m 
pleased to think that I’ll be leaving the company in sound artistic and 
financial health. There’s a family spirit at Opera North; and what I’m most 
proud of is not only that we pulled off aRing without bankrupting ourselves, 
but the breadth of the work we have been able to achieve. I just hope it’s not 
an omen that I’m leaving the company having brought Valhalla crashing to the 
ground.

 * Opera North’s Ring cycle is at Leeds Town Hall until 29 May. Box office 
0113-224 3801. Then on tour until July.theringcycle.co.uk 
<http://www.theringcycle.co.uk/>
 