
The role of the weak pound in pushing up prices for UK shoppers and motorists 
will become clearer this week, with official figures expected to show a sharp 
rise in inflation.


One leading economic forecaster is warning that rising costs will continue to 
hit consumer spending next year and in 2018, as a decline in business 
investment after the Brexit vote applies further downward pressure to economic 
growth.

Inflation is forecast to have hit its highest level since late 2014, when 
measured on the consumer prices index (CPI). Economists forecast the rate will 
have jumped to 0.9% in September from0.6% in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/uk-inflation-remains-unchanged-at-06>
 when the data is published on Tuesday, according to a Reuters poll.

Sterling’s plunge against other currencies since June’s vote to leave the EU 
has raised the cost of imports to the UK and last weeksparked a pricing row 
between Marmite maker Unilever and supermarket Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/tesco-unilever-resolve-marmite-dispute-price-supermarket>
. Experts say currency moves will take time to trickle down to the prices 
consumers pay at the tills but they expect some early effects to be seen in 
September’s inflation figures.




“CPI inflation should jump up in September, and looks set to rise quickly over 
the coming months,” said the consultancy CapitalEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> in a note to clients 
predicting a 1% inflation reading for September. “A rise in September looks 
inevitable. The drop in sterling and rise in dollar oil prices has seen fuel 
prices at the pumps rise by over 1% in September.”
Inflation chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-16T16:16:57/embed.html>
“What’s more, we expect inflation to pick up further next year, to over 2% by 
spring as the effects of the drop in the exchange rate work its way through the 
inflation pipeline.”

The EY Item Club, a forecasting group that uses Treasury modelling, expects 
the UK economy to grow 1.9% this year, fuelled by a 2.5% rise in consumer 
spending on the back of low inflation. However, this performance is expected to 
fizzle out, as inflation jumps to 2.6% next year and 1.8% in 2018, causing 
consumer spending to slump to 0.5% and 0.9% respectively.

Alan Clarke, economist at Scotiabank in London, is predicting inflation will 
rise to 0.8% in September as an increase in fuel prices overshadows the impact 
of cheaper food. He expects that downward effect from food prices to fade once 
supermarkets stop cutting prices. “Last week’s Tesco versus Unilever standoff 
highlighted that the end of the supermarket price war may be close,” he added.

Economists at Daiwa Capital Markets highlighted the likely effect of a weaker 
pound, which recentlytouched new 31-year lows against the US dollar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/04/pound-dollar-low-construction-imf-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-57f3516de4b03ca720ca247e#block-57f3516de4b03ca720ca247e>
. “The data are … expected to suggest that the sharp depreciation in sterling 
following the referendum has already started to push prices up,” they wrote in 
a research note.


The prospect of rising inflation spooked financial markets last week and 
investors offloaded UK government bonds, known as gilts. At the close of 
another tumultuous week on markets, 10-year gilt yields, which move inversely 
to prices, rose to their highest levels since the referendum in June.

The pound remained under pressure against the dollar and the euro, falling to 
below $1.22 and €1.11. That compares with $1.49 and €1.31 the night of the vote 
on EU membership.

The key pressure on sterling over the last fortnight has come from worries 
that the government has set a course for a hard Brexit settlement that leaves 
the UK shut out of the European single market. Ministers have hinted they would 
sacrifice that access in return for stricter immigration controls.

Such signals from Theresa May’s government had “shattered” a relatively benign 
market view of Brexit, said economists Robert Wood and Gilles Moec at Bank of 
America Merrill Lynch.

Referring to the mood over the summer, they wrote in a research note: “We 
often heard the argument that Brexit risks were overblown, that article 50 
might never be triggered, or that even if it was, Brexit would never really 
happen.”

Now, however, May’s commitment to trigger article 50 by the end of next March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
, launching the formal process of leaving the EU, meant Brexit was “getting 
real faster than markets expected, and getting real in a potentially negative 
way: a ‘hard Brexit’ looks more likely in our view,” Wood and Moec added.

The falling pound, inflationary pressures and blow to businesses’ investment 
plans from the Brexit vote leave the Bank of England with a difficult balancing 
act.Policymakers cut interest rates to a record low of 0.25% in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 and hinted at another cut to follow before the end of the year. But after 
reports suggesting consumers and businesses have shrugged off the initial shock 
of the Brexit vote, that further reduction is in doubt.

“Until the last couple of weeks, the monetary policy outlook had appeared 
clear cut, with the monetary policy committee giving a strong steer that it 
intended to loosen policy again before the end of the year. But since then the 
enduring strength of the incoming data and the further sharp depreciation of 
the pound have thrown a couple of spanners into the works,” said Andrew Goodwin 
at the consultancy Oxford Economics.
 