
4.12am BST 

Thank you, and goodnight!

And with that, dear readers, commenters, and tweeters … our TwiTrip must come 
to an end.

This has been a remarkable week. You've sent us to a Obama's barber in 
Chicago, dune-swimming on the shores of Lake Michigan, to the back of 
statistics classes at the University of Indiana, high stakes ping pong in 
Louisville, pig wrestling in Memphis, and … oh … so … much … food. 

A huge thank you from all of us to everyone who has contributed and kept us 
company. America, you've been superb. Until next time...

4.10am BST 

Beale St

We wander down to Beale Street. At the head of the street, a mini armada of 
cops on bikes. They're friendly. One of them, Tucker, takes a photo of the 
three of us. And – I've never seen this before – ID checks, metal detectors, 
and bags frisks just to enter the street. 

Memphis's rockabilly Vegas. A five-block pedestrianised strip, singers wailing 
from speakers pointed out to the street, neon everything. It's 10pm and there 
are some seriously drunk folk around. As we enter, a guy in a hunting T-shirt 
and camo pants is wobbling on the kerb smooth-talking a bouncer, badly. 

There are acrobats here. A guy in a white vest and tabletop hair takes a deep 
swig from a two-pint glass of water, as his buddy and a few stray cops help 
clear a block-long path, shooing tipsy groups hugging yard glasses of blue 
liquid out of the way. He does 16 back flips in a row.

4.05am BST 

Benji's saga – Chicago to Memphis mapped

The entirety of Benji's trip from the windy city, through Indiana's dunes and 
Louisville's bourbon bars, and finally down through Nashville's fabled music 
halls and down on to track mud through Memphis' finest hotel.

3.55am BST 

Freshening up.

3.50am BST 

The final day – mapped

The cross-Tennessee adventure – in its Elvis-infused, pig wrestling, Peabody 
splattering totality.

3.33am BST 

Walking into Memphis

So you've got your blue suede shoes on, but the question is do you walk with 
Marc Cohn, a little banter before hitting the baby grand's C major – or do you 
walk with Cher – yes, Cher – who bursts off a bus and rambles through black and 
white Memphis, some would say strung just a few keys higher?

Updated at 3.33am BST

3.10am BST 

Outclassed

We roll our bags into the Peabody, a Memphis classic. It's super fancy. 
Soaring marble columns in the double-height lobby hold up an elaborately 
corniced ceiling with stained glass skylights.

There's a fountain in the middle of the room. A big round mahogany bar. 
Somewhere, someone's playing a piano. There are horses and carriages outside on 
the street.

We have pig mud spatter all over our legs.

Updated at 3.42am BST

2.58am BST 

Top tippage – Memphis

Tipsters, we salute you:

The great barbecue debate:

24dbVCF <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3508496> tips and 
exhorts. The best: Germantown Commissary and Central BBQ (also recommended by 
@Paolo_Bandin <https://twitter.com/Paolo_Bandini>). The not exactly best: "Do 
NOT go to Korky's - It's crap."

@TMitch2013 <https://twitter.com/TMitch2013> suggests Cozy Corner 
<http://www.cozycornerbbq.com/>, another BBQ joint

Arcade Diner is more of a, well, diner than a straight barbecue emporium, but 
it still comes highly recommended by @CandelaDelgMar 
<https://twitter.com/CandelaDelgMar>.

Music:

Patti Tanski-Mego <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10268304>
 says Goner Records <http://www.goner-records.com/>, @CandelaDelgMar 
<https://twitter.com/CandelaDelgMar> says Sun Studio <http://www.sunstudio.com/>
.

Nightlife:

Patti Tanski-Mego <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10268304>
 suggests Murphy's Pub <http://www.yelp.com/biz/murphys-memphis>, and Haig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3226268>'s sage advice runs as 
follows.

"Wild Billl's <http://www.yelp.com/biz/wild-bills-memphis>. This is the kind 
of blues and soul spot you want to go to, not the places on Beale. Get there at 
maybe 11? Later on, it gets too crowded to get a seat. Beer by the quart, soul 
food, dancing, fantastic house band. Totally authentic and unforgettable."

Finally, the ever knowledgable and generous johnakirk101 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10400144> with a little of 
everything:

Don't forget to visit the National Civil Rights Museum  
<http://www.civilrightsmuseum.org/>

And see the duck parade at the Peabody Hotel 
<http://www.peabodymemphis.com/peabody-ducks/> while sipping a mint julep in 
the lounge (you'll have to make it there for 5 p.m. though)

Don't miss Sun Records  <http://www.sunrecords.com/>

Eat at Rendezvous Ribs <http://www.hogsfly.com/> 

And for the less obvious, go see the marker for the place where the beloved 
southern store chainPiggly Wiggly <http://www.pigglywiggly.com/> began 

And if you are looking for hokey rather than quirky Americana on the way from 
Nashville to Memphis …Casey Jones <http://www.caseyjones.com/>

2.38am BST 

Movie Memphis

The guys are rolling into Memphis, a town whose southern charm – pig wrestling 
aside – has caught filmmakers' eyes over the years. 

Actually, it may have even been that weirdness that attracted Jim Jarmusch 
back in 1989 for Mystery Train 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mystery_Train_(film)>. The movie doesn't exactly 
follow the stories of its many characters, each stranger than the next; it's 
more like the movie stars Memphis in all its glorious peculiarity. 

The manifestation of that oddity was casting Screamin' Jay Hawkins – best 
known for his wildly eccentric performances and the song'I Put a Spell on You 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7kGPhpvqtOc>'. He's a bit more demure here.

And of course, as Johnny Cash got his start in Memphis, so did the Joaquin 
Phoenix and Reese Witherspoon biopic,Walk the Line, get started filming there.

2.23am BST 

Wrassler.

2.13am BST 

Next, the "men's division". A much bigger pig, for much bigger wrestlers. Two 
men and two women. A double pig wrestling date.They catch it, and dunk it 
bottom-first into a bucket in the middle of the pen.

Updated at 2.13am BST

1.57am BST 

Beyond a red rope, teams of pig wrestlers, in fours, in matching outfits. One 
team, The Hot Hamms, in boiler suits and hair tied up in red bows – look like 
they might be on a hen do. 

Updated at 1.58am BST

1.48am BST 

A bunch of kids in chef hats – not sure why – are sliding around in wet mud, 
just outside the pen. This is a family event. There are clowns.

Holy crap. The kids in the chefs hats are first in. A tiny little pig hops out 
of a trailer and into the pen, plodding around gingerly. 

We're next to one of the kids' fathers, eagerly photographing.

"Isn't this dangerous?" I ask.

"I guess we'll find out!" he whoops.

They start, the kids racing around the pen in the wet mud, frequently ending 
up face down as the slippery pig slips from their grasps. They're having a 
great time. The pig, squealing, not so much. I'm feeling a little 
uncomfortable. 

They fail to catch the pig in the allotted 45 seconds. Neither do the next 
bunch of kids, including one girl dressed as Snow White.

Updated at 2.02am BST

1.43am BST 

Just your average ostrich at your average fair. Perfectly normal, nothing to 
see here.

Updated at 1.45am BST

1.38am BST 

It's like any fair, really, with dozens of rides and stalls and food vendors.

Until you get to the back, where there's a giant sandpit surrounded by 
bleachers. They're filling up. In the middle of the sandpit, a red pen. 
Everyone is staring at it. Shortly, it's man v pig.

1.33am BST 

Delta Fair

To the Delta Fair, a yearly event on the eastern fringes of the city. We enter 
through the gift shop, which sells all sorts of crap: phone accessories, 
football gloves, roasted nuts, cheap jewellery, pretzels, and – oh – swords.

Updated at 1.59am BST

1.23am BST 

The guys have just landed at the Delta Fair – an annual agriculture and music 
festival that offers, according to their website <http://www.deltafest.com>: 
"wholesome family entertainment while celebrating and promoting the rich art, 
music and history of the Delta”.

And that includes Hog Racing and Pig Wrasslin! 
<http://www.deltafest.com/index.cfm?page=events>

Updated at 2.22am BST

1.12am BST 

In transit

12.54am BST 

With great wi-fi availability comes great uploaded video via Hollis – behold 
Scott's BBQ at work:

12.30am BST 

Graceland 101

The team is racing to Memphis but won't have time to make it to Graceland, 
leaving a brief exploration of Elvis-mania to us at home. Benji, in particular, 
must be disappointed, seeing as he's made a notable Twitter friend:

A quick look around the credible available sources (their site, readers, 
Wiki) reveals some of the strangeness at the heart of Graceland, if no 
explanation for that strangeness.

To the uninitiated, Graceland is Elvis Presley's Memphis mansion. He moved 
just about his whole family into the place, after which all sorts of drama 
ensued. He was eventually buried in a plot there (no pun intended, conspiracy 
theorists!), but the ostentatious abode kept drawing thousands of the faithful, 
decades after the king died. 
 Graceland. Photograph: /Wiki 
Elvis kept his enormous quantities of stuff there, including costumes 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=elvis+costumes&sugexp=chrome,mod%3D9&um=1&ie=UTF-8&hl=en&tbm=isch&source=og&sa=N&tab=wi&ei=piQhUv3JJInF7AaliYHgCQ&biw=1107&bih=931&sei=qiQhUuH4NOmQ7Aalk4AQ>
 andcars <http://www.elvis.com/photos-video/photos.aspx?aid=160>. Wiki 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graceland> tells us that Elvis was meticulous 
about having certain supplies; he was also kind of a strange guy. He wanted 
these things, among others, available at all times:

Fresh, lean, unfrozen ground meat, one case orange drinks, at least 6 cans of 
biscuits, banana pudding (to be made fresh nightly), ingredients for meat loaf 
and sauce, brownies (to be made fresh nightly), fudge cookies, 3 packs each of 
Spearmint, Doublemint, and Juicy Fruit gum, cigars (El Producto Diamond Tips & 
El Producto Altas), and Feenamint gum.

There is a 'Racquetball Trophy Room 
<http://www.elvis.com/photos-video/360_tours_of_graceland/racquetball_trophy.aspx>
', 'Meditation Garden <http://www.elvis.com/news/detail.aspx?id=7210>' and a '
Jungle Room 
<http://www.elvis.com/photos-video/360_tours_of_graceland/jungle_room.aspx>':
 Graceland's Jungle Room. Photograph: /Wiki 
Below the line, stephani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4200150> reviews:

I found Graceland crowded and kitschy, but I enjoyed it. My husband wasn't so 
impressed. The house isn't as big as I imagined it either. Lots to see though. 
There is a museum full of memorabilia (the costumes were the best), you can 
tour his airplane, see his fleet of cars...

Graceland's website 
<http://www.elvis.com/downloads/elvis-fun-games/elvis_sightings.aspx> is a 
minor rabbit hole of insane and cheerful kitsch in and of itself. It has tips on
selling memorabilia <http://www.elvis.com/about-the-king/faq.aspx> and lists "
sightings <http://www.elvis.com/downloads/elvis-fun-games/elvis_sightings.aspx>
" andquotes <http://www.elvis.com/about-the-king/quotes.aspx>, among which 
include this startlingly thoughtful one:

So every dream I ever dreamed has come true a hundred times … I learned very 
early in life that without a song, the day would never end; without a song, a 
man ain’t got a friend; without a song, the road would never bend - without a 
song. So I keep singing a song.

The site also offers virtual tours 
<http://www.elvis.com/photos-video/360_tours_of_graceland.aspx>, and raves 
about the time that Elvis was named "One of the Ten Outstanding Young Men of 
the Nation <http://www.elvis.com/about-the-king/achievements.aspx>". It links 
to live webcams <http://www.elvis.com/graceland/graceland_cam.aspx> watching 
the house. Just in case someone makes an appearance.

Updated at 12.54am BST

12.18am BST 

Southern sunset.

12.01am BST 

The road to Memphis passes through Jackson, which has a mini-genealogy of soul 
music in its history. Blues harmonica player Sonny Boy Williamson 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sonny_Boy_Williamson_II> was born here, and fifty 
years later Gil Scott-Heron <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gil_Scott-Heron>
 moved here and grew up here.

Today, Scott-Heron's probably most famous for his song-poem 'The Revolution 
Will Not Be Televised', but you can hear his influence in pretty much most 
modern blues, rock and hip hop.

11.46pm BST 

Kudzu, a rapidly growing invasive species that arrived in the South decades 
ago, engulfing everything around it. It suffocates the trees and kills them, 
but, golly, ain't it purty?

Updated at 11.50pm BST

11.23pm BST 

Inside, Gary and Hollis get a sandwich with vinegar coleslaw and barbecue 
sauce piled on top of a mound of meat. Through the wall we can hear the 
rat-a-tat of the sever's cleaver chopping up the latest batch.

Updated at 12.47am BST

11.15pm BST 

Backstage BBQ

We're taken round the back by Zach Parker, the owner's son, past a pick-up 
laden with hickory logs and an open furnace full of smoking embers. 

The pigs are split down the backbone an laid out flat, connected by a hinge of 
skin at the belly, before being arranged in the pits. 

They take 24 hours to fully smoke, with hickory coal strewn underneath them 
every few hours. It's time, and Zach takes a shovel with a huge handle and 
makes a half a dozen journeys from the furnace to the pits.
When the fat starts dripping from the pig, the smoke starts.

10.52pm BST 

BE Scott

We're 15 miles south of the I-40 on a loop road around Lexington, and pull off 
at Scott's, a long wooden shack with two cinderblock smokehouses out back. A 
handful of trucks are outside, under a large Dr Pepper sign.

"Where y'all from" the server asks in a thick lilting southern drawl.
"London. We're on a mission."

Then I asked the stupidest question ever asked in the history of Tennessee. 
"What do you recommend?"

"Pig."

Scott's does pig, and pig only.

10.32pm BST 

Validation

10.16pm BST 

It turns out that what the guys saw of Loretta Lynn's Ranch Kitchen was but a 
prelude to the actualRanch <http://www.lorettalynnranch.net/main/>. 

This may be for Benji's best, however, considering word of certain creepy 
collectibles filling up a large, empty house.

We're imagining these x 1000.

Updated at 10.40pm BST

10.04pm BST 

Crossing the Tennessee

9.57pm BST 

Road snacks: a saga

Today's instalment of Hollis's road snacks: boiled peanuts. A significant 
upgrade on the ungodly Slim Jim knock-off he forced us to yesterday.

The peanuts are boiled in saltwater and stock until you can pull the shell off 
like paper, and a dribble of water spills out in your hands. The peanut has a 
consistency of a baked bean. Salty and delicious. Hollis, you have redeemed 
yourself.

9.45pm BST 

Out in the carpark, a large PA is playing country music, but it isn't Loretta 
Lynn.

9.37pm BST 

Here are some things you can buy in the Loretta Lynn gift shop:

Loretta Lynn pepper jelly, Loretta Lynn animal cookies, Loretta Lynn 
pickles, Loretta Lynn crystal candy, Loretta Lynn pen knives, Loretta Lynn 
Picture frames, Loretta Lynn phone cases, Loretta Lynn placemats, Loretta Lynn 
bells, Loretta Lynn playing cards, Loretta Lynn teaspoons with Loretta Lynn's 
face on the handle, Loretta Lynn toothpick holders and Loretta Lynn cigarette 
lighters.

Updated at 10.39pm BST

9.27pm BST 

Much a-Doo

We pull off the motorway and pop in to the Loretta Lynn Ranch, which consists 
of a buffet and a gift shop, dedicated to the beloved local country singer.

The buffet is lined with framed pictures of Loretta Lynn with two large 
stitched murals of Loretta Lynn at either end. In a side room, there are lots 
of signed pictures of Loretta Lynn's friends and a mocked-up stage with a 
life-size mannequin of Loretta Lynn performing on it.

Updated at 10.43pm BST

9.07pm BST 

I-40 Soul

And for something a good deal cheerier yet just as Tennessee-bound as 
McCarthy's novel: legends of Memphis blues and soul. Send us tune requests in 
the comments below and we'll put them on the next playlist!

Updated at 9.10pm BST

8.54pm BST 

'Tales of winter brought to light again'

Apropos Benji's post about the darker side of Tennessee, a note about Cormac 
McCarthy – America's modern master of all things western, grim and goth, often 
involving crime and always involving biblical prose.

Early in his career, McCarthy wrote a novel called Child of God, set in 
eastern Tennessee's Appalachian mountain towns, muddy forests and terrifying 
caves. The novel is being adapted intoa film by James Franco 
<http://insidemovies.ew.com/2013/08/29/james-franco-cormac-mccarthy-child-of-god-teaser/>
 of all people, which does not exactly bode well. Skepticism aside, this one 
may yet be more doable than McCarthy's famously hard-to-adapt mature novels – 
like the incredibleBlood Meridian <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood_Meridian> 
orThe Crossing <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Crossing_(McCarthy_novel)>.

As with most of McCarthy's books, Child of God is very, very dark 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Child_of_God>, and not for the faint of 
heart. Franco's trailer doesn't reveal much, so here's a rather more exciting 
glimpse of another McCarthy work in production:The Counselor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Counselor>.

Whether any of these films turn out well, or at least as good as the Coen 
brothers'No Country for Old Men <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OLCL6OYbSTw>, 
one thing can be counted on: McCarthy's books are not to be missed.

“In the spring or warmer weather when the snow thaws in the woods the tracks 
of winter reappear on slender pedestals and the snow reveals in palimpsest old 
buried wanderings, struggles, scenes of death. Tales of winter brought to light 
again like time turned back upon itself.”

Updated at 9.11pm BST

8.34pm BST 

Westward I-40

Back on the road. A note on road signs. They're different down here - more 
religion, more brutal. As we entered Tennessee, a huge sign alerts us to "BE 
PREPARED TO MEET THY GOD". Another simply lists the 10 Commandments. As we 
leave Nashville, a giant digital billboard with the number of road deaths in 
the city so far this year – 638 at present. Horrible.

On the interstate, we spot a couple of unmarked SUVs sitting in a patch of 
pavement in the central reservation. These aren't city cops, they're not county 
sheriffs, and they're not state police. This is the federally mandated, almost 
extra-legal methamphetamine task force.

The I-40 is a well-known drug corridor, dissecting the country from North 
Carolina to California, and these guys wait for information and pounce. The 
force is entirely self-funded by drug busts. 

8.18pm BST 

Hatch Show printed

7.53pm BST 

Crackling over the wires...

... Benji and the boys are taking @dickersonpk 
<https://twitter.com/dickersonpk/status/373472088863936512>'s tip and heading 
forLoretta Lynn's Ranch <http://www.lorettalynnranch.net> - "More than a 
destination, to Loretta it's home" - at Hurricane Mills, a couple of hours from 
Nashville. 

According to Wiki: Hurricane Mills, Tennessee is billed as "The 7th Largest 
Attraction in Tennessee".

We just switched on the soul for Memphis, but seeing as it's the First Lady of 
Country, it would be rude not to...

Updated at 7.59pm BST

7.08pm BST 

Extra run on Hatch Show Prints

As in the days of Gutenberg, everything at Hatch is done by hand - hand crank, 
hand ink, hand trim, hand wrap. It's like a working museum - shop manager Jim 
Sherradon's motto is "preservation through production" - and the posters are an 
archive of the Nashville music scene.

“Advertising without posters is like fishing without a worm," says Jim. "The 
Hatch poster, though, kicks with a louder boot when it blows down the door of 
advertising.”

Bit jumbled on the similes there, Jim - much like the interior of the shop - 
but you get the gist.

Updated at 7.09pm BST

6.41pm BST 

Block party

In the middle of the strip, surrounded by honky tonk bars on all sides, Hatch 
Show Prints <http://countrymusichalloffame.org/our-work/> have been letterpress 
printing gig posters since 1879, with clients from Bruce Springsteen to BB 
King, The Wailers to the White Stripes.

In the back of, it's all as it was: floor to ceiling shelves stacked with 
centuries-old wood blocks, layers of letterpress cases arranged according to 
California Job Case Layout - you need more "e"s than than "q"s, so you need 
more room in the tray.

They're packing up, shelf by shelf - Hatch has been bought (and saved) by the 
Country Music Hall of Fame <http://countrymusichalloffame.org>, and they're 
moving in with them down the road.

Updated at 6.56pm BST

6.25pm BST 

Change of groove

It's a change of city, and a change of soundtrack. They're heading for 
Memphis, home of soul, blues, R&B. The good people at the Stax Museum put 
together this playlist for us.

You can put together your own - send us your requests and we'll cue them up: 
@BenjiLanyado <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&amp;src=hash>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, or in the comments below. 

6.21pm BST 

Second breakfast done? Check.

Doors of SUV modified to accommodate XXXL passengers? Check.

We jump in the back of Hollis's truck - 20ft long, 35-inch wheels, 16 inches 
of suspension, about a metre of the ground to get in - and head toHatch Show 
Prints <http://countrymusichalloffame.org/our-work/>, back on the Downtown 
strip. It feels a little like re-visiting the scene of last night's crime. 
There's something deeply guilty about neon in the daytime.

Updated at 6.55pm BST

6.01pm BST 

We're fried

We get three chicken tenders between us - mild, medium, hot - and chow down on 
the porch outside. Ok, this was worth the wait. Prince's was raw, this is 
refined: the cayenne's sweeter, the batter better behaved.

Matt, who has already had breakfast, is having three tenders to himself, 
obviously, washed down with a root beer float.

On the side: black-eyed peas salad with vinegar, bell peppers, onions and 
bacon.

On the side of that: southern greens stewed in pot liquor.

We will never eat ever again.

Until lunch.

Updated at 6.02pm BST

5.25pm BST 

Supersize me!

This is ridiculous. I'm having fried chicken for breakfast, and I've already 
had breakfast.

It's 11am and there's a queue stretching out of the door of Hattie B's. Gary 
and I are confused, we don't know how this happened. It's a Nashville pincer 
movement - Hollis and Matt (Nashvilleeater guy) won't let us leave the city 
'til we've tried it.

5.22pm BST 

Turkey sausage and "Silver Dollar" potato cakes on a bed of egg yolk. Gary has 
gargantuan pancakes with fruit. Hollis, naturally, has a pastrami sandwich with 
chips, and is insisting we go toHattie B's <http://www.hattieb.com> straight 
after for a hot chicken chaser - Prince's is the oldest, Hattie B's is the 
best, apparently.

Noshville is still rammed - Crystal says its always like this the morning 
after a game. Ole Miss beat Vanderbilt 38-35 in a thriller.

5.00pm BST 

Whole Hog - Scott's BBQ film

Turns out that our Lexington BBQ tipster @yorkspork  
<https://twitter.com/yorkspork/status/373283141353758720>is Joe York 
<http://www.oxfordamerican.org/articles/2012/oct/01/filmmaker-interview-joe-york/>
, a filmmaker at the University of Mississippi who has made over 30 short films 
about Southern food and people. Including this one,Whole Hog 
<http://vimeo.com/1535389> made in 2006, about Scott's BBQ. Which is handy. And 
lip-smackingly good... the boys are in for a treat.

Updated at 5.03pm BST

4.51pm BST 

Bagel rush

Crystal, our waitress, is running is through the complementary bread options. 
Sourdough, wheat, rye, marble rye, pumpernickel, plain bagel, wheat bagel, 
onion bagel, poppy bagel, sesame bagel, "everything" bagel (all of the above). 
She rattles them out in under three seconds. I can't remember what I ordered.

We've got company - Matt from @eaternashville 
<https://twitter.com/EaterNashville‎> has pulled up a pew. He was born and 
raised in Memphis, and is running us though our options en route. He's seconded
Scott's BBQ in Lexington 
<http://www.roadfood.com/Restaurant/Reviews/6788/scotts-barbecue>, which was 
firsted by@yorkspork <https://twitter.com/yorkspork/status/373283141353758720>. 
Stay away from the theRendezvous 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26366751> in Memphis - 
it's a classic, but the food isn't up to much any more.Cosy Corner 
<https://twitter.com/TMitch2013/status/372137679539810304> is much better - 
proper southern soul food.

Updated at 5.20pm BST

4.32pm BST 

Pick a pickle or two

Hollis walks in and walks straight past us without saying hello. He's gone 
straight to the pickle vats and he's filling up a bowl. He saddles up next to 
us and hands out a pickle each. "Morning boys..."

Updated at 5.27pm BST

4.30pm BST 

We're in Noshville, in Nashville.

It's a classic New York-style diner with shiny leather-and-laminate booths and 
waitresses criss-crossing the floor with pots of coffee, and was recommended by
@DeepSouthUSA <https://twitter.com/DeepSouthUSA/status/373177588690083841>. 
It's packed, and there's a "Yiddish primer" in the menu: Belly lox = Nova 
Scotia salmon, salt cured. Kibbitz = chatter, talk, conversation.

I settle in at the bar with a copy of Nashville Today. It's yesterday's 
edition. Front page: a news item on Richland Creek, whose Watershed Alliance is 
opposing a request by Metro Parks to continue taking water from the stream to 
irrigate McCabe Golf Course. Inside: Councilman Sean McGuire (he has very neat 
hair) says change may be needed in Green Hills zoning.

I find a note in my phone from last night, written at don't-know-o'clock. 
Gary, before collapsing in bed after the delights of Downtown: "It's like 
everything I ever wanted, but too much of it".

Updated at 5.16pm BST

4.20pm BST 
Benji Lanyado (@benjilanyado) 
Nashville Today pic.twitter.com/ENw5hR2th0 <http://t.co/ENw5hR2th0>
 <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado/statuses/373460902886268928> August 30, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado/statuses/373460902886268928> 
4.02pm BST 

This train is bound for glory

We come to you from our west end Nashville hotel (Aloft 
<http://www.aloftnashvillewestend.com>, thanks to @WannadoLocal 
<http://twitter.com/WannadoLocal>) with heavy hearts and slightly heavy heads. 
The latter is self-inflicted, courtesy of Nashville's downtown strip anda 
handful of nightcap PBRs at Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/29/twitter-road-trips-chicago-memphis-day-four#block-52201783e4b0b76ce52c7819>
. The former is because today is the final day of our Chicago-to-Memphis 
TwiTrip!

Yesterday, you delivered. The Corvette Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/29/twitter-road-trips-chicago-memphis-day-four#block-521fb35ce4b07d9848ba9f76>
 was wonderfully weird. TheBuffalo Trace distillery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/29/twitter-road-trips-chicago-memphis-day-four#block-521f9159e4b0b76ce52c77c8>
 was obligatory and fascinating. AndPrince's Hot Chicken  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/29/twitter-road-trips-chicago-memphis-day-four#block-521fca54e4b09749b486da6d>
... hot damn, possibly the best meal we've had all week.

Today, after a few stops in Nashville, we're ploughing a south-westerly course 
across the state to Memphis. En route ... we need your help. We've heard 
whispers of full-hog roasts south of the interstate around Jackson, where pigs 
are skewered "head to ass" and cooked for most of the day. Is Graceland a 
must-visit, or a tourist trap? Send me your tips.... it's the last day, so 
let's make it a goodie.

To the usual places, please: @BenjiLanyado <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado>, 
#TwiTrips <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&amp;src=hash>, 
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, or in the comments below. 
Thanks!
 