
Cards on the table here: I have been led astray by strong drink.

A few weeks back, waiting to be served at the Woodworkers Tap Room 
<http://www.laverysbelfast.com/entertainment-category/48/the-woodworkers-rotating-tap-room.aspx>
 on Belfast’s Bradbury Place, I heard someone order a Jawbox, a name once 
associated with Belfast sinks, but apparently now shared with a craft gin, 
conceived in Belfast but distilled, the bartender told me, in County Down, at
Echlinville Estate <http://echlinville.com/>, outside Kircubbin on the west 
coast of Strangford Lough.

Next day I asked a friend whose in-laws lived out that way whether he knew the 
distillery. “Never heard of it,” he said, then added, “that road, mind you, is 
full of surprises.” Which was all the invitation I needed, that and the vague 
notion that Northern Ireland’s only other gin – Shortcross – was being 
distilled in County Down, too, on the opposite side of Strangford Lough. 
Sometimes the less you go looking for the more you find.

Finding Strangford Lough

Tourist numbers continue to rise in Northern Ireland, but for many visitors 
“seeing the sights” means the Antrim coast – Giant’s Causeway, Carrick-a-Rede 
rope bridge – Titanic Belfast,with a twist these days of Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/jun/10/northern-ireland-game-of-thrones>
, and maybe a Troubles taxi tour. And no harm in that, but even so …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf95212ae2f8a8ec2ab0027ae517dae46334c247%2F0_269_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf95212ae2f8a8ec2ab0027ae517dae46334c247%2F0_269_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The view across Strangford Lough towards the Mourne Mountains 
Strangford Lough separates the Ards peninsula – that leg dangling into the 
Irish Sea – from the west of County Down, and ends, where most Belfast people 
would probably tell you it begins, just south of Newtownards. The road from 
Belfast takes you pretty much the route that travellers have followed since the 
stone age: down from the Antrim hills, crossing the river Lagan at its most 
easily forded point (the foot of Belfast’s present-day High Street) and on out 
east, past the Parliament Buildings at Stormont and the suburb of Dundonald, 
which long ago ate the picturesque village of the same name. Up a hill it goes, 
then down to Newtownards where there are roundabouts to negotiate, the 
inevitable Tesco superstore, before, just beyond the Ulster Flying Club, you 
catch your first glimpse of water.

Instantly the road narrows to two lanes – sea wall hard by the one on the 
right – and stays that way for the 20 miles to Portaferry, where the mouth of 
the lough comes within a whisper of closing on Strangford village.

A sign a little way out of Newtownards reads, “Strangford and Lecale Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty.” It is perhaps the only ugly thing on the entire 
stretch and surely the most unnecessary, although if I told you the ingredients 
you might well shrug: low-rise countryside on one side of the road, that wall 
and the lough immediately beyond it on the other, the far shore always visible 
with, to the south, the outline ofthe Mourne mountains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/oct/18/northern-ireland-walking>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ab3abec282597e06d2fea9ccd88fdb74fd11f7%2F0_42_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8ab3abec282597e06d2fea9ccd88fdb74fd11f7%2F0_42_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Beauty mark … sign on the Portaferry Road 
The effect is more beguiling than breathtaking, but it builds and – through 
Greyabbey, then Kircubbin – builds. The turn off for Echlinville Distillery is 
about half a mile outside Kircubbin: left at the bus shelter is the best 
direction I can give, there being, as yet, no signpost. If you find yourself at 
theSaltwater Brig <http://saltwaterbrig.com/> bar, turn about, but not 
necessarily straight away. Go in, enjoy the seafood – all locally caught, 
locally as in Portavogie, on the outside leg of the peninsula, but since that’s 
only a few miles away no one would argue – or maybe just reserve a table for 
tomorrow, when according to the blackboard outside there will be free beer.

Echlinville Distillery

Echlinville is a B1-listed house by Charles Lanyon, Belfast’s leading 
Victorian architect. Lynn and Shane Braniff bought it during the recession and 
began the distillery by reviving the historic Dunville Whiskey name. They have 
since crafted their own whiskey, or what will be their own whiskey once the 
three years and a day stipulated by the whiskey gods have passed. They’ve been 
at the gin since 2015, growing and malting their own barley, making Jawbox, 
Ireland’s only single-estate gin. More recently they created an Echlinville 
Gin, flavoured with whin (gorse) and seaweed, which they have sold into Fortnum 
& Mason. There was a box on the floor the day I was there. “That’s the 
Echlinville,” said Suzanne, one of the staff of six, who was showing me round. 
“Right,” I said. “No,” she said, “I mean that’s all of it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa42cd01c369bd5f42105afff2433c9f14b08a2c7%2F0_259_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa42cd01c369bd5f42105afff2433c9f14b08a2c7%2F0_259_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The Echlinville House & Distillery on the Gransha Road, Portaferry 
Even the Echlinville tours <http://echlinville.co/visit/> (£15pp) are craft: 
one group of 12, the first Saturday of every month. Mine was met by Lynn 
herself (in the library) as well as Suzanne and Graeme the distiller, who 
introduced us to the Echlinville still, a contraption of such copper and glass 
wonder – helmets, swan necks, line arms and two enormous rectifying columns – 
that you half expect Gene Wilder to pop out Willy Wonka-like from behind it. 
There are plans for a dedicated visitors’ centre in the courtyard, even 
overnight accommodation. For now, if you intended to make a night of it your 
best bet would be to carry on to Portaferry.

Portaferry

The Portaferry Hotel <http://www.portaferryhotel.com/> (doubles from £80 B&B) 
occupies a large corner site overlooking the harbour. Again Portavogie features 
prominently in the seafood menu, along with Portaferry cockles and mussels. It 
seemed only fitting that I should order a Jawbox with my dinner – butternut 
squash gnocchi. A case, I admit, of matching food to drink, but before you 
question my judgement, try it. Either they were out, though, or they never had 
it in. They did have Shortcross, served up (as recommended) in a brandy glass.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5f2ae1dff02d09ddb1df6ff66a2d7df21bd4a5d%2F29_456_5543_3326%2F5543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5f2ae1dff02d09ddb1df6ff66a2d7df21bd4a5d%2F29_456_5543_3326%2F5543.jpg>
 Match of the day … Glenn’s lunch of butternut squash gnocchi – paired with a 
glass of gin 
“Gin makes you sin,” a woman said as I sat next to her.

I told her with me it was more like sing, although some would say that is sin 
enough.

The hotel is barely a minute’s walk from the ferry that will take you the 
half-mile across the lough to Strangford village. The ferry goes back and forth 
from 7.45am to 10.45pm (11.15pm on Saturday, 7.30am to 10.30pm/11pm in the 
opposite direction). The eight-minute crossing takes you within spitting 
distance of the tidal turbine – a world’s first when it started generating 
power for Strangford and Portaferry in 2008, though it has now been 
decommissioned. Shorn now of its enormous wings, the turbine resembles an 
oversized red-and-black buoy. John who maintains the ferry told me 
conservationists and marine experts were arguing over how to remove it, this 
lot saying it needed chopped off at the foot, that lot that it had to be dug 
right out. “There’ll be big money involved either way,” John said: divers only 
have 20 minutes to work in-between the tide finishing coming in and starting to 
go out.

The Cuan, Strangford
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3872cfd3b5baedd8b1a9be8e919b98f3e1ebf1a%2F0_630_5347_3208%2F5347.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3872cfd3b5baedd8b1a9be8e919b98f3e1ebf1a%2F0_630_5347_3208%2F5347.jpg>
 Cuan Guesthouse 
Strangford’s population is about a fifth of Portaferry’s, much of it 
concentrated in an arc around the ferry landing. TheCuan Guesthouse 
<http://www.thecuan.com/> (doubles from £95 B&B) is almost the first building 
you come to on the left-hand side. If you time your arrival right, you might be 
fortunate enough to find yourself in the company of Marie-Therese Brownlee and 
Sarah FitzSimons, aka Mrs B and Sally, aged 92 and “a dyslexic 78” 
respectively, sisters who have been coming in every day for the last 11 years.

In the course of the lunch that I spent next to them (scampi to beat the band, 
though the signature dish is chowder), the conversation ranged over the 
spelling of thesolfège syllables <https://blog.key-notes.com/solfege.html> (do, 
re, mi, fa, so, la, ti, do), misspelt, Mrs B contended, on the programme of a 
production of the Sound of Music, whether colliding with a man walking down the 
middle of the street with a herd of cows while reading his newspaper could be 
considered driving without due care and diligence and why exactly the door to 
the function room was open when they were being “blown away”. (It was over 20 
degrees outside and hardly a breath of air.) Dale McKibbin, the bar manager, 
commiserated with me that I didn’t get a bit of poetry thrown in.

You could happily spend the hours between lunch and dinner in the Cuan and, 
having eaten again, sit on into the night – it has accommodation too, although 
if by then you wanted a change of scenery and had the wit to book in advance 
there are camping pods from £38 a night atCastle Ward 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/castle-ward>, a couple of miles out of 
Strangford. Castle Ward is one of three National Trust properties flanking the 
lough (Mountstewart, near Greyabbey, and Rowallen are the others), and has 
doubled in recent years as Winterfell in Game of Thrones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3da7cee895d295fafbfb404c70e30564d84fa2a%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3da7cee895d295fafbfb404c70e30564d84fa2a%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The magical ‘Game of Thrones’ door at the Cuan Guesthouse 
The roads this side of the lough, I get the sense, are a little more travelled 
by the tour buses; even the Cuan boasts a Game of Thrones door. Turning left 
beyond Strangford will take you, by way of Ardglass, to Coney Island, which 
besides inspiring that Van Morrison track (“Wouldn’t it be great if it was like 
this all the time?”), provided the location for Terry George’s 2012 
Oscar-winning short, The Shore. My mission, though, required me to stick to the 
Strangford shore for as long as possible, heading north to Killyleagh then 
inland to Crossgar.

Shortcross Distillery

Fiona Boyd-Armstrong of the Rademon Estate Distillery, maker of Shortcross gin 
<http://shortcrossgin.com/verify.php>, had given me directions involving a left 
turn at a filling station at Crossgar (the “short” in Shortcross derives from 
“gar” in old Irish), an injunction to ignore one set of gates a mile down the 
road, but turn left again shortly after and (another quarter mile) left again 
before the humpback bridge and the tree in the middle of the road. A direction, 
that last, you would want to follow to the letter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffde7bb2adc54cbbaed7db35661158e7fd98870af%2F0_303_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Road%20to%20ruin%3A%20a%20gin%20tour%20of%20Northern%20Ireland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fgin-tour-northern-ireland-strangford-lough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffde7bb2adc54cbbaed7db35661158e7fd98870af%2F0_303_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Fiona’s parents own the 500-acre Rademon estate on which she and husband David 
started the distillery in 2012. David himself is the Shortcross distiller. He 
grew up between two former Belfast distilleries – Avoniel and Connswater – and 
told me the city in the early 1900s produced 40% of all whiskey drunk on these 
islands. Which made me think there was a marker being set down here, the 
rebirth of a tradition. (Rademon like Echlinville is counting down the 1,068 
days to the Declaration of Whiskey.) Rademon’s visitor centre is already built 
– the entrance via a stunning slate porch – and tours will start later this 
year, though not, David stressed, “like Bushmills: on the hour every hour”. 
This is still a small-scale family operation: small enough that Fiona’s 
brother-in-law was signing the labels in the bottling room when I passed 
through; small enough that when they were taking their first batch of 
Shortcross out to potential customers they didn’t even have a box to put the 
bottles in.

I don’t know whether the tours will take in all of Rademon estate – from what 
I saw it rivals any of the neighbouring National Trust properties – but on a 
rise just beyond the distillery an obelisk is clearly visible, a monument to a 
previous owner, William Sharman Crawford, a Chartist, champion of Catholic 
emancipation, founder of the Ulster Tenant Right Association, and a reminder 
that politics here, like the roads along Strangford Lough, sometimes contains 
welcome surprises.

Back to Belfast

I finished my own tour back in Belfast, in Muriel’s Cafe Bar 
<https://www.facebook.com/muriels.cafebar>, with a Jawbox served “the Belfast 
way” with ginger ale, lime and a wedge of honeycomb. Later in theCrown Bar 
<http://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/the-crown-bar> (OK, I didn’t finish in 
Muriel’s), I bumped into a group of Canadians who had arrived earlier in the 
day from Dublin. I asked them what they had seen so far. Giant’s Causeway, they 
said, Carrick-a-Rede rope bridge. And tomorrow? Black Taxi Troubles tour, 
Titanic, back to Dublin.

In the nicest possible way, I wanted to say they didn’t know what they were 
missing.
 