
Robert Snodgrass has been offered the opportunity to move to clubs in China 
and Turkey but is determined to remain in the Premier League, with West Ham 
United andMiddlesbrough <https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> 
among several potential suitors for the Hull City playmaker.

Marco Silva, the Hull manager, completed the signing of the Brazilian Evandro 
from FC Porto on Friday on a two-and-a-half-year deal, with Everton’s Oumar 
Niassealso joining on loan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/hull-oumar-niasse-everton-loan#img-1>
 until the end of the season.
Hull City 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/atoms/2016/12/transfer-window/teamDetails/embed/index.html?team=Hull%20City>
Silva would like to keep Snodgrass, who refused to sign a new three-year 
contract at Hull last month, although they recently instigated a one-year 
contract extension that means he is tied to the club until the summer of 2018.

Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/crystal-palace-robert-snodgrass-west-ham>
 and unnamed clubs in China and Turkey are also interested in luring the 
29-year-old Scotland international, who is expected to be allowed to leave the 
KCom Stadium for around £8m after scoring seven times in the Premier League 
this season despite Hull’s struggles.

However, it is understood that the former Leeds United and Norwich City player 
is not interested in moving overseas despite the opportunity to substantially 
increase his earnings – particularly with a move to China’s burgeoning Super 
League.

Snodgrass is believed to have been offered around £4m a season after tax to 
move to China but having sustained a serious knee injury in August 2014 that 
led to him missing more than 14 months, he would prefer to make up for lost 
time in English football. Hull are bracing themselves for new bids over the 
coming days, with West Ham’s opening offer of £3m turned down last week.

Evandro, a former Brazil under-20 international who played for Silva at the 
Portuguese side Estoril, will provide some much-needed competition in Hull’s 
squad.

Markus Henriksen is facing a spell on the sidelines after damaging his 
shoulder at Manchester United last week, while Dieumerci Mbokani is at the 
Africa Cup of Nations with Democratic Republic of Congo for at least another 
two weeks.
 