
The latest battleground for the future of fracking in Britain looks set to be 
Sherwood Forest, the legendary home of folk hero Robin Hood and now the target 
of a seismic survey by Ineos.

The chemical multinational, which relocated its headquarters back to the UK 
last month, appears to have agreed terms with the Forestry commission to start 
burying charges and spend up to two years using “thumper trucks” or vibroseis 
machines to search for shale gas.

Campaigners have called on the government to block any possible fracking and 
protect the forest <https://act.foe.co.uk/act/save-sherwood-forest-fracking>. 

According to documents obtained under freedom of information request by 
Friends of the Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/friends-of-the-earth>, Ineos could be 
working within 200 metres of the Major Oak, a 1,000-year old tree that in 
folklore sheltered Robin Hood and his merry men.

Commercial fracking has yet to start in Britain, although Ineos and other 
firms have obtained licences from the government for shale gas exploration. The 
technology has been deeply controversial since tests conducted by Cuadrilla in 
2011 caused earth tremors near Blackpool, but fracking operations are expected 
to restart in five wells in Yorkshire and Lancashire later this year.

A small protest camp has been established at Kirby Misperton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/30/anti-fracking-protesters-kirby-misperton-yorkshire-third-energy>
, North Yorkshire, at one of the wells where gas firm Third Energy has been 
given permission to start fracking.

Guy Shrubsole, a Friends of the Earth campaigner, said he expected the move to 
search for shale gas under Sherwood Forest to become a new rallying point. He 
said: “I can’t think of anything more iconic in the English mindset to go for. 
You’d have thought they’d have learnt from the mistakes of some of the other 
fracking companies to avoid it, but they’ve gone straight for it.”


Ineos told the Daily Telegraph that no decision had been made on whether 
fracking would go ahead under the national nature reserve, adding that “any 
decision to position a well site will take into account environmental features 
such as the Major Oak”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Frobin-hoods-sherwood-forest-faces-fracking-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57ca10284cb243da595c53c5d875f67210aad195%2F0_0_4935_2960%2F4935.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Robin%20Hood's%20Sherwood%20Forest%20faces%20fracking%20threat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Frobin-hoods-sherwood-forest-faces-fracking-threat%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Robin%20Hood%27s%20Sherwood%20Forest%20faces%20fracking%20threat&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Frobin-hoods-sherwood-forest-faces-fracking-threat%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57ca10284cb243da595c53c5d875f67210aad195%2F0_0_4935_2960%2F4935.jpg>
 Robin And Richard circa 1195: Robin Hood and his Merry Men entertain King 
Richard the Lionheart in Sherwood Forest, upon his return from the Crusades. 
Painted in 1839. Photograph: Daniel Maclise/Fine Art Photographic/Getty Images 
The firm’s shale operations director, Tom Pickering, said: “Potentially we in 
the UK have a huge supply of indigenous gas under our own feet. It would be 
simply crazy not to explore this natural resource.”

However, Friends of the Earth fear that the seismic surveys alone could damage 
the forest, whose core is a site of special scientific interest, and its 
wildlife, which include rare bats and other protected species as well as 
ancient woodland. The Forestry commission has mandated that Ineos plants its 
charges at least 50 metres away from badgers’ setts and conservation sites.


Ineos is a relatively new player in fracking, but was one of the big winners 
in the governmental handout of exploration licences, winning 21 of 159 awarded 
a year ago.

The firm, founded by Jim Ratcliffe and with 17,000 employees worldwide, was 
welcomed back to the UK by the government last month as a “vote of confidence 
in the UK economy”, as it promised a $2bn (£1.6bn) investment in businesses 
including shale gas.

Other moves by Ineos to conduct fracking surveys in Nottinghamshire have been 
rebuffed. The National Trust refused the firm permission to conduct surveys in 
Clumber Park, a few miles to the north of the forest.
 