
For much of the year, Colorado lies buried under snow. Rich people glide 
across it on skis and 4X4s, between resorts at Aspen, Crested Butte and 
Breckenridge. But when the snow melts, Colorado’s perilous mountain passes, 
plains and canyons make the perfect setting for a road trip that takes in the 
best of the American landscape.

Colorado is tucked right up in the middle of North America, between the cool 
mountains of Wyoming and sun-baked desert of New Mexico – think Brokeback 
Mountain meets Breaking Bad. My partner and I had only ever visited American 
cities, and had romantic notions of driving off into the wilderness. In 
Colorado, we could get a taste of these two extremes of America with one week 
of leisurely driving.

We liked the idea of the scenery changing dramatically every day, so planned 
to pick up a car in the Rockies then drive up as high as we could go, before 
heading south towards the desert, looping back up into the mountains to see 
Aspen, then down into the desert again.

But before we did any of that, the California Zephyr, said to be one of the 
most beautiful train journeys in the world, took us from Denver into the 
Rockies. As the train corkscrewed round the mountains, we tucked into a lunch 
of steak and red wine. Outside the window, sheer drops, swollen rivers and even 
a bear and a moose whizzed past. We drank a toast to the pioneers who endured 
the same journey on foot, and probably without wine.

We got off at Glenwood Springs – 1,798 metres above sea level – but our bed 
for the night was in Leadville, an hour and a half’s drive away, and closer to 
the clouds at an altitude of over 3,000 metres. The road curled up into the 
mountains and our ears began to pop. There was no crash barrier, just a 
glorious view stretching into the distance, aspen trees shimmering gold and the 
possibility of an imminent death plunge. Impatient drivers crowded behind us as 
I crawled around the bends at 10mph, sweaty hands glued to the wheel.

At last, as the sun dipped behind snow-capped mountains, we rolled down 
Leadville’s cool, still Main Street, the lack of oxygen making us feel giddy. 
Leadville was at the heart of the American silver rush, and would once have 
been heaving with saloons, hotels and brothels. Now, out of ski season, its 
picture-perfect 19th-century main street was quiet and sleepy, like a theme 
park after hours. We stayed at theDelaware Hotel <http://www.delawarehotel.com/>
 (twins/doubles from $65), a huge, creaking Victorian building full of dark 
wooden antiques and heavy chintz, which, we were warned, is haunted. Everything 
in Colorado is. The dramatic lives and deaths of its pioneers still haunt the 
entire state.

The next day, local historian Roger Pretti, who runs tours of Leadville’s old 
cemetery, took us to meet some of them.

“Here lies Baby Addie,” he told us, gesturing to a lumpy patch of earth 
carpeted in the dry pine needles which scented the air. “She died when a piece 
of paper holding powdered morphine blew into her cradle.”

We wandered on, glancing at small, weathered wooden gravestones. “There lies 
Goldie Moore, farm girl-turned-prostitute who killed herself in desolation.” 
Roger pulled a copy of Goldie’s suicide note from his waistcoat pocket: “This 
is a cold, cruel world … I hope the next may be different.”

Leadville isn’t quite as cold and cruel as it once was, but at night the 
temperature drops and everyone ends up in the same old saloons. We did a 
pocket-size bar crawl from the ancientSilver Dollar 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Legendary-Silver-Dollar-Saloon/229007606644>
, where the barman and waitress sported a black eye each, tothe Manhattan 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Manhattan-Bar/118342079531>, where we drank 
cans of Pabst Blue Ribbon with Mark, a taxidermist and “mountain man”, and 
another Mark who was too drunk to speak. Mountain Mark wore his straggly 
shoulder-length hair under a trucker’s cap and a thick lumberjack shirt. His 
huge black boots looked like they were carved from rock. He told us stories of 
runs-ins with bears and mountain lions, of hunting alone in the forest for 
eight days.

Strange things happen at 3,000 metres. The air is so thin and dry that you 
become electric, sparking on door handles and taps every time you touch them; 
sitting in the sun for five minutes gives you sunburn. And when we stopped the 
next day for a beer at the Green Parrot dive bar in Buena Vista, 35 miles to 
the south, we met a real green parrot. Three women who had spent the day at the 
nearby Cottonwood Hot Springs told us that they just had to pop in to show him 
around.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2Frockies-road-trip-driving-colorado-summer-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409234891904%2Fd40de49e-23da-4ed4-b2d0-1db410e3a948-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rockies%20road%20trip%3A%20driving%20Colorado%20in%20the%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2Frockies-road-trip-driving-colorado-summer-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rockies%20road%20trip%3A%20driving%20Colorado%20in%20the%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2Frockies-road-trip-driving-colorado-summer-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409234891904%2Fd40de49e-23da-4ed4-b2d0-1db410e3a948-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Hand Hotel in Fairplay, Colorado. Photograph: Alamy 
From Leadville, our journey took us through the wide grassland basin of South 
Park, once the summer hunting ground of the Ute people, to Fairplay, an 
abandoned mining settlement.

More of a street than a town, lined with rickety wooden wild-west-style 
buildings, it was dominated by the giant red HOTEL sign of theHand Hotel 
<http://www.handhotel.com/> (rooms from $64). Manager Richard showed us to our 
room, Silverheels. Our wooden balcony looked out on to a lake at the foot of 
the Mosquito mountain range, and we could see the streak of a beaver paddling 
through the water. As the moon rose and the mountains turned pale blue, it was 
like looking out at a gigantic prog-rock album cover.

We soon discovered that dining options in these tiny, unvisited mountain towns 
are limited. In Leadville we could choose between $6 steaks and jacket 
potatoes, or Mexican. In Fairplay we passed up the grill at McCall’s Park Bar – 
a rowdy tavern packed with hunters and cowboys – in favour of spaghetti at the
Valiton Hotel <http://www.stayfairplay.com/>. In the Valiton’s big wooden 
dining room, sitting beneath a mounted elk head, it felt a little Twin Peaks – 
as if Agent Cooper might walk in at any moment and order a slice of cherry pie.

From Fairplay, State Highway 9 took us over more rolling hills and past herds 
of buffalo. “For sale” signs staked in the ground next to idyllic meadows 
reminded us that this sort of unspoilt beauty won’t last forever. We stopped to 
stretch our legs in Cripple Creek because, on the internet, it looked 
picturesque and sounded creepy. But it turned out to be creepy for the wrong 
reasons: the old wooden saloons and grand hotels had all been turned into 
casinos. Heavy-set Americans trudged from building to building, sinking free 
litres of cola and funnelling cents into slot machines.

Fortunately, neighbouring Victor had so far escaped the same fate. The 
skeletal remains of old gold mines, as well as the only functioning mine we saw 
(a dusty gouge on the side of Battle Mountain), surround the town. Everything 
felt empty and slightly abandoned. In the post office we found a box of 
postcards from the early 1900s, which had never been bought, and in theFortune 
Club 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Fortune-Club-Diner-and-Grill/1429444873941874?rf=162784007230836>
 the enormous chef prepared pancakes for us behind an original 1950s chrome 
soda counter.

That night we drank local ales in Dirty Sally’s bar 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Dirty-Sallys/242169129151395> with the manager, 
biker Bill, clad in black leather Harley jacket with long grey hair in a 
ponytail. Between tales of his biker gang pub crawls across Colorado (“the 
police leave us alone,”) he told us how Victor hopes to reinvigorate itself 
with a new microbrewery, capitalising on Colorado’s booming craft ale scene.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2Frockies-road-trip-driving-colorado-summer-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409235010322%2F433a9ef8-2364-40c1-9869-2ae40a48ff0f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rockies%20road%20trip%3A%20driving%20Colorado%20in%20the%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2Frockies-road-trip-driving-colorado-summer-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rockies%20road%20trip%3A%20driving%20Colorado%20in%20the%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2Frockies-road-trip-driving-colorado-summer-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409235010322%2F433a9ef8-2364-40c1-9869-2ae40a48ff0f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Old wild-west-style buildings in Fairplay. Photograph: Alamy 
The Phantom Canyon Road, which stretches all the way from Victor to the 
desert, was perhaps the star of our trip. It’s not really even a road – just a 
dusty track through a vast, tree-lined gorge. We loved seeing the hard, grey 
mountains transform gradually into soft, red rock, and the spiky pine trees 
give way to bleached-out cactuses. We stopped looking up for eagles (no 
sightings) and started looking down for gophers, which popped out of their 
holes all along the roadside. Out on the other side, the flat desert landscape 
was terracotta red, and the ADX Supermax prison rose up in the distance.

Our next stop was Aspen. One of the country’s premier winter ski resorts, it’s 
a haven for biking and hiking in summer, and boasts a vibrant arts scene too. 
The newAspen Art Museum <http://www.aspenartmuseum.org/> building, designed by 
Pritzer Prize-winning architectShigeru Ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/24/japanese-architect-shigeru-ban-wins-2014-pritzker-prize>
 opened this month, boosting the town’s cultural kudos. But first we had to 
scale the mountains again – crossing the Independence Pass, which climbs to 
3,687 metres, and is closed for seven months of the year.

Grey clouds had begun to gather, and a storm was forecast. I put my foot down, 
regretting stopping for lunch. At 6.30pm we passed the Twin Lakes, which were 
shrouded in mist rolling off the mountains. It would be dark by eight. As the 
daylight ebbed, the road became more and more terrifying – grey scree crumbling 
away at the edges, as we climbed up the mountain. Finally, after 30 minutes of 
making high-pitched fear noises, we burst out of the mist on to the summit, 
where the wind was whipping across brown cottongrass and peat-stained pools.

We settled our nerves that night at our one glamorous stop-off, the Aspen 
Meadows Resort <http://www.aspenmeadows.com/> (from $105 a night, room-only). 
The hotel felt a bit like a swish university campus, with rooms in 
Bauhaus-inspired buildings dotted about the grounds. We headed to the pool for 
a night-time swim to wash away memories of the drive, and suddenly my boyfriend 
grabbed me by the arm, yell-whispering “A bear! A bear!” Up ahead of us, a 
black bear lumbered across the path, clawing at the flower beds. We burst into 
the pool reception, shaking.

“Oh, you’ve seen the bear,” said the manager, barely looking up from his book. 
“He usually hangs out at the trash cans.”

Before we headed home, we couldn’t resist driving over the border into Utah to 
see Monument Valley. The contrast in landscape was hard to fathom. Yesterday we 
were on a freezing-cold mountainside; today we were sunbathing in a Mars-like 
landscape of red dust and towering mesas. If we looked eastwards, we could just 
about make out the faint outline of the Colorado Rockies. Our quiet little 
mountain towns were out there somewhere, resting briefly in the sun, before the 
snow descends once more.

• Accommodation was provided by the Victor Hotel in Victor (+1 719 689 3553, 
victorhotelcolorado.com <http://victorhotelcolorado.com/VHotel/>, doubles from 
$80), and Three Dogs and a Moose holiday cottages in Utah (+1 435 260 1692,
3dogsandamoosecottages.com <http://www.3dogsandamoosecottages.com/>, cottages 
for two from $125 a night). For more information, visitcolorado.com 
<http://www.colorado.com/>

Colorado in summer: hiking, hops and history

Climb up a ‘14er’
Colorado is home to 53 peaks over 14,000ft (4,200 metres – see 14ers.com 
<http://www.14ers.com/>), more than any other US state, and summer is the 
season for climbing them. Although many are the reserve of experienced 
mountaineers, the views from the summit of Mount Bierstadt, less than two hours 
west of Denver, are spectacular and within easy reach of most hikers.

White-water rafting
Royal Gorge Canyon, on the Arkansas river, is state’s ultimate rafting 
adventure, with near continuous white water and knee-trembling rapids such as 
the endearingly named Wallslammer. Arkansas River Tours (arkansasrivertours.com 
<http://www.arkansasrivertours.com/>) has half-day trips from $70pp.
 Rafting in Royal Gorge Canyon 
Colorado beer trail
Colorado’s front range, between Denver, Boulder and Fort Collins, is known as 
the Napa Valley of beer, with more than 100 local and award-winning breweries. 
Hop on the Colorado Brewery Bus (cobrewerybus.com <http://www.cobrewerybus.com/>
, from $45pp) for a tasting tour of some of the best.

Native American history
The spectacular Native American cliff dwellings of Mesa Verde national park 
<http://www.visitmesaverde.com/>, in southern Colorado, are one of America’s 
best-preserved archeological wonders. Explore thousands of ruins and cliff 
dwellings then take a native guide into the Ute tribe’s ancestral lands that 
border the park (utemountaintribalpark.info 
<http://www.utemountaintribalpark.info/> day tour $48pp, half-day $29)

Music festivals

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2Frockies-road-trip-driving-colorado-summer-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409235269524%2Fe2a2fd48-2c0c-4a52-95a7-04fe4bc7ff6c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rockies%20road%20trip%3A%20driving%20Colorado%20in%20the%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2Frockies-road-trip-driving-colorado-summer-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rockies%20road%20trip%3A%20driving%20Colorado%20in%20the%20summer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Faug%2F31%2Frockies-road-trip-driving-colorado-summer-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F28%2F1409235269524%2Fe2a2fd48-2c0c-4a52-95a7-04fe4bc7ff6c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Flaming Lips will play the Telluride Blues and Brews festival. Photograph: 
Tim Mosenfelder/Getty Images 

Colorado shows off its hippy roots in summer with an almost endless series of 
outdoor music festivals. Highlights include theSnowmass Mammoth music, brews 
and chili festival <http://snowmassmammothfest.com/> in June and the Global 
Dance festival <http://globaldancefestival.com/CO/>at the picturesque Red Rocks 
Amphitheatre in July. In September there’s the cool littleTelluride Blues & 
Brews festival <http://www.tellurideblues.com/> and also Riotfest 
<http://denver.riotfest.org/?sort=day> in Denver, with bands like Flaming Lips 
and the Cure.

Best of Colorado listings by Aaron Miller
 