


Ten days out from Wimbledon, most of the contenders, young and old, are 
gathering strength and form, chief among them the tournament’s favourite son,
Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer>.

Federer is fighting his way back to competitive shape and fitness after 
pulling out of the French Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/19/roger-federer-pulls-out-french-open>
 – but he still has to get past the livewire German Alexander Zverev on 
Saturday to reach the final in Halle, where the Swiss has won eight times, in 
preparation for his favourite tournament. At 34, the All England Club provides 
his best chance of adding to his 17 slams.

He had to work through five match points before beating the in-form Belgian 
David Goffin 6-1, 7-6 (12-10) in the quarters on Friday. Zverev, who gave 
Federer a decent argument in their only previous contest, over two sets in Rome 
last month, finished strongly in an hour and a half to beat Marcos Baghdatis 
7-6 (11-9), 6-3.

Federer, at No3 in the world behind Andy Murray, has played only 21 matches 
all season, after knee surgery and back pain forced his withdrawal from four 
tournaments.

Dominic Thiem, leading the charge of the youth brigade this year with 
tournament wins on all surfaces, got a walkover into the semi-finals from 
Philipp Kohlschreiber.

Federer’s old rival Rafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rafaelnadal> has a tougher road back than 
the Swiss. The Spaniard’s uncle and coach, Toni, says he will resume training 
in two weeks – just as Wimbledon moves through the early stages of the 
championship – and should be ready to test the torn tendons of his left wrist 
at the Rogers Cup, which starts on 23 July in Toronto.

Nadal shocked all but those close to him when he pulled out of the French Open 
last month after two quick and impressive wins. He has had his wrist encased 
since to immobilise it.

“Rafa is doing well,” his coach told the ATP website. “The [Spanish] 
Federation doctor has said that everything is progressing as it should, in the 
timeframe we expected. Now he has to start strengthening his wrist and his arm 
a little bit and, in two weeks, we will start training step by step, working a 
little bit harder each day. The doctor said everything is on the right track. 
The plan is to play Toronto if everything goes well.”

Andy Murray forced to dig deep in Queen’s Club victory over Kyle Edmund
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/17/andy-murray-kyle-edmund-queens-club-aegon-championships>
In Birmingham, Heather Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson> lost 7-5, 6-4 to the former 
finalist Barbora Strycova in the second round. “I knew it was going to be a 
tough one,” the British No2 said. “I played her a few weeks ago; she’s a smart 
player and a good fighter. I don’t think I dealt with the circumstances as well 
as she did. On the court we were on, I was getting distracted and I don’t think 
my focus was there.”

Out also is Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta>, 
the British No1. Yanina Wickmayer, ranked 49 in the world, beat her 6-3, 6-3. 
Konta, whose excellent form has dipped a little, needs a win to get back in the 
rhythm that has lifted her into the top 20.
 