
Roger Federer <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> marked his 
long-awaited comeback from injury with a confident straight-sets victory over 
Dan Evans to help Switzerland defeat Great Britain in their Hopman Cup opener 
in Perth, Western Australia, on Monday.

The 35-year-old Federer, representing his nation in the mixed team event that 
he first won back in 2001, needed only an hour and three minutes to dispatch 
Evans 6-3, 6-4 in the Perth Arena.

Roger Federer ready for ‘unique’ new year after six-month injury layoff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/roger-federer-return-injury-hopman-cup>
Belinda Bencic then secured an unassailable 2-0 lead for the Swiss with a 7-5, 
3-6, 6-2 win overHeather Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heather-watson> in the women’s singles 
before combining with Federer to secure a 3-0 clean sweep with victory in the 
mixed doubles.

It was Federer’s performance in the men’s singles that grabbed the attention 
though, with the 17-time grand slam winner showing little sign of rustdespite 
missing six months of last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/roger-federer-return-injury-hopman-cup>
’s action with knee and back problems.

He opened the match with an ace before breaking Birmingham’s Evans in the 
sixth game of the first set. The British No3 effectively handed Federer the 
match by dropping serve in the second-set opener and half an hour later, the 
former world No1 had put the first point on the board for Switzerland.

Federer said: “I’d like to live it again. I’m a little bit sad it’s over, 
because it was so nice out there. I was actually quite emotional. I thought for 
a first match it was great, because my expectations were obviously quite low.”

Asked what keeps him going, Federer said: “I guess it depends also on how you 
get [injured]. I got hurt filling up a bath for my children. It’s not really 
the way I wanted to leave this game.”

‘I still feel like Andy Murray,’ says world tennis No1 after knighthood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/31/andy-murray-happy-with-knighthood-milos-raonic>
Federer has not won a grand slam title since Wimbledon in 2012. “It would be 
nice to win another one, of course I’d even take two, three, four,” he said. 
“It’s tough at the top. A lot of good guys are there right now, a lot of young 
guys are coming up too. The gap’s definitely not very big but I will give it a 
chance. Let’s see what happens.”

Andy Murray, meanwhile, is hoping to start the new year in winning style on 
Tuesday when he begins the season at the Qatar Open against Jérémy Chardy, the 
Scot’s first appearance at the Doha tournament since 2014.
 