
Gambling, a national obsession here in Australia, has morphed inexorably into 
the invisible enemy of tennis, lurking in small towns across the vast 
continent, where obscure players with little money and shredded ambition are 
being tempted to risk the remnants of meagre careers for short-term financial 
gain. A slow drip of more allegations of match-fixing has seeped into the 
fabric of the Australian game over the past week, as well as in minor 
tournaments elsewhere, 12 months aftera two-pronged investigation by the BBC 
and BuzzFeed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/18/eight-players-australian-open-draw-suspected-match-fixing>
 threw the 2016 Australian Open into a fit of sweating introspection.

When the 2017 tournament begins on Monday, the talk will be of crunching 
forehands, the heat (another boiling couple of days are in prospect, before 
more temperate conditions midweek), how deep the 35-year-old Roger Federer can 
go in his comeback and whether or not Andy Murray can holdNovak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> at bay as No1 in the world. 
However, there was no escaping the dark side on Saturday.

Tennis match-fixing claims: eight players in Australian Open draw suspected
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/18/eight-players-australian-open-draw-suspected-match-fixing>
The Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Integrity Unit (TIU) 
announced the conviction of another small-time miscreant, the Romanian doubles 
battler ranked 1,645 in the world, Mihaita Damian, who received a 12-month ban 
and €5,000 (£4,350) fine for illegally betting on matches in 2011 and 2013, 
none involving himself. This is the tennis equivalent of picking pockets, as 
opposed to robbing the Bank of England.

Also nicked was the toweringly anonymous Australian Calum Puttergill, 
suspended for six months and fined $A10,000 (£6,200) for betting-related 
corruption between May 2012, and November 2014. “Mr Puttergill, 23, has a 
current doubles ranking of 891 and 1,207 in singles,” the TIU announced, like a 
welfare officer reporting to Petty Sessions.

On Tuesday, the 23-year-old Romanian Alexandru-Daniel Carpen was banned for 
life for match-fixing in 2013. Fans struggling to recognise the name should 
know the 30-year-old hit a career-high singles ranking of 1,088. In 2007.

But it is the perception that leaves the deeper bruise on the sport. There 
have been a slew of little-known Australians uncovered as well over the past 
two years, and freshly condemned and punished this week – including Nick 
Lindahl, Brandon Walkin and Isaac Frost – none of them gangsters, all of them 
desperate or naive.

“Generally, the ATP and all the authorities are doing a good job in tracking 
down potential match-fixing matches,” Djokovic said on Saturday as he prepared 
for his first match on Tuesday, against the Spaniard Fernando Verdasco. “There 
are some, on a lower level in the lower category of the professional 
tournaments. Ideally, we don’t want to see any kind of match-fixing occurrences 
and situations, but unfortunately they do occur from time to time. I don’t 
think there are too many.”

Federer, whose advance to sainthood can only be delayed by temporal 
inconveniences like playing tennis for a living until he cannot stand the sight 
of a racket, was suitably magisterial. “We’re going to get a [TIU] report back 
in a couple months, which is great,” he said. “That’s going to change the sport 
for the better. The good thing is that it’s really only zero point something 
per cent of players that have done something over the course of so many matches 
and so many players. We’ve done actually OK.”

Roger Federer ready for ‘unique’ new year after six-month injury layoff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/23/roger-federer-return-injury-hopman-cup>
But he is here for the tennis, as he gently reminded his inquisitors. A year 
ago in Melbourne, having already left the tournament, he moved with 
uncharacteristic awkwardness twisting a bath tap for one of his four children 
and did enoughdamage to his knee to require surgery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/03/roger-federer-knee-surgery> that 
has kept him out of the game since Wimbledon. His army of fans will be relieved 
to learn he is as keen and bouncy as a spring lamb.

On Monday, Federer opens his 18th Australian campaign against a qualifier – 
with another to follow in the second round. He truly is blessed – but Murray, 
who has a trickier opener against Illya Marchenko, awaits him in the quarters, 
and there the fairytale might end. It does not bother the ever-smiling Swiss.

“I was always going to come back because my knee wasn’t so bad,” he said. “I 
never thought to miss the Australian Open a year later. But, after Wimbledon 
[wherehe went out in the semi-finals to Milos Raonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/milos-raonic-roger-federer-wimbledon-semi-final-match-report>
, hurting his knee again], the race was on for Australia.”

Federer was studiously conservative in his recovery programme. Whether his 
legs are as keen for the fight as his spirit, we will discover in the coming 
days.

Djokovic, meanwhile, is upbeat after a spiritual and physical malaise that 
meantMurray took his crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/andy-murray-becomes-tennis-world-no1-milos-raonic-walkover-paris>
 and dented his confidence towards the end of last season. “I couldn’t ask for 
a better start of the season,” Djokovic said of his recent form. “Saving some 
match points in the semi-finals [in Doha], playing a really exciting match 
against Verdasco, thenthe next day against Andy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-qatar-open-match-report>
. I got a lot of match play.”

But he does not want a rerun of Doha against Verdasco. “I hope I will not get 
to the stage where I have to defend [five] match points,” he said. “Fernando is 
a very complete player on any surface. On a given day, if things go right, he 
can beat anybody on any surface.Against Nadal last year in five sets, he won 
first round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/19/rafael-nadal-crashes-out-australian-open-fernando-verdasco>
.”

Beyond Verdasco lies Denis Istomin, possibly Kyle Edmund, a revitalised Grigor 
Dimitrov, the youngest player in the top 10, Dominic Thiem, then, in all 
probability, either Rafael Nadal or Raonic before he gets a chance to defend 
his title in the final – with most fans of the sport hoping for another 
showdown with Murray.

“I can’t call it a nightmare draw,” Djokovic said. “I just see it as a huge 
challenge. I hope I’ll be able to deliver. Nobody is invincible. I never 
thought of myself as a superior player on the court, even though at times I was 
very confident. I was winning a lot of matches. [But] you can get 
over-confident. That’s why I don’t want to get into that state of mind.”
 