
Wimbledon’s Court 19 is nothing special. Nothing of any major significance 
ever happens on Court 19, other than Mansour Bahrami delighting the crowd with 
his spectacular moustache and court‑jester routine. But a few hours before the 
start of play on men’s quarter-final day, it was surrounded by television 
cameras, photographers and a host of people taking an impromptu break from work.

The awestruck silence said it all, the disbelieving grins. Roger Federer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/roger-federer> was there, looking immaculate 
as he prepared for his match againstMarin Cilic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/marin-cilic> by hitting with Ivan Ljubicic. 
Every time someone wandered by, their head turned and they stopped, no matter 
how fast they were walking.

Federer strolled around the baseline practising serves, then moved on to 
backhand returns. He did not miss once and barely made a sound as he moved, 
seeming to glide across the grass, his footwork elegant and balletic. Nor did 
it fluster him that dozens of people were watching him train in hushed reverie.

Such is the power and mystique of Federer, the full extent of which was seen 
on Centre Court later that afternoon. The obituaries were being prepared when 
the 34-year-old Swiss, who had missed a chunk of the season with back and knee 
injuries, trailed Cilic by two sets. Yethe roared back to win in five sets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/06/roger-federer-marin-cilic-wimbledon-semi-final-raonic>
, drowning his Croat opponent with wave after wave of lethal groundstrokes. By 
the end of a match that lasted three hours and 17 minutes, Federer was moving 
better than ever and an 18th grand slam title remained within sight.

Later that evening, another sporting great was in action as Portugal faced 
Wales in their Euro 2016 semi-final. The match wassettled by a turbo leap from 
Cristiano Ronaldo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
, who hung in the air for even longer than a barbecued pig flying through 
Springfield.

Ronaldo is a brilliant header of the ball, not only because his astonishing 
spring allows him to soar above defenders, but also because the amount of gel 
he uses in his hair means he could dive into an empty swimming pool and emerge 
unscathed. Forget those pulsing neck muscles, the terrifying force of his 
headers surely originates from his rock‑solid rug, a triumph of elite male 
grooming, styling elevated to the highest peak.

Few stars are as divisive as Ronaldo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo>, who winked and wound up the 
rest of Europe with thosecomments belittling Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/portugal-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 at the start of the tournament but it is impossible to deny his brilliance, 
even if you find his character unpalatable. The chances of him having the last 
laugh in the final were high.

Federer and Ronaldo have dominated their respective sports for years but they 
are not similar in style. If Federer is more like Lionel Messi, then Ronaldo is 
Rafael Nadal, hardly lacking technically but defined above all by his supreme 
physical prowess. Equally, however, Federer could not float around the court 
without painstaking work in the gym. This is where the two men collide. Federer 
may not have Ronaldo’s rippling muscles but he is much stronger than he looks.

Cristiano Ronaldo’s tears of sadness turn to joy on Portugal’s greatest night 
| David Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/10/cristiano-ronaldo-tears-portugal-greatest-night>
That all changed last week. Struggling to contain a resurgent Milos Raonic in 
their semi-final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/08/milos-raonic-roger-federer-wimbledon-semi-final-match-report>
, Federer’s body was pushed to the limit. He had a massage on his aching right 
thigh, then fell and banged his left knee at the start of the fifth set. Raonic 
secured the crucial break shortly afterwards; it was the equivalent of Tony 
Soprano beating up Perry Annunziata to show that he was still the boss, only to 
throw up in front of his entire crew.

No one could remember Federer losing his footing like that before, especially 
not in front of a stunned Centre Court. The response to something as mundane as 
a simple stumble was utter shock.

Yet Federer is 35 next month and it is not a surprise his body is showing 
signs of wear and tear. It happens to everyone and when it happens to the best 
it is even more galling, a reminder of our own fallibility. Two days after 
Federer’s toppling, the 31-year-old Ronaldo’s dream of dragging Portugal to 
European glory against France wasruined by a firm but clumsy challenge from 
Dimitri Payet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/10/cristiano-ronaldo-tears-portugal-greatest-night>
.

Like Federer, examples of Ronaldo going off injured are sparse and although he 
tried to ’tis‑but‑a‑scratch his way back on to the pitch, his game was over.

Yet the anticipated schadenfreude never arrived, the whistling from the French 
fans soon giving way to an outpouring of sympathy. Plenty of people had wanted 
to revel in his misery but not like this; no, we wanted him to miss the 
decisive penalty in a shootout or score a comical own goal. Anyone watching the 
tears well up in Ronaldo’s eyes and the bottom lip tremble would have needed a 
heart as hard as his hair not to be moved. At least he returned at the start of 
extra time in his new role as the most successful assistant manager of all 
time, a demented presence on the touchline as Éder scored the winner forPortugal
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal>.

Despite Éder’s startling contribution, that match will always be remembered 
more for Ronaldo’s early departure. The sight of Federer and Ronaldo tumbling 
spoke to us on a deeper level. These people are so often described as 
superhuman it is easy to forget they also spend their eveningsplaying Pokémon 
Go. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/12/pokemon-go-14-tips-to-get-you-started-on-your-creature-collecting-adventure>
 Yet while the tiniest dimming of an athlete’s aura has a humanising effect, it 
also manages to be oddly unsettling at the same time, stripping away a layer of 
the fantasy. If Federer can fall, then so can I.
 