
Rolls-Royce Motor Cars has vowed not to turn its back on the UK amid concerns 
that firms could shift their headquarters overseas in response to theBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> vote.

The luxury carmaker, which is owned by Germany’s BMW 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bmw>, posted its second-highest annual 
sales in more than a century, up 6% on last year to 4,011 vehicles.

The chief executive of Rolls-Royce Motor Cars took the opportunity to pledge 
the firm’s future in the UK, just months after he warned staff that their jobs 
could be affected by Brexit.

“Success for Rolls-Royce is success for Great Britain and we reaffirm our 
commitment to maintaining the home of Rolls-Royce in the UK,” Torsten 
Müller-Ötvös, told Sky.

In a letter leaked to the Guardian last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/02/rolls-royce-tells-employees-britain-better-in-eu>
, Müller-Ötvös told British staff an exit from theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> would drive up costs and prices and 
could affect the company’s “employment base”.

But the comments issued alongside the company’s sales figures indicate that 
even if staff are affected, the company does not plan to abandon its 
headquarters at Goodwood in West Sussex, southern England.


“We are deeply committed to a long-term, sustainable, successful growth 
strategy and this result, amid a backdrop of global uncertainty, affirms this 
approach,” Müller-Ötvös said.

“2016 has proven the perfect year to sign off the successful first chapter of 
the renaissance of Rolls-Royce.”

Fewer car owners and more driverless vehicles in future, survey reveals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/fewer-car-owners-more-driverless-vehicles-future-survey-reveals>
In Müller-Ötvös’ letter to staff, he said Rolls-Royce and the wider BMW Group 
would be adversely affected by Brexit.

“Free trade is important for international business,” he wrote. “Rolls-Royce 
Motor Cars exports motor cars throughout the EU and imports a significant 
number of parts through the region.

“For BMW Group, more than half of Minis built and virtually all the engines 
and components made in the UK are exported to the EU, with over 150,000 new 
cars and many hundreds of thousands of parts imported fromEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> each year.

“Tariff barriers would mean higher costs and higher prices and we cannot 
assume the UK would be granted free trade with Europe from outside the EU.

“Our employment base could also be affected, with skilled men and women from 
most EU countries included in the 30 nationalities currently represented at the 
home of Rolls-Royce here at Goodwood.”
 