
Romelu Lukaku helped give his former Everton manager Roberto Martínez a night 
to remember hit Belgium for eight against Estonia in theirWorld Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifier in Brussels.

The Red Devils have won their first three qualification games under Martínez 
and they impressed once more as they ran out 8-1 victors. Thomas Meunier headed 
the hosts ahead early on before Dries Mertens and the Chelsea forward Eden 
Hazard struck.

Henri Anier pulled one back for Estonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/estonia> to give them hope heading into 
the second half but Belgium ramped things up and ran roughshod over the 
visitors’ defence. Yannick Carrasco converted Lukaku’s cross before Liverpool’s 
Ragnar Klavan scored an unfortunate own-goal.

World Cup qualifiers round-up: Payet scores winner as France beat Sweden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/11/world-cup-qualifiers-france-sweden-germany-san-marino>
Mertens added his second of the game before Lukaku added the seventh and 
eighth with clinical finishes late on.

The win means Belgium are now clear at the top of Group H, with Greece in 
second spot after Giorgos Tzavellas’ stoppage-time equaliser at home to
Bosnia-Herzegovina <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bosnia-herzegovina>.

Both sides finished with 10 men in Athens with Kyriakos Papadopoulos and Edin 
Dzeko dismissed after a clash with 10 minutes remaining.

The visitors looked set to hang on to the lead given to them by the goalkeeper 
Orestis Karnezis’ first-half own-goal when Miralem Pjanic’s free-kick hit a 
post, hit him and went in, but Tzavellas lashed home from outside the area with 
seconds left on the clock.

Cyprus took their first points in the group as they beat 10-man Gibraltar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gibraltar> 3-1.

Constantinos Laifis put the hosts in Nicosia ahead with a smart finish on 29 
minutes but Gibraltar were level when Lee Casciaro headed home shortly after 
the break.

Pieros Sotiriou re-established Cyprus’ lead, with Valentinos Sielis adding a 
third after Jayce Olivero had seen red for the visitors.

Portugal eventually came out on top as they won 4-1 against Latvia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/latvia>, with the captain, Cristiano 
Ronaldo, scoring twice and also missing a penalty for the European champions.

The Real Madrid forward, who has just penned a new deal at the Bernabéu, 
struck away one penalty, after Gints Freimanis had fouled Nani but, after Glebs 
Kluskins felled Andre Gomes on the hour, Ronaldo scuffed his second spot-kick 
against a post.

Latvia threatened to make him pay for his miss as Arturs Zjuzins levelled but 
their hope was short-lived as William Carvalho’s header had Portugal back in 
front a little over a minute later.

Ronaldo atoned for his penalty miss by volleying in a third before Bruno Alves 
wrapped up the win in the last minute.

Switzerland are in control of Group B as they maintained their perfect start 
to the qualification campaign with a 2-0 win over theFaroe Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/faroeislands>.

The Galatasaray striker Eren Derdiyok put the hosts ahead in Lucerne with a 
close-range finish before the half-hour but the points were not secured until 
the captain, Stephan Lichsteiner, headed home with seven minutes remaining.

Belgium’s Christian Benteke scores fastest goal in competitive internationals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/10/christian-benteke-fastest-world-cup-qualifying-goal-belgium>
Hungary also remain in the hunt as they eased to a 4-0 success over Andorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andorra> in Budapest.

Zoltan Gera finished from 12 yards to open the scoring with Adam Lang doubling 
Hungary’s lead before the interval as he tucked away Balazs Dzsudzsak’s cross 
for his first international goal.

And it was much the same after the break as Adam Gyurcsco made it three and 
Adam Szalai wrapped up a comfortable win by adding a fourth two minutes from 
time.

The out-of-favour Manchester United forward Memphis Depay came off the bench 
to score a match-winning brace for Holland againstLuxembourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/luxembourg>.

The 22-year-old has started only once under José Mourinho and been linked with 
a January move away from Old Trafford. But he showed what he is capable of as 
he headed home his club-mate Daley Blind’s free-kick from close range to put 
the Dutch back in front after Maxime Chanot’s first-half penalty had cancelled 
out Arjen Robben’s opener.

And Depay was not finished as he tucked away a late free-kick to secure the 
points for Danny Blind’s side and move them up to second place in Group A 
behind France.

Bulgaria are a point adrift of Holland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/holland> after picking up their second 
victory in qualification as a 10th-minute goal from Ivelin Popov was enough to 
secure a 1-0 win over 10-man Belarus in Sofia.

Popov rose to head home Spas Delev’s cross and Belarus could not respond, 
their case being further hampered when the experienced Aleksandr Hleb was sent 
off late on for a second bookable offence.
 