
Aravind Bremanandam was under a Lada, sheltering from a sandstorm, when he had 
an idea. Stuck in the Sahara during theBudapest to Bamako Rally 
<http://www.budapestbamako.org/>, he decided that the adventure might 
transplant well to his native India. “People want stupid?” Bremanandam said to 
himself. “I’ll show them stupid.”

A decade later and I’m in India, about to embark on the Mumbai Xpress. This is 
the longest and most testing of the fiverickshaw challenges 
<http://www.rickshawchallenge.com/> that Aravind’s company, the Travel 
Scientists, now organises every year. The routes and durations vary, but the 
concept is the same: foreigners come to hare through India in rickety 
auto-rickshaws, the ubiquitous three-wheel taxis that swarm through its major 
cities. This edition starts in Mumbai and ends 1,300 miles and two weeks later 
in Chennai. It’s like driving from London to Madrid on a lawnmower … well, a 
bit.
India map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/travel_india_rally/giv-2716798SnhEKyl8NK/>
To add to the challenge, the 40 or so participants, divided into 17 teams, are 
encouraged to dress up and to customise their rickshaws. There’s “Mario” and 
“Luigi” from Australia, their rickshaw painted eight-bit chic to match their 
outfits. Impressively, they have the Mario Bros theme tune playing too. Then 
there’s the Temporarily Misplaced team from New Zealand, who look as though 
they were conceived in the aftermath of a potent dose of magic mushrooms. 
Bare-chested, but wearing top hats and suspenders, the men sport neon 
feather-boas, glittery masks and little daisies, neatly daubed on their 
prominent nipples.

These are wacky races, heavy on the wacky, easy on the racing. You “win” by 
fulfilling challenges such as photographing the tuk-tuk in front of an ancient 
temple, wearing costumes, creating social media output and posing for a photo 
with a policeman. Aravind’s advice before we start ranges from serious and 
useful to a kind of pitying amusement. “Please do not ask India for logic,” he 
says. “We only have lanes in this country because we had some spare paint.”

There follows a few hours’ practice in empty school grounds before we are 
turned loose into the howling bedlam of the Mumbai streets. Instantly, it’s 
something of a disaster for me. I stall in the middle of the first junction, a 
cacophony of protest rising around me; less than two minutes later, I scrape a 
stationary truck, tattooing scars down the side of my little red rickshaw. The 
trauma leaves me gasping for breath.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9053af261a174f0e01004ab0aad8abad21198c2b%2F0_49_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Round%20India%20on%20three%20wheels%3A%20the%20Mumbai%20to%20Chennai%20rickshaw%20rally&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Round%20India%20on%20three%20wheels%3A%20the%20Mumbai%20to%20Chennai%20rickshaw%20rally&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9053af261a174f0e01004ab0aad8abad21198c2b%2F0_49_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 ‘It’s cool to see all the random stuff that’s around’ 
Not enough is made of the stench of Indian cities – people don’t warn you 
properly. They don’t tell you that when the wind blows one way you’ll smell 
life – food, festivals – and when it changes direction you get the reek of the 
other thing. He never feels too far away, the man with the scythe, partly 
because locals drive as though their vehicles are made of rubber. Aravind was 
right about the lanes, too – traffic is fluid and organic, cars becoming blood 
cells in a giant, often clotted artery.

Perhaps none of that sounds like a great deal of fun. But these niche 
adventures have become so popular that a kind of arms race is going on between 
the various rally companies. The Travel Scientists will soon launch theBullathon
 <http://www.bullathon.com/about/the-bullathon/>, in Tamil Nadu, in which 
participants must manage a chariot pulled by a pair of oxen, and operates 
several other rallies including theCaucasian Challenge 
<http://caucasianchallenge.com/>, between Istanbul and Yerevan in Armenia, and 
the 4,000-mileCentral Asia Rally <http://www.centralasiarally.com/> from 
Astrakhan, Russia, to Kyrgyzstan. Similar rallies are organised byThe 
Adventurists <http://www.theadventurists.com/>, pioneers of the infamous 
10,000-mileMongol Rally <http://www.theadventurists.com/mongol-rally/>, whose 
most recent wheeze is theNgalawa Cup 
<http://www.theadventurists.com/ngalawa-cup-the-what/> in which participants 
race 300 miles down the coast of Tanzania in very basic wooden sailing boats.

In all cases, the rallies are marketed as “minimal assistance”, meaning that 
while the organisers will book hotels for you and give you a vehicle in working 
order, they won’t give you directions or hold your hand as you go. A support 
vehicle follows behind, but for the most part, when (not if) the rickshaw 
breaks down you have to find the nearest local mechanic. Thankfully, even the 
most rural villages have someone familiar with the vehicles’ rudimentary 
innards.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc06a4436e123726ee4974e0aeee651be110abce%2F0_0_3840_1802%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Round%20India%20on%20three%20wheels%3A%20the%20Mumbai%20to%20Chennai%20rickshaw%20rally&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Round%20India%20on%20three%20wheels%3A%20the%20Mumbai%20to%20Chennai%20rickshaw%20rally&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc06a4436e123726ee4974e0aeee651be110abce%2F0_0_3840_1802%2F3840.jpg>
 Sound the horn … Luckily, the ‘racing’ aspect of the challenge is not taken 
too seriously 
For the participants of the 2015 Mumbai Xpress, the reasons for signing up 
ranged from charity (several teams have their own causes; the Travel Scientists 
also support projects around the country) to drunkenness. Most already had 
plenty of stamps in their passports, but not 25-year-old Kiwi builder Rhys 
O’Connor. This isn’t just Rhys’s first time in India, orAsia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/asia> – it’s his first time out of New 
Zealand. With no travel experience at all he opted to dive in at the deepest of 
deep ends with concrete boots on. “I know, I’m an idiot,” he laughs.

India wasn’t even on his list of places to go. “Richard [Purvis, another rally 
participant] came up with this stupid idea and I thought: ‘Yeah, why not?’ We 
organised it, then all of a sudden it was: ‘Oh shit, we’ve just booked 
tickets.’”

Now, with his partner Victoria, Rhys is whizzing around rural India and 
through cities like Pune, which he’d never heard of before. He’s learning a 
good deal about the world, and about himself too – he hated crowds before he 
got to India, but he’s a bit more relaxed about them now. “Plus it’s been cool 
to see the countryside and the scenery,” he says, “and all the random stuff 
that’s around.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d45309a51a2b57408244dfc5a4a4a5ba47e737b%2F573_0_5187_3114%2F5187.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Round%20India%20on%20three%20wheels%3A%20the%20Mumbai%20to%20Chennai%20rickshaw%20rally&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Round%20India%20on%20three%20wheels%3A%20the%20Mumbai%20to%20Chennai%20rickshaw%20rally&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d45309a51a2b57408244dfc5a4a4a5ba47e737b%2F573_0_5187_3114%2F5187.jpg>
 Licence to thrill – and spill. Photograph: Katy Morrison 
With 1.2 billion-plus inhabitants, India has plenty of capacity for random 
stuff. And for noise. Horn-honking means many things around the world: in the 
US it’s a kind of protest, in the Middle East it’s a chastisement, and in the 
UK it’s rarely used – but if things go that far, get ready for total war. In 
India, it simply means “I’m here” but with so many people on the roads, there’s 
an endless din of existential affirmations.

Once you can look beyond the mania, however, there’s a chance to enjoy the 
remarkable scenery. No one is sad to leave Mumbai behind and head south, first 
to the sea-fort town of Alibag, then on to booming Pune, with its craft-beer 
bars and seven universities giving it a more hopeful feel than Mumbai. From 
there, the landscape changes to misty mountains around Mahabaleshwar, an old 
British hill station, then down through ancient valleys to windswept beaches at 
Ratnagiri. When, after a week, we get to Goa, with its fancily painted houses 
and grand cathedrals, it feels as though we’ve driven into a different country, 
or a different era.

After a day’s rest there, the Mumbai Xpress continues down to Mangalore, turns 
inland towards the finish line 500-odd miles away in Chennai, through yet more 
gorgeous countryside, over mountains which leave the engine squealing like a 
dying pig, and into more chaotic cities such as Bangalore. As the journey 
continues and we meet more locals, each rickshaw gets increasingly garishly 
decorated, first with ceremonial garlands of fiery flowers, then toys and, at 
one point, hundreds of packets of crisps. Everywhere we go, people take 
photographs of us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20f897dcde3f8612ba3f8b7292a49448d7564915%2F232_0_3601_2160%2F3601.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Round%20India%20on%20three%20wheels%3A%20the%20Mumbai%20to%20Chennai%20rickshaw%20rally&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Round%20India%20on%20three%20wheels%3A%20the%20Mumbai%20to%20Chennai%20rickshaw%20rally&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Frickshaw-challenge-rally-mumbai-chennai-india%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20f897dcde3f8612ba3f8b7292a49448d7564915%2F232_0_3601_2160%2F3601.jpg>
 Rickshaw Challenge India 
There’s a deep sense of achievement that comes with surviving each day, but 
when out on the roads, I find it necessary to try to disconnect from the 
lunatic driving conditions. In the months preceding the rally, I became 
increasingly fixated with the psychedelic death race movieMad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/17/mad-max-fury-road-review-mark-kermode>
. Screaming lines from it eases my troubled mind. To a distracted cab driver I 
hope to overtake: “Witness me, blood bag!” As I squeeze between two thundering 
lorries: “Riding to Valhalla!”

I’ve also bought a pair of goggles not dissimilar to those worn by Nicholas 
Hoult’s character Nux, but find them of no practical use on the rally; sweat 
makes them fog up within seconds. So it’s a good thing I’m not wearing them at 
certain moments: those times when I’m trying to overtake a truck on a bend and 
can feel the engine failing, and then a car decides to overtake and so does a 
motorbike, and now we’re riding four abreast as though it’s the Derby; but then 
I see an even bigger truck coming in the opposite direction … They’re the 
moments when I expect a herd of smug, sacred cows to shamble out into the road.

Complaints, though frequent, are fleeting. People signed up knowing they would 
be tested – mentally, physically, mechanically. The toil is the appeal. As it 
goes on we master the rickshaw, cease to be so shocked all the time and quickly 
learn to have a lot of fun. Personally, the rally days taught me a new kind of 
patience, a realisation that with a bit of time and determination you can 
overcome almost anything. You need only to smile, wave often and keep a few 
rupees in your pocket for baksheesh, just in case.

Way to go

The trip was hosted by the Travel Scientists (travelscientists.com 
<http://www.travelscientists.com/>), who stage an array of rallies. The next 
Mumbai Xpress (rickshawchallenge.com 
<http://www.rickshawchallenge.com/trips/mumbai-xpress/>) is from 7-20 August 
and costs from €1,750pp, including hotels, luggage transfer and rickshaw 
servicing. Etihad (etihad.com <http://www.etihad.com/en/>) flies 
Heathrow-Mumbai/Chennai-Heathrow, both via Abu Dhabi, from around £690 in August
 