
Being black and travelling away from home during the Jim Crow era of racial 
segregation in the US was potentially life-threatening. It involved a lot of 
planning, faith and a reliable travel guide called the The Negro Motorist Green 
Book. Victor H Green, a black postal worker from Harlem, New York, published 
this annual roadside companion from 1936-1964 and it was distributed by Esso 
gas stations. Green said he wanted to “give the Negro traveller information 
that will keep him from running into difficulties and embarrassments”. This 
book did more than that: it provided life-saving information, which earned it 
the unofficial title of the Bible of Black Travel.
 A 1955 copy of The Negro Travelers’ Green Book. Photograph: Alamy 
The book listed restaurants, hotels, barbershops, beauty parlours, bars, and 
service stations that were willing to serve black people. These properties were 
not only powerful symbols of refuge, they were places that provided comfort and 
shelter in an unsafe world at a shameful time in US history.

The deep south was notorious for lynchings but travel could be even more 
challenging in western states. Since there were fewer segregation laws in 
place, many people assume the west was more liberated. But the 1930 census 
listed 44 of the 89 counties along Route 66 as “sundown towns” – all-white 
communities that posted signs stating that blacks had to leave by sundown. Most 
black people travelling in the west avoided small towns and aimed to stay in 
cities, but found little succour there – only six of the 100 motels that 
existed in Albuquerque, New Mexico, admitted black people.

The list of Green Book properties in the western US helps shine a different 
light on the race issue in the country’s history, prompting the National Park 
Service’s Route 66 Corridor Program to commission me to document the remaining 
properties along this road.

Today, of the 250 Green Book sites listed in the 1960s along Route 66, over 
half have gone. Many properties have been levelled, closed or radically 
modified; others, such as De Anza Motor Lodge in Albuquerque, are seeking funds 
for redevelopment.

But there are still some in operation. The El Rancho Restaurant and Motel 
<http://www.elranchoaz.com/> (867 Navajo Blvd) in Holbrook, Arizona, is a solid 
adobe-coloured brick building with a covered carport and a large L-shaped, 
two-storey motel in the back. Out front is a classic 1960s sign towering over 
Route 66, announcing amenities such as “refrigeration,” “TV,” and “Electric he 
t,” with the “a” falling off the sign. The restaurant serves Mexican, 
south-western and Native American dishes such as stuffedsopapillas, grilled 
fajitas and red chille burritos.
 Motel DuBeau Photograph: http://www.modubeau.com 
Motel Du Beau <http://www.modubeau.com/> (19 W Phoenix Ave) in Flagstaff, 
Arizona, was built in 1927 and was one of the US’s first hostels (with dorms as 
well as standard rooms). In the 1960s, it had the reputation of being a 
makeshift brothel with rent-by-the-hour rooms. Another well-known property 
featured in the Green Book, with a (more tenuous) link to prostitution, is the
Las Palmas Hotel <http://www.hollywoodhotellaspalmas.com/> (1738 N Las Palmas 
Ave), Hollywood, which is home to the fire escape where Richard Gere plucks 
Julia Roberts from life as a call girl in the final scene of Pretty Woman.

Two other Green Book hotels in Los Angeles are the Dunbar (4225 S Central Ave, 
no longer a hotel) and the Mark Twain (1622 Wilcox St, Hollywood, 001 323 463 
2111, no website), which is well known for being a flophouse for struggling 
artists. When Joe Barbera the animator for Hanna-Barbera (the animation studio 
that created the likes of Tom and Jerry, the Flintstones and Yogi Bear) stayed 
at the Mark Twain in 1937 he described it as an “enlightened penitentiary.” 
Today it maintains its reputation as a low rent motel for struggling actors but 
during the 1940s and 1950s it offered relatively safe boarding for black 
people, who had few other options.

Listed in the Green Book as a hair salon and hotel, the Dunbar was much more 
than that. It was the unofficial country club for the black artistic elite, 
serving Duke Ellington, Ella Fitzgerald, Ray Charles, Nat King Cole, Josephine 
Baker and Billie Holiday. Today it’s a modest senior-living facility, but the 
Spanish-style courtyard behind elegant arched entryway evokes a hint of its 
grand past.

Harvey Houses
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fgreen-book-south-west-usa-route-66-civil-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425058814011%2F6522aaff-66fe-40ea-bcce-6f4eaee94a36-1722x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Route%2066%E2%80%99s%20legacy%20of%20racial%20segregation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fgreen-book-south-west-usa-route-66-civil-rights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Route%2066%E2%80%99s%20legacy%20of%20racial%20segregation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fgreen-book-south-west-usa-route-66-civil-rights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425058814011%2F6522aaff-66fe-40ea-bcce-6f4eaee94a36-1722x2040.jpeg>
 The superbly restored La Posada hotel, on Route 66 in Winslow, Arizona 
Fred Harvey Houses were a chain of restaurants and hotels, established in 1878 
and located along the Santa Fe, Topeka and Atchison railways. Although they 
were not listed in the Green Book, they did serve black people. There are two 
that still operate as hotels today. TheLa Fonda 
<http://www.lafondasantafe.com/?gclid=COjJ0s6GgsQCFRQatAodH3YAYA> (100 E San 
Francisco St, Santa Fe, New Mexico) is a pueblo-style landmark hotel with an 
exquisite courtyard dining area. It was one of the first hotels in America to 
offer an “Indian Detour” service, which would take visitors to nearby Native 
American cultural sites. In the 1950 book Masked Gods author Frank Waters 
referred to Fred Harvey as “the man who introduced Americans to Americans”.

The other Harvey House that served black people during the Jim Crow era and 
survives as a hotel is the beautifully restoredLa Posada 
<http://www.laposadadesantafe.com/> (303 E 2nd St, Winslow, Arizona), an 
11-acre Spanish colonial-style property by renowned early 20th-century 
architect Mary Colter. La Posada has undergone a $12m renovation, transforming 
it into a magical place with handmade Mexican tin and tile mirrors, six-foot 
cast iron tubs, hand woven Zapotec rugs, and hand-painted furniture and tile 
murals.

 * Candacy Taylor’s work on the Green Book will be featured in a multimedia 
piece on theNational Park Service <http://www.nps.gov/index.htm> website by 26 
March.  