
A plane carrying 35 Russian diplomats, expelled from the United States over 
Moscow’s alleged interference in the presidential election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/29/barack-obama-sanctions-russia-election-hack>
, took off from Washington on Sunday, Russian news agencies reported.

“The plane has taken off. Everyone is on board,” said the Russian embassy in 
Washington, quoted by the state-owned Ria Novosti agency. Relatives of the 
diplomats were also on board, making 96 in all.

The expulsions were part of a package of sanctions ordered by President Barack 
Obama on Thursday.US intelligence says the Kremlin ordered a hack-and-release 
of emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/29/fbi-dhs-russian-hacking-report>
 from within the Democratic party and Hillary Clinton’s campaign in an effort 
to put Donald Trump in the Oval Office. Moscow has denied the allegations.

Thirty-five Russians, described as intelligence operatives based at the 
Russian embassy in Washington and the consulate in San Francisco, were given 72 
hours to leave the country.

Obama also ordered the closure of two Russian compounds in New York and 
Maryland that the US says are used for intelligence-related purposes.

Economic sanctions were also announced against Russia’s FSB and GRU 
intelligence agencies.

Georgian mansions, Moscow dachas and the souring of US-Russian relations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/georgian-mansions-moscow-dachas-and-the-souring-of-us-russian-relations>
President Vladimir Putin has ruled out sending home US diplomats in retaliation
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
 – a move interpreted as a sign that he is looking to Trump to rebuild 
US-Russian ties after his inauguration on 20 January.

On Saturday, Donald Trump again expressed his scepticism over whether Russia 
was responsible for the computer hacks. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/donald-trump-unfair-blame-russia-election-hacking-interference>
 In remarks to reporters upon entering a New Year’s Eve celebration at his 
Mar-a-Lago estate on Saturday night, Trump warned against being quick to pin 
the blame on Russia.

“I just want them to be sure, because it’s a pretty serious charge,” he said. 
“And if you look at the weapons of mass destruction, that was a disaster, and 
they were wrong.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-questions-russia-hacking-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20on%20Russia%20hacking%20claims%3A%20'It%20could%20be%20somebody%20else'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-questions-russia-hacking-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20on%20Russia%20hacking%20claims%3A%20%27It%20could%20be%20somebody%20else%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-questions-russia-hacking-video&media=>
Trump on Russia hacking claims: ‘It could be somebody else’ – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2017/jan/01/donald-trump-questions-russia-hacking-video>
US intelligence officials have said that they are confident Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> was behind the US election hacks , 
which could have played a role in Trump’s defeat over Democratic presidential 
candidate Hillary Clinton.

The Washington Post also reported on Friday that Moscow could be behind 
malware found on a laptop owned by a Vermont electricity utility.

In response to that discovery, Vermont governor Peter Shumlin said: “One of 
the world’s leading thugs,Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, has been attempting to hack 
our electric grid, which we rely upon to support our quality of life, economy, 
health, and safety.”

At Mar-a-Lago, Trump said: “I think it’s unfair if we don’t know. It could be 
somebody else. I also know things that other people don’t know, so we cannot be 
sure.”

Asked what that information included, the president-elect said: “You will find 
out on Tuesday or Wednesday.” He did not elaborate, although in a statement 
released on Thursday in response to Obama’s sanctions, he said he would meet 
intelligence officials.
 