
Forest wildfires rampaging across Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> are being significantly 
under-reported by authorities, according to analysis of satellite data.

Climate change is making wildfires much more likely in Russia, but regional 
officials have been reluctant to report the true extent of the problem, and 
campaigners are warning that the harm to forests, property and human lives 
could rise.

While the recent forest fires around Fort McMurray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/11/canada-wildfire-environmental-impacts-fort-mcmurray>
, Canada, destroyed more than 580,000 hectares, those in Russia have burned up 
to 3.5m hectares since the start of 2016, according to Greenpeace Russia. It 
said at least 1m hectares were in flames at the end of May in the country, 
which is home to thelargest forests in the world 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwil_bD24_LMAhXFI8AKHWF9Aw0QFggdMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fassets.panda.org%2Fdownloads%2Frussia_forest_cc_final_13nov07.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGtQCK0SGGUhdCWA55xDTVUKMhFlA>
.

Greenpeace warned that Russia’s catastrophic fire seasons of 2010 and 2012 
could soon be repeated due to the impact of global warming and the lack of 
firefighting resources. The extreme Russianheatwave of 2010 was made three 
times more likely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/feb/21/climate-change-russian-heatwave>
 by climate change, costing the nation $15bn, and the frequency offorest fires 
there has increased 30-50% 
<http://world.350.org/russian/2014/08/fast_climate_change/> in the last 20-30 
years.

But the official statistics paint a far rosier picture. The head of the 
federal forestry agency told <http://ria.ru/authors/20160607/1443845575.html> 
state news agency RIA Novosti last week that only 669,000 hectares have been 
burned by forest fires in Russia this year, more than last year. That same day, 
the head of the emergencies ministrytold 
<http://special.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/52121> president Vladimir 
Putin that the burned area was smaller this year.

The forestry agency bulletin for 10 June reported 
<http://www.rosleshoz.gov.ru/forest_fires/info/953> a mere 6,306 hectares of 
current fires across the entire country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Frussia-significantly-under-reporting-wildfires-figures-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7330067c0674628ce26cdd2e6ff89281c639e6ce%2F0_19_2800_3500%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia%20significantly%20under-reporting%20wildfires%2C%20figures%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Frussia-significantly-under-reporting-wildfires-figures-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia%20significantly%20under-reporting%20wildfires%2C%20figures%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Frussia-significantly-under-reporting-wildfires-figures-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7330067c0674628ce26cdd2e6ff89281c639e6ce%2F0_19_2800_3500%2F2800.jpg>
 Nasa satellites show wildfires burning in eastern Russia, with red hotspots 
marking areas of high temperatures. Photograph: Modis/Terra/Nasa 
Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> said that 
although its analysis of publicly available Russian and US satellite 
photographs could have a margin of error of 20% - clouds and smoke can obscure 
fires - this does not account for the large discrepancy with official figures.

Alexei Yaroshenko, head of the forestry programme at Greenpeace Russia, blamed 
chronic underreporting of the size of forest fires by local officials. That in 
turn leads to firefighting delays and the allocation of less state funding to 
tackle the problem in the future.

“The truth is needed so they’ll get ready for next season better than they did 
for this season,” said Yaroshenko.

Alexander Krylov, an expert in the remote sensing of forest fires at the 
University of Maryland in the US, said 3.5m hectares this year was likely to be 
accurate. Even thefederal forestry agency’s online monitoring system 
<https://pushkino.aviales.ru/main_pages/index.shtml> reveals fires across far 
more territory than reported in its statistics, including large fires in the 
Kamchatka, Buryatia and Irkutsk regions.

Agency spokesman Svyatoslav Neklyayev said the figures it gives are lower 
because they include only fires outside “zones of control,” which are areas far 
from human settlements and infrastructure that regional governments designate 
as low priority for firefighting. Neither the bulletins or statements mention 
any such distinction.

The agency did not respond to requests for estimates of the total area burnt 
by forest fires in 2016.

The discrepancies appear to be part of a larger trend. WWF forestry expert 
Alexander Bryukhanov said under-reporting meant that the annual extent of 
forest fires in the US and Canada are regularly double that in Russia, which 
has twice as much forest. He said differences in monitoring approaches - some 
areas are observed from the ground, some from the air, and some from space - 
are compounded by officials’ fear of retribution if they report high forest 
fire statistics for their region.

“Regions choose the figure that’s comfortable, the smallest one, and this 
creates a problem, because they don’t do enough to fight the fires until they 
have grown very large and hard to deal with,” said Bryukhanov.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Frussia-significantly-under-reporting-wildfires-figures-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff378d40ac70fff692debd2d21c57f3dcbfce3e0e%2F0_167_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia%20significantly%20under-reporting%20wildfires%2C%20figures%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Frussia-significantly-under-reporting-wildfires-figures-show%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia%20significantly%20under-reporting%20wildfires%2C%20figures%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjun%2F16%2Frussia-significantly-under-reporting-wildfires-figures-show%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff378d40ac70fff692debd2d21c57f3dcbfce3e0e%2F0_167_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Local volunteer Andrey Polomoshnov suppresses grass fires in Zabaikalsky 
region, Siberia, Russia. Photograph: Maria Vasileva/Greenpeace 
Regional governments and forestry authorities under-reported forest fire sizes 
in theAmur <http://www.genproc.gov.ru/special/smi/news/news-76225/> region in 
2012, theKarelia region in 2013 <http://www.rosleshoz.gov.ru/media/news/1571> 
and theIrkutsk <http://www.aviales.ru/popup.aspx?news=1669> region in 2014. 
Federal forestry agency deputy headNikolai Krotov told Kommersant newspaper 
<http://kommersant.ru/doc/2990079> in May that it was concerned with 
discrepancies in forest fire reporting in the several regions. “We’re not 
ruling out that political factors can exist, subjective factors, when 
information is somehow presented in a different way externally,” he said.

Understating the extent of wildfires delays assistance from other regions and 
can even lead to human casualties. In April 2015, fires in Zabaikal destroyed 
villages just outside the regional capital of Chita, as captured in aviral 
video of cars escaping between erupting columns of flame 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8r94gooSsCc>. 

Russia’s national investigative committee later said 11 people had been killed 
<http://www.interfax.ru/russia/440350> and more than 30 injured in the fires in 
the region. The natural resources ministryfound 
<https://www.chita.ru/news/72422/> regional dispatcher services had 
under-reported the size of the Zabaikal fires by 40,600 hectares.

In addition, forestry reforms in 2006 have led to less funding for fire 
fighting, Yaroshenko said, arguing that federal forestry funding is a tenth of 
what is needed. More than 17,000 people have signedGreenpeace’s online petition 
<https://act.greenpeace.org/ea-action/action?ea.client.id=1863&ea.campaign.id=51092&ea.tracking.id=news-0518>
 against the reforms.

The increase in fires also creates more smoke, which can blow into major 
cities like it did in 2010, causing respiratory illnesses and deaths.
 