
Russia is preparing to hit back at fresh EU sanctions with a new list placing 
embargos on imports of consumer goods and secondhand cars from western 
countries, deepening a tit-for-tat trade war sparked by the crisis inUkraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine>.

Andrei Belousov, an aide to Russia's president, Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, said the measures would be 
directed at a number of products where Europeans "depend on Russia more than 
Russia does on them".

Belousov was quoted, by the state-run RIA news agency, as saying: "This 
concerns the import of cars, first and foremost secondhand ones, this concerns 
several types of consumer goods which we can already produce ourselves. Not 
all, but some types of clothing. But I hope common sense will prevail and we 
will not have to introduce those measures."

Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has already imposed an 
embargo on imports of a broad range of European farm produce. It has also 
suggested it could ban western airlines from using Russian airspace if it were 
affected by further sanctions, a move that could close an important overland 
flight route to Asia for European airlines, leading to higher fuel costs and 
delays.

The Russian measures come as a new round of EU sanctions against Moscow were 
poised to come into force on Friday. The sanctions are likely to further 
restrict access to European capital markets for Russian banks and energy 
companies.

But the European council president, Herman van Rompuy, said the measures could 
be reversed if a fragile peace plan agreed a week ago for Ukraine were properly 
implemented.

He said: "If the situation on the ground so warrants, the commission and the 
EEAS [EU diplomatic service] are invited to put forward proposals to amend, 
suspend or repeal, the set of sanctions in force, in all or in part."

Western powers were also watching closely to see if Moscow was prepared to use 
its gas exports toEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> as a 
weapon in the trade war this winter. Poland complained that Russia's 
state-owned Gazprom energy company cut deliveries by about half this week.
 