
There have been times in his career when this sense of well-being has seemed 
like a distant prospect, however: as recently as a year ago, at Indian Wells, 
Safin was considering giving up the game for good. The man who changed his mind 
then was Andrei Chesnokov, the former Russian Davis Cup player, who has known 
him since he himself was a boy training at the Spartak club and Safin's mother 
used to bring her baby to courtside in a pram.

Speaking from Paris, where he is playing, Chesnokov explains that by the time 
Safin was 13 he could see that he was going to be a very great player - 'he had 
very good hands, a perfect feeling for the ball, he always saw it early and hit 
it with great power' Subsequently he saw the prodigy come of age, beating 
Agassi at Roland Garros in 1998 as a qualifier. Two years later, though, out of 
the blue, Chesnokov got a call from 'one of Marat's agents', as he says, who 
told him that Safin no longer wanted to play at all; after a run of 
dramatically poor results he was thinking of quitting the game. The agent 
wondered if a Russian might be able to help, someone he could communicate 
properly with.

The first thing that Chesnokov tried to establish was that Safin had informed 
his mentor Mensua that he was seeking a new coach. He hadn't, so it was a few 
weeks before the pair joined up, at Barcelona. Safin had, at that stage, won 
four matches in five months. On the practice court, Chesnokov says, he just 
watched him without speaking for an hour. 'Then I said to him, "The way you 
practise is no way to practise." His mind was not on the court, he was talking 
to people as they walked by, always looking around for what was going on. And 
he was trying to hit every ball as hard as he could.'

Chesnokov says that he did not coach Safin, so much as help him get his head 
together; but the results were immediate. He won in Barcelona and then again 
the following week in Mallorca. In a few months his ranking went from 123 in 
the world to No 9. Looking back on that change of fortunes now, Safin recalls 
how, previously, 'If I was playing good, I was playing unbelievable, but when I 
was playing bad, I couldn't beat my mother. [With Andrei] I started to practise 
with my head, not my strokes and everything came together.'

Oddly, the relationship did not last. Characteristically, it seems, having 
learnt what he thought he could from his friend the single-minded Safin simply 
moved on. After the French Open Chesnokov heard that Safin had gone to practise 
on grass with Tony Pickard, Stefan Edberg's former coach. There was no phone 
call, no explanation. ('Why would he do that, when we had just won everything 
together?' Chesnokov still wonders). When he called the office of Safin's 
agent, at the time, he says someone told him: 'Don't you fuck with us.' The 
pair, not surprisingly have hardly spoken since though Safin, when he is 
listing his closest friends, still numbers Chesnokov among them. 'I can talk to 
Andrei, for example, about anything,' he says, apparently oblivious to the bad 
feeling he has caused.

In some ways, Safin has many reasons to be thankful to players like Chesnokov 
, and not just for helping him get his game back on course. In recent years 
with the on-court success of the likes of Kafelnikov and the off-court success 
of Anna Kournikova, tennis has become more popular than ever in Russia, and 
there is a whole group of young players ready to follow in Safin's size 
elevens. Yet a generation ago tennis was hardly even recognised as a sport, and 
dismissed as bourgeois by the Olympic-obsessed Soviet authorities. When 
Chesnokov first played the game at school in the Seventies he went home and 
told his family that he was going to be a tennis player, and they had never 
heard of the game. Even in the Eighties when people asked him about what he 
did, and he explained, everyone would assume he was a table tennis star.

It would take many days, he tells me a little wearily, to describe the 
particular differences between his era and Safin's but he names a few: for a 
start it was almost impossible to travel; for another thing, Russian players 
could not compete in tournaments that included South Africans or Israelis; and 
wherever he went Chesnokov had the KGB with him, too, making sure he did not 
fraternise with the wrong people. Things began to change with glasnost, and the 
game really took a hold under Yeltsin, who was himself a keen player. Now, 
tennis is Russia's fastest growing sport.

When he looks at the earning potential of the likes of Safin now, Chesnokov 
says, he wishes them good luck and does not dwell on the fact that at their age 
he was not allowed to claim any prize money. He is philosophical, too, about 
the different pressures players like Safin are now under. Does he think, I 
wonder, given all of Safin's advantages, that he can achieve all that he 
promises to achieve, or does he believe that his head might still get in his 
way?

'I think,' he says, 'Marat will become a great, great player. As long, that 
is, as he chooses the right people to have around him.'

The latest Mr Right, for Safin at Indian Wells is, of course, Mats Wilander, 
and when he talks of his coach it is with the excitement of a new flirtation, 
his latest squeeze. The pair were set up as a blind date by a mutual friend; in 
the few days they have been together here they are enjoying first impressions. 
'It's not that often that a guy like this comes along,' says Safin, deadpan, 
'so I'm trying to be nice to him: I make sure I pay all his bills. But I think 
we have very different characters, you know, I need what he has, and actually, 
he needs what I have.'

Wilander, now 36, is still playing the seniors tour and, without too much 
sweat, still beating most people ('except McEnroe, of course'). He has four 
children and a single-figure golf handicap. The incentives to go back on the 
road for 20 weeks a year - 'the minimum you need to do, I guess' - are, you 
suppose, not that great. The thing that persuaded him was, he says, seeing 
Safin play last year. He had been playing golf in Sun Valley about four weeks 
before Flushing Meadow, 'and everyone was asking me who would win the Open, and 
I'd been watching Marat, and I just asked them if they had seen him. No one had 
of course. So I said, "You know unless this guy gets injured, there is no way 
Sampras is going to win a set off him." And they are all like, "Yeah sure 
Mats." But it was simple to see really...'

When his prediction came true Wilander was more excited than ever about 
Safin's game. 'In the finals he was maybe playing 50 per cent of his ability,' 
he says, warming to the vicarious pleasures of the cornerman. 'He didn't get 
carried away like, say, Phillipoussis did when he got into the final of a slam, 
or Henri Leconte. Safin proved he was on a different level to that. He proved 
that mentally he is all there. He has it. It's just that sometimes he takes his 
eye off it. But on that occasion he just said: "Here I am, I'm better than you, 
and here it all comes." And he was playing easy percentage tennis. Against 
Sampras. No one has ever done that. . .'

In the short time they have been together, Wilander seems to have formed an 
easy bond with his charge - he speaks of him as a favourite son and fellow 
traveller: another cool European in a land of college jocks. Attempting to 
explain why Safin will win many more grand slams, he explains that he sees the 
time the Russian spent in Spain as crucial to his development (tennis, it 
seems, lends itself to easy national stereotypes): 'He's much softer, if you 
know what I mean, than the generic Eastern European guys,' Wilander argues. 'I 
mean I love them all. But, say, with some of the Czech guys it looks like they 
have a hard time really giving, getting in there and fighting really hard.

'Not even Ivan Lendl was able to do that until his latter years. He was in 
many ways a typical Eastern Bloc athlete: he'd be there for the money mostly. 
Yevgeny has a bit of that in him too [Kafelnikov, who is worth upwards of Â£15 
million, recently complained that tennis players were not properly rewarded], 
you can see him fight sometimes but sometimes it's just kind of shallow...' 
Safin, by contrast, is there purely for the game, Wilander believes.

I wonder if there are elements of his own personality at 21 that he now 
recognises in the Russian? He leans forward, takes his sunglasses off, becomes 
animated. 'He's very curious,' he says. 'In people, in tennis, in what everyone 
is doing. You know he always asks - "Did you go out last night? Where's a good 
place to go?" - and you need to have that. Your brain cannot stop expanding 
just because you are a tennis professional. You know, I like the glint in his 
eye. . . If you have that you are bound to do better over the course of a 
career and are bound also to have more peaks and valleys.

'You find that the players who just go along straight,who never have a bad 
day, are never ever going to win the big tournaments, like Medvedev, or 
Corretja, say. They play just the same at the slams, and that's never going to 
be good enough. Marat has this kind of Tiger Woods mentality, he knows that the 
moment itself will fire him....'

At Indian Wells, unfortunately, the moment, such as it is, in a half-empty, 
sepulchrally quiet stadium is nowhere near enough to fire Safin, still hampered 
in his flesh-coloured corset. Serving at about 40 miles per hour below his 
normal pace he succumbs to the hustling Swede Tomas Johansen, pausing only to 
hurl his racket at the foot of the umpire's chair in disgust.

Afterwards though, he is happy enough. Pleased he came, glad he tried (and, 
you suspect, though he does not say as much, content to have secured the extra 
money that will be due to him at the end of the year having played, injured, in 
this 'mandatory' tournament). He is still having fun, too, with his new coach 
('I lose,' he says, 'and even then he was happy with me.') He has, he is sure, 
plenty to look forward to, knows this is just a stutter, his ambition is set 
firmly on next month's French Open, his favourite tournament. 'I will do 
everything to win Roland Garros. Of course I'd like to win all the grand slams, 
make people happy, win some money, stay No 1 for five years, and enjoy my life. 
But my big aim this year is Roland Garros.'

The big thing about Safin's game, Wilander says later, is that he has the 
ability to win on any surface. Having just failed to win the grand slam himself 
- he won everything except Wimbledon in 1988 - I wonder if one of the 
incentives for him as a coach is to achieve what he missed out on as a player?

'Perhaps,' he says, but for the moment he is not looking too far ahead. 'We 
decided that we would try to make it through this evening,' he says, laughing. 
'I thought that maybe now he lost he would just kick me out straightaway. But 
I'm going to hang in there, wait to see what happens.' As they drive off 
together into a sunset over the high sierra, you imagine that, with Safin, he 
will not have to wait too long.

Joining the bourgeoisie 

Six of Safin's countrymen leading the Russian takeover of tennis

Anna Kournikova 

Birthplace Moscow

Age 19

World ranking 9

WTA singles titles 0

Prize money $2,692,929

Formidable groundstokes, but still has something to prove. The lack of a 
tournament victory has scarcely affected her status as the most photographed 
woman in world sport.

Yevgeny Kafelnikov

Birthplace Sochi

Age 27

World ranking 5

ATP singles titles 23

Grand slams 2

Prize money $18, 593,024

Still a major contender in the grand slams, though motivation can be lacking 
at the lesser events. Recently claimed tennis players are underpaid.

Tatiana Panova

Birthplace Moscow

Age 24

World ranking 37

WTA singles titles 0

Prize money $554,404

Has been around a while, but is still improving, and reached her first 
semi-final on the WTA Tour in Kuala Lumpur last year. A week later she was a 
finalist in Pattaya and ended the season ranked 34th.

Andrei Stoliarov

Birthplace Sochi

Age 24

World ranking 95

ATP singles titles 0

Prize money $291, 355

Like Kafelnikov, comes from the Black Sea town of Sochi. Turned pro in 1996 
and has gradually climbed the rankings ever since. Qualified for first Grand 
Slam this year, losing in the first round of the Australian Open.

Elena Dementieva

Birthplace Moscow

Age 19

World ranking 11

WTA singles titles 0

Prize money $751,538

Very highly rated, hard-hitting Dementieva was the surprise package of women's 
tennis last year. Reached the semi-finals of the US Open and won an Olympic 
silver medal in Sydney.

Mikhail Youzhny

Birthplace Moscow

Age 18

World ranking 84

ATP singles titles 0

Prize money $174,493

After turning pro in 1999, he quickly made an impact on the men's tour, last 
year finishing as the second youngest player - after American Andy Roddick - in 
the top 200 of the ATP Champions Race.
 