
Nationalism always breaks its promises because nationalists hate enemies in 
their countries more than they hate the enemiesof their countries. Millions of 
American conservatives proved it when they voted forDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, even though he was an open 
admirer of a hostile foreign power.

Local hatreds, not national security, moved them. They hated Obama more than 
they feared Putin. They hated political correctness. They hated – not without 
reason – the attacks on freedom of speech. They hated rich liberals and defence 
lawyers. They hated Black Lives Matter and immigrants speaking Spanish in the 
shop queue. They hated the “experts” who told them that fossil fuel caused 
global warming and gun ownership caused crime. For all their patriotism, when 
it came to the crunch, they cared as little for national security as the “reds” 
their ancestors condemned in the 20th century.

You should never lose your capacity for shock. Even connoisseurs of the 
grotesque have had to take a deep breath and count to 10 after watching the 
Republican president-elect of the United States preferringthe word of Julian 
Assange 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/04/us/politics/julian-assange-donald-trump.html>
 to the word of his own intelligence agencies. That Assange is cowering from 
rape charges in the basement of the Ecuadorian embassy, and maintaining that 
the same United States would persecute him if he emerged to face his accusers 
like an honourable man, only made the task of regaining your composure harder.

If that is not enough for you, consider that the CIA once inspired fear around 
the world. Now it is so feeble it cannot stop a Russian plot in plain sight to 
manipulate a US election. The FBI once harassed real and imagined communists it 
claimed were in the pocket of the Kremlin. In 2016, its director intervened on 
behalf of the Kremlin’s chosen candidate in theUS presidential election 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/13/us/politics/hillary-clinton-james-comey.html>
. Russian enmity is hardly a secret. Watch Putin’s propaganda station, RT, 
which Ofcom believes to the amazement of all serious journalists tocomply with 
Britain’s rules 
<https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0024/86307/bc2015-07-section_5_due_impartialitiy.pdf>
 on broadcasting accuracy and impartiality, and you see that the regime hates 
the west and uses anti-western conspiracies to explain away its thefts and 
crimes.

Shocking though the fellow travelling of the useful idiots of the right is 
(and what a pleasure it will be for western leftists of a certain age to throw 
back the insults conservatives once threw at them), it is not wholly 
incomprehensible. A large cohort of Cold War conservatives did not oppose the 
godless communist dictatorships of the Soviet Union and its satellites because 
they were dictatorships but because they were godless. Russia may be a 
dictatorship again, but the atheist state has gone and it is a godly 
dictatorship now thatPutin has embraced the Orthodox Christianity  
<http://www.christiantoday.com/article/how.the.russian.orthodox.church.is.backing.vladimir.putins.new.world.order/81108.htm>
of the tsars. To further endear himself to conservatives, hepersecutes 
homosexuals 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2016/01/14/dispatches-jail-time-being-gay-russia>and 
denounces the liberal values thatthreatened his rule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/04/anti-putin-protests-moscow-russia>
 in the street protests of 2012 so vehemently his ideologue Alexander Durgin 
could say the world needs “a Nuremburg Trial for liberalism 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/erasmus/2016/11/america-russia-and-new-right>”.

Naturally, such support for the conservative side in the culture wars has not 
gone unnoticed or unappreciated.

Above all else, the west’s Christian right or as they now call themselves the 
“civilisational right” welcome Putin as an unapologetic foe of Islam. From 
9/11, western politicians from George W Bush and Tony Blair onwards bent over 
backwards to say that the west is not in a war against Islam. Putin, Trump and 
their supporters feel no such constraints. Trump’s choice for national security 
adviser, General Michael Flynn, says “fear of Muslims is rational” and that 
Islam is “like cancer”.

He sees Russia as the west’s partner against radical Islam just as it was its 
partner against Hitler. Meanwhile, Trump’s chief strategist, Steve Bannon, 
talks about the “long history of the Judeo-Christian west’s struggle against 
Islam” and also says we have to look to Putin and a Russia that,from Sarajevo 
to Aleppo 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/12/the-conservative-split-on-russia/510317/>
, has endorsed the slaughter of Sunni Muslims. Following the money is not 
always the best advice. However much Trump, Le Pen and their henchmen may have 
taken from Russia, the authoritarian right in the west and the authoritarian 
right in the Kremlin would have been natural allies, even if no roubles had 
changed hands.

In these circumstances, the support of the Labour leadership 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/stalinist-voice-of-labour-seumas-milne-jeremy-corbyn-putin/>
,Stop the War  
<http://stopwar.org.uk/index.php/action-a-events/national-events/1298-fri-25-may-stop-the-war-cultural-event-dont-attack-iran-performers-include-mark-rylance-and-tony-benn>
 and theAmerican Green party  
<http://www.jill2016.com/stein_in_russia_calls_for_principled_collaboration>for 
Russian imperialism is incredible. Perhaps we should stop condemning the 
hypocrisy and malice of the far left and conclude it is just astonishingly 
stupid. The simplest explanations are often the best, after all.

Less easy to explain away is the unprecedented dilemma now facing Britain. 
Whatever else you can say against Theresa May’s government, neither she nor her 
senior colleagues or civil servants want to follow Trump, Le Pen and Farage. 
When theEconomist journalist Edward Lucas, who first warned of a new Cold War a 
decade ago, speaks in Whitehall these days the lecture rooms are packed. 
Meanwhile, MI6 is falling over itself in an effort to recruit Russian 
specialists and the Foreign Office, which once saw Russia as a lucrative market 
for British business, has finally woken up to the danger.

Official Britain may not have yet produced a co-ordinated response. The 
essential question of how to tackle the City banks and law firms that launder 
money for the Russian kleptocracy has yet to be faced. But at least it 
understands Russia’s state-sponsored propaganda, invasions of Ukrainian 
territory and hack attacks are part of a coherent Kremlin campaign to 
demoralise and break up the west.

In the past, Britain would have looked to the US for support and leadership. 
Now, and with the worst timing imaginable, at the very moment when Brexit is 
tearing up our relationship with Europe, Britain has to wonder if America is 
still a reliable partner. Downing Street and the Foreign Office must deal with 
a US president who endorses every violation of US and international law the 
British government has denounced.Trump has proposed recognising the annexation 
of Crimea 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/trump-crimea-sanctions-russia-226292> 
that Britain opposed. Rather than fear Russian cyberwarfare as Britain does, he 
so revels in ithe encouraged Russia to hack Hillary Clinton’s emails 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/trump-putin-no-relationship-226282>.

Jonathan Powell, Blair’s chief of staff, told me he’s is not remotely 
surprised that a panickingTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is sending her most senior 
advisers to meet Trump’s team. Britain’s European alliance is in crisis and so 
is our American alliance. All the relationships we have relied on for decades 
may dissolve simultaneously. For the first time since 1941, a Britain isolated 
from Europe may have to regard the United States as a potentially hostile 
foreign power.
 