
A thin sheet of canvas separates me from the hunting ground of Botswana’s 
greatest predators. Lying in our roof-tent above the car, I can still see the 
red embers of our campfire against a starry sky. I feel at one with the 
universe.

At first it is easy to sleep. The long hot day has been filled with adventure: 
a pride of lions stalking a warthog; a fish eagle catching, then dropping, his 
large wriggling prey; a nervous giraffe spreading its front legs to drink at 
the water hole; wild dogs panting under a tree. There have been chores, too: a 
bit of car maintenance, and supper to cook on the fire, head torches for light 
and a wary eye out for thieving monkeys.

As the night thickens, I become aware of a scratching, something out there 
sniffing and scuffling, inquisitive rather than threatening. There’s an attack 
on the oil drum dustbin and I hear the unmistakable roar of a lion, far enough 
away not to raise my heartbeat. Then there are rubbing and digging sounds, and 
the padding feet of something very large. My husband, Ian, looks out of the 
mosquito netting at the side of the tent. “Can you see anything,” I whisper. 
“Yes,” he says, “elephants.” A few inches away a huge elephant is pawing the 
ground to get at the roots of the grass. I freeze. I can count his eyelashes.
Botswana map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/travel_botswana/giv-27167rYK2dhOJYuJP/>
The next morning as I clamber down the ladder, it’s as if nothing happened, 
except that surrounding the car are a number of tracks, including the paws of 
hyena and the big flat imprints from the elephants.

Planning your own safari in Botswana’s national parks is not for the faint of 
heart. It’s an adventure that will test your 4X4 driving skills, offer fear and 
exhilaration, call on your inner reserves and leave you with unforgettable 
memories. And while not exactly a budget holiday, doing it yourself like this 
costs a fraction of the price of an organised safari.

In the national parks there are very few campsites and they need to be booked 
way in advance. Prices are low for Botswana natives, more for South Africans, 
and approximately £30 a night for everyone else. (Compare that with luxury 
tented camps costing at least £500 a night, and five-day safaris £4,000 or so, 
without flights.)

Our main costs were fuel and food, both much less than in the UK. Distances 
within the national parks are huge: we averaged 150km most days, and our daily 
spend per person on fuel, food, campsites and excursions averaged £150.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd40cb24dcaa1e118be8466686b2011a2318d1e09%2F0_0_2600_1948%2F2600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Safaris%3A%20your%20game%2C%20your%20rules%20%E2%80%93%20an%20independent%20tour%20of%20Botswana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Safaris%3A%20your%20game%2C%20your%20rules%20%E2%80%93%20an%20independent%20tour%20of%20Botswana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd40cb24dcaa1e118be8466686b2011a2318d1e09%2F0_0_2600_1948%2F2600.jpg>
 In the Okavango delta an elephant gives wide berth to a pair of lions during 
their mating rituals. The lions often prey on the elephants. Photograph: Louise 
Gubb 
Since Botswana is celebrating 50 years of independence in 2016, it is a great 
year to visit. A good option is to fly to Maun (from Gaborone or Johannesburg) 
and rent a vehicle there. At Maun you can buy food and supplies, then it’s only 
a two-hour drive to the Okavango delta (declared the 1,000th world heritage 
site in 2014). We drove up from Johannesburg, and our first night in the bush 
was at Nxai Pan national park at the northern tip of the Makgadikgadi basin. At 
the park entrance we checked in, showing receipts for park and camping fees. 
Botswanans are proud and friendly. Never start a conversation without a 
greeting.

With an update on animal sightings from the ranger, we head through the gates. 
The track ahead is deep sand and we can make progress only in the lowest gears. 
A few kilometres in, we get stuck. Two attempts with a hydraulic jack fail and 
it’s 40C. By chance a young English couple from Essex pass by: their hire car 
is equipped with traction tracks, so they are able to rescue us.

As the car is finally heaved out of the sand, Fritz, an old Africa hand, rolls 
up. He cannot believe we’ve got this far without deflating our tyres. He gets 
out his deflater (apparently a matchstick also works), and the sand is 
instantly conquered. Setting off again we make a diversion to theBaines baobabs 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Thomas_Baines_Baobab.jpg>, a group of 
1,000-year-old trees by a salt pan, painted by Thomas Baines in 1862.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61517bb32d93b8b89cd7d4f7d46eb4b4ce620ca%2F0_0_2600_1761%2F2600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Safaris%3A%20your%20game%2C%20your%20rules%20%E2%80%93%20an%20independent%20tour%20of%20Botswana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Safaris%3A%20your%20game%2C%20your%20rules%20%E2%80%93%20an%20independent%20tour%20of%20Botswana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe61517bb32d93b8b89cd7d4f7d46eb4b4ce620ca%2F0_0_2600_1761%2F2600.jpg>
 Nicky and husband Ian bird watching in their campsite in Chobe national park. 
Photograph: Louise Gubb 
We reach our camp in the early evening, with the low golden sun softening the 
stark terrain of sculptured tree trunks. We head to a water hole where a family 
of elephants are frolicking in the mud, spraying each other. Nearby, various 
birds and a herd of impala are waiting their turn. We see ostriches, 
springboks, kudu and red lechwe antelope.

As the sun turns into a ball of fire it’s a race to reach the camp washhouse – 
surrounded by sharp spikes embedded in concrete to keep intruders out. We 
manage a shower, set up the tent, and light the fire before darkness falls.

Our plan was to head north to Moremi game reserve and the Okavango delta, and 
then to the river at Kwai, Savuti and Chobe. Driving time and distance would 
vary according to the road quality. Within the national parks it is mostly sand 
or track but even outside the parks sometimes there are deep corrugations. 
There’s a brief bit of tarmac at Kachikau leaving Savuti until you reach Chobe 
national park. Then there are the occasional detours to avoid river crossing or 
fallen trees. We bought maps in the UK but once there, most people navigated by 
GPS. There are maps for each park with GPS waymarks but it can be hard to 
negotiate the smaller designated tracks. Game drives focus on the watering 
holes, and the best times are early morning and sunset. But our whole journey 
is a game drive. There are no rules when it comes to finding game, except not 
to get out of the car.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90e1308e4a25581473904de0875fa5ca36b00323%2F0_616_2039_1223%2F2039.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Safaris%3A%20your%20game%2C%20your%20rules%20%E2%80%93%20an%20independent%20tour%20of%20Botswana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Safaris%3A%20your%20game%2C%20your%20rules%20%E2%80%93%20an%20independent%20tour%20of%20Botswana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90e1308e4a25581473904de0875fa5ca36b00323%2F0_616_2039_1223%2F2039.jpg>
 ‘We rattle over log bridges and ford rivers, where we lose a number plate.’ 
Photograph: Alison Gilbert 
At Maun we stock up on fuel, water and supplies before 10 days in the bush. 
Packing requires military precision, but our cars have large storage shelves 
and a fridge. Before we head out, we treat ourselves to lunch atHilary’s Cafe 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Hilarys-Cafe/319118604831562>, near the 
airport. Prince Harry, a regular visitor to Botswana in his role supporting 
rhino conservation, is at the next table.

Our campsite in the Okavango delta is called Xakanaxa 
<http://www.okavangodelta.com/accommodation/desert-delta-safaris/xakanaxa-camp/>
, and is reached via a series of log bridges, which in the late dry season can 
be in poor repair. We have swapped harsh, sandy forest for the lush grasses of 
the delta swamp with its handsome papyrus rushes that wave in the breeze. Bird 
life is rampant, as are hippos. A monitor lizard basks in the sun.

Early the next morning we decide against travelling by mokoro (dugout canoe) 
and book a faster boat ride up the delta. We are on a quest to find the rare 
pygmy goose. We see four, as well as malachite kingfishers, black-crowned night 
herons and an impressive range of storks and cranes, eagles and a yellow-billed 
kite.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F236b3544c113b2efa3af9b357659990e3704f66f%2F0_330_2600_1560%2F2600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Safaris%3A%20your%20game%2C%20your%20rules%20%E2%80%93%20an%20independent%20tour%20of%20Botswana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Safaris%3A%20your%20game%2C%20your%20rules%20%E2%80%93%20an%20independent%20tour%20of%20Botswana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F236b3544c113b2efa3af9b357659990e3704f66f%2F0_330_2600_1560%2F2600.jpg>
 Carmine bee eater with captured locust in the Okavango delta. Photograph: 
Louise Gubb 
A few days in, we’re into a routine. I’ve got used to spotting lurking hyenas 
on the way to the shower block, and the grunting and snorting of hippos at 
night. We rattle over log bridges and ford rivers, where we lose a number 
plate. Binoculars always to hand, we spot prides of lions, a leopard under 
bushes and rare roan and sable antelopes.

There are a few scary moments. All the maps have GPS co-ordinates but we don’t 
have GPS – or the popular Tracks4Africa online maps. After missing a water 
hole, we marvel at a plain filled with giraffe, but the track turns into barely 
passable sand and we round a bend to find a family of elephants blocking the 
track. As we try to reverse, there’s wild flapping of ears and a trumpeting. 
The herd, led by young bulls, runs towards us, gaining momentum as we bash our 
way backwards through the trees. In the nick of time we find a clearing just 
big enough to turn round in.

The Savuti channel is dry, the water holes parched, and our sunset game drive 
brings few results. As we debate returning to camp, a majestic lion emerges 
from a clump of bushes, beckoned by a stunning lioness sashaying her tail. 
Their frequent bouts of mating take them to the edge of a water hole in front 
of our car. Just as the lion roars in satisfaction a group of bull elephants 
charge them. They miss the car by a whisper.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69c027ab762cb5c161daa96b028bd4619e0b8ef6%2F0_0_2560_1920%2Fmaster%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Safaris%3A%20your%20game%2C%20your%20rules%20%E2%80%93%20an%20independent%20tour%20of%20Botswana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Safaris%3A%20your%20game%2C%20your%20rules%20%E2%80%93%20an%20independent%20tour%20of%20Botswana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fbotswana-independent-safari-camping-adventure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69c027ab762cb5c161daa96b028bd4619e0b8ef6%2F0_0_2560_1920%2Fmaster%2F2560.jpg>
 We soon got used to sleeping in the roof-tent above our car. Photograph: Nicky 
Holford 
We save our last few nights for Ihaha Camp, on the Chobe river. Every night a 
herd of buffalo cross from the Namibia side while elephants bathe, squirting 
each other and chucking dust and mud about. A kudu and a crocodile creep up on 
the bank. Our least welcome guest is a nasty alpha baboon, which jumps up on 
our table and grabs the handle of a bag that holds all our kitchen utensils. I 
seize the other handle and wrestle with it, like a tug of war. Fortunately I 
win.

All our campsites have been spacious, in lovely, wild settings, with nearby 
running water, a firepit and a concrete table. Clambering up the ladder to our 
rooftop-tent each night becomes second nature. We have sheets, duvets and 
pillows, and the nights are never too hot. And with time, scavenging hyenas, 
grunting hippos, and the shuffle of elephants just punctuate the night. On the 
day that we leave Chobe national park, we find a fresh kill. Vultures are 
circling as a pride of lions rip the tough skin off an elephant. The sound it 
nauseating.

Our last night is spent in luxury at the Chobe Bush Lodge 
<http://underonebotswanasky.com/camps/chobe-bush-lodge.php>: no dawn start, 
cocktails on the deck, long hot showers. It lives up to every expectation, and 
we even see a black mamba. But as I sink into my deep mattress, I miss sitting 
around the campfire listening to scops owls and frogs, the rustle of the wind 
and the sounds of life in the wild. Most of all, I miss the great Botswana sky, 
with stars so close you feel you can reach out and touch them.

• The writer paid for her own trip. BA <http://www.britishairways.com/> and 
South African Airways <http://www.flysaa.com/> fly from Heathrow to 
Johannesburg from £600 return. Onward flights to Maun or Kasane cost around 
£140 each way onAir Botswana <https://www.airbotswana.co.bw/>. National park 
campsites must be booked in advance. Overnight camping costs £25-£32 for UK 
residents; daily park permits £7.50pp; vehicle entry £3. Campsites at Nxai Pan 
are managed by theXomae Group 
<http://xomaesites.com/camping-sites/4-nxai-south-camp.html> ; Moremi game 
reserve, Xakanaka campsite by Kwalate Safaris (kwalatesafari@gmail.com 
<mailto:kwalatesafari@gmail.com>); Khwai and Savuti by SKL 
<http://sklcamps.com/camp.html>; Ihaha campsite by Kwalate Safaris. 
Accommodation for one night was provided byChobe Bush Lodge 
<http://underonebotswanasky.com/camps/chobe-safari-lodge.php> (doubles from 
£120 room only).Bushlore <http://bushlore.com/> hires out 4X4s from £1,200 for 
10 days, with satellite phone, camping equipment and roof-tent for two. The 
best time to visit is the dry season from May to the end of October
 