
Related: Fifa’s Infantino claims 48-team World Cup will boost football 
worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/fifa-vote-expand-world-cup-48-teams-from-2026>

Quote of the week

 Gianni Infantino – revealing what first attracted him to a new $6.5bn-valued 
48-team World Cup format 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/11/gianni-infantino-world-cup-oscars-fifa>
 which guarantees $5m grants for all 211 Fifa voting members: “It was a 
football decision.”

Stand of the week


Slaven Bilic – “let down and angry” with Dimitri Payet trying to leave West Ham
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/dimitri-payet-head-turned-west-ham>
: “He’s our best player and that’s why we gave him a long contract. We gave him 
everything, we were always there for him. I expect him to show commitment.”

(March 1997 – Harry Redknapp reveals he’s “bitter and angry “ with Slaven 
Bilic trying to leave West Ham: “He’s on a fantastic contract, the highest paid 
player in the club’s history. He signed it … Now he wants a move and feels 
Everton are a big club, so there’s nothing we can do. West Ham are a big club 
in our eyes, but he feels otherwise.” Bilic: “I had to do this. We are 
professionals – all players know, if anyone gets the chance of a big club, he 
must take it.”)

• Payet’s view on contract loyalty: Feb 2016, signing his new five-year 
£125k-a-week West Ham deal 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/sport/football/dimitri-payet-my-new-west-ham-contract-is-an-enormous-show-of-faith-from-the-club-and-slaven-bilic-a3178686.html>
. “For me it’s a big step, an enormous show of faith from the chairman and from 
the manager. I thank them for that. I’m proud and I’m happy to prolong my 
adventure with West Ham…All is well.  
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/west-ham-star-dimitri-payet-7357701>
The love affair continues.”

Meanwhile: also wavering

Diego Costa: “unavailable” for Chelsea two weeks after his New Year message to 
fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/diego-costa-antonio-conte-chelsea-premier-league>
: “I’m very happy, very content here... It’s good for us to have a manager who 
is not just a boss but a person we can talk to, someone whose support we can 
count on. We love him more all the time.”

• Antonio Conte’s view 
<http://www.eurosport.co.uk/football/premier-league/2016-2017/antonio-conte-every-team-wants-to-stop-our-run-not-only-tottenham_sto5999110/story.shtml>
 on3 Jan: “Last summer Diego told me: ‘I stay, I stay, I want to fight for this 
club, for my team-mates, for this shirt,’ and now he’s showing great passion in 
the right way, in every moment. We’re happy for this: me, the club, the 
team-mates, because he’s completely focused. It’s very important, this.”

Other news: moment of the week

Monday: Fifa draw a line under 2014’s luxury watch scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/09/fifa-executive-watch-gift-poisonous-present>
 and prepare to hand out luxury watches to winners at the Fifa Best Awards in 
Zurich.
Tuesday: Fifa reveal all six watches worth €92,000 “went missing” before the 
show started. “We are looking into what happened.”

Most reassured

Uli Hoeness – paroled €27.2m tax evasion convict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/mar/13/uli-hoeness-sentenced-three-and-a-half-years-prison-tax-evasion-germany>
 and reinstated Bayern president – on fitting back in to football: “I have 
become more reflective, tolerant and humble. But I think I still have a 
relatively good reputation in the international football world. It appears not 
to have suffered.”

Manager news: best belief

24 Nov 
<http://www.oldham-chronicle.co.uk/news-features/10/oldham-athletic-news/100901/chairman-corney-has-faith-in-robbo>
, Oldham chairmanSimon Corney on Stephen Robinson: “We’ve never had a 
harder-working manager, it’s just not been going for us. If anyone can’t see 
that, then I don’t know what they’re looking at. I believe in Stephen ... It 
might take six months, a year, or maybe two, to learn League One and the way it 
works, but he will get it right.”12 Jan: Sacks him 
<http://www.oldham-chronicle.co.uk/news-features/10/oldham-athletic-news/101588/sheridan-back-at-latics>
.

Zamparini latest

Italy, 6 Sep: Palermo owner Maurizio Zamparini hires coach Roberto de Zerbi. 
28 Nov: Denies planning to sack him. “I am keeping De Zerbi, that is my 
decision.”
30 Nov: Sacks him for being “pitiful”, hires Eugenio Corini instead. 
10 Jan: Loses faith in Corini and tries to rehire De Zerbi; De Zerbi says no 
<http://www.football-italia.net/96672/de-zerbi-rejects-palermo-corini-considers>
.
Corini: “Every day here is like an atomic bomb, it’s like Hiroshima.” 
Zamparini: “It’s not easy to be president.”

Best vote of confidence

France: Montpellier owner Louis “Loulou” Nicollin on his coach Frédéric Hantz: 
“I’m angry with him. His team plays sad, sad football – I’m starting to be fed 
up to back teeth. But Hantz is not in danger. We can’t afford to fire him.”

Most speechless

Portugal: Sporting B coach João de Deus: reacting to his side conceding while 
celebrating a goal at the other end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2017/jan/07/portuguese-team-concede-bizarre-counterattack-goal-video>
 which was disallowed by a “mad late flag ... It seems we have entered an age 
of surrealism. I cannot find the words. It’s so terrible. For me, this ends it 
all.”

Best clarification

Italy: Sampdoria chairman Massimo Ferrero 
<https://www.facebook.com/SpazioNapoliPage/videos/1386671551407711/>, 
clarifying what he meant by telling the press after a defeat to Napoli: “The 
referee stole it, incredible, the FA must expel him. I am truly pissed off, 
send these officials away. It is a robbery. In Italy robbery is a crime.” Two 
days later: “I don’t blame the referee and I have always defended referees. I 
have nothing against them.”

• Ferrero’s reflection on the incident: “When I am beside myself, I make 
trouble. It is my nature. He who is born round cannot die square.”

And most hopeful

Brazil: official Corinthians club model and Miss Bumbum 2016 winner Erika 
Canela, hoping hernew tattoo of Donald Trump’s face 
<http://s2.glbimg.com/YrRB5sV1ayfJElKaSqZC2oH0s4w=/620x0/s.glbimg.com/jo/eg/f/original/2017/01/13/img_1343.jpg>
 will “change his views on women and immigrants”. “But I hope he doesn’t let me 
down and go down in history as a tyrant or something … I wouldn’t want that on 
my neck.”
 