
The blackest moment of my life as a musician was on the morning of 2 June 
1989. The previous night, we’d had friends round at our house in Tulse Hill, 
London, and I’d brought my beautifulGabrielli 
<http://ingleshayday.com/archive/information/1119-giovanni-battista-gabrielli-biography.html>
 viola downstairs to show them. A Scottish benefactor had lent it to me; it was 
made in Florence in 1747, had an “M” branded on the back to signify it once 
belonged to the Medici family, and possessed a gorgeous, plaintive tone. The 
opportunity to play on it had transformed my sound.

I always kept it close by, but unaccountably, that evening, maybe tired from a 
day of rehearsals combined with looking after a baby, I didn’t take it upstairs 
with me as usual when I went to bed.

At five the next morning, I woke to the sound of a door closing softly 
downstairs. Even now, that sound chills me. I thought I must have imagined it, 
and drifted back to sleep, and it wasn’t until a couple of hours later that I 
went down.

The first thing I saw as the sun streamed into the living room was the viola 
case open in the middle of the floor. It was empty.

I froze. A musician’s instrument is like a part of the body. It is your voice.

As I approached the case, I saw that the thief had taken the piece of green 
velvet that covered the instrument – and thought: “They must be going to care 
for it.” It was a small crumb of comfort. Other things had gone too: my 
handbag, the television. But these seemed insignificant.

A friend found the two bows in an alleyway. In the following weeks, I scoured 
markets and antique shops, convinced I would find the viola. These unique 
instruments don’t just disappear – any dealer would have recognised it 
immediately. But the years went by, and it has never been found.

I made a conscious decision back then that something positive had to come out 
of this. I wanted to be able to look back and say: “If my viola hadn’t been 
stolen, then I would never have …” And what I wanted most of all was to become 
a full-time composer.

I had composed ever since my mother gave me a little blue manuscript book, and 
showed me how to mark the staves. The marks I made were flowers, faces – and I 
learned how their exact position on those five lines, or between them, 
translated miraculously into different notes from her violin.

I studied viola because it seemed the best way to earn a living while I wrote 
music, but the freelance life was all-consuming, and I was writing very little.

The theft of the viola gave me that final injection of courage to make the 
move from London to Scotland

My Glaswegian husband, the cellist Robert Irvine 
<http://www.classicalmusiciansscotland.com/artists/robert-irvine/>, had 
remarked on this, and was himself keen to raise our family in Scotland. I had 
worked withPeter Maxwell Davies <http://www.maxopus.com/index.aspx> in the 
Scottish Chamber Orchestra <https://www.sco.org.uk/>, and he had been 
encouraging and enthusiastic about a permanent move to Scotland, saying there 
were many opportunities for composers there.

The theft of the viola gave me that final injection of courage to make the 
move. Composing seemed infinitely more suited to motherhood than the itinerant 
life of a string player. I hated leaving my son, Laurie, and composing was 
something I could do in his company. By the time we made our decision, Tom was 
on the way.

True to his word, Max made sure I had plenty to do. He involved me in his 
composers’ course in Hoy – where I wished I was one of the students, rather 
than his “assistant”. I had not studied composition. I felt I had nothing to 
offer. But I learned a massive amount from him.

I already had a few commissions, from fellow musicians. I did buy another 
viola and continued to play in theRaphael Ensemble 
<http://www.hyperion-records.co.uk/a.asp?a=A779>, even after Tom was born – a 
year to the day after the viola disappeared. I didn’t stop altogether until 
1995, when we needed a new roof and it seemed sensible to sell the instrument. 
My playing was going downhill for lack of practice anyway. Around that time, my 
daughter Stephanie was conceived.

Eighteen years later, in her gap year, Stephanie went to Amsterdam as an 
apprentice with the Dutch luthierGuust François 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B1A6jXjJxFQ>. Her project was to make a viola 
in the workshop, which would then be sold to pay for her tuition. She asked me 
what size the Gabrielli had been, and chose a similar model.

The instrument she made looked and sounded astonishingly good, and I felt it 
shouldn’t leave the family, so I bought it myself. It never occurred to me that 
I would play it, and I lent it to several violists so that it would be well 
played to develop its sound. Meanwhile Stephanie decided to apply for a place 
at theNewark School of Violin Making 
<http://www.lincolncollege.ac.uk/school-musical-instrument-crafts/newark-school-of-violin-making>
, and is now beginning her third year.

The first steps were agonising. It felt like one of those nightmares where 
you're being chased and your legs won’t move

Some months later, by one of those curious bits of serendipity, I was 
contacted out of the blue byMusikdorf Ernen festival 
<https://www.musikdorf.ch/en/program> in the Swiss Alps who invited me to be 
composer in residence in summer 2015. They also asked if I would play. They had 
read my CV, seen that I had studied under the great Italian teacherBruno 
Giuranna <http://www.giuranna.it/html/home.php>, and assumed I still played.

The temptation was too much. I had a year to prepare. I decided to give it a 
go.

The first steps were agonising, embarrassing, painful. It felt like one of 
those nightmares where you are being chased and your legs won’t move. The 
muscle memory is there, but nothing happens. It was months before I regained 
any kind of fluency.

In Ernen I didn’t confess to anyone that I’d had to relearn, and just hoped I 
could get away with it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0KWBZ-bsGrk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0KWBZ-bsGrk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0KWBZ-bsGrk&media=>
I found myself playing in an orchestra for the first time in 25 years, and the 
chamber music included my own string quartet,Opus California 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d9jp66Z5TZs>. I kept forgetting to play, as I 
was waiting for the viola player to come in. It was a bizarre experience. And I 
hadn’t realised how difficult my string writing could be. (I resolved to keep 
things simpler in the future.)

Earlier this month I returned to Ernen to play Schoenberg’s Verklärte Nacht  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U-pVz2LTakM>(Transfigured Night), a piece I 
associate with the Raphael Ensemble – and also with Max, as he conducted it in 
my first concert with the SCO. The title seems apt.

And now, a Proms co-commission, I’ve written a piece in memory of Max: Merula 
Perpetua 
<http://www.scottishmusiccentre.com/event/sally-beamish-at-the-proms-merula-perpetua/>
 – the Latin title a nod to his influence – about the blackbird that caused me 
constant wakeful nights when I first moved to Glasgow after leaving the 
Stirlingshire cottage where my children grew up.

I found myself playing my own string quartet. I kept forgetting to play – I 
was waiting for the viola to come in

The piece is for my own instruments: viola and piano. It represents a new era 
in my life – a new, city life. After years of using notation software, I am 
writing by hand again. Max never used a computer (or even a piano). He paced 
his work by stopping to sharpen his pencil. But publishers now rely on the 
convenience of a computer type-set score.

My hand is shaky and uncertain. I’ve lost the skill of placing the notes with 
precision. I still make sketches by hand, but these are for my eyes only – 
scrawled, with no need for clarity. These days, as soon as I have my material, 
I go on to the software.

But I want to write out this piece by hand because the paper is special. This 
is the paper that Max left at a friend’s house, so that he could compose when 
he returned. He never returned, and the paper has been given to me.

In between writing, I take my viola from its case. Years ago, this was my way 
of spacing the composing work. But now I am similarly shaky and uncertain – and 
it is equally problematic placing notes with precision. I am still astonished 
to feel the instrument in my arms again. At 60, my life has come full circle. I 
have returned to the city – not London, but Glasgow. And I have returned to the 
viola.

 * Merula Perpetua will be premiered by Lise Berthaud and David Saudubray in a 
BBC Chamber Prom at the Cadogan Hall, London, on 29 August at 1pm 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/events/composers/fd71090f-8804-49f2-b36f-052cc0bdc3ec>
 andbroadcast on Radio 3 and on iPlayer thereafter 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07qbnrd>.
 