
Samantha Stosur <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> is 
pledging to “fight fire with fire” when her Wimbledon hopes go on the line 
against explosive German Sabine Lisicki on Wednesday.


Stosur is bracing for a torrid encounter against the former finalist and owner 
of the fastest record serve in women’s tennis history.


Lisicki surged past Stosur en route to the 2013 title match at the All England 
Club and also made the semi-finals in 2011 and the quarters on three other 
occasions.


Andy Murray told to be fast out of the blocks by Ivan Lendl at Wimbledon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/27/andy-murray-wimbledon-first-round-liam-broady>
The grasscourt specialist has dipped to 81st in the rankings after only once 
managing to string two wins together in a miserable 2016 season punctuated by 
her bitter break-up with her comedian boyfriend.


But having also partnered Lisicki to the 2011 Wimbledon doubles final, Stosur 
knows full well what is coming her way.


“No doubt this is a tournament she feels very comfortable at no matter what 
she’s been doing in the lead-up,” said Australia’s 14th seed after a 
trouble-free 7-5, 6-3 first-round win over Magda Linette.


“I’m sure when she walks through the gates here she probably feels like she’s 
No.1 in the world.


“You have to be aware of that and know she has a very big serve, she plays big 
and hits the ball hard.


“She absolutely plays aggressive. If she’s on that day, you have got to be 
really willing to fight fire with fire and go after it and not kind of feel 
like you’re going to get dictated to.”


Despite her forgettable season to date, Lisicki looked ominous in dispatching 
rising American Shelby Rogers 6-1, 6-3 in less than an hour in her opener.


“I really liked this place from the beginning. In this place you feel the 
history. It’s just a magical place,” Lisicki said.


“When I come here, I just feel really special to have the opportunity to play.”


Apart from firing down a 210kph rocket in Stanford in 2014, Lisicki last year 
crunched a world-record 27 aces in a grasscourt match in Birmingham and knows 
her showdown with Stosur will likely be decided on her racquet.


“When you serve well on this surface, it’s a big advantage, yeah,” said the 
26-year-old.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fwimbledon-day-one-australians-stosur-groth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fced86a4515094c895035a5752f679805bfa67a%2F0_0_5472_3282%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Stosur%20to%20face%20Sabine%20Lisicki%20after%20first-round%20Wimbledon%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fwimbledon-day-one-australians-stosur-groth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Stosur%20to%20face%20Sabine%20Lisicki%20after%20first-round%20Wimbledon%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F28%2Fwimbledon-day-one-australians-stosur-groth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fced86a4515094c895035a5752f679805bfa67a%2F0_0_5472_3282%2F5472.jpg>
 Sam Groth in action against Kei Nishikori on day one. Photograph: Clive 
Brunskill/Getty Images 
Meanwhile, fellow Australian Sam Groth is in a desperate fight to make the US 
Open main draw after his grand slam troubles continued with a tough first-round 
loss.

Groth will tumble to 130th in the world after falling 6-4, 6-3, 7-5 to 
Japanese fifth seed Kei Nishikori in another luckless major campaign following 
losses to Rafael Nadal in Paris and Andy Murray in Melbourne.

Wimbledon 2016: Garbiñe Muguruza stutters but beats Camila Giorgi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/27/wimbledon-2016-garbine-muguruza-camila-giorgi-match-report>
The Newcombe Medallist following his outstanding performances in 2015, Groth 
rued being unable to capitalise on a rib injury that Nishikori sought treatment 
for mid-match.

“It was always going to be a tough ask,” Groth said.

“If I had have been able to get that third set, I felt like I was starting to 
swing that momentum a little bit.

“Especially knowing that he may have been under a little bit of an injury 
cloud, if I could have maybe built for 3-1 and held for 4-1, then maybe his rib 
gets a little bit sorer than it maybe was.”

Ranked a career-high No.53 in the world last year, Groth is vowing to fight 
back.


“I’m not as bad as last time I slumped down. I’ve got to come back from 150, 
not from oblivion,” he said.

“I’m eight months now from where I was probably playing my best tennis last 
year, so I’ve got my work ahead of me.

“But I’ve got every belief that I can get back to where I believe I should be.”
 