
Samantha Stosur <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> admits she 
was powerless to stop grasscourt juggernaut Sabine Lisicki from adding to her 
Wimbledon woes with yet another premature exit from the tennis showpiece.

Runner-up in 2013, Lisicki delivered a serving masterclass to consign the 
French Open semi-finalist to a 6-4, 6-2 second-round defeat, her 14th 
first-week defeat at the All England Club.

While eight double-faults undermined Stosur’s challenge, Lisicki – owner of 
the fastest recorded serve in women’s tennis history – was nigh-on untouchable 
on her monster delivery.

Wimbledon 2016 order of play day five: Stan Wawrinka plays Martín del Potro
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/30/wimbledon-2016-order-of-play-day-five-stan-wawrinka>
The German only lost two of 22 points on serve in the first set to set the 
tone and finished off Australia’s 14th seed with her 11th and 12th aces.

“When she’s hitting the line on those serves, even if I went the right way, I 
wasn’t going to reach them very good,” Stosur said.

“Yeah, when you’re serving out a match like she was and you can serve like 
that, it’s fantastic, seems very easy.

“She played very well. You kind of know that Sabine is capable of playing like 
that.

“You’ve got to really take any opportunities you get. Unfortunately going down 
that break early kind of maybe let her loosen the shoulders a little bit, 
really relax into that.

“If you can keep it on serve, maybe then you do see some cracks form.”

A three-time semi-finalist in addition to her march to the title match three 
years ago, Lisicki snuffed out Stosur’s gallant fightback attempt early in the 
second set to break the Queenslander with two scorching returns.

Stosur thought she played “a pretty decent match” and said losing to such an 
inspired opponent was easier to swallow in many ways.

“It kind of makes things really simple to know what happened,” Stosur said.

“Look, when you are playing a player who’s playing very well, you have to find 
a way to do anything you can. I felt like I did that.

“I tried my hardest.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fwimbledon-australians-wrap-day-four%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18f0e52baadc14bf4c0ea2907e91df2b3d9d19f9%2F0_103_5472_3282%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sam%20Stosur%20crashes%20out%20of%20Wimbledon%2C%20%20Millman%20to%20face%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fwimbledon-australians-wrap-day-four%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sam%20Stosur%20crashes%20out%20of%20Wimbledon%2C%20%20Millman%20to%20face%20Murray&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fwimbledon-australians-wrap-day-four%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18f0e52baadc14bf4c0ea2907e91df2b3d9d19f9%2F0_103_5472_3282%2F5472.jpg>
 John Millman in action during the Wimbledon Lawn Tennis Championships at the 
All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club. Photograph: Julian Finney/Getty Images
Elsewhere, Australian John Millman has celebrated his Olympic call-up by 
charging into a glitteringWimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/wimbledon> third-round clash with second 
seed Andy Murray.


Millman learned of his Games selection shortly before taking the court for his 
impressive 7-6 (7-5), 6-3, 4-6, 6-2 second-round upset of 26th seed Benoit 
Paire on Thursday.


“It means the world to me to be able to represent my country at the Games,” 
Millman said.


“I’m buzzing for that, and then to be able to go out there and put together a 
pretty good performance out there was awesome.


“I live to fight another day here at Wimbledon.”


At 67, Millman is the highest-ranked available player at Australia’s disposal 
– following the twin withdrawals of top-20 talents Nick Kyrgios and Bernard 
Tomic – but as he’d not represented Australia in Davis Cup his case had to be 
heard by the ITF.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fwimbledon-2016-andy-murray-and-eugenie-bouchard-on-day-four-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wimbledon%202016%3A%20Andy%20Murray%20and%20Eugenie%20Bouchard%20on%20day%20four%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fwimbledon-2016-andy-murray-and-eugenie-bouchard-on-day-four-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wimbledon%202016%3A%20Andy%20Murray%20and%20Eugenie%20Bouchard%20on%20day%20four%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fwimbledon-2016-andy-murray-and-eugenie-bouchard-on-day-four-video-highlights&media=>
Wimbledon 2016: Andy Murray and Eugenie Bouchard on day four 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jun/30/wimbledon-2016-andy-murray-and-eugenie-bouchard-on-day-four-video-highlights>
“And I’m very grateful that the appeal went through,” Millman said.


“For me, it’s the greatest honour to play at the Olympic Games and represent 
your country.”


Millman was at his energetic and enthusiastic best against the stylish but 
error-prone and volatile Frenchman in the two-and-a-half hour win to set up a 
showcourt showdown with Murray – and admitted he’d never set foot on either of 
the two main show courts, where the match is likely to be scheduled.


Paire produced some of the finest shots of the tournament and frequently had 
Millman hurtling around the court as he dictated play – but the moments of 
brilliance were tempered by 63 errors to the Australian’s 18.


Paire also engaged in a war of words with chair umpire Carlos Ramos throughout 
the match, with his angry tirades covering topics such as his racquet not being 
restrung quickly enough, the Australian fans being too vocal and the number of 
towels he was allowed.


Millman took the first set in a tense tiebreak, and broke Paire twice to take 
second set in 43 minutes.


Paire controlled the third set with an early break.


But, egged on by Davis Cup coach Lleyton Hewitt, Millman bulldozed his 
higher-ranked rival in the fourth set – snatching two breaks as the Frenchman 
unravelled to bring a speedy halt to the match.


Millman will be joined in Rio by injured star Thanasi Kokkinakis, along with 
women’s duo Samantha Stosur and Daria Gavrilova, and doubles pair John Peers 
and Chris Guccione.
 