
Sam Allardyce has admitted a fear of failure to guide Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> to top‑flight safety is 
serving as personal motivation as he seeks to instigate an upturn at the ailing 
south London club, and has reiterated how vital it will be to make further 
additions in the transfer market this month if his team are to survive.

Palace are a point from the foot of the Premier League and will seek to rest 
first-team players againstBolton Wanderers in their FA Cup third-round replay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/bolton-wanderers-crystal-palace-fa-cup-match-report>
 on Tuesday before Saturday’s game with Everton.

West Ham forget troubles as Andy Carroll stars in win over Crystal Palace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/14/west-ham-united-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
The club are still hopeful of securing the Arsenal full-back Carl Jenkinson 
for around £7m this week, though agreement has yet to be struck over personal 
terms. The 24-year-old, who boasts a solitary England cap, earns around £40,000 
a week at the Emirates Stadium and would expect an increase in wage across the 
capital.

While that deal should eventually be completed, there is renewed hope, too, 
that the experienced Juventus left-backPatrice Evra can still be secured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/12/patrice-evra-juventus-talks-crystal-palace>
 after the player apparently relaxed his initial demand for a contract through 
to 2019. Palace would be more comfortable offering the former Manchester United 
player, now 35, an 18-month deal, though their pursuit of defensive recruits is 
a reflection of recent dismal form.

There has been one win in 16 matches in all competitions, and none in 
Allardyce’s five games to datesince he replaced Alan Pardew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/23/sam-allardyce-replaces-alan-pardew-as-crystal-palace-manager>
 just before Christmas.

The former England manager has been surprised to discover the extent of 
self-doubt that has infected an “under-achieving” Palace squad, epitomised by 
the late capitulation at West Ham on Saturday, with the task of retaining 
Premier League status suddenly daunting.

“It always scares you when you first come in, and I am scared that we won’t 
succeed, yes,” he said. “Definitely, because the last thing I want is to come 
here and not be able to save Crystal Palace with a track record which has never 
had that blemish [of relegation] on it since I’ve been in the Premier League.

“When you go to any new club the fear is as great as when you first start out, 
when you get your first manager’s job, sit behind the desk and think: ‘Making 
this team work or making this team successful is my responsibility now.’

“I’m not fearful of losing my job. It’s the fear of not wanting to blemish my 
record, and [that desire to] help Palace get out of trouble when it’s stayed in 
the Premier League so long recently.

“Let’s face it, we are in crisis mode. We’ve got 16 points from 21 games and 
we won’t feel comfortable until we’ve got the same number of points as games 
played. It’s a hard task to take on, but I’m willing to use all the experience 
I’ve gained to say to the players: ‘Look, I’ve been here before. This is what 
we need to do. If you listen to it and you put it in place as quickly as you 
possibly can, it will help you.’ I am saying it will give them a better chance.”

Palace secured Jeffrey Schlupp from Leicester last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/13/crystal-palace-jeffrey-schlupp-signs>
 for an initial £9m but continue to be hampered by injury problems – neither 
Scott Dann nor James McArthur will be risked against Bolton – while Wilfried 
Zaha and Bakary Sako compete at the Africa Cup of Nations. Allardyce has 
pointed to the upturn he instigated at Sunderland last season through the 
mid-season purchase of Lamine Koné, Wahbi Khazri and Jan Kirchhoff as evidence 
of what can be achieved in the January window.

He still aspires to add a central midfielder and, potentially, a centre-half 
to the ranks as well as those full-backs. “I still need better players to come 
in and help change the mentality and lift it,” he said. “I’ve done that with 
the players I’ve brought in at Blackburn and at Sunderland, and I’d like to do 
it here. The chairman [Steve Parish] would like to do it, but there is only a 
certain amount of money, there’s only limited resources. We have to utilise 
that money the best possibly we can. It is a risk we have to take.”
 