
In the hours after his stunning win against Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/02/novak-djokovic-knocked-out-wimbledon-sam-querrey>
 in the previous round, Sam Querrey watched every little rerun he could get his 
hands on, loving the moment. Having never gone beyond round four of a grand 
slam event, he was eager to enjoy it and as he began his last-16 match here on 
Monday, the fear of a let-down was obvious. But the American is determined to 
extend his 15 minutes of fame and his 6-4, 7-6 (9-7), 6-4 win against Nicolas 
Mahut was an exercise in professionalism.

“I felt like I did great today,” said Querrey, the No28 seed who now plays the 
No6 seed Milos Raonic of Canada in his first grand slam quarter-final. “Nicolas 
is tough. I’ve lost to him the last two times I played him. I knew in my mind 
it was going to be a tough match, even though on paper, to the outsider [it 
would have been]: ‘Ooh, he beat Novak, this is going to be an easy one’. It was 
a match I wanted to win to make it to the quarter-finals. If I didn’t win, 
there would have been a lot of: ‘wow, it was kind of a fluky match against 
Novak because you didn’t back it up.’ I feel like I did a really good job of 
putting my head down and playing really well today.”

Andy Murray defeats Nick Kyrgios to set up Jo-Wilfried Tsonga quarter-final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/04/andy-murray-nick-kyrgios-wimbledon-match-report>
With his big serve and strong forehand, Querrey has been as high as No17 in 
the world and has earned more than $7m in prize money. But victories over the 
likes of Djokovic do not happen very often for players like him and he had no 
qualms in saying he’d enjoyed it as much as he could.

“I’m not going to lie,” he said. “After the Novak match, I watched every 
highlight I could over and over. Enjoyed the hell out of that moment. I’m just 
going to keep kind of enjoying myself, hang with my friends and family, 
practice tomorrow, get ready for the next match.”

Mahut was appearing in the fourth round of a grand slam for the first time and 
must have wondered what he had done to offend the organisers, who put the match 
on Court 18, wherehe lost that 11-hour, five-minute marathon against John Isner 
in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2010/jun/24/wimbledon-2010-isner-mahut>. The 
Frenchman is enjoying something of an Indian summer to his career and is a fine 
grass-court player but Querrey was too solid. Having taken the first set thanks 
to one break, he recovered from 3-1 down to win the second-set tiebreak and 
then eased through the third to advance to the last eight.

Should he get past Raonic, a man he leads 2-1 in completed matches, including 
a win here in 2012, then his parents, who missed his win over Mahut, are likely 
to return, having left after the Djokovic match. “They actually moved their 
flights back to watch the remainder of the Novak match,” he said. “My dad took 
the whole week off of work last week, and my mom, I don’t really have an excuse 
for her [smiling]. I think they would [come back if he makes the semi-finals], 
for sure. I don’t think they would hesitate to fly back for that.”

Raonic looked in trouble after he dropped the first two sets to Belgium’s 
David Goffin. But the big Canadian raised his game as the match wore on and 
Goffin, who had admitted to being exhausted after playing through the weekend 
because of rain, faded to give Raonic a 4-6, 3-6, 6-4, 6-4, 6-4 win.

Pablo Cuevas in pee-related controversy during Wimbledon doubles loss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/04/pablo-cuevas-pee-controversy-wimbledon-doubles-marcel-granollers-jonny-marray-adil-shamasdin>
Roger Federer, meanwhile, crushed the American Steve Johnson 6-2, 6-3, 7-5 to 
reach the last eight without dropping a set. The Swiss continues to insist he 
is not yet 100% after a recent back injury and knows that he is likely to face 
a much tougher test when he plays Marin Cilic. The Croat, who advanced when Kei 
Nishikori retired trailing 6-1, 6-1 because of a rib injury,beat Federer in the 
semi-finals of the US Open in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2014/sep/06/us-open-2014-roger-federer-vs-marin-cilic-live>
 on his way to his first grand slam title.

“He’s very aggressive,” Federer said. “He blew me off the court at the US Open 
[so] I know what I’m getting into. But I’m happy about my game as well, that 
I’ve been able to rise now to the occasion and play a really good match against 
Johnson today. I think it was by far my best match.”

The Frenchman Lucas Pouille edged out Bernard Tomic 10-8 in the final set to 
reach his first grand slam quarter-final, where he will play either the former 
runner-up Tomas Berdych or another Czech, Jiri Vesely.
 