
Samantha Stosur <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> has scored 
a typically rollercoaster three-set win to reach the fourth round of the BNP 
Paribas Open in California.


Australia’s former US Open champion battled back from a service break down in 
the deciding set to eke out a 6-4 2-6 6-4 victory over American Christina 
McHale.


Bernard Tomic forced out of Indian Wells Masters with wrist injury
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/15/bernard-tomic-forced-out-of-indian-wells-masters-with-wrist-injury>
Stosur dropped serve to love to fall behind 3-0 before reeling off six of the 
next seven games to take the two-hour thriller.


Seeded 26th, Stosur is likely to face two-time Australian Open champion 
Victoria Azarenka for a place in the quarter-finals in Indian Wells.


Earlier, Swiss seventh seed Belinda Bencic and former champion Ana Ivanovic 
were both sent packing.


Bencic was stunned by Slovakia’s Magdalena Rybarikova 6-4 3-6 6-3 while former 
world No 1 Ivanovic was beaten by Czech Karolina Pliskova 6-2 6-0.


The 97th-ranked Rybarikova eliminated Australia’s Daria Gavrilova in her 
previous match.


After an uneven start at the Indian Wells Tennis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Garden, 18th seed Pliskova’s game 
clicked into gear in spectacular fashion, reeling off 10 consecutive games to 
close out her one-sided victory.


Ivanovic entered the tournament fresh off a run to the quarter-finals and 
semi-finals in Dubai and St Petersburg, respectively, while Pliskova had 
suffered a couple of early exits in the Middle East.


'Nick, stop using 'F' words': umpire scolds Kyrgios in Indian Wells loss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/13/nick-stop-using-f-words-umpire-scolds-kyrgios-in-indian-wells-loss>
Pliskova, perhaps, perked up in seeing Ivanovic across the net. She had won 
all three of her previous encounters with Ivanovic, including earlier this year 
in Sydney.


“We’ve played a few times already and I’ve always won. But I think I played 
really good tennis today and I’m happy that I made [the next round] so fast,” 
said Pliskova, who powered in 18 winners.


Next up for Pliskova will be Britain’s Johanna Konta, who advanced 6-4 6-1 
over Czech Denisa Allertova, who had conquered second-seeded Australian Open 
champion Angelique Kerber in the previous round.


Rybarikova advanced to another challenging test against US Open runner-up 
Roberta Vinci.


The ninth-seeded Italian hurried past Elina Svitolina of Ukraine 6-1 6-3 to 
book her spot in the fourth round.
 