
Samantha Stosur’s Melbourne Park malaise remains as debilitating as ever, with 
the veteran jolted from theAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> in straight sets.


Stosur added another chapter to her miserable record at home on Monday night, 
losing 6-4 7-6 to the Czech qualifier Kristyna Pliskova.


Nick Kyrgios cruises into second round of Australian Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/19/nick-kyrgios-cruises-into-second-round-of-australian-open>
Fourth-round finishes in 2006 and 2010 remain Stosur’s best results in her 
home grand slam.


At the age of 31 that is unlikely to change for the 2011 US Open champion: 
certainly on Monday night’s evidence, when Stosur fought for one hour and 43 
minutes but could not push the match to a third set.

Not since 2012 has Stosur exited the Melbourne tournament without winning a 
set.


Stosur was seeded 25th and fully expected to account for Pliskova. Pliskova is 
ranked No114 in the world and has played second fiddle to her twin sister and 
world No12 Karolina throughout her time on the WTA circuit.

“It was the biggest match of my career,” Pliskova, who was troubled by a leg 
injury in the contest, said.

Stosur started her 14th Australian Open as the top-ranked local hope in the 
women’s draw, as has been the case so many times. Unfortunately for the 
Queenslander, it was not the only repetitive element of her campaign. Stosur 
broke back twice in the second set, most notably when Pliskova was serving for 
the match at 5-4.

The comeback continued. Stosur had two set points but failed to convert 
either, with Pliskova holding serve to push the set to a tiebreaker. Pliskova 
took control of the contest, thanks to her powerful serve and fittingly it was 
the 23-year-old’s 10th ace that finished the match.

Pliskova smacked Stosur in the face with her serve and sent down two aces in 
the tiebreak.

The Australian tennis great Todd Woodbridge says he is unsure how much longer 
Stosur will continue her career after her disappointing first-round exit. “I’m 
not sure how much longer she could play with that level because that would 
become frustrating when you’ve played at higher levels than what we saw,” 
Woodbridge said on Tuesday.

“I thought last night was a real disappointment. She didn’t play anywhere near 
to the level she is capable of.”




Woodbridge said in previous years the pressure and expectation of her home 
grand slam may have weighed on Stosur but Monday night’s performance suggested 
bigger problems with her game.

“I thought this summer – I called every one of her matches in Brisbane, Sydney 
and last night – she just has not been hitting the ball very well,” Woodbridge 
said. “She’s not playing as solid tennis as she was previously.

“She’s [almost] 32 years of age and I wonder whether that now if her best 
tennis could be past her – that’s quite a possibility.”
TennisAustralia (@TennisAustralia) 
Unfortunately this match has slipped away from #Stosur 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Stosur?src=hash>, losing 6-4 7-6. But she'll 
rebound like always. Head up Sam!pic.twitter.com/eNHzLBYuON 
<https://t.co/eNHzLBYuON>
 <https://twitter.com/TennisAustralia/status/689048641151995904> January 18, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/TennisAustralia/status/689048641151995904> 
Stosur’s struggles at Melbourne Park 

1st round exit: 2016, 2012, 2005, 2002


2nd round exit: 2015, 2013, 2007, 2004


3rd round exit: 2014, 2011, 2009, 2003


4th round exit: 2010, 2006.
 