
Independent lab tests have found that some Samsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> TVs in Europe appear to use 
less energy during official testing conditions than they do during real-world 
use, raising questions about whether they are set up to game energy efficiency 
tests.

The European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>
 says it will investigate any allegations of cheating the tests and has pledged 
to tighten energy efficiency regulations to outlaw the use of so-called “defeat 
devices” in TVs or other consumer products, after several EU states raised 
similar concerns.

The apparent discrepancy between real-world and test performance of the TVs is 
reminiscent of theVW scandal that originated in the US last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/30/emissions-scandal-how-the-drive-for-diesel-ran-out-of-gas>
. The car company has admitted fitting software to 11m diesel vehicles 
worldwide which meant the cars produced less pollution during testing than 
real-world driving.

Samsung strongly denies that its TVs’ “motion lighting” feature is designed to 
fool official energy efficiency tests or that it constitutes a defeat device. 
The company says it reduces screen brightness in response to numerous types of 
real-world content including fast-moving action movies and sports and slower 
moving footage such as weather reports - not just during test conditions.

Brussels targets super-sized TVs in drive for energy efficiency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/18/brussels-targets-super-sized-tvs-in-drive-for-energy-efficiency>
“There is no comparison [between motion lighting and VW defeat devices],” a 
Samsung spokesman said. “This is not a setting that only activates during 
compliance testing. On the contrary, it is an ‘out of the box’ setting, which 
reduces power whenever video motion is detected. Not only that, the content 
used for testing energy consumption has been designed by the international 
electrotechnical commission to best model actual average picture level 
internationally.”

The apparent differences came to light in unpublished lab tests by an 
EU-funded research group calledComplianTV 
<http://www.compliantv.eu/eu/about-the-project/home> which recorded 
consistently higher energy consumption rates for the company’s models in 
real-world situations than in official test conditions.

The lab studies found that Samsung’s ‘motion lighting’ feature reduced the TV 
sets’ brightness – and power consumption – under international electrotechnical 
commission (IEC) test conditions. These involve the playback of fast sequences 
of varied material, such as recorded TV shows, DVDs and live broadcasts.

But under real-world viewing conditions, no reductions in power consumption 
were registered, making the sets’ power consumption, fuel bills and carbon 
emissions correspondingly higher.

After tests in February, a ComplianTV report, which did not name Samsung, 
said: “The laboratories observed different TV behaviours during the 
measurements and this raised the possibility of the TV’s detecting a test 
procedure and adapting their power consumption accordingly. Such phenomenon was 
not proven within the ComplianTV tests, but some tested TVs gave the impression 
that they detected a test situation.”

“Samsung is meeting the letter of the law but not the spirit of the law,” 
Rudolf Heinz, the project manager of ComplianTV’s product lab, told the 
Guardian.

World's energy systems at risk from global warming, say leading firms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/01/worlds-energy-systems-at-risk-from-global-warming-say-leading-firms>
Some of the ComplianTV study results were presented at a Royal Society meeting 
sponsored by theEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Saving 
Trust in London on Tuesday.

There is no suggestion that Samsung, the world’s biggest TV manufacturer, 
behaved illegally, although energy efficiency campaigners claim that EU testing 
procedures are overly generous.

In response to a Guardian inquiry, the European commission pledged to outlaw 
the use of defeat devices within the bloc’s TV ecodesign regulations, and said 
that any allegations of their use would be fully investigated.

“The commission is proposing specific text to clarify that [the use of defeat 
devices] is illegal and that products found to behave differently under test 
conditions cannot be considered compliant,” a spokesperson said. “The 
commission will investigate whether this practice is used in other product 
sectors.”

Several EU states have already complained about the problem, including the 
Swedish Energy Agency in a letter to the European commission earlier this year.

 “The Swedish Energy Agency’s Testlab has come across televisions that clearly 
recognise the standard film (IEC) used for testing,” says the letter, which the 
Guardian has seen. “These displays immediately lower their energy use by 
adjusting the brightness of the display when the standard film is being run. 
This is a way of avoiding the market surveillance authorities and should be 
addressed by the commission.” The letter did not name any manufacturers.

“There’s more than a whiff of diesel fumes coming out of this, with officials 
finding gadgets that recognise test conditions and alter their behaviour,” said 
Jack Hunter, a spokesman for the European Environmental Bureau an environmental 
watchdog funded by European governments and international bodies. “If deception 
is proved for TVs, there’s bound to be a fresh hoard of angry customers à la 
Volkswagen.”

Three years earlier, the UK also told the commission that it had received 
intelligence indicating that some TVs had been pre-installed with default 
software settings that changed static video signals to dynamic ones, reducing 
luminance and power consumption.

“The purpose seems to be to pass the peak luminance measurement test and then 
reduce luminance (and power) to get a better energy label ranking when the on 
power is measured,” the correspondence says. “All very clever and it is not 
dimming so much that it makes a huge difference, but does the commission 
consider this an acceptable practice or is this a non-compliant activity?”

Emissions scandal: how the drive for diesel ran out of gas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/30/emissions-scandal-how-the-drive-for-diesel-ran-out-of-gas>
 The commission did not respond to a request for its answer to the question. 
But one UK market surveillance officer told the Guardian that the use of defeat 
devices was “an area of increasing risk to us – not just in TVs but across the 
board and future programmes are being duly adjusted to look at these areas.”



 Research underway by the National Resources Defense Council (NRDC) in the US 
has also uncovered what Noah Horowitz, the NRDC’s director for energy 
efficiency standards called “a curious anomaly with one manufacturer’s TV’s”.

 More testing is planned to establish whether manufacturers are gaming 
television testing procedures. But “it wouldn’t take much for an unscrupulous 
manufacturer to install software to detect the unique ‘signature’ of the test 
and to then have the unit go into some sort of eco-mode and produce superior 
results (ie lower energy use) that wouldn’t occur under normal usage,” Horowitz 
said.



Televisions typically consume up to 10% of a typical household’s electricity 
use, according tocoolproducts <http://www.coolproducts.eu/product/tvs>, a 
coalition of NGOs which campaigns for energy-saving product designs. The group 
says that across Europe, TVs now account for as much energy use as the combined 
electricity consumption of Sweden and Portugal, and that this figure is growing.

 