
For the rabid restaurant fan like me, a trip to San Francisco is like being 
dropped into a sweetie shop with the key thrown away.There’s a restaurant in 
San Francisco for every 376 people 
<http://www.creditdonkey.com/where-foodies.html>, the highest density in the US.

The odds are stacked in the city’s favour: the local produce is magnificent 
with peachy fresh seafood – Dungeness crabs in season and Hog Island oysters. 
And the sunny terrain surrounding the foggy city bursts with fertility – and 
it’s not just grapes.

The stalls at the Ferry Building Farmer’s Market  
<http://www.cuesa.org/markets>deliver almost synaesthetic pleasure – just smell 
those hues. San Francisco’s farm-to-fork reputation was cemented when this 
landmark building reopened its doors back in 2003, encouraging people to 
explore newly excellent American cheeses and ask for their Early Girl tomatoes 
or Walla Walla onions by name. Before they became wearyingly ubiquitous, I had 
my first ever cupcake there – carrot, piled high with cream cheese frosting; it 
made quite the impression. It turned out to be gluten-free – there’s a real 
focus on organic and environmentally sound practices as well as, yes, food 
faddism in the city. But I neither knew nor cared.
 I left my tarts in San Francisco … desserts at Craftsman and Wolves in the 
Mission District 
This is a town that breeds invention and innovation. Nobody’s hidebound by 
tradition, and restaurants such asSaison <http://saisonsf.com/> and Benu 
<http://www.benusf.com/>, both newly-blessed (or cursed) with the full three 
Michelin stars 
<http://sf.eater.com/2014/10/21/7009551/michelin-guide-2015-bay-area-analysis> 
as of this October, are as likely to chuck out the tablecloths as they are to 
marry Asian flavours to intensive French techniques.

It pays to go with an open mind, and hunt down the likes of ginger churros 
with miso caramel (Dirty Habit <http://www.dirtyhabitsf.com/>) or beef tendon 
puffs (Alta CA <http://altaca.co/>) or home-made headcheese (Trou Normand 
<http://www.trounormandsf.com/>). Pleasingly, the broom-up-the-ass style of 
service has disappeared too; when even the Ritz Carlton has de-starched its 
restaurant, you know that here you can just lean back and relax.

There’s a fluidity about San Francisco’s new-Cali cooking, a light, almost 
feminine touch – perhaps because two of the scene’s pioneers were women: Alice 
Waters creating seismic ripples from herChez Panisse in Berkeley 
<http://www.chezpanisse.com/about/alice-waters/>, and Judy Rodgers (RIP) of the 
still-wonderfulZuni <http://www.zunicafe.com/>. The people with restaurant 
money to spend are well up for blowing raspberries to convention too: tech 
start-ups and established new media superstars. Twitter, incentivised by 
attractive tax and rent breaks, has landed in a previously (and if I’m honest, 
still) sketchy part of town, bringing in its wake a wave of new, exciting 
restaurants. Currently, hot pop-up and street-food collectiveThe Hall 
<http://www.thehallsf.com/#about> (the bánh mi from Little Green Cyclo 
<http://littlegreencyclo.com/> are outstanding) is making waves in an abandoned 
snooker hall, previously only notable for people shooting up in its doorways.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417796747898%2F2b047602-51cb-4545-b4e6-2991b3965df3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F5%2F1417796747898%2F2b047602-51cb-4545-b4e6-2991b3965df3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Craftsman and Wolves Photograph: PR 
This buzz-chasing and thrill-of-the-new also means that, yes, you’ll queue. 
But who cares if you can’t score the hottest tables? There’s always something 
delicious round the corner: in addition to the famous city-centre Chinatown, 
there are mini versions in Richmond and Inner Sunset; or hit Little Saigon in 
The Tenderloin (contrarily, I came here for Thai atLers Ros 
<http://www.lersros.com/>). In the Western Addition, there’s one of the US’s 
last three remaining Japantowns, for ramen slurping and kawaii gift-shopping. 
And who could resist the Mexicana of The Mission, or the Little Italy of North 
Beach?

The choice is so dizzying: better even, I’d say, than New York. And it lacks 
the Big Apple’s attitude – I don’t think we ate anywhere that diners at 
neighbouring tables didn’t chat, offering restaurant advice and gossip, and 
even – when our taxis failed to show – lifts to our destination.

Given the sheer scale of the numbers, this is clearly a very personal 
selection. But you’d have to try very hard, or be particularly contrary, to 
have a bad meal in San Francisco; I haven’t managed it yet. It’s also an 
astonishingly beautiful city – if you can raise your eyes from the plate long 
enough to appreciate it.

The contemporary superstars

Every week, there’s a new arrival to the restaurant scene, a new spot for 
getting Yelpers and Instagrammers hot under the napkins. But frequently the 
hype is more than deserved: fierce competition sees off duds pretty rapidly and 
the stars shine bright. Recent arrivalMonsieur Benjamin 
<http://www.monsieurbenjamin.com/>, the funky sibling to Corey Lee’s Benu, is 
where a new generation is thrilling to the joys of flawless renditions of 
devilled eggs,blanquette de veau and butter lettuce salad. The staid world of 
patisserie isn’t resistant to innovation in SF:Craftsman and Wolves 
<http://www.craftsman-wolves.com/> – on a gorgeously food-focused strip of The 
Mission – dishes up hot salted butter caramel drink with croissant shavings, 
and their notorious egg-yolk pooling, sausage-studded Rebel Within savoury 
muffin. I rate local heroesFlour + Water <http://www.flourandwater.com/> for 
their perfectionist in-house butchery and salume-making. Street food might not 
be as huge here as it is in LA or Portland, but the roamingOff the Grid network 
<http://offthegridsf.com/markets> of foodtrucks is making a big noise; I loved 
the Coca-Cola-braised pork with preserved mustard seeds on steamed buns fromThe 
Chairman <http://www.thechairmantruck.com/>.

My pick: State Bird Provisions <http://statebirdsf.com/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417715685726%2F2473185f-9a83-4885-ab51-0c3cb01e47e4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417715685726%2F2473185f-9a83-4885-ab51-0c3cb01e47e4-1020x612.jpeg>
 A hamachi-avocado and seaweed cracker at State Bird Provisions 
Meriting every syllable of praise that’s heaped on it, Stuart Brioza and 
Nicole Krasinski’s punky little restaurant is a genuine game-changer: I’ve 
never encountered its like. Matching the ambition of the dreaded fine-dining to 
a riotous atmosphere (the queues! The furniture and walls made from pinboard!) 
plus a touch of the dim-sum trolley, every mouthful, whether ordered from the 
menu or grabbed from the circulating trays, is a revelation. I still dream 
about the sultry duck liver mousse with almond biscuits; the ‘State Bird’ – a 
quail – grilled into smokiness on its bed of gently pickled, sautéed onions and 
crowned with Parmesan; the smoked duck ham with umeboshi. You may have to beg 
or wait months for a reservation, but if you only hit one restaurant in San 
Francisco, make it this one.

The old school

Just because tourists love a “storied” restaurant doesn’t mean we should 
dismiss them. I adore San Francisco’s hoary old-timers, preserved in some kind 
of delicious aspic – everything from vast, crisp apple fritter donuts fromBob’s 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Bobs-Donut-Pastry-Shop/116148785065071> to 
equally vast, expertly mesquite-grilled steaks at the clubbyAlfred’s (leave 
their uninspired Italian food for the tourists and don’t miss the justifiably 
legendary martinis).

I’ve waited in line, fuelled with Anchor Steam beer, for a seat at the marble 
counter atSwan Oyster Depot <http://www.sfswanoysterdepot.com/>, for its 
Dungeness crab, smoked salmon and, of course, briny bivalves. Seemingly 
untouched since its birth in 1912, it’s a beautiful timewarp; insiders swear by 
the off-menu crudo-style sashimi, and the buttery, sweet crab fat, perfect for 
dunking in chunks of so-San Francisco sourdough bread. (

Nob Hill offers rich pickings: the outrageous Tonga Room 
<http://www.tongaroom.com/> (it rains indoors!) in classic grand dame hotel, 
The Fairmont; andBig 4 <http://www.big4restaurant.com/> in the more boutiquey 
Scarlet Huntington across the road, all starched tablecloths, green leather 
booths and grand piano. Meatloaf and pot pie: vintage heaven. More cause for 
rejoicing for us retro freaks: venerableSam’s Grill 
<http://www.belden-place.com/samsgrill/> has just reopened for veal cutlets 
Milanese and charbroiled sweetbreads with bacon.

My pick: Tadich Grill <http://www.tadichgrill.com/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417716949874%2Fd5f9687f-79e9-443c-87dd-81af8b7ac430-2060x1051.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417716949874%2Fd5f9687f-79e9-443c-87dd-81af8b7ac430-2060x1051.jpeg>
 A seafood dish at Tadich Grill 
I can chase the buzz alongside the San Franciscans, but I always make time for 
the Tadich Grill, 160 years old and still packing ‘em in. It’s a moment out of 
time preserved with love: the long bar, the wood panelling and mirrored booths, 
the long-aproned senior waiters, the classic cocktails, the neon… it’s all 
thrilling to the fan of classic Americana. And the food’s no slouch either: the 
city’s beloved fish stew,cioppino; Dungeness crab and prawns à la Monza with 
cream and paprika, a nod to the restaurant’s Croatian origins, as is their 
habit of cooking the daily catch over mesquite wood; and rich, rich oysters 
Rockefeller.

The essential brunches

San Franciscans seem happy to queue for anything up to two hours for entry 
into the city’s most popular brunch spots. On a Sunday: this is their new 
religion. Just try getting into Potrero Hill’sPlow <http://www.eatatplow.com/> 
(their lemon ricotta pancakes and golden, crunchy home-fried potatoes are 
almost – almost – worth queuing for); or woodsyOuterlands 
<http://outerlandssf.com/>, where hungry fans set off to foggy Outer Sunset for 
fluffy mini Dutch pancakes with bacon. The Mission’sTartine Bakery 
<http://www.tartinebakery.com/> is a perennial favourite; for me, it has to be 
their insanely buttery ham and gruyere croissants. But why stick to the 
traditional when you can have Italian brunches, or Mexican, or Vietnamese (
Rice, Paper, Scissors <http://www.ricepaperscissors.com/> do a killer fried-egg 
bánh mi)? You can brunch on fromage at gloriously whiffyMission Cheese 
<http://missioncheese.net/> or New Orlean’s-style beignets stuffed with 
crawfish atBrenda’s French Soul Food <http://frenchsoulfood.com/> in the 
Tenderloin. My tip for brunch? Go on a weekday when San Francisco’s at work – 
menus are frequently identical.

My pick: Verbena <http://www.verbenarestaurant.com/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417716108914%2Fead42158-bb9e-4e5d-a0dd-ab3c2b6d8f73-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417716108914%2Fead42158-bb9e-4e5d-a0dd-ab3c2b6d8f73-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Verbena, in Russian Hill, a chic restaurant with great food 
This was a toss-up between Serpentine <http://www.serpentinesf.com/#about> in 
the arty, emerging Dogpatch district, or Russian Hill’s Verbena. Grungy little 
Serpentine gets points for its ramshackle charm and house-cured salmon 
Benedict. But Verbena wins because it’s just so darn San Franciscan, with its 
sprouted seed bread, and duck confit with Chinese broccoli and “rice grits”. 
I’ve never tasted anything like their red corn pancakes with lemon 
verbena-braised strawberries, Asian pear and green fennel butter: every 
mouthful a sweet-savoury-sharp-sticky revelation. It’s chic and high-ceilinged 
inside, and the fact that you can sit outside and people-watch Russian Hill’s 
weekend passeggiata is a true bonus.

The Italians

The city runs on Italian food, whether it’s the cioppino-slingers – the 
tomato, seafood and fish stew is a San Francisco invention – down at 
Fisherman’s Wharf (not for me, thanks) or the evolved, like Flour + Water orSPQR
 <http://www.spqrsf.com/>, with its riot of glorious antipasti. Then there are 
the pizzas: the brash, self-publicising but undoubtedly assured World Pizza 
ChampionTony Gemignani’s empire <http://tonyspizzanapoletana.com/> with his 
limited-edition margherita (only a random 73 made a day…). Or the chic: The 
Mission’sDelfina <http://www.delfinasf.com/restaurant/>, with its farm-to-table 
ethos and queues. Or the reverential:Una Pizza Napoletana 
<http://www.unapizza.com/> in SoMa, where tattooed Anthony Mangieri crafts his 
naturally-leavened pies in the centre of the tall, stark former garage before 
briefly blasting them in the huge wood-fired oven. $25 per pizza for the chance 
to join the worshippers.

My pick: Tosca Cafe <http://toscacafesf.com/>

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417716202176%2F6da1fe64-7ccb-4e91-acdd-4e1d9068d14c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417716202176%2F6da1fe64-7ccb-4e91-acdd-4e1d9068d14c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tosca Cafe and its long, muralled bar 
In the heart of North Beach, where poetry evenings jostle with strip joints, 
lies Tosca Cafe, its arched windows and long, muralled bar a beacon for 
everyone from North Beach bums to Francis Ford Coppola. The kitchen hadn’t 
served food for over 50 years, but now it has passed into the hands of Brit 
April Bloomfield who, with Ken Friedman, has had New Yorkers queuing for seats 
at her Spotted Pig and Breslin. Despite chunterings by the locals at the 
potential blighting of their favourite hangout, the duo have spent a fortune to 
keep it looking much as it did: the murals, the red booths, the jukebox, all 
still here. And now it has the food to match the history; as you’d expect from 
Bloomfield, it’s gutsy and great: towering pillows of foccaccia, imaginative 
pastas –lumaconi and gemelli, fine salumi, and the star – a wonderful whole 
roast chicken. And yes, they still do the booze-laced “house cappuccino”.




The Mexicans

The Mission is home to some of the best tacos and tortillas outside Mexico. We 
spent a blissful, greedy day winding in and out of many of the area’s finest, 
sharing just the one plate of tacos or dividing a burrito (still a mammoth 
meal) in each.La Taqueria <https://www.facebook.com/LaTaqSF?ref=br_rs> won the 
accolade of best burrito in America (and the queues reflect this); it’s fine 
enough, but it’s not a real “Mission” burrito – there’s no rice in the wrap. 
For the fattest real burrito,El Farolito <http://www.elfarolitoinc.com/> a few 
doors down does one the size of a bolster (and we didn’t even supersize it), 
humming with vibrant flavours, in a sticky oilclothed atmosphere that defines 
grungy. A walk down 24th Street gives a real flavour of the area; heading 
towards the beautifully unreconstructed vintage diner St Francis Fountain isLa 
Torta Gorda <http://www.latortagorda.net/Welcome.html>, where their ginormous 
sandwiches are stuffed with all manner of good things: carne asada, grilled 
poblano peppers, or their cultpierna enchilada (pulled pork shank). My 
favourite tacos were from a food truck: smoky carnitas, sparky and vibrant with 
fresh salsa, from El Gallo Giro 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/El-Gallo-Giro-Taco-Truck/172738349427591> at 
23rd and Treat.

My pick: Nopalito <http://www.nopalitosf.com/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417716442142%2F10a77a4e-6dd2-4729-8d6f-f3153ed61a2d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=San%20Francisco%E2%80%99s%20restaurant%20scene%3A%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20bad%20lunch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fdec%2F06%2Fsan-francisco-restaurants-marina-oloughlin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F4%2F1417716442142%2F10a77a4e-6dd2-4729-8d6f-f3153ed61a2d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Nopalito serves some of the best Mexican food in San Francisco. Photograph: 
https://www.flickr.com/photos/94700189@N02/ 
Away from The Mission, but so worth the trip, this bright-windowed restaurant, 
its walls cactus-green and tables bare, dishes out some of the city’s freshest, 
most flavour-bombing Mexican food. And it’s no generic taco joint: cornmasa is 
ground in-house before being crafted into crisp, chilli-toppedtotopos or chewy 
soft tortillas; they even make their own fresh cheese and chorizo. Fish tacos 
are glorious: the white fish seared over wood and piled into tacos with slices 
of fresh orange, ancho chilli – a spiky little salsa of morita chillies and 
tomatillo and chipotle cream. Blowsy squash blossoms are crammed into 
empanadas, cushiony and satisfying. Unusually, the ingredients used in their 
bright, vivid cooking are organic; with its sibling in Sunset, they’re a pair 
of firecrackers.

Delicious surprises

San Francisco is one of those wonderful cities boasting whole streets 
resistant to chains and homogenisation. Every quirky strip has its treasures: 
sure, Chinatown is worthy of its must-visit status, but a wander round Richmond 
for a dumpling crawl is an eye-opener (and not just because of the shops 
selling live frogs or cow’s uterus). Then, even further off the tourist trail 
is the jangly, youthful little Asia that’s Outer Sunset along Irving St, all 
boba tea joints (people queue outside TPumps!) and lurid Chinese bakeries. 
Canteen-like San Tung, with its hand-pulled noodles and outrageous, crisp, 
sweet-sour-hot chicken wings is rammed every evening, for good reason.

I loved the branches of retro-styled groceries Bi-Rite Market 
<http://www.biritemarket.com/> (in The Mission and Western Addition), with 
their lustworthy displays of local produce. The Mission branch has the added 
bonus of its “creamery” a few doors down: all ice-creams made in small batches, 
with slurpable flavours such as malted vanilla with peanut brittle, Sonoma 
honey and lavender, and brown sugar with ginger caramel swirl.Omnivore Books 
<http://omnivorebooks.com/> in Noe Valley, with every book on food you could 
possibly imagine, new and vintage and antiquarian, is truly unmissable. Looking 
for that cookbook you remember from your childhood? This is the place to come.

My pick: Cookin’ (339 Divisadero St, +1 415 861 1854, no website) This 
eccentric Lower Haight treasure isn’t so much shop as wonderland of antique 
(and not-so-antique) kitchenalia. Every inch of the long, dim store is rammed 
with items for cooking – baking, broiling, shaping, slicing, weighing, grating, 
processing – plus several I’d have trouble putting a use to. The American love 
for the Bundt cake is enshrined here, with row after row of tins of various 
vintages. Owner Judy Kaminsky calls it “Recycled Gourmet Appurtenances”, and 
has growled at browsers for over 30 years. But that’s part of the charm of a 
place that, to me at least, is an emporium every bit as magical as anything in 
Diagon Alley.• Accommodation was provided by The Scarlet Huntington (
thescarlethotels.com 
<http://www.thescarlethotels.com/huntington-hotel-san-francisco/>) and The 
Fairmont (fairmont.com <http://www.fairmont.com/san-francisco/>)

• This article was amended on 8 December 2014. The chef running Tosca Cafe is 
April Bloomfield, not Broomfield as we originally had it. This has been 
corrected.

 