
Bernie Sanders <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> has spent 
much of his time on the presidential campaign trail admonishing “casino 
capitalism”. On Monday morning he did so again – this time literally.


“What we’re seeing in Atlantic City encapsulates the ugliness and the greed,” 
the Democratic hopeful told a crowd just off the famous casino strip in the New 
Jersey gambling town, “the greed and the recklessness we have seen fromDonald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and Carl Icahn.”

Interrupted by howls of disapproval from the crowd, he asked: “Oh, you know 
Donald Trump? Well, I take it you don’t think he is a brilliant, successful 
businessman who can bring the kind of prosperity to America that he has brought 
here.”

If American voters want to know what a United States ruled by Trump might look 
like, they could start by looking here.

Boardwalk Hall, the ornate art deco hall where Sanders spoke, is steps from 
the now-shuttered Trump Plaza casino, where a boarded-over marquee is notably 
absent Trump’s name. The presumptive Republican nominee sued to have it 
removed. It’s also just a mile from the Trump Taj Mahal casino.

This is one of America’s most distressed cities. It is about a week from 
bankruptcy, still rebuilding from “Superstorm” Sandy and reeling from 
consecutive casino closures.

It’s also a town molded by Trump, whose name stomps across the top of the 
nearby Taj Mahal casino. He has sued to have his name removed from that 
building too, buthad a 10% stake in the business now owned by billionaire Icahn 
until this February 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/trump-taj-mahal-casino-out-of-bankruptcy-into-carl-icahns-hands-1456545458>
.

Bernie Sanders adds more delegates, but chances of winning are still slim to 
none
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/07/bernie-sanders-adds-washington-delegates>
Nevertheless, though many of Sanders’ supporters knew the odds were stacked 
against their man in an increasingly untenable bid for the White House, they 
refused to relinquish hope.

“People who say the Sanders campaign can’t make it – it doesn’t matter,” said 
Riley Rooster, a 27-year-old New Orleans native who has traveled across the 
country for the last two months to volunteer for Sanders. “It’s about 
reinvigorating the youth vote,” he said. Sanders supporters, he said, have 
“legitimate hope, and compassion, and love in their hearts … and we’re hoping 
to use that hope and love as our weapon”.

Less than a month out from New Jersey’s 7 June primary, things increasingly 
look desperate for the Vermont senator. As things stand, former secretary of 
state Hillary Clinton needs 155 delegates to secure the Democratic nomination, 
and Sanders needs 929. Although Clinton only leads Sanders by about 300 
delegates, she has a huge advantage in superdelegates – party elites who are 
not bound by primary results and favor her in vast numbers.

In this state, an average of two polls conducted by New Jersey’s Rutgers and 
Monmouth universities put Clinton ahead of Sanders by 18.5%. As elsewhere in 
the Democratic race, New Jersey’s 126 delegates will be awarded proportionally, 
meaning even if he wins, Clinton’s delegate count will also increase.

As Sanders pointed out at the Atlantic City rally, however, he fairs better 
than Clinton ingeneral election polls 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/2016_presidential_race.html>
. On average, Clinton has a 6.5% average lead over Trump. Sanders has a 13.4% 
advantage.

Poker face off

Atlantic City’s connections to the presumptive Republican nominee seem endless.

The state’s unpopular governor, Chris Christie, who is attempting to take over 
the city’s government in a fashion similar to Michigan’s takeover of Detroit, 
was just appointed to Trump’s “transition team”.

“Governor Christie is an extremely knowledgeable and loyal person with the 
tools and resources to put together an unparalleled transition team,” said 
Trump in a statement.

At Sanders’ local campaign office on Atlantic Avenue, the city’s main 
commercial street, volunteers rustled up support for Monday’s rally inside a 
stuffy storefront normally home to Unite Here Local 54, a service workers’ 
union.

That storefront is feet away from the road that leads directly to the Taj, 
where workers thiswinter lost a court case to Icahn 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/trump-taj-mahal-owner-icahn-wins-fight-with-casino-union-1452877380>
, the casino’s new billionaire owner who purchased the asset from Trump. 
Trump’s remaining ownership stake was negotiated after a lawsuit to remove his 
name, that was settled with a 10% piece of the business and an agreement to 
leave the Trump name plastered on and throughout the building.

“I let them use my name, but I have nothing to do with it,” Trump told NPR in 
2014 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2014/08/06/338367389/donald-trump-sues-to-remove-his-name-from-atlantic-city-casinos>
, when he started his lawsuit to get his name removed from two casinos. “I got 
out seven years ago – my timing was impeccable.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fbernie-sanders-atlantic-city-casino-donald-trump-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aed53d7cfca9ea06458130e05a132d66eb59f47%2F0_0_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sanders%20decries%20'casino%20capitalism'%20on%20Trump's%20turf%20%E2%80%93%20a%20decaying%20Atlantic%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fbernie-sanders-atlantic-city-casino-donald-trump-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sanders%20decries%20%27casino%20capitalism%27%20on%20Trump%27s%20turf%20%E2%80%93%20a%20decaying%20Atlantic%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fbernie-sanders-atlantic-city-casino-donald-trump-capitalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5aed53d7cfca9ea06458130e05a132d66eb59f47%2F0_0_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 Inside Trump Taj Mahal, branding related to the Republicans frontrunner is 
inescapable. Photograph: Jessica Glenza for the Guardian 
Trump, as much as any Borgata or Caesar’s mogul, has shaped the landscape of 
the city. The first casino to bear Trump’s name opened in 1984 – the Harrah’s 
at Trump Plaza, according to theUniversity of Las Vegas Center for Gaming 
Research <http://gaming.unlv.edu/abstract/nj_main.html>. Trump Castle opened in 
1985, and was renamed Trump Marina in 1996. Trump Taj Mahal opened in 1990.

Trump did successfully have his name removed from Trump Plaza, and the hulking 
black shell of a building now mars the city’s boardwalk, with no evidence of 
its previous owner visible.

The city was the scene for three of Trump’s four bankruptcies 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2015/sep/21/carly-fiorina/trumps-four-bankruptcies/>
. The first camejust one year after the Taj opened 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1991/12/31/business/year-finance-newsmakers-1991-money-movers-caught-turbulent-times-90-s-donald-j.html>
, when the $1bn casino (financed by Trump) had $3bn in debt. Trump Hotels and 
Casinos Resorts, the group that held the Taj and Trump Plaza before Icahn, 
restructured in 2004, becoming Trump Entertainment Resorts. That went bankrupt 
in 2009,according to PolitiFact 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2015/sep/21/carly-fiorina/trumps-four-bankruptcies/>
, leading to the Icahn takeover.


For local business owners in Atlantic City, construction companies and 
investors in the casinos, these bankruptcies meant personally losing thousands 
of dollars so Trump could escape debt. Many counted reduced retirements and 
construction debts in their losses.

The Press of Atlantic City 
<http://www.pressofatlanticcity.com/news/donald-trump-in-atlantic-city-jackpot-or-crackpot/article_7ae16c2c-3d14-11e5-aa3b-5b415c6c45e9.html>
 reported contractors viewed Trump “as a jerk and a bum”.

“It was a joke among all the [subcontractors] that you’d tack on an extra 10% 
on to your bids” to balance against delayed payments, Dave Farragut, president 
of United States Roofing Corporation of Norristown, Pennsylvania,told the 
newspaper 
<http://www.pressofatlanticcity.com/news/donald-trump-in-atlantic-city-jackpot-or-crackpot/article_7ae16c2c-3d14-11e5-aa3b-5b415c6c45e9.html>
 about a $600,000 roofing job he picked up at the Trump Taj Mahal. “He was slow 
pay, everybody knew.”

The Trump brand

Inside Trump Taj Mahal, branding related to the New Yorker is inescapable. The 
casino’s frequent visitors enjoy Trump One membership, which gives you access 
to special offers. A monumental black and white portrait of the man hangs in 
the first store seen from the escalator to the shopping level. Above the 
photograph is a Trump quote: “You have to think anyway, why not think big?”

Each receipt for a bottle of water or a muffin bears Trump’s name. In bright 
lights, “Donald J Trump presents the Taj Mahal” adorns the valet entrance. 
Trump’s name is on the ice buckets.

They bet everything on the casinos and now they’re losing
David Peter Alan, Sanders supporter 
But when New Jersey residents voice their displeasure with the city’s former 
baron, they are equally outspoken. This winter, an 18-foot homemade Trump lawn 
sign in nearby Egg Harbor Township was defaced twice in a month thenset on fire 
<http://www.pressofatlanticcity.com/news/donald-trump-supporter-s-billboard-burned-in-egg-harbor-township/article_008616a0-ead2-11e5-8e6d-a362f226ea38.html>
.

“These jobs were good jobs back in the early 80s,” said Valerie McMorris, a 
cocktail waitress and member of Local 54, at the Sanders rally Monday, 
referring to casino work. “That was a time when the owners were hands on.”


“Then you have people like Donald Trump,” she said, to a chorus of boos. “I 
was a cocktail waitress, I had a pension, I had job security … All these things 
are gone because a billionaire from Wall Street used the bankruptcy laws to 
strip the workers of all these things,” she said, referring to Icahn and Trump.

Away from casinos, small businesses are also suffering income losses in 
Atlantic City, not only from casino workers but from municipal employees who 
delayed their paychecks for a month when the city couldn’t pay its bills.

“Economy is bad, very bad,” said Trupti Shah, one of a family of proprietors 
of Peter’s Convenience Store on Arctic Avenue. “I got robbed in a week two 
times.”

Shah used to supervise slots at a Hilton-owned property, but lost her job when 
the company reorganized. She then took a position at the ill-fated Revel, which 
lasted only two years before the $2.4bn casino shuttered andsold for just $82m 
<http://www.nj.com/atlantic/index.ssf/2015/04/revel_casino_sold_for_3_of_cost_to_build_to_florida_developer_attorney_says.html>
.

“When we had only the casinos, that was good. But when they give permission to 
Philadelphia they screwed Atlantic City,” she said. The native of Gujarat, 
India, blames the government entirely for this. “Nobody cares about Atlantic 
City.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fbernie-sanders-atlantic-city-casino-donald-trump-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97a9baafc73112f2672d30fffe49609b1bb5bef1%2F0_7_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sanders%20decries%20'casino%20capitalism'%20on%20Trump's%20turf%20%E2%80%93%20a%20decaying%20Atlantic%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fbernie-sanders-atlantic-city-casino-donald-trump-capitalism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sanders%20decries%20%27casino%20capitalism%27%20on%20Trump%27s%20turf%20%E2%80%93%20a%20decaying%20Atlantic%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fbernie-sanders-atlantic-city-casino-donald-trump-capitalism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97a9baafc73112f2672d30fffe49609b1bb5bef1%2F0_7_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 A boarded up house stands just steps from the casino. Photograph: Jessica 
Glenza for the Guardian 
At one time, Atlantic City seemed to mint money. 

A losing hand

Though the town is famous for its casinos, they have been here for less than 
40 years. Casino gambling was legalized in New Jersey in 1978 through a 
constitutional amendment that restricted casinos to Atlantic City.


The measure was billed as a way to revitalize the town, which lost tourism 
when travel to destinations such as Florida and the Bahamas became easier. 
Other taxes on casino revenue, such as an 8% tax on gross casino revenue to aid 
senior citizens and the handicapped, eased the transition.

In 2006, thousands of visitors spent $6.5bn at casinos alone, a marquee year. 

But by 2011, that had fallen to $4.5bn. The number of slots alone reduced by a 
quarter, from nearly 36,000 to around 27,000. In that space of five years more 
than 10,400 people lost casino jobs.

Now, the city is at a roughly 32-year low number of casino employees. The 
latest estimates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics for Atlantic City put the 
number of hospitality employees at about 34,700. In 1984, the second year the 
Center for Gaming Research began tracking it, casinos alone employed 33,681.

Unemployment in Atlantic City hovered at 7.8% in March. That is significant 
progress from a year earlier, when the city’s unemployment rate was 11.6%, but 
it is still above the national average.

“They bet everything on the casinos and now they’re losing,” said David Peter 
Alan, a 68-year-old socialist and Sanders supporter from South Orange, New 
Jersey. In 2014, he traveled to Atlantic City to watch the closing of Trump 
Plaza.

“I saw the empty room with its 1980s garishness with one slot machine after 
another doing nothing,” he said. “I wanted to see it, I made the trip to AC to 
see it.”

Problematically, Atlantic City’s fortunes are beginning to impact the rest of 
New Jersey.

Sanders is bad on detail, but he has what Hillary lacks: the spirit of protest 
| Jill Abramson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/09/hillary-clinton-winning-bernie-sanders-supporters-campaign-jill-abramson>
Alan, a transit activist, said he is now concerned because limp casino 
revenues have halved grants transit authorities use to provide buses to the 
disabled and elderly.

New Jersey’s bond rating, essentially its creditworthiness, has been 
downgraded eight times by three separate agencies since Christie took office. 
Many now fear that if Atlantic City isn’t bailed out, it could worsen all New 
Jersey’s cities lots by making it more expensive to borrow money.

That has precipitated a state takeover of the city, with the likes of 
Detroit’s former emergency manager Kevyn Orr, whoshut off families’ water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/true-north/2014/jun/25/detroits-water-war-a-tap-shut-off-that-could-impact-300000-people>
 in Detroit, and George Norcross, south Jersey’smost notorious Democratic 
powerbroker 
<http://www.pressofatlanticcity.com/news/norcross-involvement-in-atlantic-city-concerning-fulop-says/article_3632f43c-114f-11e6-84e5-d7ea1e57fc6b.html>
, advising the governor.

“So, we’re either going to do it, or Atlantic City is going to bankrupt,” said 
Christie about his state senate-backed takeover bill. A separate takeover bill 
that would have bought the city more time and installed an advisory committee 
with local leaders, but the bill was defeated last week. “I know there are many 
in the Republican caucuses who believe that might be the best option.”

And despite that many attribute flagging revenue in AC to fierce casino 
competition 
<http://www.cardplayer.com/poker-news/13189-a-look-at-casino-growth-in-the-united-states>
 in neighboring states, a referendum this year allows voters to decide whether 
to put morecasinos in North Jersey 
<http://www.nj.com/politics/index.ssf/2016/03/nj_voters_to_decide_whether_to_allow_north_jersey.html>
, and end Atlantic City’s monopoly in the state.

“We’re in trouble. We’re a community in deep trouble,” said 28-year-old Alex 
Stein, a Sanders supporter. “We’re on life support. We’re staring down the 
barrel of a state takeover … I’m watching a lot of businesses close down around 
the area. We’ve had five, six casinos close, heroin’s become a huge problem.”

Still, he said, Sanders’ goal does not seem out of reach. “This is far better 
odds than I’m used to.”
Democratic delegates 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/03/2016-primary-delegates-embed/?party=Dem> 