
Those who envision themselves living in Santa Monica, the wealthy and 
politically progressive coastal enclave west of Los Angeles, no doubt envision 
themselves living happily there. It would seem to have everything: miles of 
coastline with beaches open to all, the striking Santa Monica mountains just to 
the north, plenty of equally striking southern-Californian architecture (its 
many celebrity residents include theillustrious architect Frank Gehry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/frank-gehry>), top-rated schools, 
police and firefighters, and, of course, that world-famous pier.

It has also avoided some of the problems that plague Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles>, from the financial (its 
general fund reserve exceeds that of LA, which has over 40 times Santa Monica’s 
population) to the cultural (that population itself – among which you more 
often hear British accents than the babel of tongues that characterise the big 
city just east – appears to get along without much visible conflict). Given 
this sun, sea, stability and prosperity, one would imagine that one’s wellbeing 
would take care of itself.

However, starting in 2013, the city of Santa Monica began developing a means 
by which to gauge, both objectively and subjectively, whether its citizens 
really do enjoy such a famously high quality of life. TheWellbeing Project 
<http://wellbeing.smgov.net/>, funded by a million-dollar grant from Bloomberg 
Philanthropies’ firstMayors Challenge <http://mayorschallenge.bloomberg.org/>, 
a competition meant to spur city leaders to come up with, in the words of 
founder and former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg, “innovative new ways 
to address urban challenges – and then share what’s working with the world”.

The same year the Mayors Challenge awarded a grant to Santa Monica for the 
Wellbeing Project, it also awarded grants to four other American cities – 
Chicago, Houston, Philadelphia, and Providence – to fund their own ideas. As 
the smallest in that cohort by a wide margin, Santa Monica looked like an 
outlier from the beginning, but its modest size also made its proposal more 
viable, given its stated ambition of not just breaking down overall quality of 
life into a set of measurable factors, but actually going out and measuring 
them in its population of 93,000.

Santa Monica’s impressive branding of the Wellbeing Project, an effort with 
serious resources behind it, begins with the word “wellbeing” itself – who, 
anywhere, could argue they don’t want more of it? But its wide range of 
meanings is also something of a liability, as the Wellbeing Project has faced 
the challenge defining it both as precisely and as unobjectionably as possible. 
The resulting Wellbeing Index measures Santa Monicans’ quality of life across 
six broad categories: outlook, community, place, learning, health and 
opportunity.

If Santa Monica can’t be an exemplary model then what hope is there for 
Jakarta or Johannesburg …
Rick Cole  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437478910722%2F1f8767ab-5ced-4bca-84f5-cd804e7d6607-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Santa%20Monica%3A%20the%20city%20that%20wants%20to%20design%20itself%20happier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Santa%20Monica%3A%20the%20city%20that%20wants%20to%20design%20itself%20happier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437478910722%2F1f8767ab-5ced-4bca-84f5-cd804e7d6607-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Wellbeing Index measures Santa Monicans’ quality of life across six broad 
categories: outlook, community, place, learning, health, and opportunity. 
Photograph: P Eoche/Getty 
Undergirding these feel-good words with suitably rigorous methods of data 
collection – as well as determining what data to collect in the first place – 
called for a series of high-profile partnerships. The City of Santa Monica 
enlisted as its research partner theRand Corporation <http://www.rand.org/>, a 
policy thinktank known for its sternly cerebral image and history of work with 
the US military (and conveniently located in an office across the street from 
Santa Monica’s city hall). Rand, in turn, partnered with theNew Economics 
Foundation <http://www.neweconomics.org/>, another thinktank, based in London, 
with experience in the emerging field of happiness research and its integration 
with traditional forms of economic assessment.

This alliance assembled the Wellbeing Index by gathering information on three 
fronts: conducting a survey of 2,200 adult Santa Monica residents in autumn of 
2014; assembling relevant administrative data already held by the City of Santa 
Monica (from, for example, the police department, the bus system, or the 
libraries) and other entities (such as theAmerican Community Survey 
<http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs/> and the California Health 
Interview Survey <http://healthpolicy.ucla.edu/chis/Pages/default.aspx>), and 
tracking the opinions (or, in the Wellbeing Project’s terminology, “sentiment 
data”) of Santa Monicans aired directly on social media services such as 
Twitter and Foursquare.

The Wellbeing Project released its first report, Creating a city for wellbeing 
<http://wellbeing.smgov.net/Media/Default/docs/WellbeingProject-IndexFindings-April2015.pdf>
, in April, which offered a host of encouraging, if unsurprising, findings – 
“Residents are generally satisfied with life and most have time to do things 
they enjoy” ... “engaging in more frequent social interactions and spending 
time outdoors are highly correlated with higher personal wellbeing” – as well 
as such mild causes for concern as “middle-age groups report greater stress and 
difficulties with work-life balance”.

But one category of finding has taken many involved with the Wellbeing Project 
by surprise: Santa Monicans “reported high levels of trust in the 
neighbourhoods in which they live, but still not enough day-to-day connection 
with neighbourhoods”. Indeed, few “felt they could actually count on the people 
in the neighborhood” if it came down to it, relative to the responses given in 
similar surveys nationwide.

The research also discovered that, “while many residents were engaged in 
volunteering and voted in general elections, relatively few felt they had 
influence in affecting decisions in Santa Monica”. Their “high number of 
neutral positions on these questions” suggested “a certain level of apathy with 
regard to these issues” – a troubling revelation, surely, for a city that 
prides itself on its reputation for high civic engagement.

Ana Jara, a Santa Monica-born community leader, worked on Cradle to Career 
<http://www.santamonicacradletocareer.org/>, a data-driven project focused on 
youth wellbeing, which could be considered the Wellbeing Project’s predecessor. 
She recalls her surprise upon first reading of the Wellbeing Index’s reflection 
of this widespread sense of civic disengagement – especially among the young 
and more recent arrivals to the city – so starkly did it contrast with her own 
personal experience of Santa Monica as place of classically tight-knit 
small-town social fabric.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437478789535%2F5b8c605f-a325-4927-a6b8-8faa0cc19db9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Santa%20Monica%3A%20the%20city%20that%20wants%20to%20design%20itself%20happier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Santa%20Monica%3A%20the%20city%20that%20wants%20to%20design%20itself%20happier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437478789535%2F5b8c605f-a325-4927-a6b8-8faa0cc19db9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Santa Monica has largely remained a city where ‘each person is stuck in a 
car’. Photograph: George Rose/Getty 
To explain this fragmentation, Jara points first to the way Santa Monica has, 
on the whole, remained a city “where we’re each stuck in a car”; one where, 
according to the Wellbeing Project’s data, most residents (44% of whom don’t 
live within five minutes’ walk of either goods or services) drive alone to 
work. Despite Los Angeles County’s ambitious construction of urban rail over 
the past 25 years, much of Santa Monica – whose first and only planned link to 
the systemwon’t enter service until next year 
<http://www.metro.net/projects/expo-santa-monica/> – has held to the stolid 
suburban car dependence of the region’s affluent west side. (It lends a certain 
irony to the Wellbeing Project’sMayors Challenge entry video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=quAWRNiRKEg>, set entirely on city buses.)

The city also suffers from a long-standing aversion to high-density 
development, which contributes to the problem Jara laments even more 
emphatically: housing. Approximately one-fifth of the Wellbeing Project’s 
survey respondents expressed worries about paying their rent or mortgage, but 
they, by definition, are the lucky ones, those who manage to live in Santa 
Monica at all. Many, no matter how rooted in the community, have had to move 
outside the ever-more-expensive low-rise city’s boundaries and work on “trying 
to find a way back in” — including no less a dyed-in-the-wool Santa Monican 
than Jara herself.

Jason Islas, editor of Santa Monica Next <http://www.santamonicanext.org/>, a 
news site oriented toward the city’s future and with a younger demographic than 
the Santa Monica median age (40.2, according to the Wellbeing Project), points 
to a variety of factors that make life unnecessarily difficult for that 
generation of residents. The list begins with a forbidding political culture 
characterised by deeply acrimonious five-hour city council meetings and 
culminates in the persistent “urbanophobia” that has kept the city’s housing 
stock artificially low, scarce and expensive.

“As someone who grew up in Santa Monica, I would say the single hardest thing 
is the cost of living,” says Islas. “Yes, Santa Monica is one of the more 
desirable places to live, so rents are always going to be higher than other 
places in the county, but if you have a political culture that’s resistant to 
building housing, you’re adding to the pile of affordability issues. Here, you 
spend most of your twenties trying to keep your head above water; you don’t 
have time to start a family. That affects our wellbeing. If you’re spending 
50%-60% of your pay on rent, you don’t have money to go to concerts with your 
friends, to go out and eat – the things that help us socialise and make 
connections in our community.”

As someone who grew up in Santa Monica, I would say the single hardest thing 
is the cost of living
Jason Islas  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437479157496%2Fbbd0622c-5099-4987-8ca5-96bb9a960147-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Santa%20Monica%3A%20the%20city%20that%20wants%20to%20design%20itself%20happier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Santa%20Monica%3A%20the%20city%20that%20wants%20to%20design%20itself%20happier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437479157496%2Fbbd0622c-5099-4987-8ca5-96bb9a960147-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Santa Monica is one of the more desirable places to live, so rents are always 
going to be higher than other places in the county.’ Photograph: Jon 
Hicks/Corbis 
Islas cites such Wellbeing Project statistics as the 53% of Santa Monicans who 
report concern over their children’s prospects of affording life in the city. 
But how to bring this information to bear on these issues? The short history 
between happiness measurement and governance offers few encouraging examples. 
Early materials from the Wellbeing Project looked toBhutan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/bhutan>, the poor Himalayan kingdom that 
famously declared its commitment not to gross domestic product (GDP) but “gross 
national happiness” – which critics such asthe Financial Times’ Alan Beattie 
<http://blogs.ft.com/beyond-brics/2014/09/04/gross-national-happiness-a-bad-idea-whose-time-has-gone/>
 call “a deeply illiberal means of legitimising undemocratic rule [that] has 
distracted from much more constructive and democratic ideas of running 
countries in the interests of their citizens’ wider wellbeing”.

Though it may boast an actively left-leaning city government, the People’s 
Republic of Santa Monica – as both its loudest critics and fans call it – 
hardly counts as similarly autocratic. More than a world away from the 
subsistence farmers of Bhutan, the Wellbeing Project’s report recognises 
(albeit in passively bureaucratic language) where its own challenge lies: 
“While there has been increasing national, state and local focus on wellness 
and to some extent even wellbeing (see Seattle’s Happiness Index, the Gallup 
Healthways Well-being Index), there has been far less focus on how to translate 
that information into meaningful action that can be executed by communities as 
a whole.”

Very few officials, in other words, have actually chosen to steer by the 
“wellbeing measurement dashboards” so far engineered. Will Santa Monica’s 
choose differently? With the data collected and the findings released, the 
operation seems to have entered a wait-and-see phase – or, as the report puts 
it, a time “to ensure the data motivate community discussions about potential 
solutions”.

“The Wellbeing Project is equipped to inform,” says Islas. “It’s really a 
question of what leaders do with that information. My concern is that ideology 
would trump good decision-making … People talk about the need for affordable 
housing, but what policies have we adopted that would actually make that a 
reality?” In fact, the city recently voted to remove the option of building new 
four- and five-storey mixed-use residential buildings along its major 
boulevards.

Some decision-makers have their own ideas about how to use the Wellbeing 
Project’s data: mayor Kevin McKeown (an opponent of those new residential 
buildings) mentions that its documentation of the high stress felt by residents 
of houses in the vicinity of Santa Monica airport will provide valuable 
evidence in his case against the city’s obligation to run an airport at all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437479053949%2F6cc2556a-94b3-4aed-98b8-4f4cb6ae7700-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Santa%20Monica%3A%20the%20city%20that%20wants%20to%20design%20itself%20happier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Santa%20Monica%3A%20the%20city%20that%20wants%20to%20design%20itself%20happier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fsanta-monica-city-design-happier-wellbeing-sun-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437479053949%2F6cc2556a-94b3-4aed-98b8-4f4cb6ae7700-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The city recently voted to remove the option of building new four- and 
five-storey mixed-use residential buildings along its major boulevards. 
Photograph: Getty Images/Lonely Planet/Jean-Pierre Lescourret 
“We’ve always had to rely on intuition, common sense and good intentions,” 
says McKeown. “Now we have data.” The Wellbeing Project has, at least at this 
early stage, looked like an important step toward putting Santa Monica at the 
forefront of the much-discussed age of the ‘data-driven city’, where constant 
streams of precision-collected information curated for maximum relevance – a 
kind of perpetually updated Wellbeing Index – would enable both residents and 
officials to make more beneficial choices for the community and for themselves.

This ideal harmonises well with Santa Monica’s recent hiring of Rick Cole as 
city manager, who is a well-respected if peripatetic Southern California city 
official and high-profile advocate of “data-driven governance”, who has spent 
the last two years as Los Angeles mayor Eric Garcetti’s deputy for budget and 
innovation. He, too, sees setting a global example as a significant part the 
city’s mission: “If, with all of our educational and financial resources, Santa 
Monica can’t be an exemplary model,” he said inan interview 
<http://www.santamonicanext.org/2015/07/a-city-on-the-beach-an-interview-with-santa-monica-city-manager-rick-cole-part-i/>
 with Islas, “then what hope is there for Jakarta or Johannesburg or Manila or 
Kinshasa or, for that matter, Shanghai and Shenzhen?”

Los Angeles: a city that outgrew its masterplan. Thank God
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jan/28/los-angeles-city-plan-california>
Los Angeles, as Cole put it in a much-quoted parting shot, “is not designed to 
work”. Santa Monica, by contrast – or so its well-established community 
partisans might tell you — is. McKeown tells of receiving complaints that the 
city fixes potholes too frequently, which would certainly never make the long 
list of resident grievances in Los Angeles.

The Wellbeing Project could, it seems, have no more suitable proving ground 
than this compact, manageable (in Cole’s words) “cool city that has money” – 
but what about the larger, considerably more troubled metropolises of the 
world, starting with the one just past Santa Monica’s city limits?

That question interests Bloomberg Philanthropies above all others. “Santa 
Monica is regarded as a fairly special place,” says James Anderson, leader of 
Bloomberg’s public sector innovation programmes, “but the idea is one that 
mayors everywhere are contending with. Is this a solution that addresses issues 
many cities face? Does it require any ‘special sauce’ that may be present in 
one locality but not others? We actually think this idea very much passed those 
tests. It’s an idea other cities can readily implement, and Santa Monica is 
creating a toolkit, a playbook, that will allow other cities to follow.”

Or, in Islas’s words: “If Santa Monica can’t do it, what hope is there for 
places that don’t have the resources it has?”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 