
Sasha Go Hard, London

How hard does Sasha go exactly? Well, given that her name was suggested to her 
by members of Chief Keef's GBE crew, and that Chief Keef is a rapper who has 
spent much of his fledgling career under house arrest for violent offences, and 
who makes hip-hop in its most unglossy and primal form, you'd have to say 
that's pretty hard. In Chicago, they call this raw and uncompromising music 
"drill", which according to Sasha is a synonym for "fighting", but it would be 
wrong to say that her music is exclusively that. True enough, recent work such 
as Rondo or Problem might suggest she's not moved on much from her early 
Keef-associated 'hood anthems (which mostly involved her slagging off female 
rivals), but that's not to say that her own verbal skills can't stretch out 
when the beat or the occasion demands it. As hard as she goes, the likes of 
Saluting suggests when she goes clever, it's pretty good too.

Birthdays, E8, Fri

JR

Foals, On tour

Foals <https://www.theguardian.com/music/foals> manage to be precise without 
being inflexible. Purveyors of fidgety guitar music since 2007, the band's 
third album, Holy Fire, amplifies both their rock and also their nagging funk. 
They can sound like a prog Metallica but, when at their best, their cocktail of 
Chic and Battles is a pretty compelling one.

East Village Arts Club, Liverpool, Sun; Olympia Thtre, Dublin, Tue & Wed; O2 
Apollo, Manchester, Fri; touring to 15 Feb

JR

The Wave Pictures, Manchester, Nottingham & Bristol

The Wave Pictures are a trio playing what you might call avant skiffle. Their 
rhythm section sets up a Smithsy groove, which is then offset by the guitar 
playing of David Tattersall. On these dates, the band reprise their 
intermittent collaboration with Stanley Brinks. Formerly one of French indie 
band Herman Dune, Brinks is the pseudonym for Andr√© Herman Dune, another 
prolific singer-songwriter, in his case one who writes often about the many 
social and philosophical effects of strong drink.

The Deaf Institute, Manchester, Sat; Spanky Van Dyke's, Nottingham, Sun; The 
Louisiana, Bristol, Fri; touring to 18 Apr

JR

Billy Cobham Band, London

Former Mahavishnu Orchestra sideman Billy Cobham is the kind of explosive 
player who has no trouble sounding like three drummers at once. He's the type 
of virtuoso who has peers queueing up for his gigs, and Cobham's originality 
lies in the quality of his composing, his vision as a bandleader, and a 
sensitivity that makes him build music from a whisper more often than he 
launches into a roar. For those who remember his arrival in the 1970s, this 
week of Cobham gigs will undoubtedly have a nostalgic sheen: it's the 40th 
anniversary of his best-known album, the pioneering jazz-fusion session 
Spectrum, and his quartet will play the whole volatile tracklist through every 
night.

Ronnie Scott's, W1, Mon to 8 Feb

JF

The Damon Brown/Martin Zenker Group, Southport & Edinburgh

These gigs double as the start of a tour for British trumpeter Damon Brown and 
a stand-out moment at Southport's Jazz On A Winter's Weekend festival (to Sun). 
Brown not only loves hardbop, one of the most widely accessible and 
soul-steeped of all jazz styles, but he goes to remarkable lengths to find 
talented exponents of it on the world's least-known jazz scenes. That includes 
South Korea, where he discovered German bassist Martin Zenker holding down a 
jazz professorship in Seoul. The pair struck up a relationship that produces 
the kind of fireworks hardbop did in its golden age. Drummer Mark Taylor joins 
this latest edition of the Brown/Zenker group, alongside baritone saxist 
Michael Lutzeier and pianist Paul Kirby. The group also make a trip up to 
Kirby's home town of Edinburgh on Friday.

Royal Clifton Hotel, Southport, Sun; The Jazz Bar, Edinburgh, Fri; touring to 
16 Feb

JF

Sir Peter Maxwell Davies world premiere, London

Next month Sir Peter Maxwell Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/peter-maxwell-davies> steps down as master 
of the queen's music. He's been a wonderful champion of the importance of music 
and music education during his 10 years in the role, and as well as the 
ceremonial pieces he's been required to write, he has continued to produce a 
huge range of other music. One of the most ambitious of those recent works, his 
10th Symphony, gets its first performance this weekend from the London Symphony 
Orchestra and Chorus conducted by Antonio Pappano. In what he says will be his 
final symphony, Davies has returned to the culture of Italy, a country that has 
always fascinated him. The 10th is built around the life and work of the 
17th-century Roman architect Francesco Borromini; it ends with a setting of 
Borromini's final testament, sung by a baritone soloist while the chorus sings 
the names of churches he designed.

Barbican Hall, EC2, Sun

AC
 