
Domaine Rotier Les Gravels Gaillac, France 2012 (£11.45, Berry Bros & Rudd 
<http://bbr.com>) Bounded to the west by the starchy grandees of Bordeaux, and 
to the southeast by the great engine-room of French wine, the 
Languedoc-Roussillon, the cluster of disparate, individualistic appellations 
known collectively as South West France sometimes struggle for attention 
outside their local communities. But this is fertile territory for anyone 
looking for something a little different or for wines that always tend to have 
a food-friendliness and refreshment factor, no matter their colour or style. 
Made from the very particular local grapes braucol and duras with a dollop of 
syrah in the Gaillac appellation that straddles the Tarn to the east of 
Toulouse, Domaine Rotier’s gloriously spicy, crunchy lighter red exemplifies 
those qualities perfectly, especially with a jar of succulent duck rillettes 
and a pile of toast.

Château du Cèdre Cahors, France 2013 (from £13.50, The Wine Society 
<http://thewinesociety.com>; Lea & Sandeman <http://leaandsandeman.co.uk>; Wine 
Library <http://winelibrary.co.uk>) Perhaps the most famous of the southwestern 
appellations, Cahors lies to the north of Gaillac in the Lot Valley around the 
beautiful medieval city from which it takes its name. In its 14th-century 
heyday, its famously dark, strong “black” wines were more highly prized than 
those of Bordeaux. Its recent revival owes rather a lot to the Argentinians, 
who’ve made a speciality of Cahors’ red grape variety, malbec, a style that has 
been one of the UK wine trade’s biggest hits of recent years. Today’s Cahors 
malbecs have some of the power of both Argentina and those antique black wines. 
But they are a little more sinewy, with the best, such as Château de Cèdre’s, 
offering a floral lilt to leaven the meaty, meat-friendly richness.

Domaine Berthomieu Madiran Haute Tradition 2012 (£11.95, Eton Vintners 
<http://etonvintners.com>; Buon Vino <http://buonvino.co.uk>; Smiling Grape 
<http://smilinggrape.com>; Bentleys Wine <http://bentleyswine.com>) The South 
Americans, specifically the Uruguayans and Argentinians, have also helped 
raised the profile of the main grape variety of another south-western region, 
the tannat of Madiran, in the Gascon foothills of the Pyrenees. The variety is 
aptly named, since the forceful, dramatic red wines it makes always come with a 
bristly bearhug of tannin. Like Italian nebbiolo (the grape variety of 
Barbaresco and Barolo), that kind of texture only begins to make sense with 
food – not least the magret or confit de canard that is a staple in this part 
of the world. But if, as in Domaine Berthomieu’s example, you also have 
deliciously fragrant black berry fruit and mineral freshness, it’s a match made 
in heaven.

Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach <https://twitter.com/daveydaibach>
 