
The beach at Gurupokuna on Sri Lanka’s south coast is wild and empty. Look up 
and down its length and you’re unlikely to see another person. The waves here 
are wild, too. Too wild to swim in for eight months of the year. They crash and 
pound so angrily that you can hear their roar at least half a mile inland. At 
night it felt like our hut, which was just metres from the surf, was about to 
be engulfed by the ocean. The fact that the original huts were swallowed by the 
sea in the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami gave a slight edge to our first night at
Mamboz Beach Cabanas <http://www.mambozbeach.com/>.

But all angst evaporated with the morning sunshine. Mamboz is a very simple 
place: just four huts on stilts in the sand, a few hammocks strung under palm 
trees, and a back gate that opens directly on to that beach. Arriving with my 
partner and six-year-old son, I felt like we’d stumbled across an exotic little 
club: exclusive because of its spectacular and remote setting, but friendly and 
welcoming thanks to the easy charm of its owner, American Matthew Gale. Over 
dinner of tuna steaks and banana leaf curry, one couple told us they’d come for 
three days but were now into their eighth. “We can’t leave.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc73e9cb8917a7368329503756d1dd48ba43263e0%2F0_0_5194_3463%2F5194.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc73e9cb8917a7368329503756d1dd48ba43263e0%2F0_0_5194_3463%2F5194.jpg>
 Galle old town and lighthouse. Photograph: Alamy 
While Matthew will arrange tuk-tuks or cars to nearby attractions – including 
Udawalawe national park and its 500-strong elephant population, or the 
Mulkirigala rock temples – what people love most about Mamboz is falling into 
various states of idleness, whether it’s lolling in a hammock, watching the 
setting sun turn the wet sand gold and the sky pink, or being pulled and 
pummelled for two hours: Matthew is an expert in Thai massage.

However, there is work to be done for those who feel energetic. Every morning 
at around 7am, fishermen cast vast nets between 200 and 300 metres out to sea, 
then spend an hour hauling them in. Half the village was there to help and 
every extra pair of hands was welcome. My partner joined the long line of 
people leaning back and slowly heaving the load in as an older man sang to keep 
the momentum going. Eventually the net was dragged on to the beach with its fat 
wriggling cargo. Locals who’d come to help picked the tiddlers out of the net 
while the bulk of the catch was sorted into polystyrene crates to be taken to 
market. It’s quite a contrast to some of the stilt fishermen near Galle, who 
have become one of the most photographed sights in Sri Lanka and now only “fish 
for tourists”, according to one guide we spoke to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d6dec32b01a7f4495e2f7a12ccf1f63e2f58d52%2F0_0_5150_3326%2F5150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d6dec32b01a7f4495e2f7a12ccf1f63e2f58d52%2F0_0_5150_3326%2F5150.jpg>
 Rekawa beach on the south coast. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
But even here, where fishing is a living rather than an attraction, it’s not 
the same as it was. “They used to go out once a day; now four teams go out up 
to four times a day,” Matthew told us when we got back. And it’s not just the 
fishing that’s changing on this coast. After 13 years of splendid isolation, 
Mamboz is getting a neighbour, a luxury, modern hotel being built by Russian 
investors. Matthew doesn’t object to having a neighbour, but he’s concerned 
about the scale of hotel development across the country. Seven years after the 
end of the civil war, Sri Lanka is in the midst of a building boom, with 
international chain hotels mushrooming along the coast.

The bay of Weligama, the southern coastal town famous for its surf schools, is 
now dominated by a hulking Marriott hotel – the group’s first on the island. In 
Hambantota, 18 miles east of Mamboz, a 300-room Shangri-La opened in June this 
year, overlooking a pristine beach. It’s handy for the new Mattala Rajapaksa 
airport, or it would be ifany international airlines actually flew into it 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/wadeshepard/2016/05/28/the-story-behind-the-worlds-emptiest-international-airport-sri-lankas-mattala-rajapaksa/#482fe00d62fd>
. The million-passenger-capacity airport, with its 4km runway built over an 
elephant corridor is just one of several vanity projects built by – and named 
after – former president Mahinda Rajapaksa in a bid to turn his home town into 
an thriving business hub. A new convention centre and new cricket stadium are 
also barely used white elephants.

Back to hotels and the list goes on: luxury chain Anantara opened its first 
property here, on the outskirts of Tangalle, late last year; an Amari, another 
upscale hotel, is due to open in March; Sheraton is opening a hotel on Kosgoda, 
a prime turtle nesting beach; and in 2017 Colombo will gain a Shangri-La, 
Mövenpick, Sheraton, Grand Hyatt and the first ITC outside of India.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F702915239ac8867511620b37138e33c44387559a%2F0_0_3792_2518%2F3792.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F702915239ac8867511620b37138e33c44387559a%2F0_0_3792_2518%2F3792.jpg>
 Bedroom at Mamboz beach cabanas. Photograph: Isabel Choat for the Guardian 
You can’t blame a country, especially one held back for so long by civil war, 
for wanting to benefit from tourism. The Sri Lanka Tourism Development Agency 
is aiming to almost double visitor numbers in the next four years, from 2.2 
million in 2016 – up from 1.5 million in 2015 – to four million by 2020, but 
what does such rampant growth mean for the people of Sri Lanka? Matthew was due 
to open Mamboz the day the tsunami struck. He was fixing the roof when he saw a 
“wall of white” coming towards him and told his staff to run. Fortunately no 
one was hurt and Mamboz was rebuilt. Now, 13 years on, the huge increase in 
hotel capacity along the coast is having a direct impact on his bookings and he 
is scathing about the government’s focus on big luxury developments. “You 
should have come 10 years ago. Mass tourism is where it’s going,” he said 
ruefully.

For born and bred Sri Lankans who are passionate about preserving their 
country, the new wave of tourism means redoubling efforts to protect heritage 
and the environment. Tharanga Liyanarachchi is an archaeologist employed by the 
Galle Heritage Foundation. His job is to protect the historic buildings within 
the 400-year-old Unesco-listed Galle Fort. The main physical threat is from 
developers who want to change the unique facades of the old town houses, but 
earnest and determined Tharanga is also charged with making sure the fort 
doesn’t become an open museum that only rich tourists can afford to stay and 
shop in – there are already six boutique hotels, a growing number of upmarket 
shops selling $40 sarongs and luxury beauty products and restaurants offering 
cocktails and sushi.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa87e9c25de3701dedd45560b8f9d57408236d5c7%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa87e9c25de3701dedd45560b8f9d57408236d5c7%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
 The beach off Galle Fort. Photograph: Alamy 
The indigenous community has already fallen from 2,500 to 1,500 and he wants 
these people to be able to continue living and working in the fort. “We have a 
tuk-tuk association for the 80 drivers in the fort, and a mobile vendors’ 
association. We must get participation for them to preserve our culture. The 
money must go to them.”

As well as running daily heritage walking tours of the fort, he has introduced 
a monthly traditional dance show at the court square and is developing the 
fort’s 14 bastions into exhibition and event spaces to showcase local culture.

But his passion for conservation isn’t confined to the 80 acres of streets and 
historic buildings within the fort’s Dutch-built ramparts. He wants to see a 
commitment to “intangible heritage” across the country in a way that benefits 
local communities directly. “Some tours take tourists to mask shops; we should 
be taking them to the mask makers, so that they get paid for their work 
directly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a898d8ea542f6f0f610067a05fca81a65747cdf%2F0_0_5212_3551%2F5212.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a898d8ea542f6f0f610067a05fca81a65747cdf%2F0_0_5212_3551%2F5212.jpg>
 A fearsome devil mask Photograph: Alamy 
The current government, which replaced Rajapaksa’s administration two years 
ago, has made a commitment to sustainable tourism. People like Tharanga and 
Sunela Jayewardene, a Sri Lankan architect specialising in eco-friendly builds, 
are doing all they can to make sure that is not an empty promise. “I would like 
to see that whatever happens is environmentally sustainable. This is 
particularly vital for a country of our size. The natural environment is the 
badge we wear. If we lose that, we will be killing the goose that lays the 
golden eggs,” said Sunela.

And for the visitor? So far the hotel chains have focused on the major coastal 
hubs. Away from these, it’s still perfectly possible to find your own patch of 
empty beach. Walking the sandy back roads just inland from Mamboz we came 
across tiny Kingfisher restaurant, where the only person we saw while we ate 
our lunch of grilled prawns was a buffalo herder, who brought his cattle to 
graze in the neighbouring paddy field.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642d58f3d9337dff09763cf6decbc9714aa2df12%2F52_0_855_513%2F855.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F642d58f3d9337dff09763cf6decbc9714aa2df12%2F52_0_855_513%2F855.jpg>
 A purple swamp hen at Kalametiya bird sanctuary. 
At 6.30am in Kalamatiya bird sanctuary, just east of Mamboz, the lagoon was 
utterly peaceful, the birds unruffled as local guide Gayan used a wooden pole 
to steer us through the shallow waters. Visitors understandably make a beeline 
for the big-name big game parks like Yala, but sharing sunrise over the lagoon 
with Indian pond herons, black and yellow bitterns, a dazzling purple swamp 
hen, black cormorants, a peacock surveying the scene from a rocky perch and 
even a small crocodile, had its own magic.

A former tuk-tuk driver, Gayan started bird-watching only after a tourist gave 
him a pair of binoculars, a luxury he could never have afforded. Now he is a 
self-taught guide and dedicated conservationist. He would like to see the 
government put as much effort into preserving places like Kalametiya, which is 
under threat from illegal fishing, as they do into promoting already overrun 
parks. “Yala is horrible now,” he said. “One leopard, 500 jeeps. It’s big 
business, not nature.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff34984bc360a722a2b2195eaab68e71e84e9d9e6%2F0_62_3338_2003%2F3338.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff34984bc360a722a2b2195eaab68e71e84e9d9e6%2F0_62_3338_2003%2F3338.jpg>
 Breakfast at Back of Beyond 
For our trip we deliberately picked small, slightly off-the-beaten track 
places to stay, so much so that our driver was unconvinced there was any kind 
of accommodation along the dusty, unpaved road that led to our next stop, the 
aptly namedBack of Beyond <https://www.backofbeyond.lk/index.html>, a cluster 
of bungalows by an estuary. There our son skipped about trying to catch lizards 
and frogs – easy since they liked to congregate in our outdoor bathroom – and 
we spent afternoons by the pool or kayaking through the backwaters to a broad 
empty beach.

Even in the more populous areas – near Galle for example – you don’t have to 
venture far to find quiet places to stay. The Old Palm House is a gorgeous 
colonial villa a couple of miles inland from the hippy beach town of Unawatuna. 
On the tuk-tuk ride there we had our eyes half-shut as the driver whisked past 
buses with centimetres to spare and swerved to avoid stray dogs with a death 
wish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c2a1c3a191d5e8a6ffa4606efcab16b202bfb0f%2F0_72_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c2a1c3a191d5e8a6ffa4606efcab16b202bfb0f%2F0_72_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Sunset over the pool at Old Palm House, Sri Lanka 
Once we entered the villa’s gates all was calm. From the lawn we could see 
nothing but tree tops and the only interruption to lazy mornings on the terrace 
was the noise of squabbling langur monkeys and green parrots.

Like most holiday homes in Sri Lanka, the Old Palm House had a resident chef. 
His name was Ruwan and we loved him, not just for his amazing cooking but for 
his cheerful demeanour. A devoted Buddhist, he chatted away about impermanence 
and reaching higher states of being. “We are all going to die, madame,” he told 
me cheerily one morning, while chopping vegetables.

April’s scorching heat and Ruwan’s cooking – fish or prawn curries, whole 
butter fish, homemade passion fruit cheesecake – made leaving the villa hard, 
but there was plenty to see within a short tuk-tuk ride.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdff7b830feae9ce998ced83fb1ee65b47f1b6fbb%2F0_58_3264_2275%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Savour%20Sri%20Lanka%3A%20sights%2C%20sunshine%20and%20beaches%20%E2%80%93%20away%20from%20the%20crowds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fsri-lanka-tourist-development-hotels-beaches-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdff7b830feae9ce998ced83fb1ee65b47f1b6fbb%2F0_58_3264_2275%2F3264.jpg>
 The impressive spread prepared by our host, Deevika, after shopping at 
Habaraduwa market. Photograph: Isabel Choat for the Guardian 
We visited the market at Habaraduwa with a guide who took us to his house by a 
railway track for a cooking demonstration by his wife, Deevika. She spent an 
hour preparing a huge spread of dishes, using her own curry powder: jackfruit 
curry, crispy chewy aubergine, bitter gourd salad, fish balls, mango chutney and
ambulthiyal – chunks of yellowfin tuna steeped in spices. Deevika kept my son 
and another child entertained by asking them to grate coconut and chop garlic.

Sri Lanka is famed for heritage sites such as the rock temples at Dambulla but 
there are hundreds of smaller temples waiting to be discovered. I was the only 
foreigner wandering among the jumble of boulders and admiring the wall 
paintings at 2,200 year old Yatagala, not far from the Old Palm House. A small 
group of worshippers sat under an ancient bodhi tree, their chanting mingling 
with the yowl of peacocks and the swish of a brush sweeping leaves from the 
sandy ground. On the way out I noticed a sign asking visitors to respect the 
site; it ended with the words: “May you have the bless [sic] of triple gems.”

In a country on the brink of a tourism boom, Yatagala served as a reminder of 
how many gems this country has to offer – and how many it needs to protect.

Way to go

The trip was provided by Experience Travel Group 
<https://www.experiencetravelgroup.com/sri_lanka>. A nine-night holiday, 
including activities and transfers, three nights at Old Palm House, two at Back 
of Beyond and four at Mamboz Beach Cabanas, costs £1,015pp B&B, based on a 
family of four. Direct flights Heathrow to Colombo with Sri Lankan were 
provided bynetflights.com <http://www.netflights.com/>, from £469 return
 