
Even now, when I get an unexpected whiff of the perfume my mother once wore, I 
am transported – suddenly, violently almost – back to childhood.

I’m back there, hanging around her dressing table, getting in the way, picking 
up things I shouldn’t, watching longingly as she gets ready to go out. Her 
special night-time perfume for me meant fresh, blow-dried hair, hot tongs, pots 
of blush, and the heady promise of an adult world that seemed impossibly far 
away.

The Australian Art Quartet <http://australianartquartet.com/> knows the power 
of smell. In Scent of Memory, which ended on Thursday after three sellout shows 
at the canary-colouredYellow House Sydney 
<http://yellowhousesydney.com.au/about/>, the waft of handpicked perfumes are 
mixed with the sounds of Tchaikovsky, Gurdjieff, and Mountfort.

‘I’ve been told bacon smells lovely’ – life without a sense of smell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/26/ive-been-told-bacon-smells-lovely-life-without-sense-smell>
Since launching its 2016 season, the Art Quartet has aimed to jolt classical 
music fans out of their shell. Past events have included theButt Naked Salon 
<http://www.limelightmagazine.com.au/live-reviews/review-butt-naked-salon-australian-art-quartet>
, featuring composer Andrew Batt-Rawden in nothing but his birthday suit, and
Shocking Cliches 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/newslocal/city-east/australian-art-quartet-hooked-up-to-electric-shock-nodes-in-concert-designed-to-push-some-buttons/news-story/3a9102292b5e87ee6560fc2f2f1a1c01>
, in which the musicians were hooked up to electric shock pads.

Scent of Memory is a gentler, softer, but no less sensual experience.

Creating the smells is Mexican-born, Paris-educated, New York-based perfumer 
Carlos Huber. Also a historic preservationist and architect, Huber sees 
ingredients in a scent “like the colours in the painting”.

He is an accomplished storyteller: before every piece of music begins, Huber 
describes how his smells were conceived and constructed, each one designed to 
evoke particular historical moments or moods.

“Scents have the ability to bypass rational thought – it’s pure emotion,” the 
Art Quartet’s artistic director James Beck explains. “That’s very powerful: the 
way it can trigger long-lost memories. The idea of locked parts of our mind.”

Beck wants us to “withdraw from our devices” to provide all-encompassing 
recitals that celebrate the here and now, and which, crucially, are able to 
take classical music to a new, wider audience. “We can’t just sit here in black 
clothes” and expect concertgoers to come to us, he says. “It’s about responding 
to those people who don’t necessarily have academic or classical [music] 
knowledge.”

Incorporating smell into performance is challenging: it is hard to bottle and 
harder to distribute. But the Australian Art Quartet is tapping into a wider 
movement. Last year saw arevival of Smell-O-Vision in cinema 
<http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20151013-the-movie-you-can-smell> and we are 
closer to having scented messages on our smart phones than ever before 
<http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/is-digital-smell-doomed>. When it works 
– and that’s a big when – it’s a surefire way to saturate the senses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fscent-of-memory-smell-and-classical-music-prove-an-intoxicating-combination%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73ff02f8d95356574ca305eb8de57829f40705aa%2F0_0_1333_2000%2F1333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scent%20of%20Memory%3A%20smell%20and%20classical%20music%20prove%20an%20intoxicating%20combination&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fscent-of-memory-smell-and-classical-music-prove-an-intoxicating-combination%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scent%20of%20Memory%3A%20smell%20and%20classical%20music%20prove%20an%20intoxicating%20combination&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fscent-of-memory-smell-and-classical-music-prove-an-intoxicating-combination%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73ff02f8d95356574ca305eb8de57829f40705aa%2F0_0_1333_2000%2F1333.jpg>
 Carlos Huber of Arquiste, who collaborated with the Australian Art Quartet for 
Scent of Memory. Photograph: Kevin Tachman 
Tonight, however, there’s no flashy devices to distribute the smells: just 
paper scent sticks that we hold up to our noses. Behind the stage a small stall 
from Potts Point home décor store Becker Minty sells Huber’s perfumes – yours 
for just $249. Such bottled luxury might sit uneasily if the music wasn’t so 
moving, performed with passion and zest by Beck on cello, Dan Russell on violin 
I, Anna Albert on violin II, and Alina Zamfir on viola.

For Estonian Arvo Pärt’s Fratres, the quartet takes us on a journey not to the 
1970s, when the piece was composed, but to a 17th century Japanese galleon on 
the Pacific. It’s loaded, Huber tells us, with rare cargo: spices, black 
pepper, Spanish leather, frankincense. Handing out his woody, earthy perfume 
Nanban, with its notes of Malabar black pepper, Persian saffron, black tea, 
myrrh and sandalwood, Huber conjures up “roasted coffee, smoky, dark” that 
plays on Pärt’s sounds.

Others smells follow: the soapy, fresh scent of sage, cinnamon, orange flower 
water and Moroccan rosemary in the perfume Él, evoking the naked skin, and 
matched to Danzón No 2 by Mexican composer Arturo Márquez. Coco and chilli 
represent the riches of the New World in the fragrance Anima Dulcis, paired up 
with George Gurdjieff’s Chant from a Holy Book.

'The missing sense': why our technology addiction makes us crave smells
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/16/smell-digital-technology-ophone-cyrano>
Then there’s the formal masculinity – with its faint champagne hint and floral 
flourish – of Boutonnière No 7 released to Tchaikovsky’s Scherzo & Finale from 
Quartet No 1. It evokes a past era of black tie operas frequented by men 
wearing white gardenia, and flirtatious grand dames.

Scent and music together are a intoxicating combination, potent and 
overpowering. On Wednesday night rain rattled wildly outside as the concert 
unfolded. Hours earlier Trump had won. But in this small corner of Potts Point,
Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> – in the hues of the 
Yellow House – it felt like another world.
 