
If a time traveler from the late 1800s were to visit the present, the one 
place that she would recognize and, in many cases, feel right at home in, would 
be academia. Today’s universities and other science institutions are often the 
sole exception to the percussive pace of change we are now seeing in society 
and nature. They are, in a word, slow.

But that contemplative, reflective pace that defines academia has a growing 
number of researchers worried that science is too often left sitting at the 
kids table while decisions are made elsewhere - especially in today’s rapidly 
changing world.

Nowhere is this more true than in the planning for the future of our cities. 
Over the coming week, tens of thousands of people will spill into Quito, 
Ecuador, forHabitat III <http://habitat3.org/>, a United Nations Conference 
that will set the course for the development of cities around the world. At La 
Casa de la Cultura Ecuatoriana “Benjamín Carrión” in Quito, delegates from 
nations around the world will vote to approve theNew Urban Agenda <>. It’s a 
bulging document that details pathways for the growth of cities in the next two 
decades.

Meanwhile, somewhere in the 1.5 acres of exhibition space located almost a 
half mile from where the leaders are meeting, if you look carefully, you can 
find a 20-foot by 20-foot space focused on research. There,Future Earth 
<http://futureearth.org/>, the International Council for Science 
<http://www.icsu.org/> (ICSU) and Potsdam University <http://www.fh-potsdam.de/>
 in Germany areorganizing an exhibit space <http://habitatxchange.org/> on the 
science of cities. It’s a bubble of science all but lost in a sea of policy.

This observation meshes with what many in the urban research community have 
been saying for months: Science and diverse fields of urban researchers have 
played a minimal role in Habitat III. In acommentary published this week 
<http://www.nature.com/news/scientists-must-have-a-say-in-the-future-of-cities-1.20760>
 in the journalNature, a group of prominent urban researchers write: “One 
reason is that the scientific community was unprepared for Habitat III. The few 
scientists invited to participate accepted a consultative role, nested among 
other public voices.”

It’s not an isolated occurrence, either. Cities use an estimated 70 percent of 
the world’s energy. But only recently has the Intergovernmental Panel for 
Climate Change (IPCC), perhaps the world’s most well-known body for 
international science, given special attention to the needs of cities. This 
year, the IPCC agreed toproduce a special report 
<http://www.c40.org/blog_posts/ipcc-to-give-cities-special-focus> on climate 
change and cities, due out in 2023 to 2028. Effectively, however, climate 
scientists have for years been cut off from the leaders who make decisions with 
huge consequences for climate change: Town mayors, city departments, local 
non-profit organizations and others.

Still, there is momentum building toward a type of science that can keep pace 
with the speed of change round the world. Researchers with The Luc Hoffmann 
Institute at the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), for example, haveconvened a 
team of diverse experts 
<http://luchoffmanninstitute.org/2015/09/using-the-earth-hour-city-challenge-to-identify-high-leverage-points-for-footprint-reduction-in-cities/>
 to comb through mountains of data collected through theEarth Hour City 
Challenge <http://www.worldwildlife.org/pages/earth-hour-city-challenge> -- a 
global coalition of cities that are collecting and distributing data on how 
they are working to respond to climate change. From this work, the team is 
building a map of how urban areas are tackling climate change and the key 
points that different cities are using to rapidly shift their carbon footprint.

This momentum, and the solutions for global challenges cropping up all over 
the world, is the focus of a new magazine that Future Earth will launch at 
Habitat III. The magazine takes its name from the Anthropocene, the word for a 
new epoch in the geologic history of the planet defined by humanity’s 
wide-reaching impacts on the planet.Anthropocene: Innovation in the Human Age 
<http://www.anthropocenemagazine.org/> is a magazine focused on innovation and 
science that is fast, relevant to society and committed to spurring solutions 
The first issue, which has a special focus on cities, includes stories about 
driverless cars and the unlikely path that our electronic gadgets take when we 
throw them out.

The speed of change in this new human age -- from the ballooning use of fossil 
fuels to rising seas and disappearing natural ecosystems -- is at odds with the 
slow, contemplative nature of science. ButAnthropocene magazine will work to 
merge those two worlds. The publication produces daily digests of 
sustainability science from around the world, but it will also take time to 
reflect on the nature of the Anthropocene itself. In this first issue, for 
example, veteranNew York Times science journalist Andrew Revkin reflects on how 
his own thinking around the Anthropocene has changed over the years. He writes: 
“Lately I’ve come to realize that my lifelong beat, in essence, has been one 
species’ growing pains.”

Science is going through growing pains, too. But it may be on the verge of 
finding a new maturity.
 