
Scrapping bonuses and capping directors’ pay are among a number of ideas being 
considered by a powerful City investor in an attempt to curb executive 
remuneration.


Fund manager Hermes Investment Management is drawing up a paper on overhauling 
boardroom pay, which could include a number of options such as the abolition of 
bonuses, or the simplification of pay to reduce the size of bonuses and 
increasing salaries.

The proposals could cut the average pay for an FTSE 100 chief executive from 
£5m, including bonuses, to about £3m.

Hermes is also preparing to propose ideas that would in effect put a limit on 
pay deals by requiring companies to set out the maximum amount that the chief 
executive could receive each year. It would also require executives to keep a 
shareholding in the company even after they had left.

Many boardroom executives have three components to their pay: salaries, annual 
bonuses and a three-year bonus plan paid in shares. A debate about revising 
this format has been raging for some time. But it has been pushed to the top of 
the agenda after Theresa May pledgedto reform the capitalist system during her 
campaign to become prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/25/theresa-may-reform-capitalism-philip-green-bhs-scandal>
. She has discussed giving shareholders a new binding vote on pay and putting 
workers on boards.

Hans-Christoph Hirt, co-head of the stewardship team at Hermes, acknowledged 
that getting rid of bonuses entirely was unlikely to gain immediate support and 
said one idea could “be the partial abolishment of bonuses and other variable 
pay, and moving towards increased fixed pay”.

Fund managers usually step back from being prescriptive about the total size 
of a pay package, but Hirt said companies should set out a maximum.

“The objective is to have an agreement about what the maximum would be even 
when the company is performing very well,” he said.

One of the high-profile rows over pay during this year’s annual general 
meeting season took place at the advertiser WPP whena third of investors 
opposed a £70m pay deal handed to its chief executive, Sir Martin Sorrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/08/sir-martin-sorrell-pay-deal-faces-investor-revolt-at-wpp-agm>
. The size of the deal was higher than had been expected because of an increase 
in the value of the shares he had been awarded in previous years.

Another fund manager has also been setting out its ambitions to reform 
executive pay. Legal & General Investment Managementhas called for a cap on 
directors’ bonuses, so they are no bigger than two times salary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/16/legal-general-warns-firms-over-bonuses-executive-pay>
, and also for companies to publish the pay ratio between their chief executive 
and their median employee.

Some companies have already abolished bonuses. Neil Woodford, a respected City 
fund manager,has put all staff at his Oxford-based Woodford Investment 
Management on a flat salary this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/top-fund-manager-neil-woodford-investments-scraps-staff-bonuses>
. He gave them a pay rise for the current financial year.

In July a group of City grandees, which met under the auspices of the lobby 
groupthe Investment Association <http://www.theinvestmentassociation.org/>, 
also published ideas to reform pay.
 