
Sean Dyche will not be lulled into thinking Burnley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/burnley> have already gained a strong 
foothold in the Premier League.

As their campaign reaches its midpoint with Saturday’s visit of Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland>, the promoted Clarets are 
sitting in a healthy-looking 14th position with 20 points, six above the bottom 
three.

Burnley v Sunderland: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/burnley-sunderland-match-preview>
But while Dyche recognises his side are coping better than in their one‑season 
top-flight spell of 2014-15, he is guarded against any complacency.

“I always say we’re not the real deal,” Dyche said. “We know we have got to 
continue to use everything we have got to get points on the board. That’s what 
our focus is on.

“The key word is reality – we don’t do blind faith here. We know it’s a tough 
challenge in the Premier League. We are playing some ‘Super Bowls’, as I call 
them, then there is a middle group and we’re below that.

“We have played some very strong sides and managed to get points on the table 
against the odds but it must continue. You get to where we are now and most 
people would take that but it’s an ongoing thing.”

All bar one of Burnley’s points have come at Turf Moor but Dyche does not want 
to over-emphasise the importance of home advantage ahead of their New Year’s 
Eve outing.

He said: “I don’t really go in for all that chatter. I go in for realities and 
that is you can find yourself being unbeatable if you’re ready to perform. We 
target every game with the mindset to win, we focus on every game to get a 
performance that can give us what we want. But it is helpful that when we’re at 
home we’ve got a strong crowd who get behind the team. That doesn’t guarantee 
you anything but it gives you a better chance.”

Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/30/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>
Burnley will hope to pick up further points against 18th-placed Sunderland at 
home before facing a tough trip to Manchester City on Monday.

The coming days will be a test of the Clarets’ resolve but Dyche is not 
complaining about the schedule.

Dyche, who is without suspended midfielder Jeff Hendrick this weekend, said: 
“I don’t get too flannelly about these things. The whistle blows get ready to 
play – simple as that.

“Re-energising is a big thing, your body only metabolises at a certain rate so 
to get the energy levels back up is important. But I’m not sure if it will ever 
change. I think fans like the Christmas period and outside the Premier League 
the chairmen like it from a business point of view.”
 