
So you’ve heard of Alessandro Scarlatti 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alessandro_Scarlatti>? Vaguely perhaps. Didn’t 
he write somerather good keyboard sonatas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FccWYCkUPoE>? Well, actually no: that was his 
son,Domenico <http://www.baroquemusic.org/bqxdscarl.html>. There are two 
Scarlattis, and given not many people have heard of even one of them, you’d be 
forgiven for thinking that this composer is off the beaten track because it’s 
not really worth the effort. So it falls to me to convince you that Alessandro 
Scarlatti is not only worth the effort but actually rather good.

Like many singers, I first came across Scarlatti as a student. A teacher 
recommended I try one of his more florid arias (Ergiti, amor) as something a 
bit different from the usual competition fare. I really liked it, and thought 
then that there must be more to this composer.
 Alessandro Scarlatti … his arias are regularly murdered by well-meaning 
singers at a musical festival near you 
Most singers come across him in books of Arie Antiche 
<http://www.musicroom.com/se/id_no/0396604/details.html> (Old Songs) when 
learning to sing, and his arias are regularly murdered by well-meaning, reedy 
voiced wannabe singers at music festivals. There’s nothing wrong with that, but 
we never hear these arias as they were originally written, with an orchestra 
and a professional singer. So, a few years ago I started researching his music.

At Westminster Music Library I got out every score of Scarlatti’s music I 
could find. ConductorLaurence Cummings 
<http://www.rayfieldallied.com/artists/laurence-cummings/> and I ploughed 
through any remotely promising arias and made a longlist, then a shortlist, my 
hope being to record a CD of these neglected works. I also listened to anything 
I could find online, including bits of a recording of Joan Sutherland singing 
some arias fromMitridate Eupatore <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ko96leuU2FY>
, arranged very fashionably for the time (but rather inauthentically) for a 
larger orchestra.

Scarlatti is considered the father of the Neapolitan school of opera, and yet 
this early 18th-century work, possibly his masterpiece, remains unserved by a 
modern recording. Finding the manuscript was a nightmare – there’s a librarian 
in Seattle to whom I owe at least a large beer and probably dinner – but we 
were able to record three arias from this astonishing tale of blood, gore and 
clothes-swapping. To think that in 1707 Scarlatti could write the tortured 
chromaticism of Cara tomba is mind-boggling.

Good news: I can sing 88 notes without a breath! Bad news: Scarlatti wrote 89

And then there was Torbido irato <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NEezNCZRfFU>
, written for the 17-year-oldFarinelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/29/the-king-and-farinelli-iestyn-davies-claire-van-kampen>
. I found a published (hooray!) score in the library and a manuscript (double 
hooray!) at the Royal College of Music. The music is outrageously hard, with 
lots of coloratura (very fast runs of lots of notes), the most mind-bending of 
which produced one of my best evertweets <https://twitter.com/lizwattssoprano>: 
“Good news: I can sing 88 notes without a breath! Bad news: Scarlatti wrote 89.”

Farinelli clearly had a good set of lungs on him (castrati were renowned for 
this), so I resorted to using a candle flame to show my breath control (if the 
flame in front of your mouth flickers there is too much breath – an old 
castrati trick), acres of practice (my long-suffering neighbours can probably 
still hum this run) and an overdose of sheer bloody-mindedness to get through 
it. In the end, I added a few extra notes when it came to the recording, just 
to show off.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2a_KFTlQCw4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2a_KFTlQCw4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2a_KFTlQCw4&media=>
One of the best pieces by Scarlatti is his cantata Sul le sponde del Tebro 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNQoGB7lqQw>, for soprano and trumpet. His 
cantatas are probably among the most recorded of his works, so I looked into 
other repertoire. It turns out he had a penchant for this combination (very 
fashionable at the time), and I found a few corkers. To create extra interest I 
added percussion to a couple.

This is where baroque music is so exciting. There is so much that we don’t 
know, and so much that was left to performers to interpret. Percussion is a 
known unknown – we know it was used more often than stated in the score, but 
not quite in which way, so you can introduce instruments with a vague stamp of 
authority. I feltCon voce festiva <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kAhvxrn8_38> 
was crying out for tambourine, so we ask our percussionist to bring one. I was 
delighted when he turned up with not one but a boxful for Laurence and me to 
choose from. Early music has a lot to offer anyone inclined to geekiness.

Laurence Cummings and I spent many hours together dreaming up spectacular 
things for me to get my tonsils around

Finding a record label willing to let me commit a selection of my discoveries 
to disc was a huge bonus. Thank you, Harmonia Mundi USA. Another big help was 
the Borletti-Buitoni trust <http://www.bbtrust.com/>, which supports 
interesting projects.

Then there was Laurence Cummings. As well as expertly curating my ideas and 
weeding out some of the more bizarre ones, he also helped with the extra 
ornamentation so essential to this style. Scarlatti Sr pretty much invented the
da capo aria <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xjm_9-qLznU>. Da capo means “from 
the top”, the instruction to go back to the beginning and sing the first 
section again once you have sung the two written-out sections of the aria. But, 
rather than sing the first bit the way you did before, you improvise, adding 
notes and different lines. Laurence and I spent many hours dreaming up 
spectacular things for me to get my tonsils around.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Falessandro-scarlatti-opera-classical-music-soprano-elizabeth-watts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F24%2F1448358644530%2Fc1c1b9c9-3120-4eda-a238-ece230501829-1020x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Searching%20for%20Scarlatti%3A%20my%20quest%20to%20rehabilitate%20the%20Baroque%20master&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Falessandro-scarlatti-opera-classical-music-soprano-elizabeth-watts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Searching%20for%20Scarlatti%3A%20my%20quest%20to%20rehabilitate%20the%20Baroque%20master&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Falessandro-scarlatti-opera-classical-music-soprano-elizabeth-watts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F24%2F1448358644530%2Fc1c1b9c9-3120-4eda-a238-ece230501829-1020x1020.jpeg>
 Scarlatti: Con eco d’amore by Elizabeth Watts 
It’s been a major undertaking to put all this music together for the disc, to 
find the scores and to learn 16 technically difficult arias, many of them da 
capo. Along with the music for Farinelli, gems fromMitridate Eupatore 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mitridate_Eupatore>, dazzling trumpet wizardry, 
frankly crackers ornamentation and tambourine fun are Io non son, an aria with 
words by a pope, Figlio, tiranno!, from an opera written for five castrati and 
a tenor (just imagine the dressing-room tension),Mentr’io godo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qnf_thcDeIo>, a piece my husband simply refers 
to as the “sexy times” aria, plus other fabulous tunes. The disc puts together 
the various facets of a neglected composer and showcases his inventiveness and 
diversity in a broad portrait.

And for my next trick? Well, I am dreaming up another disc of course, now the 
five years working on this project are over. The contents are top secret for 
now, but I have a title. I think it’s going to be called MegaWatts…

• Con eco d’amore, recorded with the English Concert and Laurence Cummings for 
Harmonia Mundi 
<http://www.harmoniamundi.com/mobile/pages/Album01.php?lang=UK&id=2120>, is out 
now. Download it oniTunes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/album/alessandro-scarlatti-con-eco/id1037827926> 
or order onAmazon <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Music/dp/B00YTATRU6>. Read a review 
here <http://www.gramophone.co.uk/review/scarlatti-con-eco-damore>. 

 * 27/11/15: An editing error meant that the phrase “Scarlatti is considered 
the father of the Neapolitan school of opera” became “Scarlatti is considered 
the father of modern opera”. This has now been corrected.  