
From the counter, where a woman is pouring buckets of tea into an urn, the 
queue snakes as far as the front door and out into the street: students, 
businessmen, women in Prada – and one very elderly, bent lady clutching a paper 
bag and munching doughnuts. Welcome to the Pyshki cafe, purveyor of greasy 
Soviet-era doughnuts, treacly tea and service most definitely without a smile 
since 1953.

How the place has survived is anybody’s guess. Pyshki is on Bolshaya 
Konyushennaya street, one of the most fashionable in St Petersburg, home to 
Dior, Louis Vuitton and Prada. Virtually next door is DLT, once the First State 
Department Store, now the city’s answer to Harvey Nichols, stuffed with 
designer labels. “Milan prices,” boasts the sign on the door, hinting at the 
effect of international sanctions imposed since the start of Russia’s conflict 
with Ukraine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66c5478d2c1e2ff8537c7fb0cd75cad14fad172c%2F0_579_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66c5478d2c1e2ff8537c7fb0cd75cad14fad172c%2F0_579_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 The Pyshki cafe. Photograph: Harriet Green for the Guardian 
I’ve come to St Petersburg curious to see what Russians themselves think of 
the revolution that started in this great city a century ago next year. Do they 
think of it at all – or is it just something best forgotten?

We have a guide (not compulsory to have one, but helpful, as many sites cater 
poorly for English speakers). Elena has brought us to Pyshki for a short break 
from sightseeing. She reddens with embarrassment as the woman at the counter 
sloshes tea cheerlessly into our polystyrene cups, and tells us her mother 
adores the place because it reminds her of her childhood. For many older 
people, Elena elaborates, the Soviet days seem a simpler time – if choice and 
opportunity were limited, at least people didn’t worry so much about money. 
They knew where they stood. For people like Elena’s mother, these doughnuts – 
still warm from the fryer – are so much more than pastries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c85f58a7dc807274fac821d00d2b4fcc6a305b%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56c85f58a7dc807274fac821d00d2b4fcc6a305b%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Peter and Paul Fortress pictured from across the Neva river. Photograph: Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
Unlike Elena’s mother, young Russians see the anniversary as largely 
irrelevant, to be remembered only with a kind of kitsch nostalgia, if at all. 
At theMuseum of Soviet Arcade Games 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/the-alternative-universe-of-soviet-arcade-games-1729012559>
, clunky vintage slot machines, using real Soviet kopeks, are played by Russian 
teens for whom even the fall of the Berlin Wall is ancient history. I look at 
them and reflect that even their parents were young when my hotel, the historic
Angleterre <http://www.angleterrehotel.com/>, was pulled down in 1987 (and 
later rebuilt), leading to the first mass demonstration in the Soviet era to go 
unpunished.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54b4d505b800e0965b12c7c61af93d02e065b4bf%2F0_0_5146_3088%2F5146.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54b4d505b800e0965b12c7c61af93d02e065b4bf%2F0_0_5146_3088%2F5146.jpg>
 A room at the Hermitage Museum. Photograph: Getty Images/Gallo Images 
The tourist trail in St Petersburg is all about the tsars – the palaces of 
Peter and Catherine the Greats, the French architecture, Renaissance 
masterpieces, Fabergé eggs, the gold, the jewels. Less visited is a tinywooden 
cabin on the banks of the Neva 
<http://www.saint-petersburg.com/virtual-tour/cabin/> built for Peter in just 
three days in 1703. Here he lived for six years, on mosquito-infested 
marshland, while presiding over the building of the city from nothing – a 
coastal city that would give Russia vital access to Europe. The hut was not 
much loved by the tsarina, who also had to live in it, but it is one of the 
most memorable city sites. It’s tiny – just three rooms – and breathtakingly 
modest. Lacking access to stone, Peter had his workers paint the wooden 
exterior to look like brick, with horizontal rows of white separated by thin 
strips of red paint. In 1723, he had it encased in a red brick pavilion, and 
ordered that it be preserved for posterity, with many of his possessions, 
including an armchair he carved himself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa13589d940ae219dc93821c29919d39d353f7d82%2F0_67_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa13589d940ae219dc93821c29919d39d353f7d82%2F0_67_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 The Winter Palace and Hermitage Museum. Photograph: Walter Bibikow/Getty Images
Nearby, at the Peter and Paul Fortress, the bones of the last tsar, Nicholas 
II, his wife Alexandra and their children were solemnly reburied in 1998 – in a 
service attended by members of the wider Romanov family. Our guide Elena is 
solemn when she points out the tombs – covered daily in fresh flowers – and 
describes their final bleak days in Ekaterinburg, where the family were killed 
by a Bolshevik firing squad. No one mentions that the Peter and Paul Fortress 
was where Leon Trotsky was incarcerated in 1905 – as was Lenin’s brother in 
1887, after the attempted assassination of Alexander III.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb487679d1e5e1477d0fa6d60e25a2fcbc932700%2F0_144_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb487679d1e5e1477d0fa6d60e25a2fcbc932700%2F0_144_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 Tsars in their eyes … tourists flock around the Peacock Clock in the Hermitage 
Museum. Photograph: Alamy 
At the tsars’ former Winter Palace, the vast eau-de-nil wedding cake on the 
banks of the Neva better-known as theHermitage Museum 
<http://hermitagemuseum.org/>, we skip from one gold and crystal room to 
another, gasping at the magnificent vulgarity. The splendour, the 18th-century 
bling, is almost overwhelming. (The BBC’s recent adaptation ofWar and Peace on 
the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/13/clive-james-bbc-war-and-peace-measure-up>
 gave some idea – and triggered a marked increase in British tourists.) In one 
room, everybody crowds round to gawp at a stunning golden Peacock Clock – 
fashioned by English jeweller James Cox and acquired for Catherine in 1781. 
Amid all this ornament there are incredible works: two Leonardos (both 
Madonnas) as good as any at the Louvre, and numerous Rembrandts, displayed in 
galleries where the alarms go off every few seconds, as one tourist after 
another gets too close.

We ask to see the rooms in the palace that were used by the provisional 
government – the mainstream politicians who held power from February to October 
1917, after Nicholas II’s abdication. Elena whips us through chamber after 
almost deserted chamber of French classical paintings – to a small dining room. 
This is where the provisional government held its last meeting: on the 
mantelpiece, the clock is stopped at 2.10am – the moment the Winter Palace was 
taken by the Bolsheviks. Thecruiser Aurora 
<http://www.saint-petersburg.com/museums/cruiser-aurora/> – docked nearby on 
the Neva – had fired a blank shot to signal the storming of the palace. The 
government quickly surrendered.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faddd1f1cb19442dc62f6e551ec3bcb18c0b3943b%2F0_434_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faddd1f1cb19442dc62f6e551ec3bcb18c0b3943b%2F0_434_3024_3024%2F3024.jpg>
 The Museum of Soviet Arcade Games, in St Petersburg. Photograph: Harriet Green 
for the Guardian 
The next day, we visit the Aurora, where an expert explains animatedly how the 
events unfolded. There are pictures of sailors with red armbands raised high, 
gleaming shells and other weaponry from a century ago. The cruiser has recently 
been refitted, but as we are leaving, our guide says there was debate about 
whether to bother with any of the displays relating to the revolution. More 
interesting to most Russians are the Aurora’s exploits during the second world 
war.

As this suggests, the Soviet era is not suppressed in St Petersburg, but you 
could easily miss it. Here and there we see little hints: the odd plaque on a 
side street, commemorating where Lenin held some meeting or other. But what 
happens if you go looking for more? I do that at thePolitical Museum 
<http://www.saint-petersburg.com/museums/museum-of-political-history/> – once 
the home of Mathilde Kschessinska, a prima ballerina with the Imperial Ballet. 
Unquestionably talented, Kschessinska nevertheless owed much of her renown and 
wealth to her affairs with no fewer than three grand dukes of the Romanov 
family, including the future Nicholas II. This made her something of a target 
for the Bolsheviks: she lost her palace to Lenin and friends in April 1917, 
soon after Lenin returned to Russia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69c674a644e6fa97d35bdbbbbc998acb0b5e0da0%2F0_144_3843_2306%2F3843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69c674a644e6fa97d35bdbbbbc998acb0b5e0da0%2F0_144_3843_2306%2F3843.jpg>
 The cruiser Aurora remains a revolutionary symbol. Photograph: Alamy 
Lenin’s desk has been preserved in the room that served as the office of the 
Communist party newspaper, Pravda. And he often made speeches from the nearby 
balcony, overlooking Kronverkskiy Prospekt. There’s much else here to absorb a 
keen historian – quantities of material relating to later leaders, notably 
Stalin – but this is one of several museums that seem not to expect visitors 
who aren’t Russian, or can’t read or speak the language.

The no-frills Russian Museum <http://en.rusmuseum.ru/> is likewise in a vast 
palace, but reeks of Soviet-era austerity. The grand façade is no less imposing 
than the British Museum’s in London: there are giant gates bearing imperial 
eagles. But to get in, visitors creep through a furtive, subterranean 
side-entrance. The interior is spartan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fe3a6732850082d4760fa1eeb03b922e70745ed%2F0_270_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9fe3a6732850082d4760fa1eeb03b922e70745ed%2F0_270_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 House of Soviets and Vladimir Lenin statue at Moskovsky Square. Photograph: 
Feifei Cui-Paoluzzo/Getty Images 
This museum attracts far fewer overseas visitors than the Hermitage, which is 
a terrible shame, because it’s packed with art treasures depicting Russia from 
before the revolution, through the second world war and beyond the end of the 
Soviet era.

Works by Ilya Repin (1844-1930) – master social documentarist – hint at the 
shifts to come. In one room there’s his giant painting of thestate council, 
finished in 1903 
<http://en.rusmuseum.ru/collections/painting-of-the-second-half-of-the-xix-century-beginning-of-xxi-century/artworks/torzhestvennoe-zasedanie-gosudarstvennogo-soveta-7-maya-1901-goda-v-den-stoletnego-yubileya-so-dnya-/>
 – the uniformed establishment soon to be overthrown. HisBarge Haulers on the 
Volga 
<http://en.rusmuseum.ru/exhibitions/peredvizhniki-russian-realism-and-repin-1870-1900/#rmPhoto[gallery6520]/0/>
 brutally presents the miserable serfs, exhaustedly dragging a boat upstream. 
Further on, there’s a noticeable shift in 1917 and through the 1920s and 
beyond, as painters turned their attention from aristocracy to farmers and bus 
conductors.

Stepping outside the Russian Museum, I find early autumn sunshine sparkling on 
the city’s brightly painted buildings and busy waterways. It’s easy, for a 
moment, to think I’m in another European city with canals: Amsterdam or Venice. 
And St Petersburg is, of all Russian cities, the most European. For most of the 
time since it was founded, it was Russia’s capital, and even after the 
government was moved to Moscow in 1918, St Petersburg remained important. Like 
any former or current capital, it holds much that is beautiful, and much that 
is darker. Often there are both qualities in the same place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c48ebf95ae750a43bd60197ac6a5e726c6cb57d%2F0_218_5911_3547%2F5911.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c48ebf95ae750a43bd60197ac6a5e726c6cb57d%2F0_218_5911_3547%2F5911.jpg>
 ‘It’s easy, for a moment, to think I’m in another European city with canals: 
Amsterdam or Venice.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Take the General Staff Building, a wing of the Hermitage 
<https://www.hermitagemuseum.org/wps/portal/hermitage/explore/buildings/locations/building/B60/?lng=>
, which rivals Tate Modern in London in its minimalist splendour. It has a 
breathtaking collection of impressionist and post-impressionist works: 
Cézannes, Van Goghs, Monets, Picassos, Toulouse-Lautrecs and Matisses. Many 
were collected by businessmanSergei Shchukin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/feb/10/treasures-modern-art-seen-outside-russia-first-time-sergei-shchukin>
, to fill his Russian home. In one room he kept 16 of Gauguin’s Tahiti 
paintings. But the Soviets seized it all – Lenin himself signed the decree to 
expropriate the works – and Shchukin fled to France. Others, as we know, were 
not so lucky.

Or consider the Astoria hotel 
<https://www.roccofortehotels.com/hotels-and-resorts/hotel-astoria/?gclid=CJGB4MyV088CFdU_GwodYfAB0g>
, bySt Isaac’s Cathedral 
<http://www.saint-petersburg.com/cathedrals/st-isaacs-cathedral/>. The hotel 
was built in 1910 and, during the first world war, aristocrats threw 
extravagant parties in its ballroom. Rasputin came here to visit his married 
lovers. But in 1917, hand-to-hand fighting between Tsarists and Bolsheviks saw 
blood shed on the pavement outside and, within a couple of years, the hotel had 
become a popular bolthole for the revolutionaries – with Lenin taking advantage 
of its royal suite balconies to deliver yet more of his oratory. Renamed 
Leningrad in 1924, the city fell under siege in the second world war and the 
Astoria served as a hospital. But Hitler got word of the hotel’s former 
splendour and made plans to hold his victory party here – even going so far as 
to make up his invitations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa453fa6a9b65a89d87a5cba6e1764ad25eff03e5%2F0_129_3854_2312%2F3854.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Searching%20for%20signs%20of%20the%20Soviets%20in%20St%20Petersburg&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fst-petersburg-museums-culture-soviets-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa453fa6a9b65a89d87a5cba6e1764ad25eff03e5%2F0_129_3854_2312%2F3854.jpg>
 The Astoria Hotel has seen its fair share of history; its visitors have 
included Rasputin and Margaret Thatcher. Photograph: Alamy 
Hotel guests enjoying the finest luxury today might have no idea of this 
backstory. Does that matter? Some might laugh, finding kitsch where others see 
only horror. For me, it’s been a thrill to discover a beautiful city of great 
cultural significance, and to have to work hard for my lessons in revolutionary 
history. Others might be satisfied with less. In which case, I recommend a 
quick study of the brass plaques on the wall beside the Astoria’s elegant 
elevators. Without comment, these show the names of its many notable visitors. 
Among them: Elton John, Margaret Thatcher, Lenin and Rasputin.
• The trip was provided by Russia specialist Regent Holidays 
<http://www.regent-holidays.co.uk/> (020-3131 5562) which has a three-night 
stay at theAngleterre Hotel <http://www.angleterrehotel.com/> from £630pp or at 
theHotel Dostoevsky <http://www.dostoevsky-hotel.ru/en/> from £480pp, based on 
two people sharing and including breakfast and flights from the UK. For 2017, 
Regent Holidays will be offering a seven-day guided tour combining the 
revolutionary highlights of St Petersburg and Moscow

Don’t miss

Icons of Modern Art: The Shchukin Collection 
<http://www.fondationlouisvuitton.fr/en/expositions/icones-de-l-art-moderne.html>
This collection’s arrival at the Fondation Louis Vuitton in Paris is the first 
time these extraordinary paintings have been seen outside Russia. The 
exhibition comprises 130 major pieces – seized by Lenin in 1918 after Sergei 
Shchukin fled the country – with particular emphasis on Monet, Cézanne, 
Gauguin, Rousseau, Derain, Matisse and Picasso.
• 22 October to 20 February 2017

Revolution – New Art for a New World <http://revolution.film/>
This fascinating new documentary by Margy Kinmonth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/04/hermitage-revealed-documentary-margy-kinmonth>
 remembers the avant-garde art movement that thrived in the early years of the 
revolution. It tells the stories of artists like Chagall, Kandinsky and 
Malevich who flourished in the years after 1917, only to be silenced in 1932 by 
Stalin’s brutal crackdown. The film features paintings banned during the Soviet 
era and masterpieces that rarely leave Russia.
• In UK cinemas on 10 November
 