
It's impossible to picture the Pacific Northwest without the image of a totem 
pole. Considered by many as the emblem of the native people of North America,
the poles <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Totem_pole> have been the iconic symbol 
of the region since the late 19th century.

Seattle's poles stand at many of the city's most-visited attractions: the Pike 
Place Market, Pioneer Square, the waterfront, the locks, Lake Union, the 
University of Washington campus, and many public parks. No visit toYe Olde 
Curiosity Shop <http://yeoldecuriosityshop.com/catalog/yocs-home.php> on 
Seattle's waterfront would be complete without buying a souvenir pole keychain 
to remember your visit.

But the poles are not indigenous to this region. In fact, Seattle businessmen 
imported Tlingit andHaida poles <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haida_people> 
from south-east Alaska to market Seattle as the "Gateway to Alaska" after the
Klondike gold rush <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klondike_Gold_Rush> – a 
marketing gimmick that was wildly successful. It's no wonder that the poles 
make fabulous public art – that was their original purpose among the Tlingit 
and Haida communities, where they illustrated, predominantly, wealth and status.

But among the Salish tribes <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coast_Salish_peoples>
 of western Washington the tradition of art-making focused on smaller, personal 
objects or interior houseposts shown only to select guests. Salish work did not 
lend itself to being appropriated as a public symbol of the growing metropolis 
of Seattle in the early 20th century.
 A Salish wood carver displays his craftsmanship during a cultural workshop. 
Photograph: Marilyn Angel Wynn/Corbis 
More recently, however, Salish art has come into its own in the public sphere 
and on the art market. State-funded art has helped bring local indigenous 
traditions and aesthetics into the public realm.Roger Fernandes 
<http://www.turtleislandstorytellers.net/tis_washington/transcript_r_fernandes.htm>
 (of the Lower Elwha band of the Klallam) recently designed the new gateway for 
the Thomas Street pedestrian overpass linking several tourist destinations in 
Seattle, including theOlympic Sculpture Park <http://www.seattleartmuseum.org/> 
and theSpace Needle <http://spaceneedle.com/>.His cedar-and-glass installation, 
Snoqual/Moon the Transformer, tells of the creation of Snoqualmie Falls and the 
first appearance of salmon in the river, while also illustrating the reshaping 
of the Duwamish waterway by civic engineers in 20th century. And when the city 
leaders ofTacoma, Washington, wanted an indigenous piece to showcase in 
Tollefson Plaza (the original site of the Puyallup village of spuy'elepebS), 
Shaun Peterson (Puyallup/Tulalip) convinced them not have a Northern-style 
totem pole, but a 24ft cedar Salish welcome-figure. Peterson's woman now stands 
welcoming all, with hands outstretched in a traditional Salish greeting 
<http://youtu.be/NgYBmzFXWHc>.

Peterson's work marks Tacoma as Salish territory, where his "Salmon Continuum" 
bus shelter of sandblasted glass and aluminium stands near light posts 
decorated with the frogs and moon of Salish oral history. While the ancient 
Salish art forms have long been overshadowed in the Puget Sound region by the 
towering poles imported from the North, contemporary Native American artists 
are shaping Salish forms into new urban experiences that tap the deep 
indigenous traditions in this region for tourists and local alike.

Kathryn Bunn-Marcuse is assistant director of the Bill Holm Center for the 
Study of Northwest Coast Art <http://www.burkemuseum.org/bhc>, Burke Museum, 
University of Washington

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 