
Secret aid worker: Surely NGOs should embrace trade unions, not block them?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/22/secret-aid-worker-surely-ngos-should-embrace-trade-unions-not-block-them>
It started out like any other retrenchment story. A consultant was flown in to 
lead a process of change, sold to us staff as necessary and inevitable in light 
of the changing context of international development and the need to keep up 
with the times.

Fair enough. This is not the first NGO to use this spin when it no longer has 
enough money to sustain itself – and it won’t be the last.

The consultant presented the new business model, complete with fancy charts, 
colourful graphics and well-placed pop culture references.

Some of my colleagues and I were surprised; mainly because we had been 
recently hired for open-ended positions. Being offered such a position was a 
huge factor in our decisions to join the organisation. After all, for an 
industry that runs on unpaid internships and fixed-term contracts, an 
open-ended contract is equivalent to Willy Wonka’s golden ticket.

For many of my senior colleagues, some who had been working for the 
organisation for longer, the news was more damaging. They had children in 
school and mortgages to pay. Many were the sole breadwinners of their immediate 
and extended families. Like any other employee, they had managed their lives 
differently after securing open-ended contracts.

We were made to feel like outdated fossils, totally disposable, regardless of 
outstanding performance records

Despite that, we took it all in our stride. We expected the entire process to 
take its time to go through the required stakeholder consultations, on account 
of the organisation’s emphasis on collaboration, transparency and inclusiveness.

But from then on, everything went full speed. A tight timeline was adhered to 
and it became clear that the organisation’s new direction saw no value in 
keeping or developing the talents it had previously hired. But worse was that 
it allowed staff to doubt their own abilities to perform in an agile and 
flexible environment. We were made to feel like outdated fossils, totally 
disposable, regardless of outstanding performance records.

The entire process took a few months. This impressive accomplishment should be 
taken as proof that any large NGO can be as efficient as it wants to be, 
particularly if it involves letting go its staff to save its bottom line.

Was it legal? Yes. Was it ethical and in accordance with its own professed 
values? Arguably not.

The management failed to see that the distressing situation was, ultimately, a 
result of its own incompetence. When aid organisations lack the ability to 
forecast their own operating budget and staff needs over a period of five years 
– heck, even two years – people will suffer; whether it’s the communities they 
claim to help, or their employees who believe (or believed) in the work they 
do. That’s the bottom line.

Secret aid worker: when your dream job ends in depression
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/19/secret-aid-worker-when-your-dream-job-ends-in-depression>
I guess that open-ended contract really was Willy Wonka’s golden ticket; rare 
and, in the end, too good to be true.

Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us 
confidentially atglobaldevpros@theguardian.com 
<mailto:globaldevpros@theguardian.com> – please put “Secret aid worker” in the 
subject line. If you’d like to encrypt your email to us, here areinstructions 
<https://www.mailvelope.com/help> on how to set up a PGP mail client and our 
public PGP key <https://pgp.theguardian.com/PublicKeys/Global%20Devpros.pub.txt>
.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 