
The current debate about the ever-growing pressure on social care services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/15/council-tax-bills-can-rise-by-3-for-two-years-to-help-fund-social-care-says-javid>
 is by no means the first, and certainly won’t be the last. But it is always 
predicated around the same central assumption: with increasing numbers of older 
people, the costs can only go up. This is to miss an important point, one well 
known to public health experts but strangely ignored by most politicians. The 
problem isn’t just about an ageing population, it’s also about an increasingly 
sedentary one.

That far too many Britons are not physically active is well documented, even 
if the sheer extent can sometimes be surprising. For example, a fifth of 
Scottish people say they havenot walked for more than 20 minutes 
<http://www.eveningtimes.co.uk/news/14575052.More_than_a_fifth_of_Scots_don_t_walk_for_20_minutes_ONCE_a_year/>
 even once over the past year. Not once. Also well known, if less discussed, is 
the toll this takes on the public health. The usual estimate is that about
85,000 people die early 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2805691/One-six-deaths-lack-exercise-Britain-worst-West-inactivity.html>
 each year in England and Wales due to illnesses caused by sedentary living, 
mainly heart disease, type 2 diabetes and various cancers.

But callous as it sounds, what really keep senior civil servants awake at 
night isn’t the mortality rate; it’s the parallel issue known as morbidity: the 
quality of life people can expect as they age, and thus how independent they 
remain. Here, the near-magical effects of keeping up even a fairly minimal 
regime of exercise arealso well documented 
<http://www.nhs.uk/livewell/fitness/pages/whybeactive.aspx>.

Physical activity keeps people stronger 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4762192/> and more supple as they 
age. It alsoimproves balance <http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/686412>, gives 
better bone density and makes them less likely tobe depressed 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/stress-anxiety-depression/pages/exercise-for-depression.aspx>
 ordevelop Alzheimer’s 
<https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/news_article.php?newsID=2427>. 
These are all things associated with needing less social care.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fsedentary-lifestyles-social-care-crisis-exercise-ill-health-old-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0259db849dd46af28a951f2b268425271436d0cf%2F0_42_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sedentary%20lifestyles%3A%20the%20hidden%20factor%20in%20the%20social%20care%20crisis%20%7C%20Peter%20Walker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fsedentary-lifestyles-social-care-crisis-exercise-ill-health-old-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sedentary%20lifestyles%3A%20the%20hidden%20factor%20in%20the%20social%20care%20crisis%20%7C%20Peter%20Walker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fsedentary-lifestyles-social-care-crisis-exercise-ill-health-old-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0259db849dd46af28a951f2b268425271436d0cf%2F0_42_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Cyclists in Amsterdam: ‘The Netherlands and Denmark have spent decades 
deliberately re-shaping their road environments away from the car culture of 
the 1960s and 70s towards mass cycling.’ Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
The earlier people start such a regime, the better the effect into older age. 
One public health expert once told me he encourages people this way: “I tell 
them, ‘being active throughout your life is about being able to get to the loo 
on time in your old age’. They can get their heads around that.”

If it’s so conclusive, why is the government not pushing this as part of the 
solution? Here we get into the more tricky area of what is politically 
acceptable, and whether ministers want to embark on what is, in effect, 
low-scale social engineering. Decades of experience has shown that just 
encouraging people to exercise has limited impact. Urging people to go to a gym 
or walk briskly round their local park eats into what is known to experts as 
“discretionary time” – when they could be doing something else. Thus they tend 
to give up pretty soon.

One of the few exercise regimes proved to stick is active travel, more 
specifically making walking or cycling to work, school or the shops 
sufficiently safe and convenient that it becomes easier for people to do it 
than not. Cycling is arguably the mode that should be encouraged the most. 
Aside from the fact people can cover greater distances on a bike than on foot, 
studies have shown that the slightly greater exertion it involves bringseven 
more miraculous health benefits <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10847255>.

The mechanics of how you nudge people away from cars and on to bikes is 
another discussion, but there is little doubt it can be done if the political 
will is there. The Netherlands and Denmark, for example, have spent decades 
very deliberately re-shaping their road environments away from the car culture 
of the 1960s and 70s towards mass cycling. It’s not an accident.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fsedentary-lifestyles-social-care-crisis-exercise-ill-health-old-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe77f70cfff4b2ab75f5ec7547dc128967f80011b%2F0_164_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sedentary%20lifestyles%3A%20the%20hidden%20factor%20in%20the%20social%20care%20crisis%20%7C%20Peter%20Walker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fsedentary-lifestyles-social-care-crisis-exercise-ill-health-old-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sedentary%20lifestyles%3A%20the%20hidden%20factor%20in%20the%20social%20care%20crisis%20%7C%20Peter%20Walker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fsedentary-lifestyles-social-care-crisis-exercise-ill-health-old-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe77f70cfff4b2ab75f5ec7547dc128967f80011b%2F0_164_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 ‘In his first interview as transport secretary, Chris Grayling spoke of 
cyclists only to complain about those who jump red lights and to say bike lanes 
cause problems for “road users”, a group that apparently doesn’t include people 
on bikes.’ Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Yes, it would take the UK a decade or so to make similar changes. But given 
the vast and unquestioned public health benefits on offer, with the huge 
savings this would bring on social care (not to mention the NHS, which some 
experts predict will soon become bankrupt due to the costs of ailments linked 
to sedentary lives), it’s a bit depressing that we haven’t even begun the 
debate.

For all the occasionally hysterical media narrative on cycling, it barely 
exists as an issue at the top of government. In his first interview as 
transport secretary last week,Chris Grayling spoke of cyclists only 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/chris-grayling-i-use-a-phone-to-buy-lunch-so-why-do-we-still-queue-for-rail-tickets-a3413296.html>
 to complain about those who jumped red lights and to suggest that bike lanes 
caused problems for “road users”, a group that apparently doesn’t include 
people on bikes.

Grayling’s predecessor in the job, Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, now the chancellor, was 
reported last month 
<http://www.bikebiz.com/news/read/rip-out-parliament-s-cycleway-for-cash-chancellor-told-london-s-mayor/020344>
 to have urged London’s mayor,Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sadiqkhan>, to rip out one of the few 
properly designed and safe bike lanes in the entire country. This is not to 
castigate the pair personally. Barring a handful of exceptions, almost all 
Britain’s top politicians think much the same about cycling as everyday 
transport.

The debate on social care shows how blinkered this is. As part of a book I’ve 
been writing about the beneficial effects of more cycling, I spoke to a number 
of public health experts about the problem of sedentary living. Several of them 
used the same analogy: getting people active in their everyday lives is, they 
said, like “a miracle pill” in the way it wards off disease and decrepitude. 
That miracle pill is well known. We’re just waiting for someone with the 
political vision to administer it.

• Bike Nation: How Cycling Can Save the World 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/1113912/bike-nation/>, by Peter Walker is 
published in April
 