
A report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/call-for-action-to-tackle-growing-ethnic-segregation-across-uk>
 was released this week by the academic Ted Cantle warning of the dwindling 
number of white residents in the ethnic minority dominated areas of the inner 
city. Between the 2001 and 2011 census, the white British population of 
Birmingham fell from 65.6% to 53.1; in Leicester it declined from 60.5% to 
45.1%; and in Newham in London, only 16.7% of the population is white British. 
This is a follow-on from hisinfluential 2001 report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/dec/11/race.world5> that argued that one 
of the causes of the riots in Bradford and Oldham that year was that people
lived “a series of parallel” lives 
<http://dera.ioe.ac.uk/14146/1/communitycohesionreport.pdf>. Unfortunately this 
narrative spawned the policy agenda of “community cohesion” in order to bring 
the nation together that has done more harm than good in addressing the 
problems of racism and belonging.

Since mass migration from the former colonies after the second world war, 
ethnic minorities have been predominantly housed in inner-city areas. Contrary 
to the belief that this was due to “self-segregation”, the clustering of 
minorities in deprived urban areas was due to racism. The jobs available to 
migrants, regardless of their previous skills or professions, were low paid, 
which limited housing options. Even if migrants could afford to live outside 
the inner city there was a strong colour bar that prevented them moving into 
more affluent areas. In 1963,Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> city council attempted to open a 
boarding house for Caribbean migrants in the then affluent Northfield, but 
after an outcry by residents it repented and located the accommodation in 
Handsworth instead. We can only understand why Handsworth is now only 7.2% 
white British by placing the figure in this historical context.

Call for action to tackle growing ethnic segregation across UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/call-for-action-to-tackle-growing-ethnic-segregation-across-uk>
At the same time as restricting where migrants could live in the country, 
white residents abandoned neighbourhoods as minority residents moved in. “White 
flight” meant that areas that had been exclusively white quickly became 
dominated by ethnic minorities, who were given limited choice about where to 
settle. Though Cantle is keen to avoid using the term, his evidence clearly 
demonstrates that white flight is still as prevalent today as it was in the 
1960s. His “complex” set of reasons for white flight include that people want 
better housing and dream of life in the suburbs.

There is some truth in this: regardless of colour, people tend to move out of 
deprived areas into better housing when they have the chance. But this ignores 
the different opportunities available to ethnic minorities.Higher levels of 
unemployment 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN06385> and a 
staggering wealth gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/08/50-anniversary-race-relations-act-uk-prejudice-racism>
 mean that opportunities to leave the inner city are severely constrained. But 
the most important aspect missing from the discussion is that the areas white 
people are fleeing from are not run-down, crime-ridden ghettoes. Handsworth, 
for instance, features some of the nicest houses in Birmingham; so it is the 
people in the neighbourhood who are the reason for white flight, not the 
housing.

The truth about segregation in Britain is that it is the white middle class 
who are by far the most “self-segregating”. The suburbs and rural commuter 
zones are almost exclusively white and middle class. If segregation is the 
social problem that Cantle claims it is, then the focus should not be on the 
diverse inner city, but monocultural suburbs. This tells us that it is not 
segregation itself that is being defined as the problem, but who is living 
together. The self-segregated white middle class is assumed to have the correct 
values and therefore does not need to be integrated into the nation. However, 
it is seen as dangerous to have ethnic minorities cut off from the white 
population where they may develop “parallel” and dangerous lives. There is also 
a paternalistic idea that to succeed in society, minorities need to integrate 
and learn from mixing with white people. You cannot measure equality by who 
lives together; you measure it by the outcomes for different groups.

How has Brixton really changed? The data behind the story
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/datablog/2016/jan/14/how-has-brixton-really-changed-the-data-behind-the-story>
The problems facing ethnic minority communities are not down to a lack of 
white people, but to a lack of investment. Cities have become engines of 
growth, whichsuck all the money into the centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/commentisfree/2015/oct/23/lozells-riots-anniversary-birmingham-east-handsworth-poverty>
 as they develop into commercial and tourist attractions. The neglect of 
disadvantaged parts of the city is one of the most underrated drivers of racial 
inequality. Cantle argues that one of the ways to solve the problem of 
segregation is to “sell” diverse areas to white populations to reverse the 
trend of segregation. But this kind of marketing leads to the worst kind of 
diversity, somethingwe typically call gentrification 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/neoliberalism-through-a-dream-catcher-five-signs-your-town-has-gentrified>
.

One of the newer forms of urban population movement is white middle class 
people moving into inner city areas previously dominated by ethnic minorities, 
such as Brixton in southLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. As the 
centres of cities develop and expand, the once deprived inner city becomes 
prime real estate and increasingly “marketable”. The result is the development 
of expensive flats and wine bars, and the pricing out of local communities. In 
some areas there is now the reverse of white flight, with ethnic minority 
communities being forced out of the areas they were historically assigned to. 
White residential settlement is actually one of the problems facing ethnic 
minority communities, and definitely not any kind of solution. What is 
necessary is a reframing of the discussion away from the distraction of 
“segregation” and to addressing the racism that has caused the issue in the 
first place.
 