
Karolina Pliskova, the big-serving Czech who had already brushed aside a 
mounting reputation as a grand slam underachiever by making it to the US Open 
semi-finals, delivered a stunning display of power and composure to overwhelm 
top seedSerena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> in 
the upset of the tournament on Thursday night.

An eerie hush fell over Arthur Ashe Stadium after Williams double-faulted on 
match point in the second-set tiebreaker, closing the show at 6-2, 7-6 (5) and 
ensuring Pliskova’s shock passage into Saturday’s final after 86 minutes. The 
outcome cost Williams not only a chance at a history-making 23rd grand slam 
title to eclipse Steffi Graf’s professional-era mark for major championships 
but also the No1 ranking that she’s held since February 2013 – a span of 186 
weeks that equaled Graf’s record for consecutive weeks on top.

Kei Nishikori rips up Andy Murray’s script at US Open but victory is no shock 
| Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/kei-nishikori-andy-murray-us-open-stan-wawrinka-semi-final>
It marks the second straight year Williams has fallen at the penultimate 
hurdle in a bid for history at the season-ending major. Last September, a 
three-set loss to the unseeded Italian Roberta Vinci torpedoed her challenge 
for a calendar-year grand slam. On Thursday, the saboteur was a slender Czech 
all but unknown to casual observers due to her chronic underperformance in the 
early rounds of the sport’s four bedrock tournaments. Until now.

The matchup between the tour’s two best servers – Pliskova’s 446 aces are the 
most on the circuit this year while Williams exits with a tournament-high 65 – 
augured the hellfire that unfolded on a humid night at the world’s largest 
tennis stadium. The American kicked off proceedings with a 95mph ace out wide 
and held at love, but Pliskova responded with a 113mph missile down the middle 
in her opening service game.

The No10 seed drew first blood in the third game when she attacked a second 
serve with a vicious two-handed backhand that Williams couldn’t handle for 
30-love. Her baseline power forced Williams into another error to earn a 
break-point chance, which she converted when Williams sent a backhand sailing 
past the baseline.

When Pliskova raced out to 40-love in the following game before consolidating 
the break on a Williams error, there was no evidence of the opening-reel nerves 
that had cost her the first set in Monday’s fourth-round win over Venus 
Williams. Instead the 24-year-old served confidently, was aggressive early in 
the rallies and went for winners.

“I was pretty calm today,” Pliskova said. “Before the match I felt a little 
bit like pressure, a bit nervous. But when I stepped on the court I didn’t feel 
anything. I just, you know, wanted to win, actually. Not just enjoy but to win.”

Serving at 1-3, Williams fell behind love-30 but fought back to stay within 
touching distance. She pushed Pliskova in the following game with the aid of 
two double faults, but the Czech served her way out of trouble. All night 
Williams struggled to read Pliskova’s serve as she hit all four corners of the 
service box, disguising the direction masterfully with her toss.

Williams, serving at 2-4, followed a double fault with three unforced errors 
and was broken at love. Pliskova calmly followed with a stress-free hold to 
take the first set in 26 minutes, winning 11 of the final 12 points as a 
near-capacity crowd buzzed with concern.

At that point Williams had more than twice as many unforced errors (11) as 
winners (five) and had made zero net approaches after winning 26 of 32 points 
at the net against Simona Halep in Wednesday’s quarter-final win.

That might have been in mind when she came forward to win the opening point of 
the second set. But Pliskova rattled off three straight points and Williams was 
made to face a break point for a fourth straight service game. She’d save them 
both – the second with a 106mph ace out wide – for another hard-won hold but 
the pressure was mounting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fserena-williams-out-of-us-open-with-shock-loss-to-karolina-pliskova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceed13e6feecf995439aa4896bf67617fc5b2c48%2F0_0_2163_1509%2F2163.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Serena%20Williams%20out%20of%20US%20Open%20with%20shock%20loss%20to%20Karolina%20Pliskova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fserena-williams-out-of-us-open-with-shock-loss-to-karolina-pliskova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Serena%20Williams%20out%20of%20US%20Open%20with%20shock%20loss%20to%20Karolina%20Pliskova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fserena-williams-out-of-us-open-with-shock-loss-to-karolina-pliskova%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceed13e6feecf995439aa4896bf67617fc5b2c48%2F0_0_2163_1509%2F2163.jpg>
 Karolina Pliskova celebrates a point during Thursday night’s semi-final win. 
Photograph: Mike Stobe/Getty Images for USTA 
Meanwhile Pliskova, a lean 6ft 1in figure with lengthy arms, continued to 
coast through her service games with unnerving dispassion, crushing deep, 
penetrating groundstrokes into the corners and offering Williams no quarter. On 
the rare instances when she did fall behind on serve, Pliskova’s booming 
rainmaker bailed her out. She rallied from 15-30 in the fourth game to cap 
another hold with consecutive 108mph aces for 2-all.

Pliskova then broke Williams for 3-2, but Williams broke back at love – the 
lone break point the Czech faced all night – and they were back on level terms.

Any doubts that had surrounded Williams, who turns 35 this month, had centered 
on a persisting shoulder injury, but ultimately it was a left knee ailment 
which compromised the American in the championship rounds. Surely it didn’t 
help that Thursday’s semi-final started less than 22 hours after Williams’s 
three-set win over Halep, but she denied the notion that fatigue contributed to 
her downfall.

“We play every single week,” the 22-times grand slam champion said. “I have 
been in Toronto or Montreal or Cincinnati where I play Wednesday, Thursday, 
Friday, Saturday, Sunday. I mean, if I’m not used to playing this, and I really 
should think of something different. I’m not going to sit here and make an 
excuse, because that’s not me.

“I’m a professional player. Been playing for over 20 years. If I can’t turn 
around after 24 hours and play again then I shouldn’t be on tour.”

The players continued to trade holds as the second set pressed on, though the 
injury-hampered Williams was made to work harder in her service games. When 
Pliskova pounded a 109mph ace to hold for 6-all, a tiebreaker would settle 
matters.

Kei Nishikori rips up Andy Murray’s script at US Open but victory is no shock 
| Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/kei-nishikori-andy-murray-us-open-stan-wawrinka-semi-final>
Pliskova rattled off the first three points but fended off a fightback from 
Williams, who went up a mini-break with a forehand winner for 4-3. But Williams 
double-faulted to give it right back before Pliskova got the best of a 
17-stroke exchange – the longest of the night – to move within two points of 
the finish line. Williams then went long on a forehand, followed by the fatal 
double fault – her 31st unforced error of the night – that spelled her doom.

Williams described her knee ailment as “serious” and said it came up “after 
the second or third round” but declined to share the diagnosis.

“I’d rather not say, actually,” she said. “I wasn’t able to move the way I 
wanted to move. When you’re injured you’re thinking of other things when you 
should be just playing and thinking of your shots. My mind was just a little 
bit everywhere. But it was what it was.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fserena-williams-out-of-us-open-with-shock-loss-to-karolina-pliskova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e875e1d9c21f6e0653e64f9267f73adfee59bba%2F128_83_3492_2211%2F3492.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Serena%20Williams%20out%20of%20US%20Open%20with%20shock%20loss%20to%20Karolina%20Pliskova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fserena-williams-out-of-us-open-with-shock-loss-to-karolina-pliskova%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Serena%20Williams%20out%20of%20US%20Open%20with%20shock%20loss%20to%20Karolina%20Pliskova&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fserena-williams-out-of-us-open-with-shock-loss-to-karolina-pliskova%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e875e1d9c21f6e0653e64f9267f73adfee59bba%2F128_83_3492_2211%2F3492.jpg>
 A dejected Serena Williams during her defeat. Photograph: Don Emmert/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Pliskova refused to let the talk of Williams’ injury remove the sheen from her 
career-best win.

“I don’t care,” she said. “You know, sometimes it is like this. Not even me. 
I’m sometimes not playing when I’m 100% ready and I don’t think others care. If 
someone is not ready and she doesn’t think she is ready, she should not go on 
the court. But after the match I would say it’s still her choice if she wants 
to play or if she is ready to play or not.

“I’m just happy with my win, and I’m not gonna think about something like 
this.”

Pliskova had entered the US Open on a crest of momentum after defeating the 
world No3, Garbiñe Muguruza, and the No2, Angelique Kerber, en route to the 
Cincinnati title. But the 24-year-old, who reached a career-high ranking of No7 
last year, went into the fortnight as the lone player in the top 20 who had 
never made it to the quarter-finals of a major, prompting murmurs over her 
nerve on the sport’s biggest stages.

Bethanie Mattek-Sands and Lucie Safarova reach women’s doubles final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/bethanie-mattek-sands-lucie-makarova-us-open>
Then came Saturday’s breakthrough win over Venus Williams, which propelled 
Pliskova into the second week of a grand slam for the first time in 18 
appearances.

“Right now America hates me because I’ve beat both sisters Williams, but right 
now I’m very happy,” she said.

Now she’s become the fourth player to defeat both Williams sisters in the same 
major tournament, joining Martina Hingis (2001 Australian Open), Justine Henin 
(2007 US Open) and Kim Clijsters (2009 US Open) – and enters her maiden grand 
slam final on an 11-match win streak that includes five victories over 
opponents ranked in the top 10, none bigger than Thursday night’s historic 
scalp.

An even bigger prize awaits should Pliskova win Saturday against Kerber, the 
No2 seed who prevailed in Thursday’s second semi-final and will inherit the No1 
mantle from Williams when Monday’s rankings are released. And given her 
blistering form, Pliskova will step on court with confidence to burn.

“Definitely it was about those last two, three weeks what I have played here 
in States and I won good matches. It gave me a lot of confidence, and that’s 
what tennis is all about. If you believe in yourself you can beat anyone. 
Especially in girls’ tennis it’s not only about a game and tennis, but it’s 
more about the mental things sometimes.

“So I really believe now that I can beat a good players. All of the players, 
actually now.”
 