
Two players at this US Open, Serena Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> and Laura Robson, are 
coming to terms with what is left of their very different careers and doing it 
in contrasting ways.

When she arrived in New York for the tournament a year ago, Williams looked 
and sounded nervous, an observation given substance when the Italian doubles 
genius,Roberta Vinci, caused a shock by putting her out in the semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/11/serena-williams-grand-slam-ended-roberta-vinci>
, crushing the world No1 when she was within reach of completing the first 
calendar slam since Steffi Graf in 1988.

It became obvious in the aftermath of that disappointment that the weight of 
history was too much for the best player in the world, the best of her 
generation and probably of all time.

Twelve months later, Williams, who has just turned 35, is still chasing Graf. 
She has at last pulled alongside her on 22 majors and is a week shy of the 
German’s record of 185 consecutive weeks at No1 in the world. Again, there are 
worrying signs of anxiety.

“Mentally, some times I definitely do put a little more pressure on myself 
than I did a long time ago,” Williams said after the draw on Friday had pitched 
her into a first-round match against Ekaterina Makarova, on the same side of 
the draw as her sister Venus and Sam Stosur,the Australian who beat her in an 
extraordinary final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/sep/12/samantha-stosur-wins-us-open> at 
the end of a tumultuous tournament in 2011.

It seems such a long time ago and it is easy to forget the trauma Williams had 
been through with illness and injury. Her home slam was her sixth and last 
tournament of the season. Her ranking then tumbled to No12 in the world and 
despond gripped her, shaking her self‑belief to the core.

Mary Pierce: 'seeing Michael Phelps and Usain Bolt win gold was bucket list 
stuff'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/26/mary-pierce-seeing-michael-phelps-and-usain-bolt-win-gold-was-bucket-list-stuff>
Her health is letting her down again, this time a shoulder injury that has 
restricted her shot-making and her recent appearances, even though she declares 
herself fully fit.She went out early at the Rio Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/09/serena-williams-crashes-out-olympics-shock-defeat-elina-svitolina-rio-2016>
 and pulled out of the Cincinnati Open at the last minute after making the long 
journey from Brazil.

“It wasn’t very easy, physically, just really trying so hard and trying 
everything to get better,” she said. “I knew I gave the best effort I could and 
it just wasn’t enough.”

Seasoned Serena-watcher Chris Evert, whose own cool demeanour in a garlanded 
career was so at odds with the public near-meltdowns of her compatriot, 
recognises the pressure building on Williams.

“There’s a lot at stake for her, to break Steffi in so many different ways,” 
Evert said on ESPN. “First of all, to win 23 and also the consecutive weeks. 
Hopefully, she can get that shoulder right. I think a lot of it has to do with 
her shoulder because that serve is the big key for her to win matches. There’s 
going to be pressure on Serena.”

How much of it is generated from within is impossible to see. But the odds are 
she will again look as if someone is trying to extract her teeth on every 
point. Still, you get the feeling she is ready to make some more history.

Laura Robson <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/laura-robson>, meanwhile, has 
an entirely different take on her past and her future. She squeezed into the 
main draw on Friday with a stirring, flawed win over the German Tatjana Maria, 
7-6 (7-5), 6-1, and spoke about how she has stopped trying to recreate what she 
had achieved before a wrist injury cut her down more than two-and-a-half years 
ago in Hobart.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fserena-williams-laura-robson-us-open-pressure-flushing-meadows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67e4d62eba317b57d2a38f14faf7ffdb83c5a10c%2F0_9_3152_1891%2F3152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Serena%20Williams%20weighed%20down%20by%20history%20but%20Laura%20Robson%20ignores%20past%20%7C%20Kevin%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fserena-williams-laura-robson-us-open-pressure-flushing-meadows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Serena%20Williams%20weighed%20down%20by%20history%20but%20Laura%20Robson%20ignores%20past%20%7C%20Kevin%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Fserena-williams-laura-robson-us-open-pressure-flushing-meadows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67e4d62eba317b57d2a38f14faf7ffdb83c5a10c%2F0_9_3152_1891%2F3152.jpg>
 Laura Robson during qualifying for the US Open. She will face fellow Briton 
Naomi Broady in the first round on Tuesday. Photograph: BPI/REX/Shutterstock 
Surgery and long, tedious rehab would have sapped the spirit of many players – 
and did not exactly please the young Londoner – but, until she came away from 
Wimbledon this year, where the world No2, Angelique Kerber, embarrassed her, 
she had looked too much to her past, she admits.

“I’m not really looking at it that way any more,” she said. “I maybe was at 
the start of the year when I still had my protected [ranking], but it’s a 
totally different vibe for me now. I was so happy to just be in qualies and to 
play three good matches. To get through to the main draw is all I could ask 
for, to be honest. Now that I’m in the main draw I’m pumped about it, but I 
don’t really think about how I used to play because it’s so far down the line 
that I’m just taking it one match at a time.”

A cliché, but an apt one. In 2012 here, Robson retired the great Kim Clijsters 
and beat the world No9 Li Na, before Stosur, the defending champion, stopped 
her rousing run. This year, she enters on a stretch of eight unbeaten matches.

Still smiling, and looking fitter and leaner than when she was a prodigy, she 
said: “Initially, when I was coming back, I just lost the joy of playing a 
little bit. It was such a grind for me trying to get through a tournament and 
stay healthy. I’m just enjoying it. If it works out, great; if it doesn’t, it’s 
not the end of the world. My mum always says to me: ‘It’s just a tennis match.’ 
Although I did call her and she was tearing up a bit. So she says that, but it 
means a lot.”

On Tuesday, she plays her compatriot Naomi Broady, which made her smile. 
Robson had a mild premonition that would happen. The future is slowly 
overtaking the past.

• This article was amended on 27 August 2016 with a new headline and to 
correct the year in which Steffi Graf won a grand slam
 