
Serena Williams’ Australian Open preparation suffered a jolt when her fellow 
American Madison Brengle stunned the world No2 by beating her 6-4, 6-7 (3-7), 
6-4 in the second round of the Auckland Classic on Wednesday.

Playing her first tournament since her semi-final loss at the US Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/09/serena-williams-out-of-us-open-with-shock-loss-to-karolina-pliskova>
 in September, Serena was left to rue the 88 unforced errors she made in the 
contest against an opponent 70 rungs lower in the WTA rankings.

“I really think I played – I’m trying to think of a word that’s not obscene – 
but that’s how I played,” she said after the loss less than two weeks before 
the year’s first grand slam starts at Melbourne Park. “Eighty-eight unforced 
errors is too much, just way too many. It’s a lot. I can’t expect to win 
hitting that many errors,” said the 35-year-old, who had constant trouble with 
her ball toss in the swirling wind.

Andy Murray starts year with a win against Jérémy Chardy in Qatar Open
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/andy-murray-beats-jeremy-chardy-qatar-open-tennis>
Brengle was trailing 1-4 before she staged a brilliant comeback to run away 
with the first set against the 22-times grand slam singles champion, who had 
triumphed 6-0, 6-1 in their only previous meeting in 2015.

Serena was a set and 4-3 down when she made a comeback of her own to clinch 
the tie-breaker and force the decider.

The third set went on serve until the 10th game when Brengle held two match 
points, only for Serena to fight off both and slump in relief when she hit a 
cross-court forehand to get back to deuce.

Brengle strode confidently across court, secured her third match point and 
stared in disbelief as Serena double-faulted to hand her the biggest victory of 
her career.

“I’ve never returned like that in my life. It’s a little frustrating, 
especially since I worked so hard in the off-season, but at least the 
conditions won’t be like this in Melbourne,” Serena said. “She obviously did a 
much better job than I did. I really abhorred the conditions. I don’t think 
I’ve ever hit 88 errors in my career. I could Google that and that’s probably 
accurate. So there’s no need to look back on such a crappy game.”

Brengle meets seventh seed Jelena Ostapenko in the quarter-finals. “Honestly I 
don’t know [how I won],” the 26-year-old American said. “It’s so cool. It’s 
what you dream about, playing the best in the world.”

Earlier, Serena’s sister Venus beat the local favourite Jade Lewis 7-6 (7-2), 
6-2 before withdrawing with a right arm injury. “I love this tournament and I’m 
really sad that I have to withdraw, but I’m happy to have had the opportunity 
to be here again this year,” Venus said in a statement. She had been due to 
play the Japanese youngster Naomi Osaka.

Kyle Edmund <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kyle-edmund> is through to the 
quarter-finals of the Brisbane International after his opponent, France’s Lucas 
Pouille, retired trailing 6-3, 3-1. The British No2 will now face Stan 
Wawrinka. The third seed, Kei Nishikori, booked his place in the last 16 after 
coming from a set down to beat the qualifier Jared Donaldson 4-6, 6-4, 6-3.

The British No3, Naomi Broady, got her 2017 season off to a fine start as she 
breezed into the second round of the ASB Classic in Auckland. The world No90 
beat her higher-ranked opponent Danka Kovinic 7-6, (7-5), 6-3 and ensure she 
remains in the top 100.

Broady reached the quarter-final of this tournament last year but looked up 
against it early on against the world No70 as she was broken twice to trail the 
first set 5-2. But she found her groove and rattled off four successive games 
to send the set to a tie-break, where she again wiped out a deficit, winning 
five successive points to claim it 7-5. The second set followed a similar 
patter as an early break for Kovinic gave her a 3-0 lead but Broady’s response 
was even better as she won the next six games to get the job done in straights.

The British No2 Heather Watson suffered defeat to Kristina Mladenovic in the 
Hopman Cup. There are no ranking points on offer at the mixed-team 
international tournament in Perth, where Watson is playing with Dan Evans, but 
she fell to her second loss of the year as she went down to the Frenchwoman 
6-4, 5-7, 6-3.
 