
Serena Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/serena-williams> has 
announced she is engaged to the co-founder of Reddit, Alexis Ohanian.

Williams, who won the women’s singles title at Wimbledon in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jul/09/serena-williams-v-angelique-kerber-wimbledon-womens-final-live>
, announced the engagement in a poemon a Reddit thread 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/isaidyes/comments/5kycyr/i_said_yes/> for people to 
share their engagement stories.

‘We must continue to dream big’: an open letter from Serena Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/29/dream-big-open-letter-serena-williams-porter-magazine-incredible-women-of-2016-issue-women-athletes>
She said in the poem, posted from her verified Reddit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/reddit> account, that Ohanian proposed 
at the place they first met during a surprise trip to Rome.

Williams wrote: “I came home/A little late/Someone had a bag packed for me/And 
a carriage waited. Destination: Rome/To escort me to my very own ‘charming/Back 
to where our stars first collided/And now it was full circle/At the same table 
we first met by chance/But by choice/ Down on knee/He said 4 words/And I said 
yes.”

The couple have been dating since at least late 2015, but have kept their 
relationship quiet, with the exception of a few Instagram posts.

Four weeks ago, Williams posted a photo of the couple at a costume party. 
Within minutes of the engagement announcement, comments on the photo were 
dominated with congratulatory messages and emojis.

Bear necessities <https://www.instagram.com/p/BNYH1Y9gpiP/>

A photo posted by Serena Williams (@serenawilliams) on Nov 28, 2016 at 6:14pm 
PST




Ohanian shared Williams’s Reddit post on his Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/alexis.ohanian/posts/10103214212798596> with the 
message: “she said yes”. He also commented on her Reddit thread, writing: “And 
you made me the happiest man on the planet”.

Why Serena Williams is the greatest sportsperson ever | Michael Eboda
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/07/serena-williams-greatest-sportsperson-ever>
Williams is widely regarded one of the greatest tennis players of all time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/07/serena-williams-greatest-sportsperson-ever>
 and has won 22 major singles titles and a further 16 in doubles. She will aim 
to win her seventh Australian Open title in Melbourne next month.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fserena-williams-and-new-fiance-reddits-alexis-ohanian-arrive-in-auckland-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Serena%20Williams%20and%20new%20fianc%C3%A9%2C%20Reddit's%20Alexis%20Ohanian%2C%20arrive%20in%20Auckland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fserena-williams-and-new-fiance-reddits-alexis-ohanian-arrive-in-auckland-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Serena%20Williams%20and%20new%20fianc%C3%A9%2C%20Reddit%27s%20Alexis%20Ohanian%2C%20arrive%20in%20Auckland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fserena-williams-and-new-fiance-reddits-alexis-ohanian-arrive-in-auckland-video&media=>
Serena Williams and new fiancé Alexis Ohanian arrive in Auckland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/dec/30/serena-williams-and-new-fiance-reddits-alexis-ohanian-arrive-in-auckland-video>
Both she and her sister Venus arrived in Auckland on Friday for a tournament 
leading up to the Open.

Venus Williams said she had to keep a lid on the news of her sister’s 
engagement after getting the early word.

“I might just be her big sister, I might know these things,” she said.
 