
Good news. Comfort eating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/08/cure-for-2016-comfort-eating-ice-cream-jay-rayner>
 dealt brilliantly with the horrors of 2016, though sadly the effect was only 
temporary. Once I’d eaten all the salted caramel ice cream, the things that 
drove me nuts about the world were still there. This made me angry. After 
sticking a fork in my hand repeatedly to see if the feelings would go away, 
I’ve decided to stay angry. Because this year, being furious is the only way 
forward. Here then, are seven things in the food world to continue being livid 
about in 2017.

I’m exasperated by the relentless use of the word “artisan”. What does it 
mean? Someone who’s skilled? People working in big factories are skilled. 
Someone who’s not successful enough to have staff to help them? It’s 
meaningless marketing garbage which tells you nothing about the product. All 
those food stuffs with the “artisanal” tag aren’t made on grandma’s gnarly 
kitchen tables and thank God for it, because the result would most likely be 
food poisoning. They’re made in strip-lit, hygienic, light industrial units on 
ring roads. All that matters is whether the food is good or not.

People claiming to be gluten intolerant still make me want to hit things. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/16/leave-it-out-are-food-intolerances-fact-or-fad-gluten-dairy-free-from-coeliac>
 You’re not gluten intolerant. That bloated feeling you have when you eat too 
much bread is because you’ve eaten too much bread. Stop it. You’re just a picky 
eater trying to control the world around you through food and, in the process, 
making life harder for people who are genuinely coeliac.

I’ve had enough of any restaurant or food offering with the word “skinny” in 
the title. That’s lunch with a side order of judgmentalism.

I am infuriated by anyone who claims they have to import sea water 
<https://munchies.vice.com/en_uk/articles/why-this-chef-puts-seawater-in-his-pizza-dough>
from a thousand miles away to make their pizzas better. I don’t even care ifthe 
pizzas are better 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/07/over-london-se1-restaurant-review-pizza-marina-oloughlin>
. It’s stupid.

I’m enraged by ignorant numpties banging on about the evils of refined sugars 
and the glorious benefits of the unrefined stuff. Learn some basic biology. It 
doesn’t matter whether you get your sugars in white granules from a paper bag 
or by collecting the raging tears of the Honey Monster. Sugar is sugar. 
Whatever the source, it all gets converted to glucose in the body. Are there 
trace nutrients in the unrefined stuff? Possibly, but if you attempt to get 
your daily dose of iron from unrefined sugars you’ll have type 2 diabetes 
quickerthan I can say Paula Deen 
<http://blog.nj.com/njv_editorial_page/2012/01/paula_deens_type_2_diabetes_re.html>
.

The raw milk lobby drives me to distraction. Louis Pasteur was not a health 
and safety nut. Pasteurisation has saved millions of lives. And don’t claimraw 
milk is healthier <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-cumbria-38409110> than 
pasteurised. You only want to consume raw milk as an expression of some 
anti-modernist, self-satisfied, hipster lifestyle, not because you’re trying to 
stave off osteoporosis. The people who bang on about raw milk are plenty 
nourished. As are the goggle-eyed bandwagon jumpers who claimcoconut oil 
greases the path to godliness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/15/truth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil>
. As with refined sugars, you’d have to eat so much of it to gain any benefits 
you’d be the size of a house, thus making you very unhealthy indeed.

Which brings me to all those who point at clumsy, ill-written, pseudo-science 
asproof that their desperate, self-aggrandising food choices are better than 
yours; people who don’t know the difference between a causal link, correlation 
and sheer coincidence. They make me really, really angry. Does getting all this 
off my chest make me feel better? No. I’m still livid. And I’m damn well 
staying that way.
 