
To say that the eurozone has not been performing well since the 2008 crisis is 
an understatement. Its member countries have done more poorly than theEuropean 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> countries outside the eurozone, 
and much more poorly than the United States, which was the epicentre of the 
crisis.

The worst-performing eurozone countries 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/imf-euro-crisis-response-by-anders-aslund-2016-08>
 are mired in depression or deep recession; their condition – think of Greece – 
is worse in many ways than what economies suffered during the Great Depression 
of the 1930s. The best-performing eurozone members, such as Germany, look good, 
but only in comparison; and their growth model is partly based on 
beggar-thy-neighbour policies, whereby success comes at the expense of 
erstwhile “partners”.

Four types of explanation have been advanced to explain this state of affairs. 
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> likes to blame the victim, 
pointing to Greece’s profligacy and the debt and deficits elsewhere. But this 
puts the cart before the horse: Spain and Ireland had surpluses and low 
debt-to-GDP ratios before the euro crisis. So the crisis caused the deficits 
and debts, not the other way around.

Deficit fetishism is, no doubt, part of Europe’s problems. Finland, too, has 
been having trouble adjusting to the multiple shocks it has confronted, with 
GDP in 2015 around 5.5% below its 2008 peak.

Other “blame the victim” critics cite the welfare state and excessive 
labour-market protections as the cause of the eurozone’s malaise. Yet some of 
Europe’s best-performing countries, such as Sweden and Norway, have the 
strongest welfare states and labour-market protections.

Many of the countries now performing poorly were doing very well – above the 
European average – before the euro was introduced. Their decline did not result 
from some sudden change in their labour laws, or from an epidemic of laziness 
in the crisis countries. What changed was the currency arrangement.

King Canute's lessons for Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/king-canutes-lessons-for-brexit>
The second type of explanation amounts to a wish that Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> had better leaders, men and 
women who understood economics better and implemented better policies. Flawed 
policies – not just austerity, but also misguided so-called structural reforms, 
which widened inequality and thus further weakened overall demand and potential 
growth – have undoubtedly made matters worse.

But the eurozone was a political arrangement, in which it was inevitable that 
Germany’s voice would be loud. Anyone who has dealt with German policymakers 
over the past third of a century should have known in advance the likely 
result. Most important, given the available tools, not even the most brilliant 
economic tsar could not have made the eurozone prosper.

The third set of reasons for the eurozone’s poor performance is a broader 
rightwing critique of the EU, centred on the eurocrats’ penchant for stifling, 
innovation-inhibiting regulations. This critique, too, misses the mark. The 
eurocrats, like labour laws or the welfare state, didn’t suddenly change in 
1999, with the creation of the fixed exchange-rate system, or in 2008, with the 
beginning of the crisis. More fundamentally, what matters is the standard of 
living, the quality of life. Anyone who denies how much better off we in the 
west are with our stiflingly clean air and water should visit Beijing.

That leaves the fourth explanation: the euro is more to blame than the 
policies and structures of individual countries. The euro was flawed at birth. 
Even the best policymakers the world has ever seen could not have made it work. 
The eurozone’s structure imposed the kind of rigidity associated with the gold 
standard. The single currency took away its members’ most important mechanism 
for adjustment – the exchange rate – and the eurozone circumscribed monetary 
and fiscal policy.

In response to asymmetric shocks and divergences in productivity, there would 
have to be adjustments in the real (inflation-adjusted) exchange rate, meaning 
that prices in the eurozone periphery would have to fall relative to Germany 
and northern Europe. But, with Germany adamant about inflation – its prices 
have been stagnant – the adjustment could be accomplished only through 
wrenching deflation elsewhere. Typically, this meant painful unemployment and 
weakening unions; the eurozone’s poorest countries, and especially the workers 
within them, bore the brunt of the adjustment burden. So the plan to spur 
convergence among eurozone countries failed miserably, with disparities between 
and within countries growing.

This system cannot and will not work in the long run: democratic politics 
ensures its failure. Only by changing the eurozone’s rules and institutions can 
the euro be made to work. This will require seven changes:

• abandoning the convergence criteria, which require deficits to be less than 
3% of GDP

• replacing austerity with a growth strategy, supported by a solidarity fund 
for stabilisation

• dismantling a crisis-prone system whereby countries must borrow in a 
currency not under their control, and relying instead on Eurobonds or some 
similar mechanism

• better burden-sharing during adjustment, with countries running 
current-account surpluses committing to raise wages and increase fiscal 
spending, thereby ensuring that their prices increase faster than those in the 
countries with current-account deficits;

• changing the mandate of the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>, which focuses 
only on inflation, unlike the US Federal Reserve, which takes into account 
employment, growth, and stability as well

• establishing common deposit insurance, which would prevent money from 
fleeing poorly performing countries, and other elements of a “banking union”

• and encouraging, rather than forbidding, industrial policies designed to 
ensure that the eurozone’s laggards can catch up with its leaders.

From an economic perspective, these changes are small; but today’s eurozone 
leadership maylack the political will 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/eu-fiscal-rules-not-enforced-spain-portugal-by-daniel-gros-2016-08>
 to carry them out. That doesn’t change the basic fact that the current halfway 
house is untenable. A system intended to promote prosperity and further 
integration has been having just the opposite effect. An amicable divorce would 
be better than the current stalemate.

Of course, every divorce is costly; but muddling through would be even more 
costly. As we’ve already seen this summer in the United Kingdom, if European 
leaders can’t or won’t make the hard decisions, European voters will make the 
decisions for them – and the leaders may not be happy with the results.

•Joseph Stiglitz is a Nobel prizewinner, the chief economist of the Roosevelt 
Institute, a former senior vice-president and chief economist of the World 
Bank, and was chair of the US president’s Council of Economic Advisers under 
Bill Clinton.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>

Joseph Stiglitz’s new book, The Euro 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/euro-398177.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (Allen Lane , £20) is available from the Guardian Bookshop for £16.40. To 
order a copy, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/euro-398177.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 