
A stroll along Shanghai’s Suzhou Creek was, for much of the 20th century, best 
undertaken with a handkerchief clamped firmly over the nose. Effluent from 
factories poured directly into its waters, which doubled as a public drinking 
well and sewer for the multi-generation families living on the sampans that 
crowded it from bank to bank. Cholera, typhoid, and dysentery were rampant.

Now, what was once Asia’s most notorious aquatic slum is poised to join the 
likes of Paris’s Canal St Martin as an agreeable urban waterfront.

A multi-million dollar redesign of 7½ miles of canalside was recently awarded 
to Sasaki Associates, the Boston architect that collaborated on Chicago’s 
applauded Riverwalk. “The idea,” says Michael Grove of Sasaki, “is that Suzhou 
Creek will be a place for visitors to stroll, as well as a corridor for 
commuters walking or cycling to and from the railway station.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fshanghai-suzhou-creek-clean-up-redevelopment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec132c523850a8e0b8c3aa41033c5179e58ee958%2F0_554_2700_1619%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shanghai%E2%80%99s%20Suzhou%20Creek%20cleans%20up%20its%20act&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fshanghai-suzhou-creek-clean-up-redevelopment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shanghai%E2%80%99s%20Suzhou%20Creek%20cleans%20up%20its%20act&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fshanghai-suzhou-creek-clean-up-redevelopment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec132c523850a8e0b8c3aa41033c5179e58ee958%2F0_554_2700_1619%2F2700.jpg>
 Suzhou Creek from Broadway Mansions in 1935. Photograph: Virtual Shanghai 
Nodes centred on parks and public squares will be no more than 500 metres 
apart. “We want to extend the idea of the waterfront beyond the physical 
water’s edge,” says Grove. “The north shore of False Creek in Vancouver, for 
example, has a contiguous public edge along the waterfront, but includes 
restaurants and cultural destinations.”

The odoriferous canal’s rehabilitation began in 1996, when the council, with 
help from the Asian Development Bank, cleared the creek of barges and 
factories, and built sewage treatment facilities. This was so successful that 
duckweed and freshwater fish have returned to its waters.

The creek’s position on the border of two districts –wealthy Jing’an and the 
traditionally working-class Zhabei – means it has been spared too much 
development. There are no skyscrapers towering over Suzhou Creek. From the 
penthouse of the Broadway Mansions hotel – once the social HQ of the foreign 
press corps – there is still a good view of the sprawling eight-storey 
Embankment Building, built by in 1932 by property tycoon Sir Victor Sassoon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fshanghai-suzhou-creek-clean-up-redevelopment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e7bc1986eb627195b1a34db7309ee3978b2f553%2F173_0_3799_2279%2F3799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shanghai%E2%80%99s%20Suzhou%20Creek%20cleans%20up%20its%20act&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fshanghai-suzhou-creek-clean-up-redevelopment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shanghai%E2%80%99s%20Suzhou%20Creek%20cleans%20up%20its%20act&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fshanghai-suzhou-creek-clean-up-redevelopment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e7bc1986eb627195b1a34db7309ee3978b2f553%2F173_0_3799_2279%2F3799.jpg>
 Victor Sassoon’s Embankment Building. Photograph: Taras Grescoe for the 
Guardian 
Heritage advocates who despair at the way traces of Shanghai’s days as a 
treaty port are being erased will be pleased that Sasaki plans to spare the 
neo-Renaissance hotels, cantilever bridges, and art deco apartment complexes 
that still line the canal.

“All the historic structures will be preserved and reused, mainly for cultural 
purposes,” says Grove. As a model, he points to the M50 art district, a warren 
of contemporary galleries in a disused textile mill further up the Creek. New 
building will be limited to non-historic sites or unoccupied land, in the form 
of offices, residential buildings and ground-level retail. Construction is set 
to start in 2019 and take three to four years.

Which means that visitors still have time to stroll Suzhou Creek from the 1911 
Garden Bridge to the 1924 Post Office, enjoy a cheerfully dilapidated part of 
the megacity that has, against all odds, retained the essence of old Shanghai. 
Minus, of course, the stink.
• Taras Grescoe is the author of Shanghai Grand: Forbidden Love and 
International Intrigue on the Eve of the Second World War (Macmillan, £20).To 
buy a copy for £16.40 including UK p&p visitbookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/shanghai-grand-407578.html>
 