
Medical waste, broken bottles and household trash are some of the items found 
in more than 100 tonnes of garbage salvaged near a drinking water reservoir in 
Shanghai.


The suspected culprits are two ships that have been dumping waste upstream 
<http://www.shanghaidaily.com/metro/society/Suspects-held-after-garbage-engulfs-island/shdaily.shtml>
 in the Yangtze river. It has then flowed downstream to the reservoir on 
Shanghai’sChongming island  
<https://www.google.com.au/maps/place/Chongming+Island/@31.7080599,121.4380268,11z/data=!4m5!3m4!1s0x35b20143cfc9ac7b:0x91d19deb5b7458de!8m2!3d31.641077!4d121.566172>
which is also home to 700,000 people.

The reservoir at the mouth of the river is one of the four main sources of 
drinking water for the country’s largest city, according to local media.

China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has struggled with air, soil 
and water pollution for years during its economic boom, with officials often 
protecting industry and silencing citizens that complain. China’s cities are 
often blanketed in toxic smog, while earlier this year more than 80% of water 
wells used by farms, factories and rural households was found to beunsafe for 
drinking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/12/four-fifths-of-chinas-water-from-wells-unsafe-because-of-pollution>
 because of pollution.

Related: Smog refugees flee Chinese cities as 'airpocalypse' blights half a 
billion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/smog-refugees-flee-chinese-cities-as-airpocalypse-blights-half-a-billion>

Officials dispatched more than 40 workers to clean up the mess, but the area 
around the reservoir will take about two weeks to clear, the Shanghai Daily 
reported. Shanghai’s water authority claims supplies are still safe to drink, 
but has stopped the flow coming in while it continues testing, the paper said.

Videos circulating on social media showed beaches and wetlands covered in a 
rainbow of plastic bags.

“There’s enough trash to cover several football fields,” a local resident can 
be heard saying in one video. Catheter bags and used IV sacks are pulled from 
the water, and in some places only a sea of trash can be seen, completely 
obscuring the river water.

“This is so sad, just humanity digging its own grave,” one commenter on 
Twitter-like Sina Weibo said.

Needles and medical tubes were found in the trash, which has been washing 
ashore since 5 November. Despite cleanup efforts, a new wave of garbage 
inundated the island again this week.

Earlier this year more than 500 students developed nosebleeds, rashes and 
illnesses, some assevere as leukaemia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/chinas-toxic-school-officials-struggle-to-hold-back-uproar-over-sick-students>
, in what local media linked to illegal toxic dumping by chemical factories.

Although parents complained for months, local officials ignored their claims 
and disputed any connection despite levels of chlorobenzene, ahighly toxic 
solvent <http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxfaqs/tf.asp?id=488&tid=87> that causes 
damage to the liver, kidney and nervous system, nearly 100,000 times above the 
safe limit.

The country’s air pollution has been shown to contribute to more than 1 
million deaths a year, linked to about a third of deaths in China’s major 
cities.
 