
There are lots of remote communities in Australia, but there’s something 
different about an island. Maybe it’s the water, a kind of moat mentality. I’ve 
lived in a village and they can be pretty back-stabbing, whereas on a small 
island, if you have a problem you sort it out because you can’t run away. You 
can’t ignore things. We were in theAbrolhos Islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/nov/25/western-australia-coral-coast-perth-monkey-mia-denham-islands>
, off the west coast, for Anzac Day, and there were lots of drunk Aussies 
playing [traditional gambling game] Two Up. But it was a terrific atmosphere. 
There’s wild abandon, but also a lot of money raised for charity.

Filming for the Islands of Australia series was a big task. It involved 
journeys to and from 16 islands. It wasn’t until we stopped that it sunk in how 
enormous an undertaking it was. I don’t think we ever went from one to another. 
There was always a hub involved, and the loading of kit on and off planes and 
cars, but it was worth it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmartin-clunes-western-australia-coast-diving-itv-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69326e90eef0215c32287c9112add66adeb763c4%2F0_93_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shark%20tales%3A%20Martin%20Clunes%20dives%20off%20Western%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmartin-clunes-western-australia-coast-diving-itv-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shark%20tales%3A%20Martin%20Clunes%20dives%20off%20Western%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmartin-clunes-western-australia-coast-diving-itv-series%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69326e90eef0215c32287c9112add66adeb763c4%2F0_93_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
 Martin swims alongside a whale shark. 
In the Abrolhos, we were filming with a family of cray fishermen. That 
frontier way of life still exists. It made all the difference being embedded in 
a welcoming family and seeing how they live their lives rather than staying in 
a hotel. They’re not pretty islands, the Abrolhos, just rocks that protrude 
from the sea really, but interesting all the same. It felt like an outpost.

There’s a supportive sense of pride in island communities. People work hard to 
earn the right to live on an island

In the UK you seldom meet anyone from Western Australia. The vast state is 
quite a secret. I had a feel for it because I’m big a fan of the writerTim 
Winton <https://www.theguardian.com/books/tim-winton>. His novel Cloudstreet 
gives an insight into the Western Australian condition. Everyone’s quest is 
Sydney harbour and Uluru but they should make their way out west.

The Muiron Islands are geared up for swimming with whale sharks. You often 
worry about these things – that animal welfare isn’t going to be top of the 
list – but it was beautifully done. When you go alongside them it’s just a 
privilege, mesmerising. I was snorkelling along on my side, completely 
hypnotised by this beautiful big fish and watching how the body worked, her 
musculature, and her beady eye on the side of her head scoping me. I was 
oblivious to the camera for about 30 or 40 minutes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmartin-clunes-western-australia-coast-diving-itv-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0486626392c52e54fb873b53eff50095a1e9290%2F877_720_3813_2288%2F3813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shark%20tales%3A%20Martin%20Clunes%20dives%20off%20Western%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmartin-clunes-western-australia-coast-diving-itv-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shark%20tales%3A%20Martin%20Clunes%20dives%20off%20Western%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmartin-clunes-western-australia-coast-diving-itv-series%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0486626392c52e54fb873b53eff50095a1e9290%2F877_720_3813_2288%2F3813.jpg>
 Martin Clunes on Lord Howe island. 
I’m not an entirely happy diver but I’ve done a fair bit. It’s quite 
nerve-racking when you get started but what you’re looking at takes care of 
that. You get back in the habit of breathing underwater. I kind of lost my 
nerve when making Islands of Britain (ITV, 2009). I had a nasty experience off 
the coast of a Scottish island, diving a wreck in freezing water. But I got 
back in the swing with a manta ray shoot that we filmed in the Maldives and the 
Cayman Islands. In Western Australia recently I visited the Shoalwater Islands, 
just south of Perth. I’ve seen dolphins (we get them off the coast of Cornwall) 
but here, swimming with them in the wild, moving with them, was a real thrill.

I started to travel independently in my late teens. I’d go off to a Greek 
island on my own, having rocked up in Athens

There’s an appeal, a draw to islands for me. Visiting them for work, and not 
as a tourist, gives me a sense of the community. There’s a really admirable, 
supportive sense of pride in island communities. Everyone has two or three 
jobs. People work really hard to earn the right to live on an island. There’s a 
clear boundary: a journey over water that binds people together.

When my father was alive we used to go to Mallorca. He had a little house and 
some land, and we’d go every school holiday. It was very rural but close by 
there was a pretty coastal village, and in the bay a tiny island and beyond it 
a bigger island. We would put sandwiches in plastic bags and swim out to the 
little island for picnics. That was my first exposure to islands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmartin-clunes-western-australia-coast-diving-itv-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27927a6f0bd4d49b4b5b445ba58fcee1fab1362d%2F0_96_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shark%20tales%3A%20Martin%20Clunes%20dives%20off%20Western%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmartin-clunes-western-australia-coast-diving-itv-series%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shark%20tales%3A%20Martin%20Clunes%20dives%20off%20Western%20Australia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmartin-clunes-western-australia-coast-diving-itv-series%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27927a6f0bd4d49b4b5b445ba58fcee1fab1362d%2F0_96_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
 Martin with inhabitants of the Tiwi islands, which are 60 miles north of 
Darwin. 
I started to travel independently in my late teens. I’d go off to a Greek 
island on my own, having rocked up in Athens and got on the first ferry out. 
Greeks have a great tradition of welcoming visitors. The black-clad widows 
would meet the boats and make the sign of laying your head down. You’d follow 
them and for a few bob have a bed for the night.

When I go on holiday now I don’t care about where I am, as long as there’s a 
beach, a pool and a restaurant. I don’t want to go and watch how they make 
baskets in the village. Frequently it’s on islands – the Maldives, Sri Lanka. I 
tell a lie, in Sri Lanka I did get out. I’m perhaps not as much of a pleb as 
I’m making out.


• The first episode of Martin Clunes: Islands of Australia is on ITV, on 10 
January at 8pm
 