
The actor Shia LaBeouf has told of being raped while performing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/30/shia-labeouf-collaborators-turner-ronkko-speak-alleged-rape-iamsorry-art-show>
 his work #IAMSORRY at a Los Angeles art gallery. Was this a case of 
performance art creating an atmosphere in which anything, including crime, can 
happen?

Ever since the first ancestral performance happenings in the early 20th 
century, this dynamic and unpredictable form of art has been associated with 
violence and danger. From riotous Futurist evenings and the chaos of notorious 
avant-garde premieres such as that ofThe Rite of Spring 
<http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Rite_of_Spring> in Paris in 1913, to 
surrealists insulting priests on the street 
<http://history-is-made-at-night.blogspot.co.uk/2009/01/benjamin-pret-songs-of-eternal-rebels.html>
, the moment when art becomes a kind of drama has often been a moment of 
physical threat.

LaBeouf’s performance #IAMSORRY is reminiscent of a more recent tradition of 
performance art that started in the early 1970s and replaces the sadism of the 
surrealists with a masochism in which the performer is a victim. In 1971,Chris 
Burden got himself shot in the arm in the name of art 
<http://icstoa.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/fig21.jpg?w=173&h=217>. He was also 
crucified on the back of a Volkswagen 
<http://wtfarthistory.com/post/14868420227/crucified-on-a-volkswagen-beetle>. 
Marina Abramović <http://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marina_Abramovic> nearly died 
in a performance in which she was trapped in a burning, petrol-drenched star.
Vito Acconci <http://www.moma.org/collection/artist.php?artist_id=53> assumed 
the humiliating role of masturbating under the floor of an art gallery as he 
fantasised about the visitors above him.

Was a female visitor’s apparent assault on LaBeouf a grotesque 
misinterpretation of the myths of self-exposure and suffering that surround 
performance art?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fdec%2F01%2Falleged-rape-of-shia-labeouf-is-inexcusable-but-so-is-bad-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F1%2F1417436860643%2F3f5aa060-16ba-4fac-b173-4e31d0ef02c3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shia%20LaBeouf's%20%23IAM%20SORRY%3A%20art%20is%20often%20violent%2C%20but%20nothing%20can%20excuse%20rape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fdec%2F01%2Falleged-rape-of-shia-labeouf-is-inexcusable-but-so-is-bad-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shia%20LaBeouf%27s%20%23IAM%20SORRY%3A%20art%20is%20often%20violent%2C%20but%20nothing%20can%20excuse%20rape&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fdec%2F01%2Falleged-rape-of-shia-labeouf-is-inexcusable-but-so-is-bad-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F1%2F1417436860643%2F3f5aa060-16ba-4fac-b173-4e31d0ef02c3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Visitors outside the Cohen Gallery, Los Angeles, in February 2014 for Shia 
LeBeouf’s #IAMSORRY Photograph: Valerie Macon/Getty Images 
Regardless of that incident, #IAMSORRY stinks of bad art. It shows how hard it 
is to create good work in this strange and difficult genre. To work, a 
performance must create a genuinely special and intense atmosphere of intimacy 
and risk. LaBeouf’s show, in collaboration with artists Luke Turner and Nastja 
Säde Rönkkö sounds, to be honest, like athird-rate imitation of the works of 
Abramović or Yoko Ono 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/nov/11/scrotum-top-10-shocking-performance-art>
, whose Cut Piece dramatises vulnerability perhaps more powerfully than any 
other. People queued to encounter LaBeouf in a gallery. Er, hasn’t that been 
done? This piece is highly reminiscent of Abramović’s eventThe Artist Is 
Present, at the Museum of Modern Art 
<http://www.moma.org/visit/calendar/exhibitions/965> in New York.

Like Abramović, the actor sat behind a desk waiting for visitors to interact 
with him. The difference was that he had a bag over his head bearing the words 
“I am not famous any more.”

It is the charisma and mystique of an Abramović that enables her to make such 
a performance powerful rather than pointless. LaBeouf’s exhibit sounds more 
like the kind of poorly conceived and basically silly event that gets 
performance art a bad name. Real artists rarely wear bags on their heads.

Clearly this does not excuse rape.

Yet it does put into perspective the romantic myth of “suffering for art”. 
People suffer for art all the time. Unfortunately, the art is rarely worth it. 
Pain alone does not make you an artist.
 