
There was always a danger that France's Arnaud Clément, having reached his 
first grand slam final, indeed only the third singles final of his career, 
might end up playing a bit part in the great Andre Agassi road show. And so it 
proved, the 30-year-old American winning his thirdAustralian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> title 6-4, 6-2, 6-2 with 
businesslike efficiency.

"Arnaud, escargot," a lone Australian voice rhymed out with stentorian glee 
during the third set, which was both pitiless and unjust, for Clément is the 
fastest man on the circuit, a fleetness of foot which on occasions made Agassi, 
a nice little mover himself, appear decidedly ponderous. Perhaps the reference 
to a snail was because the man from Las Vegas was simply pounding the Clément 
carapace to tiny bits.

"I have beaten him two times before but today his game was two or three levels 
higher," said Clément. "It was impossible to beat him today. Impossible. He was 
just too strong."

Having played his dramatic semi-final against his fellow Frenchman Sébastien 
Grosjean with the roof of the Rod Laver stadium closed because of intermittent 
rain, the 23-year-old Clément, seven years younger than Agassi, reverted to his 
prescription wrap-around sunglasses for a Melbourne day that might have been 
plucked from the Cte d'Azur. And there was no doubting the clarity of his 
vision in the opening service game, which he took to love, but thereafter 
Agassi, on the way to his seventh grand slam title, putting him on a par with 
John McEnroe, John Newcombe and Mats Wilander, was generally dominant.

There were a number of remarkable rallies and stunning shots by Clément but 
Agassi was the boss, except for the third set when he suddenly appeared a 
little flat-footed and wary.

The Frenchman, only 5ft 8in tall, was beginning to punish the Agassi serve, 
despite not being able to hold his own. The first three games of this set all 
went against the serve, and then Clément had four more break points as Agassi 
pressed hard for a decisive 3-1 lead. He achieved it, and the relief was 
palpable. It was, in effect, Clément's last stand. Had he levelled at 2-2 there 
is just a chance he might have turned the match around, as he had against 
Grosjean, and Agassi was all too aware of the danger.

Perhaps this was why Agassi's victory speech had more than a touch of 
valediction about it. He did not say that he would not be back but this was, 
after all, his first tournament victory since he won here last year, and 
although Clément clearly lacked the American's control, variation, and above 
all experience, he frequently hit the ball harder than Agassi and was certainly 
quicker.

As in last November's Masters Cup final which he lost to Brazil's Gustavo 
Kuerten, Agassi displayed further signs of ageing. The slowing-down process is 
as yet far from terminal but there seems every likelihood that this will be his 
last year at the top, with so many young and talented players breathing down 
his neck.

Not that worries about the quality of the opposition were too obvious in his 
post-match reflections. Far from it. "I hope I can get better. That's my goal. 
That's what I want to do. You're always striving for the perfect, perfect game 
and match."

It is dangerous to make predictions about Agassi, for he has already made 
fools of those who wrote him off in 1997 when he plummeted out of the top 100. 
Two years later he won the French and US Opens and was runner-up to Pete 
Sampras at Wimbledon. Since then two Australian Opens have been bagged, but he 
cannot go on for ever.

His argument is that because his career has been a stop-go affair he still has 
plenty left. "I think the down periods in my career have played a big part in 
my ability to be healthy and determined now, and I still feel that sense of 
hunger."

Whereas Agassi knew precisely what to do to win this match, Clément was lost. 
"He's very talented and he can really hurt you with his speed," said the 
American. "There are lots of guys who are bigger and more powerful but he 
presents a whole different rhythm. But he's always going to have to work hard 
to win."

Clément has proved himself a bonny fighter, but whether he has the weapons to 
capture the big prizes remains in doubt. However, assuming Grosjean gets over 
the trauma of his semi-final defeat by Clément, these two French friends may 
well push each other into the top 10.

In comparison, American men's tennis appears to be living on borrowed time, 
for there is nobody emerging to replace Agassi and Sampras. The pair are fast 
approaching the end of the road, and it will be fascinating to see which of 
them lands the final grand slam of their joint careers. In this respect Agassi 
has taken the initiative, with Sampras, beaten in the fourth round here by Todd 
Martin, looking tired and uninterested. Come Wimbledon, of course, the Sampras 
juices will doubtless be flowing again.

 Todd Woodbridge won his 12th grand slam title when he and his new Swedish 
partner Jonas Bjorkman won the men's doubles final. The fourth seeds beat the 
No14 seeds Byron Black of Zimbabwe and David Prinosil of Germany 6-1, 5-7, 6-4, 
6-4 in just under three hours. It was the first time Woodbridge had partnered 
Bjorkman at a grand slam; the Australian's long-time doubles partner Mark 
Woodforde retired after the Sydney Olympics.

Thirtysomething champions

Since the sport went open in 1968 only seven men have won grand slam titles in 
their thirties:

1969 Rod Laver (grand slam) 31yrs 1 month 

1972Ken Rosewall (Australian) 37yrs 2m 

1975 Arthur Ashe (Wimbledon) 31yrs 11m 

1975 John Newcombe (Australian) 31yrs 4m 

1983 Jimmy Connors (US Open) 31yrs 

1990 Andres Gomez (French) 30yrs 4m 

2001 Andre Agassi (Australian) 30yr 9m 

All-time grand slam winners 

13 Pete Sampras 

12 Roy Emerson 

11 Rod Laver, Bjorn Borg 

10 Bill Tilden 

8 Fred Perry, Ken Rosewall, Jimmy Connors, Ivan Lendl 

7 Richard Sears, William Renshaw, Bill Larned, Henri Cochet, Rene Lacoste, 
John Newcombe, John McEnroe, Mats Wilander,Andre Agassi
 