
The International Maritime Organisation (IMO) agreed on Thursday to set a cap 
on the sulphur content of marine fuels, in a move that campaigners predictwill 
save millions of lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/07/delay-to-curbs-on-toxic-shipping-emissions-would-cause-200000-extra-premature-deaths>
 in the coming decades.

At a meeting of the IMO’s environment protection committee this week shipping 
officials agreed to cap the sulphur content of marine fuels sold around the 
world at 0.5% by 2020, finally making good on a 2008 agreement to cap sulphur 
levels by 2020 or 2025.

Sulphur dioxide (SO2) emissions have been linked to premature deaths from lung 
cancer and heart disease. The current limit on sulphur content for marine fuels 
is 3,500 times higher than for diesel in European road vehicles, and the 
shipping sector is by far the biggest emitter of SO2.

The move is expected to slash SO2 emissions in the shipping industry by 85% 
compared to today’s levels, and according to onestudy 
<http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/es071686z> reduce the number of premature 
deaths by 200,000 every year.

The move was widely welcomed by both industry and environmental campaigners. 
Shipping giant Maersk said via Twitter the new regulation will help to create a 
“level playing field” for all shipping operators.

Bill Hemmings, shipping director at campaign group Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> & Environment, called the move a 
“landmark decision”.

“This decision reduces the contribution of shipping to the world’s air 
pollution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/21/the-worlds-largest-cruise-ship-and-its-supersized-pollution-problem>
 impact from about 5% down to 1.5% and will save millions of lives in the 
coming decades,” he said in a statement. “Now the focus should shift towards 
implementing this decision, which is a big issue since it’s not yet clear who 
should police ships on the high seas, and how.”

Other items on the agenda for this week’s meeting include proposals for 
mandatory requirements for ships above 5,000 tonnes in weight to record and 
report on their fuel consumption, and the establishment of a working group for 
an “in-depth debate” on how to further reduce greenhouse gas emissions from 
ships.
 