
Boardroom bosses have received stinging rebukes over pay, with the engineering 
group Weir forced to abandon potential share awards for its top management team 
andShire <https://www.theguardian.com/business/shire> Pharmaceuticals failing 
to get a majority of investors to support its pay deals.

On a dramatic day in the annual general meeting season, the building materials 
groupCRH <https://www.theguardian.com/business/crh> also suffered a 40% vote 
against its pay policies as investors showed a renewed willingness to protest 
against large pay deals in scenes reminiscent of the 2012 shareholders’ spring.

Weir, a FTSE 250 company, suffered the biggest embarrassment with 72.4% of 
investorsvoting against its pay policy 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/weir-group-plc--weir-/gnw/result-of-agm/20160428163528H8051/>
, one of the largest rebellions since shareholders were given a “say on pay” in 
2013. The vote on pay deals for the next three years is binding, unlike the 
report on the previous year’s pay, which is advisory.

Sarah Wilson, the chief executive of the advisory group Manifest, said: “This 
is one of the most significant voting results of all time.”

It builds on the defiant mood in which the AGM season started earlier this 
month when there were no votes at two FTSE 100 companies, BP and Smith & Nephew,
on the same day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
.

Rebellions also continued at FTSE 100 companies on Thursday. At the 
Dublin-based Shire, an advisory pay vote squeezed through with only 50.5% in 
favour of a 25% salary rise for CEO Flemming Ørnskov to $1.7m (£1.2m). If 
deliberate abstentions were included, support fell to just below 50%.

At CRH a 40% vote against its pay policy was not binding because the company 
is also based in Ireland.

Ashley Hamilton Claxton, a corporate governance manager at Royal London Asset 
Management, said: “This year has seen a ‘spring of discontent’ for a number of 
major British companies, with shareholders demonstrating their unhappiness at 
the remuneration packages awarded to top executives last year at a time when 
company performance was lacklustre at best.”

Weir <https://www.theguardian.com/business/weirgroup> is now going back to the 
drawing board to devise new bonus schemes for its senior executives, including 
its chief executive, Keith Cochrane. It had wanted to award Cochrane up to 165% 
of his £750,000 salary in shares, but while this was less than the 250% he 
currently stands to receive, there were no performance criteria to qualify for 
the award.

Weir had argued it needed to change its pay deals because of its exposure to 
volatile commodity markets. Shire, meanwhile, insisted its chief executive had 
presided over stellar performance at the drug maker. CRH said it would “contact 
individual shareholders to more fully understand their perspectives, as 
appropriate”.

On a day in which more than 25 London-listed companies held their annual 
meetings, Schroders shareholders registered their frustration with the fund 
management group’s elevation of Michael Dobsonfrom chief executive to chairman. 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/03/schroders-corporate-governance-chief-executive-chairman-role>
 Nearly 15% voted against his re-election, and almost 12% voted against Lord 
Howard, the senior independent director who oversaw the move. Hermes, which 
represents pension funds and had urged other investors to oppose Dobson’s 
promotion, voted against both.

It is a sizeable protest vote, given that the Schroder family owns 48% of the 
shares. Howard told shareholders the company, whose own fund managers exercise 
votes on pay, was aware that it was breaching the corporate governance code, 
but defended the promotion. “We thought he was such a good and such an obvious 
candidate,” he said.

At the estate agents Countrywide, there was a 20% vote against pay while 
Barclays faced criticism of its pay, culture, the cut to its dividend and any 
possible links to thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> – although at the end 
of the long meeting it escaped a rebellion over paywith a 6% 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/barclays-plc--barc-/rns/result-of-agm/201604281545027166W/>
 protest vote.

The bank’s chairman, John McFarlane, told investors he was taking personal 
responsibility for restoring its fortunes aftercutting the dividend for 2016 
and 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/01/barclays-cuts-dividend-as-profits-fall-8-percent>
 and putting its once coveted African operations up for sale.

Michael Mason-Mahon, a familiar face at many major companies’ AGMs, urged 
McFarlane not to sell Barclays’ Africa operations to the bank’s former chief 
executive Bob Diamond, whosaid earlier this week he had funding in place to 
consider making an offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/26/bob-diamond-interest-in-barclays-africa-confirmed>
. “I’d rather take a lollipop from the devil himself,” Mason-Mahon said.

Another regular attendee, John Farmer, drew applause from other shareholders 
when he said bankers’ pay was out of control and out of kilter.

McFarlane insisted the bank had cut bonuses and was not paying as highly as 
rivals, although one shareholder was not impressed at being told the bonus pool 
was £1.6bn compared with £1.1bn to go to shareholders. “You got more than we 
did,” they said.

“I take full personal responsibility for the situation of the company, as does 
the board. The issue is ours to fix, and fix it we will. It does though leave a 
great deal to do,” McFarlane said.

Barclays’ chief executive, Jes Staley, who spent much of his career at JP 
Morgan, addressed shareholders after five months in the role. “You have been 
patient long enough,” he said. “Like you I am aBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> shareholder,” he said, pledging 
to increase the dividend “over time”.

He added: “I want to help to restore our profession to the esteem and respect 
that it enjoyed when I first joined it, esteem and respect that I certainly 
feel for my colleagues in Barclays as I see the way in which they serve our 
customers and clients every day.”

As the Barclays AGM drew to a close, the Competition and Markets Authority 
revealed the bankhad written to 10,000 customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/28/barclays-writes-ppi-payment-protection-insurance-customers-apologise-statements>
 with payment protection insurance to apologise after it failed to send them 
annual statements telling them how much they were spending on their policies 
and outlining their rights to cancel them.
 