
New figures from the Office for National Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/one-in-10-crimes-recorded-by-police-are-domestic-abuse-cases-ons>
 showing that one in 10 recorded crimes is domestic abuse may be shocking to 
some, but for the abused women themselves, or those working with them, they 
simply bear out what is already known. While statistics are extremely valuable 
when trying to understand the scale of social problems such as domestic abuse, 
it is important to remember that they do not always give us the full picture.

Domestic abuse is a largely invisible crime, occurring mainly behind closed 
doors. It is often difficult to measure it accurately and women are often 
reluctant or afraid to report it to the police. Many women whose experiences of 
domestic abuse are confined to psychological or coercive abuse may not even 
define themselves as “abused women” since there is little education about what 
non-violent abuse consists of.

One in 10 crimes recorded by police are domestic abuse cases – ONS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/one-in-10-crimes-recorded-by-police-are-domestic-abuse-cases-ons>
It is important to point out that domestic abuse affects both men and women 
but the numbers of women affected are higher. The British Crime Survey 
statistical bulletin has reported that domestic abuse affects one in four women 
and one in six men, accounts for 16% of all violent crime and has more repeat 
victims than any other crime (on average there are35 assaults before a victim 
calls the police 
<http://www.refuge.org.uk/get-help-now/what-is-domestic-violence/domestic-violence-the-facts/>
). Additionally domestic abuse leads to an average of100 women and 30 men per 
year being murdered <http://www.lwa.org.uk/understanding-abuse/statistics.htm>. 
Thus women continue to be overrepresented as victims of domestic violence, 
suffering physical verbal, social, financial and emotional violence.

The true number of abused people is likely to be far higher than the 
statistics suggest. It is also certain to include many women facing other 
difficulties including homelessness. My own research found that in the UK, 
Hungary, Sweden and Spain, 70-100% of women in one sample reported sleeping 
rough as a direct result of domestic abuse. This confirmed earlier findings of 
the connection between abuse and homelessness, with 40-70% of women interviewed 
for another project reporting either abuse from a partner or within the family 
home. 

“My husband would throw me out at night when he was drunk. I slept in a 
cupboard behind the local freezer shop. My husband broke my ribs, tore my hair 
out, perforated my ear drum and head butted me. Eventually I reported him and 
he was sent to prison; I have a permanent non-molestation order against him,” 
was how one woman described her experiences. Another said: “I needed to get out 
of the house because of sexual abuse by my father. He sexually abused all his 
daughters including me. I think my mother knew but did nothing about it. I left 
my husband who also abused me physically and slept rough for years.”

With homelessness in the UK now on the rise, this connection gives further 
cause for concern about the impact of abuse on women.  But with the connection 
with homelessness still not widely recognised, domestic abuse is still a 
largely hidden problem to which the criminal justice system takes a mainly 
reactive approach, when what is needed is an evidence-based, problem-solving 
and preventive one. 

However good the criminal justice system becomes at dealing with domestic 
abuse, arresting and prosecuting people on its own will not solve the problem, 
but only “manages” it. Solutions need to start much earlier and include 
targeted interventions. For example, education during childhood and early 
adulthood could help to break down taboos, and to challenge the normalisation 
of domestic abuse – both in terms of its nature and prevalence – educating new 
generations of young people about the nature of healthy relationships, mutual 
respect and the links between violent homes, unstable relationships and ensuing 
health problems as well as emphasising that domestic abuse is a crime and not a 
part of ordinary family life.

This approach has been successfully adopted in relation to homelessness by 
Tamworth borough council housing department with theirHomelessness Education 
Programme <http://www.tamworth.gov.uk/young-people-and-homelessness>. This is 
designed to prevent homelessness by educating young people to make informed 
decisions about their housing situation and is delivered via sessions in 
reception, year six and in high schools.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr_lWQJPLd-8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr_lWQJPLd-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dr_lWQJPLd-8&media=>
Abuse in Relationships: Can You See It? Advert campaign 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r_lWQJPLd-8> 
A similar approach could be taken to domestic abuse education, helping to 
eliminate some of the myths and taboos which currently surround it as well as 
the propensity for victim blaming – holding the victim wholly or partially 
responsible for what has happened to them – within domestic situations, wider 
society and in the courts. Only this month Justice Gilbart sitting at 
Manchester crown court commented that a woman hadleft herself open to a sexual 
assault 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/senior-judge-says-woman-sex-12258606>
 by being “foolish” and drinking too much. Minimising perpetrator 
accountability in this way and the use of victim-blaming terms highlights the 
need to educate not just the young, but criminal justice staff and wider 
society about the importance of domestic abuse and the language used to 
describe it.

Of course the new statistics are concerning but in looking at domestic abuse 
we need to move beyond crime figures. Althoughadvert campaigns 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eeVelhH-aIU> have been launched by the 
government to educate young people about the unacceptability of violence in 
relationships, there are still no national standards to protect women’s safety 
or to make sure that local councils work together so women’s safety is not 
disproportionately affected by thefunding cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/30/britain-violence-against-women-domestic-abuse-funding-cuts>
 that have taken place. Labour’s view is that £3m could be saved from the 
abolition of police and crime commissioners and used to set up a national 
women’s refuge fund.

Issues surrounding domestic abuse need to be higher on the government’s policy 
agenda, together with more relationship education, and a commitment from those 
involved in such cases within the criminal justice system to having the right 
skills and training to protect the vulnerable. Such measures would go a long 
way to helping end domestic violence.
 