
Britons spooked by the shock vote to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
 are ditching plans to buy homes, putting big purchases on ice, and looking for 
work abroad.

The panic triggered in financial markets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/24/global-markets-ftse-pound-uk-leave-eu-brexit-live-updates>
 following Britain’s decision to quit the EU has started to ripple down to 
everyday decision-making, as consumers brace themselves for sustained 
uncertainty.

Estate Agent Haart said there was an 11% rise in the number of people pulling 
out of property deals at the weekend compared with the final weekend of June 
2015.


Searches for jobs in other countries spiked in the immediate aftermath of the 
decision, withIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> a popular 
alternative to the UK, as well as the US and Australia, according to jobs site 
Indeed.

UK current account deficit deepens Brexit fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/30/uk-current-account-deficit-deepens-brexit-fears>
Meanwhile, a survey conducted both before and after the poll by YouGov and 
Cebr revealed a crash in consumer confidence after the shock result was 
announced.

Scott Corfe, a director at Cebr, said households had been “highly spooked”, 
with the mood expected to weigh on retail sales and spending on big ticket 
items.

A separate survey by Retail Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> found that more than a third 
of people were planning to cut back on large purchases such as holidays, 
televisions, bathrooms, and furniture.

Guardian readers have been in touch to describe what impact the Brexit 
decision is already having on their lives. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/what-impact-has-brexit-already-had-on-your-daily-life>

One reader from Oxfordshire who did not want to be named said his family had 
abandoned plans to build their own home and were braced for years of financial 
struggle.

He said: “We have cancelled plans to buy a plot to build our own house, we are 
wishing we hadn’t already booked an expensive European holiday, which we had 
taken out a loan to pay for. And we are uncertain about whether to take out a 
new fixed rate mortgage on our house now that we are unlikely to be selling it 
to pay for the build.

“We will be returning to the ‘survival mode’ approach to spending that we took 
following the banking crash, as we expect years of financial struggle ahead.”

An IT consultant from Dorset, who also did not want to be named, said the 
company he worked for had cancelled plans to hire 30 new staff and a customer 
in Germany had postponed a €130m (£108m) contract.

He said that spending on IT was often one of the first things to be cut by 
companies in times of economic uncertainty, because much of it was 
discretionary rather than essential.

“Decisions are being postponed. This happened massively during the financial 
crisis and it’s happening again. We have reduced UK sales forecasts by 15% 
purely because of Brexit.”

Another Guardian reader from Milton Keynes said that plans to buy a property 
in Spain had fallen through. “We will probably never be able to afford a 
property in Spain again,” he said.

Haart said new listings from people selling homes were down by 3.9% last 
weekend compared with the same weekend a year earlier, while calls into 
branches were 7% below the trend for the three weeks in the run-up to the vote.

The firm, which has more than 100 branches across England, said that it had 
seen an increasing number of people booking valuations “to understand what 
effect there has been”.


Charles Perdios, who runs estate agency Anthony Pepe in north London, said 
some sales had fallen through since the weekend. “One was a lady who pulled out 
of a sale because her job was funded by the EU, so she was directly affected by 
the result,” he said.

“We have had a couple of people saying they’re going to take their houses off 
the market and wait now.”

Post-Brexit should we defer completing purchase of our first home?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/30/post-brexit-should-we-defer-completing-purchase-of-our-first-home>
Perdios said on Friday morning there was a flurry of calls from would-be 
buyers “trying their luck” with offers up to 15% below asking price, although 
these had not been accepted.

Some other deals had been renegotiated following the decision: “We have 
negotiated a few down. We are expecting 20% fewer transactions in the second 
half of the year than we expected before.”

David Hollingworth of mortgage broker London & Country saidborrowers have been 
pulling out of purchases. “There are some who are quite early on in the 
process, who haven’t spent money on solicitors or surveys, who do not feel 
wedded to a property, who have decided to wait and see what happens rather than 
going ahead,” he said.

Research published by the National Association of Estate Agents (NAEA) showed 
that before the vote demand for property had already fallen to a three-year low.

Mark Hayward, managing director of the NAEA, said: “Although in the short 
term, we believe that house prices will remain stable, we cannot be certain 
about the next quarter as political uncertainty and market unrest could affect 
the housing market.”

On the parenting forum Mumsnet <http://www.mumsnet.com/>, people shared 
concerns about going ahead with house purchases, spending money on extensions, 
and the sort of reception they might receive when holidaying within the EU.

One prospective home buyer wrote: “From all the data, it looks like we will be 
buying at what would be a peak. I am getting very nervous now about a crash ... 
Should we pull out? Please help me to get some perspective here.”

Abta, which represents UK travel agents and tour operators, said it was “too 
soon to tell” what impact Brexit would have on the industry.

A spokeswoman said: “People due to travel this summer will see little changes 
to their holiday. However, the fall in value of the pound will have an 
immediate impact on holidaymakers and their spending power overseas.”

Holiday group Thomas Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/thomascookgroup> said that it was focused 
on business as usual. “At this early stage the implications of the UK vote to 
leave the EU are still unclear,” a spokeswoman said.

She added: “Like other UK-listed companies we will of course be monitoring 
events very closely over the coming days and months and we will provide updates 
on any developments as they become clear.”

What impact has Brexit already had on your daily life?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/what-impact-has-brexit-already-had-on-your-daily-life> 