
Matt Trueman, theatre critic and journalist


Has British theatre shied away from violence and atrocity, as the director 
Katie Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/katie-mitchell> claimed last 
week? I’m not so sure. There’s a long tradition of it – from Jacobean 
tragedians to the in-yer-face playwrights of the 1990s – but violence alone 
doesn’t make for challenging theatre.

Mitchell’s revival of Sarah Kane’s 1998 play Cleansed 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/cleansed?cast> at the National Theatre 
caused five audience members to faint last week. It features gruesome imagery – 
limbs are mangled, tongues are cut out – all played with an eye for 
excruciating detail. ButCleansed isn’t challenging simply because it contains 
extreme violence. Shakespeare and Tarantino show us much the same. In fact, the 
hardest thing to watch was an actor force-fed an entire box of chocolates – 
hardly the stuff of an 18 rating.

It’s challenging because it doesn’t give us easy explanations. We’re never 
told why these people are being tortured – or why they submit. Kane asks us to 
make sense of what we’re watching and, crucially, what we’re feeling. We have 
to reconcile the play’s contradictions, its beauty as well as its horror. Too 
often British theatre gives us all the answers. A lot of plays tell us exactly 
what they’re talking about, what we should think, when to laugh, cry and clap. 
We need more uncertainty: theatre that challenges us to find our own route 
through.

Mark Shenton, joint chief critic and associate editor of The Stage


This isn’t the first time a play has caused fainting in the stalls — Titus 
Andronicus <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/jun/04/theatre> at 
Shakespeare’s Globe in 2006 and revived in 2014, had audiences falling like 
flies; there were 43 reported at one performance alone. Its director Lucy 
Bailey was proud to have provoked this reaction, saying in one report, “I find 
it all rather wonderful. That people can connect so much to the characters and 
emotion that they have such a visceral effect. I used to get disappointed if 
only three people passed out.” She amplified the realism of the violence, which 
includes one character having her tongue cut out, telling me at the time, “We 
were canny in using dark blood – usually in the theatre it is too bright, so 
people don’t believe it.”

As with Cleansed, Titus Andronicus — written 400 years earlier — is meant to 
shock. As are shows likeJerry Springer – the Opera, also produced at the 
National, orThe Book of Mormon in the West End, that both deal in 
taboo-breaking representations of religion. (InJerry Springer, we had Jesus in 
a nappy admitting to being “a little bit gay”, and God declaring in an aria “It 
ain’t easy being me”.) Audiences go with some expectation that they’re going to 
be challenged; theatres don’t necessarily need to push the boat out any 
further. But they could perhaps have better prepared audiences as to what to 
expect in the case ofCleansed. A small warning in the publicity that the play 
“contains graphic scenes of physical and sexual violence” is little more than a 
theatrical equivalent of an X-rating.

MT It depends what you mean by challenging. If an audience arrives braced for 
shock, even eager to be shocked, are they really being challenged?Jerry Springer
 andThe Book of Mormon are good examples actually. Is the blasphemy really 
shocking audiences, who not only choose to attend but pay for the privilege, or 
is our reaction a kind of mock shock? We mightperform offence but we’re 
actually displaying our own unshockability. Besides, these shows don’t 
challenge anything – not really. In 2007two British judges ruled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/dec/05/independentproductioncompanies.bbc>
 that Jerry Springer “could not reasonably be regarded as aimed at, or an 
attack on, Christianity or what Christians held sacred.” The Mormon church 
itself advertised inThe Book of Mormon programme.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fis-theatre-challenging-enough-debate-cleansed-sarah-kane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9103cefa7e51b17a6fbf84cf14bd1658a1925fb%2F0_59_3008_1806%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20our%20theatres%20do%20more%20to%20challenge%20audiences%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fis-theatre-challenging-enough-debate-cleansed-sarah-kane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20our%20theatres%20do%20more%20to%20challenge%20audiences%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fis-theatre-challenging-enough-debate-cleansed-sarah-kane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9103cefa7e51b17a6fbf84cf14bd1658a1925fb%2F0_59_3008_1806%2F3008.jpg>
 Mock shock: David Soul plays Jerry in Jerry Springer – the Opera in 2004. 
Photograph: Richard Young/Rex/Shutterstock 
That extends across theatre. It tends to leave the status quo intact. Because 
we go to it, rather than vice versa, theatre can end up preaching to the 
converted – not challenging audiences but confirming everything they already 
believe. When we talk about challenging audiences, we need to ask who those 
audiences are. Different things will challenge different audiences – so the 
question comes back to access and diversity.

MS Yes, the theatre necessarily gets a self-selecting audience; one that tends 
to either be open for the challenges it might provoke, or knows what it wants, 
and that is to have a good time. The audiences flocking toThe Lion King are 
very different to the ones that might go to see aSarah Kane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/kane> play at the National.

But theatre is very good, too, at using Trojan horses to challenge each of 
those audiences: Disney entrustedThe Lion King to an experimental theatre maker 
and puppeteerJulie Taymor <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/julie-taymor>, who 
gave it a truly theatrical treatment, not a pantomime; and Katie Mitchell, who 
directedCleansed, is a director known for her bold, confrontational experiments 
with theatrical form.

Right now, the biggest hit on Broadway is Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/02/how-did-hamilton-become-broadway-breakout-hit>
, a dazzling musical history of one of America’s founding fathers refracted 
through a hip-hop score and an intentionally mixed-race cast, to claim a very 
white story as one that is owned by all Americans. It’s a challenge to the 
status quo, and has turned the modern Broadway musical on its head. Likewise, 
the West End stage musical version ofBend It Like Beckham (closing on March 5) 
is the most diverse show in London, a portrait of contemporary multicultural 
London that is thrillingly of the moment and fuses western and Asian musical 
influences to make something new. Theatrical form, in other words, is being 
tested and shifted, even in the supposedly risk-averse world of the commercial 
musical.

MT So why not argue for more of that? Why wouldn’t you want theatre to push 
itself further – and, in the process, push its audiences further? Imagine if 
every audience member, even those just hoping for a good night out, left the 
theatre challenged by whatever they’ve just seen.

That’s how art changes the world, isn’t it? It doesn’t trigger social change 
overnight. It shifts attitudes and assumptions, bit by bit, one person at a 
time. To do so, it has to challenge its audiences – and challenging theatre 
doesn’t have to be off-putting.

Even crowd-pleasing musicals can challenge their audiences, so why settle for 
those that don’t?

As you say, even crowd-pleasing musicals can challenge their audiences, so why 
settle for those that don’t? By the same token, there’s no reason that 
challenging shows can’t also prove popular.Cleansed is regularly selling out 
the Dorfman theatre, despite (or perhaps because of) some one-star reviews. If 
there’s a better argument for British theatres challenging their audience, I 
can’t think of one. It sells.

MS Agreed! Change is incremental. But it doesn’t need to be wholesale. Hamilton
 didn’t arrive on Broadway without, first, its composer Lin-Manuel Miranda 
penning a far more conventional, but nevertheless Tony-winning, musical,In the 
Heights (now at London’s King’s Cross theatre <http://intheheightslondon.com>), 
and second, by means of an off-Broadway run at the Public Theater (arguably the 
closest New York has to the National Theatre). Seeking to be confrontational 
with audiences, therefore, and challenging them shouldn’t be done for its own 
sake – or even just to annoyDaily Mail theatre critics — but in a staged 
approach.

But there also has to be room for work that is simply audience-pleasing. Not 
everyone wants to be challenged every time they go to the theatre.

As for selling out the Dorfman, that’s impressive – but it only has 400 seats. 
To fill the average West End house, you need audiences two or three times that 
size. And that’s what the original production ofShopping and Fucking achieved, 
too, when it improbably transferred from the 80-seater Royal CourtTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Upstairs (then temporarily based at 
the Ambassadors) to Shaftesbury Avenue in the mid-90s.
 