
When I was a secretary on the Sun’s showbiz desk, I once took a call from a 
very haughty public relations expert who inquired: “Who is your opera 
correspondent?” To which the only possible response was: “Have you ever seen 
the newspaper?”

Today, I am indebted to another publication – the Daily Mail – for permitting 
the artform its debut in Lost in Showbiz. My eye is drawn toan article 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-3572335/SEBASTIAN-SHAKESPEARE-1-3m-sweetener-saving-James-Middleton-s-marshmallows.html>
 concerning the new general director of Glyndebourne, Sebastian Schwarz, whose 
rider conditions should pass immediately into music legend. To wit: he demands 
an apiary.

“It is amazing to sit next to a beehive in the morning when you first get up,” 
Sebastian explains – and there is no suggestion he is talking about the 
provisional wing of Beyoncé’s fans. Indeed, Sebastian will be bringing his bees 
over from Vienna, home tohis last gig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/17/sebastian-f-schwarz--glyndebourne-opera-general-director>
, and requires accommodation for this inspirational apian entourage.

In this request, he has been humoured by Glyndebourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glyndebourne>’s executive chairman Gus 
Christie. (Who, the Mail notes, last year welcomed a son named Bacchus. 
Bacchus!) “We’re putting new hives in for Sebastian,” says Gus.

Well. I hope he doesn’t for a moment think that will be the end of it. 
Clearly, by the time we get to the festival’s opening night, things will have 
escalated to the point where the bees themselves are demanding their own 
flowerbeds with all the green bits picked out. Furthermore, opera critics 
should be aware of how very nasty things can get when the Beehive is set upon 
you, and temper theirGlyndebourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glyndebourne> reviews accordingly.
 