
The first batch of 75-metre-long wind turbine blades will roll out of a new 
factory inHull <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull> on Thursday, destined 
for huge windfarms off the UK’s coast.


The inauguration of the Siemens <https://www.theguardian.com/business/siemens> 
plant at the city’s Alexandra Dock employs 700 people and was hailed by 
campaigners as an example of how curbing carbon emissions could create jobs.

Greg Clark, the energy secretary, is due to attend the opening of the £310m 
facility, which he said was the sort of project he wanted as part of the UK’s 
industrial strategy. The UK leads the world on offshore wind power, butother 
European countries such as Germany are catching up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/02/germany-leads-europe-in-offshore-wind-energy-growth>
.

“In the coming years the new offshore wind projects that this factory will 
supply could generate enough clean electricity to power over 3m homes and 
businesses – all with wind turbine blades produced by the dedicated and highly 
skilled Siemens workforce right here in Hull,” said Clark.

The facility’s blades are much longer than those on previous generations of 
wind turbines, and will be deployed on bigger, more powerful windfarms further 
off the coast. The first batch will be delivered to a 580MW windfarm being 
built by DongEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> 17 miles 
(27 km) off Blakeney Point, Norfolk, which is expected to be complete by 2018. 
The factory is expected to build hundreds of the blades each year.


“This is a fine example of the new jobs and investment that people across the 
UK can expect to see if the government backs offshore wind in its industrial 
strategy and emissions reductions plans,” said Dr Doug Parr,Greenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace> chief scientist.


“But for this to take off, companies needs a strong signal from the government 
that Britain is open for business and is still an attractive investment 
environment for cutting-edge renewable technologies and infrastructure, such as 
offshore wind or solar and battery storage.”


The green energy trade body, RenewableUK <http://www.renewableuk.com>, called 
the plant “a key part of our nation’s modern industrial strategy”.


Renewable sources provide around a quarter of UK electricity generation, but 
since coming to power in 2015 the government has ended subsidies for onshore 
windfarms and solar panels. Ministers have continued to indicate their backing 
for offshore wind, but have delayed spelling out how much support it will get 
beyond 2020. More detail is expected in the 2017 budget.

 