
There are some popular misconceptions about Seattle – like the notion that it 
rainsall the time. It is, in fact, raining as I type this. Am I going to stick 
a fork in my eye? Or jump off a bridge? Hell no! Seattle's best-kept secret is 
that it's usually a sunshiny 80F (27C) in the summer. It's cloudy and might 
rain? Yawn. Rain is easy. We don't even use umbrellas, because it's too 
difficult to carry a coffee and eat a sandwich walking with an umbrella.

And coffee – our drug of choice – really is the most important thing you're 
ever carrying. Find the small dealers. The three Vs of coffee shops are:Vivace 
<http://espressovivace.com/>, Vita <http://www.caffevita.com/>, and Victrola 
<http://victrolacoffee.com/>. These similarly named coffee houses are equally 
excellent roasters, with casual atmospheres. Any one of them is a perfect place 
to get a fix. Skip the original Starbucks in the Pike Place Market. Pike Place 
is miserable when crowded – it's only great on a week night, minutes before 
closing, when locals haggle for flowers and fish. At dusk, you may also run 
into Princess Angeline, daughter of Chief Si'ahl, aka Chief Seattle – one of 
several old souls that people claim to see wandering around the 100-year-old 
market after the sun drops behind the Olympic mountains.
 Hoh Rain Forest trail, Olympic national park, Washington. Photograph: 
Jean-Paul Ferrero/Auscape/Corbis 
The Olympic peninsula, visible from Seattle's waterfront, is the first day 
trip you should consider. Hop on aferry from Colman Dock 
<http://www.wsdot.com/ferries/schedule/Default.aspx> (aka Pier 52) and drive 
straight to theHoh Rain Forest 
<http://www.nps.gov/olym/planyourvisit/visiting-the-hoh.htm>. It's a long drive 
(about two hours from Port Angeles) but you won't be sorry, nor will you 
believe your eyes when you see this drippy, neon-green forest, which is 
thousands of years old and looks almost like it was put on Earth by aliens. 
Also on the peninsula, at Sequim, is theOlympic Game Farm 
<http://olygamefarm.com/>, which has waving grizzly bears. No, really! Two 
gigantic real bears wave at you like prom queens in a 4th of July parade.

Back in Seattle, the Capitol Hill neighbourhood is dense and walkable, and you 
can't throw a rock in any direction without hitting a restaurant or a shop. Try
Momiji <http://momijiseattle.com/#home_> for sushi. For records it's Wall of 
Sound <http://wosound.com/home.php>. The owners Jeffery Taylor and Michael 
Ohlenroth have impeccable taste for rarities and vinyl – from avant-garde 
Japanese noise to electro-acoustic - and share an "all-killer, no-filler" 
philosophy in stocking music for the store.

The three-floor thrift store Value Village <http://www.valuevillage.com/> is 
probably Capitol Hill's best one-stop shop for everything else – cut-rate 
clothing, cookware and even art (like the photograph of a Canadian bodybuilder 
framed with his posing pouch that I saw here for $6). You might bump into 
Seattle rapperMacklemore <http://macklemore.com/>.

For live music, pop into Neumos <http://neumos.com/> for hip-hop, rock, and 
hipster faves orChop Suey <http://chopsuey.com/> for scrappier punk, and garage.
 Rachel Taylory and guitar player Trevor Kelly of He Is We perform at Neumos. 
Photograph: Dana Nalbandian/WireImage 
Bars worthy of a stop include Unicorn <http://unicornseattle.com/>, which is 
tricked out in dizzying circus stripes with taxidermy on the walls;Bimbo's 
Cantina, which serves tacos and tequilas in booths under the gaze of Mexican 
wrestling masks and religious icons by staff who all play in rock bands on the 
side; andBait Shop <http://baitshopseattle.com/>, a 70s-style diner whose 
wood-panelled walls are adorned with stuffed fish and nautical memorabilia and 
which sells Hemingway daiquiris alongside its fish and chips.The Pine Box 
<http://pineboxbar.com/> is also worth a stop. It's a beer hall in a former 
mortuary. Bruce Lee's funeral was held here. Lee, now buried at Lake View 
Cemetery (also in Capitol Hill) alongside his son Brandon, is rumored to haunt 
the Pine Box, along with the ghost of a woman and a small boy.

Capitol Hill is also Seattle's premier gay-bourhood. Gay marriage is legal. 
Civil rights are being honoured and celebrated citywide. Nowhere does the 
celebration shine more brightly than in a flower-shop-turned-gay-bar calledPony 
<http://www.ponyseattle.com/>. Instead of being full of ghosts, Pony is full of 
hopes for the future. It's a magical place where everyone – gay, straight, and 
all shades in between – comes together. There's also a clothing-optional photo 
booth, vintage pornography everywhere, a stripper's pole and a glory hole in 
the bathroom …

But I'll perhaps save those details for another story.

Kelly O is a music writer and columnist on Seattle's The Stranger 
<http://www.thestranger.com/> magazine 

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 