
Being an international rock star in a band that have been described as the 
coolest in the world usually has its fair share of perks. But for Georg Holm – 
a founding member ofSigur Ros who plays everything from bass guitar to toy piano
 <https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2001/apr/15/featuresreview.review5> – 
keeping up with Iceland’s remarkable progress at Euro 2016 has not been easy.

Having spent the last three years mainly in the studio apart from making guest 
appearances onGame of Thrones <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eQsS-Akv7gg> and 
The Simpsons 
<http://sigur-ros.co.uk/news/2013/sigur-ros-scores-an-upcoming-episode-of-the-simpsons/>
, the experimental quartet known for their ethereal sound and innovative videos 
released a new single Ovedur (Storm) last week and embarked on a world tour at 
the start of June.

“We’ve been watching them everywhere – it’s been quite difficult to be 
honest,” explained Georg as the band prepared to play the John Peel stage at 
Glastonbury on Friday night.

Iceland: overachievers not underdogs, and they want England scalp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/24/iceland-england-underdogs-last-16-euro-2016>
“I actually stayed behind to watch the Austria match in a pub in Covent Garden 
and took a later train to catch up with the tour bus. Unfortunately I was 
watching the English commentarybut I heard the Icelandic version the next day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/jun/23/commentator-gumundur-benediktssong-iceland-austria-euro-2016-video>
. Gudmundur Benediktsson is famous at home for being very enthusiastic and he 
really feels the game when he is commentating.

“But being Icelandic and watching that goal being scored in the last second of 
the game, I understood how he was feeling. I was shouting and screaming at the 
top of my voice and I think people in the pub were quite scared of me!”

Affectionately known as Gummy Ben, former Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> international Benediktsson’s 
near-meltdown of the last-minute goal that secured a last-16 tie against 
England has since been described as the best piece of commentary of all time. 
With an estimated 10% of the entire population of 320,000 currently in France, 
fervour for the national team runs deep in the land of fire and ice.

“I love football. I went to most of the home qualifiers in Reykjavik and it 
was just unbelievable,” says Georg, a lifelong Liverpool supporter who still 
plays five-a-side when time permits.

“It’s been difficult [to believe] because they’ve never been this good. We’ve 
had fantastic players in the past but they have never played as a team like 
these guys do. It’s kind of beautiful to watch. Finally we have this amazing 
team from Iceland. I’ve been waiting for this a long time!

Iceland’s Lars Lagerback: ‘I have played England six times and never lost’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/iceland-england-euro-2016-coach-lars-lagerback>
“I remember going to school when I was a kid and if we had gym class then I 
had this little brown Liverpool bag that I always brought with me. We grew up 
watching English football all the time so it will mean a lot to play against 
them.”

A hectic schedule that began in Barcelona on 4 June means he and the rest of 
the band will not be in Nice, although Georg and drummer Orri Dyrason, whose 
father Dyri Gudmundsson made five appearances in goal for Iceland and “was 
close to making it” as a player himself, have already made plans for Monday 
night.

“I can’t go. I really wish I could. We only have two days off and I have to go 
home,” he says with a deep sigh. “But the next best thing is to watch it in on 
the big screen in Ingolfstorg square while I’m wearing my Iceland shirt. I 
think we do stand a chance but in all honesty if we lose then I will still be 
proud to say we made it through to the last 16 and lost to England. That’s a 
pretty good achievement for a nation of just 300,000 people.”

Yet while England’s notorious fallibility at penalty shootouts should give 
Icelanders hope, Georg is not getting carried away when it comes to making any 
predictions. “I don’t want to jinx it because I’m quite superstitious but I 
definitely know that Gylfi Sigurdsson will score one. He is probably the best 
penalty and free-kick taker I have ever seen and probably one of the best in 
the world.”

Sigur Ros made their international breakthrough with their second album, 
Agætis Byrjun, in 1999, and tracks such as Hoppipolla (Hopping in Puddles) and 
Staralfur (Staring Elf) have been featured by several TV channels as the 
soundtrack to sporting events, including the 2006 World Cup and 2012 Olympics 
in London.Their video for Viorar Vel Til Loftarasa (Good Weather for an 
Airstrike) in 2001 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6apd9vpQdKc> even had an 
impact on the debate about the lack of gay footballers in the professional 
game. Set in 1950s Iceland, it depicts a junior football match and culminates 
in a kiss between two boys that is eventually broken up by an enraged father 
who runs on to the pitch.

“The football world is so macho – especially some of the supporters who follow 
the game – so we wanted to do a twist on that,” Georg explains. “There’s 
probably a lot of gay players that can’t even come out of the closet because 
they’re afraid of what the reaction might be and that’s a shame.”

A new album is being worked on, although in language that Sigur Ros 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/sigur-ros> fans are probably accustomed to 
by now, “we don’t have a 100% plan yet”, according to Georg. “We’ve had a lot 
of ideas but we haven’t really finished anything yet,” he says. “We just need 
to find some time in between gigs.”

And the football.
 