
It is clear to everyone that we have lost a wonderful composer and one of our 
most important artistic figures, a man who embodied music, and who wanted it to 
be part of everybody’s life, from the youngest to the oldest. He wrote for 
every possible type of ability, from some of the thorniest orchestral scores of 
their time to music for young people that was as practical as it is 
irresistible. It is now a sad irony that the LSO were responsible for his last 
two large-scale works; one was the powerful 10th symphony, which he was well 
enough to hear in London in 2014; his last piece, The Hogboon, we will premiere 
in June. Fittingly, it is designed to be performed by children, amateur singers 
and professionals, and it looks like an instant classic on the page. He was 
certainly very proud of it, and was impatient to hear it.

I had read that he loved purple and I was therefore unwilling to wear any 
other colour

Personally he was a hero for me from childhood onwards; as a young teen my 
parents used to curse him, as I had read that he loved purple and I was 
therefore unwilling to wear any other colour. Some of the first music I 
conducted were his chamber pieces: Seven in Nomine and Antichrist. When the 
Philharmonia asked me to premiere his first symphony in 1978, I felt as though 
all my Christmases had arrived at once, and I will never forget the thrill of 
sitting down in his publisher’s office and reading through the score, feeling 
the visceral power leaping out of the page. His thank you present was typically 
thoughtful; “Simon”, he said, “I think your life will be improved by a taste 
for good wine. I will send you 24 half bottles, 12 pairs of my favourite wines, 
and you can see what appeals to you. Don’t forget what you are tasting!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsimon-rattle-on-peter-maxwell-davies-he-was-a-hero-to-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99c9843e22391bdaa42c4b71e6b7391c12228d22%2F0_24_2836_1701%2F2836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simon%20Rattle%20on%20Peter%20Maxwell%20Davies%3A%20'He%20was%20a%20hero%20to%20me'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsimon-rattle-on-peter-maxwell-davies-he-was-a-hero-to-me%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simon%20Rattle%20on%20Peter%20Maxwell%20Davies%3A%20%27He%20was%20a%20hero%20to%20me%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fmar%2F17%2Fsimon-rattle-on-peter-maxwell-davies-he-was-a-hero-to-me%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99c9843e22391bdaa42c4b71e6b7391c12228d22%2F0_24_2836_1701%2F2836.jpg>
 Simon Rattle and Peter Maxwell Davies photographed in 1981 ahead of the world 
premiere of Max’s Black Pentecost. Photograph: Ian Tyas/Getty Images 
This desire to share pleasure and knowledge was also maybe the key to his 
music, so often written for friends, or with specific people in mind. His 
political activity too was always designed to remind people that music was for 
everyone and could never be taken for granted - a view he promulgated with 
passion and sometimes acid wit. He kept his pixie sparkle to the end, and the 
unwavering intensity of his eyes will remain forever with all of us who knew 
and loved him.

•Sir Simon Rattle and the London Symphony Orchestra give the world premiere of 
the Hogboon on 26 June 2016 at the Barbican, London 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=17633>.
 