
Pelléas et Mélisande has been intoxicating audiences and performers alike ever 
since its first appearance in 1902. Although Claude Debussy’s intense opera is 
full of dark and disturbing music, it manages to be as seductive as it is 
unsettling. At the turn of the 20th century, the composer’s vision of opera was 
radically different from the apocalyptic myth-making of Wagner’s music-dramas. 
Instead, the Frenchman’s music turned inward – and, in a great performance, you 
feel that every note, every syllable, sounds out the inner lives not just of 
its characters, but of everybody seated in the audience.


Will Simon Rattle and Peter Sellars deliver such a performance? The two bring 
their radical version to London this weekend. It’s the latest of their recent 
projects reimagining concert halls as places for heightened dramatic 
experience. Their realisations of Bach’s St Matthew and John Passions – 
performed in Berlin, New Yorkand at the Proms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/sep/08/prom-66-st-matthew-passion-review>
 – revealed the power of this way of working.

But Debussy’s claustrophobic opera is an entirely different proposition to the 
ritualised drama of the Passions. The story is a tragic love triangle: 
Mélisande is discovered by Golaud as an enigmatic and traumatised young woman 
in the forest; they marry, but a relationship develops between Mélisande and 
Golaud’s younger half-brother Pelléas. In the fetid atmosphere of the castle 
ruled by Golaud’s monstrous grandfather Arkel, things don’t end well for the 
lovers. Golaud kills Pelléas and Mélisande dies shortly after – to the sound of 
Debussy’s exquisitely and dangerously narcotic music. What attracted Rattle and 
Sellars to this powerful work?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsimon-rattle-peter-sellars-interview-pelleas-et-melisande-gerhaher-kozena%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F535c447bb0a1ecbbecba03d29288ad04b64fc7ec%2F0_298_4928_2959%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simon%20Rattle%20and%20Peter%20Sellars%20on%20Pell%C3%A9as%20et%20M%C3%A9lisande%3A%20'It's%20as%20creepy%20as%20Hitchcock'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsimon-rattle-peter-sellars-interview-pelleas-et-melisande-gerhaher-kozena%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simon%20Rattle%20and%20Peter%20Sellars%20on%20Pell%C3%A9as%20et%20M%C3%A9lisande%3A%20%27It%27s%20as%20creepy%20as%20Hitchcock%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsimon-rattle-peter-sellars-interview-pelleas-et-melisande-gerhaher-kozena%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F535c447bb0a1ecbbecba03d29288ad04b64fc7ec%2F0_298_4928_2959%2F4928.jpg>
 Gerald Finley (left) and Christian Gerhaher as the brothers torn apart by 
love. Photograph: Monika Rittershaus 
Simon Rattle, conductor


Pelléas et Mélisande is one of the saddest and most upsetting operas ever 
written. If you love the opera as I do, then you love it to pieces, 
obsessively. It is the first thing Peter and I ever did together, in Amsterdam 
in 1993. If I don’t do it every five to 10 years, I’m miserable. Look beyond 
the beauty of the music and you see incredibly damaged people. Our new 
production has the right singers for every single one of them. When I persuaded 
Christian Gerhaher to sing Pelléas, he sent me a text saying he was so thrilled 
he couldn’t sleep.

Although we are making the opera for concert halls, this really is a production
. Our approach has allowed us to do things that Debussy originally asked for, 
which you can’t do in a conventional opera house. For example, he conceived his 
orchestra as the forest in which the opera takes place. He wanted the woodwind 
players to be seated around the orchestra, rather than lumped together as a 
block as they usually are. So we have flutes and clarinets on either side of 
the ensemble. Despite all the difficulties this creates in terms of 
co-ordination, it means we have an extraordinary feeling of having forest 
sounds coming from everywhere.

And because we’re all so close to each other physically – the singers are 
right with the orchestra, and even in the middle of it during the love scenes – 
you don’t get that feeling of the orchestra being stuck in the pit, having to 
struggle to project their sound out. They can shimmer along with the singers. 
Plus every musician can see the lips of the soloists, bringing them closer to 
the words of Maurice Maeterlinck’s text. We are all lost in the forest of the 
orchestra.

Sometimes musicians worry too much about how beautifully they are playing. But 
the minute Peter is in the room, it’s all about meaning. You don’t ask: “Is 
this beautiful enough?” You ask: “What does this music mean, dramatically, 
emotionally?” Debussy said he wanted Mélisande to die in the violins. This way, 
we grant him his wish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsimon-rattle-peter-sellars-interview-pelleas-et-melisande-gerhaher-kozena%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa905c14fb931b533af39204b9d4597249f7d4b24%2F0_0_5231_3385%2F5231.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simon%20Rattle%20and%20Peter%20Sellars%20on%20Pell%C3%A9as%20et%20M%C3%A9lisande%3A%20'It's%20as%20creepy%20as%20Hitchcock'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsimon-rattle-peter-sellars-interview-pelleas-et-melisande-gerhaher-kozena%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simon%20Rattle%20and%20Peter%20Sellars%20on%20Pell%C3%A9as%20et%20M%C3%A9lisande%3A%20%27It%27s%20as%20creepy%20as%20Hitchcock%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F07%2Fsimon-rattle-peter-sellars-interview-pelleas-et-melisande-gerhaher-kozena%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa905c14fb931b533af39204b9d4597249f7d4b24%2F0_0_5231_3385%2F5231.jpg>
 Peter Sellars and Simon Rattle (second and third from left) take the applause 
with soloists after a performance with the Berliner Philharmoniker. Photograph: 
Monika Rittershaus 
Peter Sellars, director

Debussy’s music is vivid, tactile, immediate and shocking. It speaks the 
unspoken and is alternately truly ecstatic and then terrifying. It’s like the 
level of thought and creepy intensity that you have in a great Hitchcock film, 
where your emotions are put through dramatic reversals, where reality keeps 
spinning.

When Pelléas is performed in an opera house, the sound comes out from the pit 
pre-mixed, like a cake made from a packet you buy in a shop. What’s thrilling 
about performing the piece as we are is that you get air: the sound opens out 
in space and a dialogue occurs across and through the orchestra. It gives the 
drama a chamber-music intensity.


Right behind the cello section is the timpani, whose menacing heartbeat cuts 
through the flesh of the cello lines. You can’t believe the immediacy, the 
tactile pleasure that creates, or the sparkle you get from seeing that every 
word Pelléas says is garnished by a harp glissando. The singers are lost in 
this incredible wash of sound. When Golaud sings “I hear crying”, it’s right 
there in the first violins.

That’s the power of the world of symbolism, both in Maeterlinck’s play and 
Debussy’s score. Symbolism was a way of talking about things that you weren’t 
meant to talk about in the real world. In the drama of the opera, that means 
generation after generation of hurt and loathing, of men such as Arkel who 
abuse their children and crush people so completely that, in their loneliness, 
the only way to go on is to continue the cycle of abuse. And the violence isn’t 
just physical – there are brutal levels of psychological violence stretching 
across decades in this sad family.

At the centre is Mélisande. As a refugee fleeing from a place of terrible 
violence, she has no choice but to be taken in by these men. But, in Magdalena 
Kožená’s performance, Mélisande isn’t some fading frangipane blossom, but a 
truly courageous and desperate woman. Debussy caught in his music the sound of 
women traumatised by violence. In that sense, his opera is as relevant as ever.

• Simon Rattle conducts the LSO in Debussy’s Pelléas et Mélisande at the 
Barbican, London on 9 and 10 January 
<http://www.lso.co.uk/whats-on/icalrepeat.detail/2016/01/10/301/84/pelleas-et-melisande>

 