
Three years ago Katie Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/09/katie-mitchell-british-theatre-true-auteur>
 suggested that I write a version of Anton Chekhov’s The Cherry Orchard. I told 
her I would never dare.

The Cherry Orchard is my favourite play. It is a complex exploration of a 
culture on the cusp of disappearance, the Russian aristocracy as it enters the 
final decade, before the revolution. Chekhov is my favourite writer. In his 
plays and short stories he excavated the human condition with more tenderness 
and honesty than anybody else I’ve read. Startling in his economy, he sees into 
his characters and their capacity for contradiction and silliness and despair 
with a clarity that staggers me.

I didn’t feel that I was good enough to write Chekhov into English. I didn’t 
feel as though I was grown-up enough.

Six months later, I changed my mind. I still didn’t feel grown-up or skilled 
enough to write a version of The Cherry Orchard properly but I hadn’t been able 
to shake the idea. Turning down such an opportunity troubled me more than my 
probable failure.

I have had three English-language versions of other plays produced. All three 
of them have been at the Young Vic. In 2011 my version of Jon Fosse’sI Am the 
Wind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/11/i-am-the-wind-theatre-review> 
was staged there, and in 2012 my version of Henrik Ibsen’sA Doll’s House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jul/10/dolls-house-young-vic-review>.

The process for working on The Cherry Orchard was similar to my processes in 
both those versions. I don’t speak Russian. The Oxford academicHelen Rappaport 
<http://www.helenrappaport.com/> produced a thorough and invaluable literal 
translation of Cherry Orchard, complete with lengthy footnotes. My task was to 
make her translation actable. To turn it into a text that sits happily in 
actors’ mouths.

It is a process I find fascinating and rewarding. When making my own plays I 
rarely think consciously about language. Rather the bulk of my conscious work 
concerns narrative or structure or theme. The actual line writing is done best, 
I think, when it is entirely instinctive. Sometimes I can’t remember why I made 
particular word choices. This ignorance is often exposed by inquisitive actors 
in rehearsal rooms. This is how it should be.

My sole concern, in the case of these three versions of plays, has been 
linguistic. I have kept the characters the same and the structure the same and 
the story the same on all occasions. The judgment behind my word choices in The 
Cherry Orchard is entirely subjective and based on no linguistic consideration 
of original Russian syntax or grammar.
 On the cusp of disappearance … The Cherry Orchard at the Young Vic. 
Photograph: Stephen Cummiskey 
The politics and ethics surrounding this process of producing new English 
versions of texts written in other language has sparked much debate.

In an introduction to his compelling versions of Strindberg plays, Gregory 
Motton savages the culture of writers writing versions from literal 
translations. The subjective decisions the writers make ease the jaggedness and 
vitality of the original plays, he argues. The act of writing a version becomes 
necessarily a dilution. The esteemed Chekhovian translator Michael Frayn 
agrees. His widely produced versions are written from the Russian. Frayn is a 
fluent Russian speaker.

I admire Motton and Frayn hugely. I also think they are wrong.

I think their ideas are based on the odd assumption that it is in some way 
possible to make a pure translation. It isn’t. Language shifts and mutates 
historically as well as geographically and to assume the possibility of a 
perfect translation is to ignore these shifts and changes.

It seems especially odd to suggest that a play text, out of any literary form, 
should be carved out of an attempt to accurately translate the original 
language of an author writing a century ago. Playwriting, for me, is not a 
literary or linguistic pursuit and plays are not literary artefacts. I think of 
them instead as being starting points for a night in the theatre.

It bewilders me that a translator of a Chekhov play should concern themselves 
with accurately replicating in English the Russian of the early last century 
even if this comes at the expense of the vitality, sensuality, pathos, rage and 
compassion of the spirit in which those plays were first made. When the concern 
with accuracy prevents interpretation or imagination on behalf of a director or 
an artistic team then it is not just wrong-headed but damaging.

To offer an example: Chekhov’s plays, like all plays, were written in the 
theatrical conventions of his time. He wrote four acts, which were performed 
with 45-minute intervals between each act. This leant itself to a literary 
style that became necessarily expositional. The audience needed reminding about 
what was going on. Our contemporary audience operates with different skills and 
needs and assumptions. To not address this and refine a text accordingly, 
purely because it would be an inaccurate representation of the original source 
artefact, seems bull-headed.

The Cherry Orchard has been translated into English on countless occasions. 
Since Stanislavski’s first production of the play at the Moscow Art theatre in 
January 1904, it has never been out of production and has been performed all 
over the world. It could be argued that the last thing the world needs is 
another version of the play.

I think the reason it continues to be reimagined and restaged is because 
nobody has ever got it right. Nobody has ever captured the depth and spirit of 
the play. Nobody has done this because nobody can, because language doesn’t 
work like that and language in theatre certainly doesn’t.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Foct%2F16%2Fthe-cherry-orchard-chekhov-simon-stephens-katie-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413388228470%2F9196c02e-a427-4558-83c5-956c92c491c8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simon%20Stephens%3A%20why%20my%20Cherry%20Orchard%20is%20a%20failure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Foct%2F16%2Fthe-cherry-orchard-chekhov-simon-stephens-katie-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simon%20Stephens%3A%20why%20my%20Cherry%20Orchard%20is%20a%20failure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2014%2Foct%2F16%2Fthe-cherry-orchard-chekhov-simon-stephens-katie-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F15%2F1413388228470%2F9196c02e-a427-4558-83c5-956c92c491c8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gala Gordon (Irina), Mariah Gale (Olga) and Vanessa Kirby (Masha) in Three 
Sisters directed by Benedict Andrews at the Young Vic in 2012. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton 
Freed from the pursuit of achieving the impossible, writers have instead been 
inspired to calibrate Chekhov’s work through their own standing ground. Anya 
Reiss in London and Annie Baker in New York have produced urgent contemporary 
versions of Uncle Vanya. John Donnelly’s recentThe Seagull 
<http://headlong.co.uk/work/seagull/> felt driven by a faith in Chekhov as a 
theatre worker with a vital relationship to his audience. Filter Theatre 
Company’s deconstruction of Christopher Hampton’s Three Sisters was as engaging 
as Benedict Andrews’ own version last year. I love Motton and Frayn’s writing 
but I think they are wrong to disparage the work of Reiss, Baker, Donnelly, 
Andrews and hundreds of others when the work these writers have made has felt 
so alive and alert.

I have worked closely with Katie Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/katie-mitchell> on my version of The Cherry 
Orchard. It is a thousand words shorter than Rappaport’s literal. Ours is not 
an accurate representation of what Chekhov intended, but it is an honest 
refraction of what his play means to us.

The Cherry Orchard is a play that resonates now with as much force as it ever 
did. It made sense to both myself and Katie that it should be produced in the 
100th anniversary of the beginning of the first world war. The war was the 
first catastrophe that manifested the terror that Chekhov seemed to foretell 
for his characters. He dramatised a world shuddering with an uncertain sense 
that something awful was about to happen. The notion that England now is 
shuddering in the same sort of anticipation gripped both of our imaginations.

We were fascinated too by its consideration of grief. We have relocated the 
action of the play to more tightly excavate the grief caused by the death of a 
child. We have simplified the nomenclature of the play. We don’t use 
anachronistic words or references to our own contemporary culture in the way 
thatBenedict Andrews did with such joy in Three Sisters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/sep/10/benedict-andrews-chekhov-three-sisters>
, but we have tried to make a language that is simple and clear and economic.

We’ve done this not because we think it is a more accurate representation of 
the original Russian language, but because we are inspired by the play to make 
a night in the theatre that evokes the same sense of loss and tenderness and 
fear that reading Chekhov evokes in us.

I told the cast on the first day of rehearsals that I have probably failed in 
my version. I haven’t captured the breadth of the play or its truth or comedy 
or sexiness (and it is a very sexy and funny play). I never could have done. 
Nobody could have done. No matter how brilliant their Russian. No matter how 
masterful their stagecraft. The nature of translation means that to think 
otherwise is folly. The nature of theatre means that to aspire to do so is 
slightly perverse.

Instead we try to make versions of versions of versions. That is the essence 
of our work and it defines our art form.

In my failure though, I think we might come close to capturing something 
interesting. And I also think that we might continue the conversation so that 
in a very short space of time another writer will write another version of The 
Cherry Orchard. They will fail like I’ve failed. Their failure will inspire 
others. This is how it works and exactly how it should work. This is something 
to celebrate I think, not to chastise.

• Simon Stephens’ version of The Cherry Orchard <http://www.youngvic.org> runs 
at the Young Vic in London until 29 November 2014.

 