
When Sir Simon Rattle returns to Britain to pick up his baton in front of the 
London Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/london-symphony-orchestra>, can he rely on 
finding a British concert hall fit for the world-beating music he hopes to make?

The plans for a new venue on a site near St Paul’s cathedral, due to be made 
public next month, are already dividing music experts and performers and 
threatening the most discordant of overtures to Rattle’s reign at the LSO.

“The cost of building in the middle of the Square Mile is prohibitive – half a 
billion pounds, at current estimates. [A] ridiculous amount compared to the 
general global cost of a concert hall,” the veteran critic and music writer 
Norman Lebrecht fumedin his online blog 
<http://slippedisc.com/2015/10/london-picks-wrong-site-for-simon-rattle-concert-hall/>
 as word leaked out last week of the content of a long-awaited £1m feasibility 
report.

The proposed hall on the current site of the Museum of London would, Lebrecht 
added, simply be replacing “one concrete monster with another”, while music 
promoter Raymond Gubbay told theObserver the scheme is unnecessary since London 
is not “so badly off” for concert halls. “Rather than build yet another one, 
may I suggest they consider transporting Symphony Hall the 110 miles from 
Birmingham toLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>? It’s by far the 
best concert hall in the country,” he said.

Rosemary Johnson, the director of the Royal Philharmonic Society 
<http://royalphilharmonicsociety.org.uk>, welcomed any new spending on 
classical music, but said her organisation had not been consulted. “It is vital 
for everyone in the orchestra world to combine our resources on this,” she 
said. “I just don’t think you can bolt something new on that will just serve 
one community, if some of the money is coming from the government.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Fsimon-rattle-lso-new-london-concert-hall-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc100ec797c71691d448eb860d7cd76f406a21c1b%2F383_166_3873_2325%2F3873.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simon%20Rattle%E2%80%99s%20return%20to%20LSO%20marred%20by%20squabble%20over%20new%20London%20concert%20hall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Fsimon-rattle-lso-new-london-concert-hall-row%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simon%20Rattle%E2%80%99s%20return%20to%20LSO%20marred%20by%20squabble%20over%20new%20London%20concert%20hall&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Fsimon-rattle-lso-new-london-concert-hall-row%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc100ec797c71691d448eb860d7cd76f406a21c1b%2F383_166_3873_2325%2F3873.jpg>
 World renowned cellist Julian Lloyd says the money for a new London concert 
hall would be better spent on musical education. Photograph: Linda Nylind for 
the Observer 
The draft proposal for a new Centre of Music was drawn up under the 
chairmanship of Sir Nicholas Hytner, the former artistic director of the 
National Theatre, and is being privately considered by the mayor of London and 
the Treasury before it goes before the public. Yet presentations made in the 
city in the past few days have made it clear the feasibility study has settled 
on the London Wall site, which will be vacated when the Museum of London moves 
to Smithfield market. The new hall would then be likely to operate as an 
extension to the Barbican, where the concert auditorium is widely regarded as 
not good enough to be home to the LSO.Rattle, one of the world’s leading 
conductors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/jan/10/simon-rattle-berliner-philharmoniker>
, will return from Germany to lead the LSO in 2017 after a 15-year stint 
conducting the prestigious Berlin Philharmonic.

Among groups gathering to fight the recommended site are those worried about 
an expensive new facility that might come to be dominated by just one London 
orchestra and those who think the City of London is the wrong place to attract 
new audiences. Timothy Walker, chief executive and artistic director of the 
London Philharmonic Orchestra, welcomed any move to invest in London as the 
cultural capital of the world, but said: “If we have only one chance for a 
state-of-the-art concert hall then it should benefit all five London 
orchestras. I am realistic enough to understand that if all the funds are 
raised from, and it’s operated with, non-public sources, then that wish is 
unlikely to happen.”

If we are to make a once-in-a-generation investment, then this really is not 
good enough
Jonathan Rose, New Queen's Hall Orchestra 
Some musicians and classical concert-goers are also concerned about the poor 
sound quality provided by the potential fan-shaped, or “vineyard”, design of 
the auditorium. An oblong, or “shoebox”, hall is thought to give a truer sound. 
Amsterdam, Birmingham and Vienna all benefit from shoebox halls.

“If you want to play in the best concert hall, it should be a shoebox,” said 
Julian Lloyd Webber, the renowned cellist who runs the Birmingham 
Conservatoire. “Birmingham has the best halls and when it comes to London they 
should have rebuilt the Queen’s Hall in London 60 years ago. But why do we need 
a legacy building as a grand gesture? What I would do instead is put the money 
intomusic education. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/22/new-concert-hall-classical-music-simon-rattle>
”

Jonathan Rose, a trustee of the New Queen’s Hall Orchestra who hopes to build 
a hall elsewhere, is also perturbed by the proposal. “If we are to make a 
once-in-a-generation investment, then this really is not good enough,” he said.

The ambitious draft proposal for London Wall will go out to wider consultation 
at the end of the year and is an attempt to harness investment in the city’s 
cultural infrastructure along the tourist and commuter corridor that runs from 
Tate Modern over the Thames to St Paul’s. If approved, it is thought it would 
not be completed until 2020 at the earliest, but Mark Boleat, chairman of the 
City corporation’s policy and resources committee, told the body’s Court of 
Common Council last week that the proposals are already supported in principle 
“by government, the Greater London Authority and other organisations such as 
the Arts Council”. He urged the City of London to do its bit to provide more 
funding.

Although proposals for a new building were announced just before Rattle agreed 
to move to the LSO, the conductor has since said that a concert hall wasnot a 
condition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/03/simon-rattle-says-he-was-not-lured-to-the-lso-by-a-new-concert-hall>
 of him taking up his role.

Fiona Maddocks, the Observer music critic, said: “However fond we are of 
London’s two main concert halls – the Barbican and the Royal Festival Hall – 
the best acoustics are to be found outside the capital: Birmingham, Manchester, 
Newcastle. Several halls with good acoustics have been built around the world 
in the past few years – Paris, LA, Miami, the far east. London, a world leader 
in music, is lagging behind.”
 