
If there’s a lazy Australian stereotype that needs debunking, it’s that 
Australians are, well, lazy. Laid back. Laconic. All the L-words. Step up Simon 
Stone. The 31-year-old director is opening two major theatre productions in as 
many months, adapting Woody Allen’sHusbands and Wives 
<http://tga.nl/voorstellingen/husbands-and-wives> with Toneelgroep Amsterdam 
before making his London main-stage debut withLorca’s Yerma 
<http://www.youngvic.org/whats-on/yerma> at the Young Vic in July. Meanwhile, 
his feature film debut, The Daughter, is currently on UK release. Stone wrote, 
as well as directed, all three.

The Daughter first look review – Simon Stone's striking bloodline squabble
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/05/the-daughter-review-simon-stone> 
Katie Mitchell may be theatre’s British queen in exile  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/14/british-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell>
and Ivo van Hovethe king of New Amsterdam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/may/03/tony-awards-hamilton-musical-makes-history-with-16-nominations>
, but Stone is the Aussie upstart. Except he’s not Australian – not really. 
“The accent is a red herring and my secret weapon,” he says, wedging his 
handsome, lanky frame into a small cinema seat, deep inside the belly of a 
Sydney film distribution company. “I’ve never felt at home in Australia.”

Still, he likes to drop by. It’s July 2015 and Stone is on a fleeting four-day 
visit, jetlagged but in high spirits.The Daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/05/the-daughter-review-simon-stone>, 
a chilly but compelling arthouse family drama starring Geoffrey Rush, has 
premiered at the Sydney film festival to a warm reception. It’s based on The 
Wild Duck, an Ibsen play Stone directed with typical irreverence in 2011, but 
he insists this is not simply a film of that play.

“It’s the story of a series of people burdened with a complicated and 
interrelated past,” says Stone, adding that adapting Ibsen a second time was 
more challenging than writing a screenplay from scratch. “Theatre and film are 
so fundamentally different as artforms. As much as you think it’s the story 
that shocks you, the same story told in a piece of cinema could be mawkish and 
stupid if you don’t assume it needs to becomes a completely separate piece of 
storytelling. So I was going right back to the beginning.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1edc7f21a2488058305e62974ba4e379ebe79c3a%2F0_0_1575_1040%2F1575.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simon%20Stone%3A%20'If%20theatre%20could%20be%20half%20as%20good%20as%20HBO%2C%20we'd%20be%20hitting%20gold'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simon%20Stone%3A%20%27If%20theatre%20could%20be%20half%20as%20good%20as%20HBO%2C%20we%27d%20be%20hitting%20gold%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1edc7f21a2488058305e62974ba4e379ebe79c3a%2F0_0_1575_1040%2F1575.jpg>
 Chilly but compelling ... Geoffrey Rush in The Daughter Photograph: Roadshow 
Entertainment 
Born in Switzerland to Australian academic parents, Stone spent his childhood 
in Melbourne and then Cambridge, where his biochemist father was relocated for 
a job before dying suddenly when Stone was 12. The family returned to 
Australia, where cinema and Shakespeare jostled to distract him from his grief, 
and he got his break in front of the camera, in small but successful indie 
films such asJindabyne <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/may/25/drama> and 
Balibo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/19/balibo-rewatched-the-powerful-tribute-to-a-group-of-gutsy-australian-reporters>
, before setting up a theatre company, The Hayloft Project, on the Sydney 
fringe.

From stage to screen: why Australian cinema is so in love with the theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/from-stage-to-screen-why-australian-cinema-is-so-in-love-with-the-theatre>
“I only started making theatre as a kind of experiment in how to work with 
actors,” says Stone. “Having been an actor, I wanted to make sure as a director 
I could create a safety net for performers. I thought it was something I needed 
to do on the way to making movies.” But then he fell in love with the artform. 
“I got sidetracked, people wanted me to do more. It was an occupation, a 
calling, all of a sudden.”

His calling card? That 2011 production of The Wild Duck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/27/the-wild-duck-review-ibsen-simon-stone>
, hacked to bits and staged in a glass box at Sydney’s Belvoir theatre. It was 
Stone’s ticket to Europe, launching his international career but also 
confirming what he calls his “in-between” existence. “I literally have no fixed 
address,” he jokes.

In Australia, he is held up by some as the worst kind of example of the 
“European influence” on theatre (“They seem generally OK with the UK 
influence,” he says wryly). Conversely, when he works in Germany and Austria he 
can be accused, sometimes aggressively, of being “too interested in reality”. 
“They say: ‘He wants to reduce theatre to HBO.’ My first thought is: Jesus 
Christ, if theatre could be half as good as HBO, we’d be hitting gold.” It’s 
partly why he feels the need to touch base with Australia so often. “It lets me 
feel sane enough to continue to work in all of the different cultures and 
languages I’m working in.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ce26a4b42039aeca53172679f7def29bab7bab4%2F0_0_4404_2936%2F4404.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simon%20Stone%3A%20'If%20theatre%20could%20be%20half%20as%20good%20as%20HBO%2C%20we'd%20be%20hitting%20gold'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simon%20Stone%3A%20%27If%20theatre%20could%20be%20half%20as%20good%20as%20HBO%2C%20we%27d%20be%20hitting%20gold%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ce26a4b42039aeca53172679f7def29bab7bab4%2F0_0_4404_2936%2F4404.jpg>
 Simon Stone and Ewen Leslie, star of The Daughter. Photograph: Paul Miller/AAP 
When he arrived back as a teenager, he felt like an outsider. “And I was 
treated like one. But slowly my affection has grown because there is a level of 
relaxation, open-mindedness and acceptance built into this country that I find 
extraordinary.”

One that’s at odds with Australia’s politics? Stone can’t, or won’t, say. 
“It’s certainly at odds with our response to the arts. People are quick to be 
conservative towards risk-taking in the arts in Australia, when culturally, 
there is such a celebration of social risk-taking. Sometimes I want to say: do 
you not realise the haven for free thinking we’ve created in this country? 
Let’s reflect it on every level.”

And it goes both ways. “In Europe, you’re all such free thinkers in relation 
to art but people will be really weird about how you use your cutlery. Even a 
radical theatre-maker might say: ‘That was really rude when you did that.’” How 
weird is that!”

The next time we speak, Stone is back in Europe, braving the cutlery-etiquette 
minefield, and phones in from an Italian layby somewhere between Bologna and 
Montepulciano. Ostensibly he’s on holiday, but his head is deep in preparation 
for Husbands and Wives. “We weren’t sure whether we were going to be able to do 
it. It sat on Woody’s desk and he ended up personally approving it, which felt 
incredible!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe33f4cbad7e40a988626d24d8bf6cfddf604b70c%2F0_0_4724_3149%2F4724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simon%20Stone%3A%20'If%20theatre%20could%20be%20half%20as%20good%20as%20HBO%2C%20we'd%20be%20hitting%20gold'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simon%20Stone%3A%20%27If%20theatre%20could%20be%20half%20as%20good%20as%20HBO%2C%20we%27d%20be%20hitting%20gold%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe33f4cbad7e40a988626d24d8bf6cfddf604b70c%2F0_0_4724_3149%2F4724.jpg>
 Allen approved ... Husbands & Wives in Amsterdam Photograph: Jan Versweyveld 
With its dissection of relationships and monologues straight to camera, 
Allen’s film is a ready-made play, says Stone. So no Katie Mitchell-style “
vandalising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/14/british-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell>
” of the script then? Stone is happy to take the bait. “Calling what Katie does 
vandalism – that comment only comes from people who believe in thea priori 
right for theatre to exist. Her work may be some people’s idea of vandalising 
literature. But a theatre text is only a blueprint for a theatre event, not a 
piece of art in and of itself.”

Katie Mitchell, British theatre’s queen in exile | Charlotte Higgins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/14/british-theatre-queen-exile-katie-mitchell>
In an age of Netflix and podcasting, when storytelling is so polyphonic and 
accessible, theatre has to make the case for itself on the night, says Stone. 
“The idea that we all walk into a theatre together for this social ritual – 
which I happen to think is one of the most cathartic social rituals left to us 
– doesn’t mean you can convince the audience just by continuing to act out the 
ritual. You have to get people to say: ‘Wow, we really are all sitting in this 
room together and it means something’.”

Take Shakespeare. “I grew up reading his plays as literary texts – I loved 
them. But the moment a play becomes a piece of theatre, you need to convince 
the audience it has something to say about the life they live now. That cannot 
only be something you put in the programme notes.Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> as it was originally invented was 
for the groundlingsand the people getting blowjobs in the top seats.”

And so to Yerma: “There’s a lot about this play I am going to be vandalising,” 
he laughs. “Look mate, this is Greek tragedy. Lorca wrote a 20th-century Greek 
tragedy about a very specific modern dilemma: what it means as a woman in the 
world when you discover you might not be able to have kids.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9cdf4851f656602658910a5f24521f9f50f770d%2F0_0_1575_945%2F1575.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Simon%20Stone%3A%20'If%20theatre%20could%20be%20half%20as%20good%20as%20HBO%2C%20we'd%20be%20hitting%20gold'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Simon%20Stone%3A%20%27If%20theatre%20could%20be%20half%20as%20good%20as%20HBO%2C%20we%27d%20be%20hitting%20gold%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fsimon-stone-theatre-film-the-daughter-yerma%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9cdf4851f656602658910a5f24521f9f50f770d%2F0_0_1575_945%2F1575.jpg>
 Behind you ... Paul Schneider and Miranda Otto in The Daughter. Photograph: 
Roadshow Entertainment 
Lorca’s original protagonist – to be played in Stone’s adaptation by Billie 
Piper – is a farmer’s wife in rural Spain. “But there are Yermas walking around 
in cities everywhere. London, Sydney, Berlin. I know these Yermas. That moment 
for women – family, friends, colleagues – where they say: ‘I’ve spent my entire 
life making sure I’m not defined by my choices, by my gender, or by cliched 
expectations of what I want to do with my life.’ Then suddenly biological 
questions start knocking.”

Stone won’t be pushed on specifics, but admits: “This has been a narrative in 
my own life, which is why I wanted to do that play. I wasn’t the woman in the 
scenario. But I witnessed what the woman went through. And it broke my heart.”

His UK directorial debut is doubly emotional, he says – because in some way, 
his father’s death froze him at a particular time and place. “I always feel 
like my existence is somewhere behind me, a bit like the world of The Daughter. 
Keep living, then figure out what it means. Some day, I’d like to be at the 
centre of something more mundane, more relaxed, more spiritual. But I suppose 
there will be time for that in the future.”

 * The Daughter is out at selected UK cinemas. Husbands and Wives is at the 
Holland festival 
<http://www.hollandfestival.nl/nl/programma/2016/?gclid=CJuJ6cz3i80CFWcq0wodA6QJIQ>
 from 4 June. Yerma is at theYoung Vic, London 
<http://www.youngvic.org/whats-on/yerma>, from 28 July.  