
The young man with the infectious smile would never tell you, and you’d never 
know, that he was imprisoned, tortured and beaten almost to death by the Syrian 
regime for demonstrating against the government at the start of thecurrent 
crisis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>. Remarkably, by the time his 
family arrived, believing they had come to collect his body, Mohamad was 
breathing again. His parents had to fake a death certificate to release his 
body before he could travel to Turkey to rebuild his life.

Scenes from Syria, illustrated by George Butler – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2013/mar/17/syria-illustrated-george-butler-in-pictures>
The fact that Mohamad no longer exists on paper is of no consequence. He is 
joyfully alive, and for three days last month, smoking Gauloises and grinning, 
he drove me round southern Turkey to see some of the projects that theHands Up 
Foundation <http://www.handsupfoundation.org/> has supported over the last 
three years. This includes funding doctors’ salaries in Aleppo and a prosthetic 
limb project in Syria and Turkey.

One morning in August 2013, I was in Azaz as a guest of the Free Syrian Army. 
My job as a freelance illustrator was to capture some of what was happening 
through my drawings (the pictures werepublished in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2013/mar/17/syria-illustrated-george-butler-in-pictures>
). Fras, a “rebel” who I haven’t heard from since, looked amusingly disgusted 
at my dishevelled look as I wondered outside. Despite not sharing a common 
language, he ushered me on to the back of his motorbike, down the road and into 
an already busy barber’s, where much to the interest of the others I was shaved 
to within an inch of my life. At no point was there any question that I should 
pay, at no point did this friendly exchange with someone I barely knew not feel 
like a normal day. And yet within days of my encounter with Fras and his 
barber, the city would be under heavy bombardment.Azaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/21/azaz-syria-turkey-russia-kurds> 
has been subject to heavy shelling for the last year, and 90% of its population 
have had to leave.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsinging-for-syria-hands-up-foundation-carol-singing-charity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffbb62fb23106b18a03a600b42d22667dd2880ee%2F0_101_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Singing%20for%20Syria%3A%20why%20I'm%20putting%20my%20mouth%20where%20my%20money%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsinging-for-syria-hands-up-foundation-carol-singing-charity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Singing%20for%20Syria%3A%20why%20I%27m%20putting%20my%20mouth%20where%20my%20money%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsinging-for-syria-hands-up-foundation-carol-singing-charity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffbb62fb23106b18a03a600b42d22667dd2880ee%2F0_101_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 George Butler’s drawing of Taftanaz, in the northwest of the country. 
Illustration: George Butler 
Three friends and I, who had all lived and worked in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, set up the charity, united by a 
sense of sadness at the unfolding crisis in the country. We knew that even 
small donations, in the right hands, could still help, and we wanted to remind 
the people we had met that they had not been forgotten.

The problems faced by aid agencies and donors are enormous. Who are the good 
guys and where does my money go? These are pertinent questions, properly asked 
but rarely answered accurately. Syria is one of the most difficult places in 
the world to deliver aid to, and the closer you get to the need, the higher the 
risk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsinging-for-syria-hands-up-foundation-carol-singing-charity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43f20f33c177180a35ea86aac82216368d8ccb60%2F0_566_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Singing%20for%20Syria%3A%20why%20I'm%20putting%20my%20mouth%20where%20my%20money%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsinging-for-syria-hands-up-foundation-carol-singing-charity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Singing%20for%20Syria%3A%20why%20I%27m%20putting%20my%20mouth%20where%20my%20money%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fsinging-for-syria-hands-up-foundation-carol-singing-charity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F43f20f33c177180a35ea86aac82216368d8ccb60%2F0_566_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Ahmed in hospital. Illustration: George Butler 
But in southern Turkey alone there are hundreds of Syrian-run, 
Turkish-registered aid organisations supported by many western governments and 
international charities operating across this border. They often speak English, 
they have audited accounts, regular reporting and transparent processes. 
Political uncertainty or the presence of armed groups is no longer an excuse 
not to give.

One of the ways the Hands Up Foundation is raising money is through singing. 
And on 13 December, 750 people will descend onSt Margaret’s Church in 
Westminster 
<http://westminster-abbey.org/st-margarets-church/special-services/upcoming-special-services/singing-for-syrians-carols-concert>
 for a carol service, led by a choir of MPs including Victoria Prentis, Will 
Quince, Nicola Blackwood and Anne-Marie Trevelyan, and with readings from Simon 
Callow, Michael Morpurgo and Robert Peston. In addition, actors Alexander 
Armstrong and Tom Hollander will be singing and whistling Walking in the Air. 
Last year, a similar event raised £45,000. Our target this year is to double 
that.

The Westminster event is just the flagship. We have launched a nationwide 
Singing for Syrians campaign <http://www.singingforsyrians.com/>, and this 
month hope to instigate 100 singing events nationwide. Many are already planned 
and will be held all over the UK, and there is even going to be one in 
Istanbul’s St Antoine Cathedral. Everyone can sing. We hope more will hear 
about the events and take the initiative.

•Find an event near you, or learn how to hold your own, at 
singingforsyrians.com <http://www.singingforsyrians.com/>.
 