
• No reimbursement of mortgage interest payments or any other costs associated 
with the purchase of a property. In future only rent or hotel costs should be 
reimbursed.

• Commercial agency to provide and maintain rented accommodation for new MPs 
entering parliament at the next election, to be extended to all MPs if 
successful.

• Second-home payments to continue for council tax, water, fuel, phones, 
contents insurance and removal at the beginning and end of a tenancy. Expenses 
banned for cleaning, gardening and furnishings.

• No second-home expenses for MPs within a "reasonable" commuting distance of 
Westminster, as determined by the independent regulator.

• Any future capital gains in the value of accommodation purchased with the 
help of public funds to be surrendered to the exchequer.

• Ban on MPs appointing members of their own families to their staff and 
paying them from public funds. Those currently employing family members should 
be able to continue to do so for the life of one further parliament or five 
years, whichever is the longer.

• A code of conduct for MPs' staff, barring party political work.

• Communications allowance to be abolished.

• "Golden handshake" resettlement grant to be retained at a rate of up to nine 
months' pay for MPs who lose their seats at a general election, as the result 
of deselection or because of boundary changes, but scrapped for MPs who 
voluntarily stand down, who will instead receive eight weeks' pay.

• Receipts or other documentary evidence to be required for all claims.

• MPs to meet the cost of normal commuting journeys themselves. Payments for 
longer journeys only if they are on genuine parliamentary duties and for family 
members travelling between constituency and London. Receipts required for all 
travel claims.

• Annual review of maximum claimable amounts by independent regulator, and 
comprehensive review of the system at least once in every parliament.

• Designation of main and second homes to be determined according to an 
objective test, enforced by the independent regulator.

• Cut in the London costs allowance for MPs in the capital.

• Only MPs who stay in a hotel to be entitled to claim for the costs of food, 
currently up to a maximum of £25 per night, with receipts required.

• MPs with existing expenses-supported mortgages to be able to continue to 
claim until the end of the next parliament or for five years.

• MPs who share second home accommodation as partners to be entitled between 
them to claim up to a limit of one individual cap on rent or mortgage payments, 
plus one third.

• Work of MPs to be subject to robust independent audit, with strict penalties 
for breach, to ensure public funds are not used for party political activities.

• MPs to continue to be able to select and directly appoint their own staff.

• Equipment purchased with office expenses should be regarded as public 
property.

• Ban on claiming expenses for accountancy costs to help fill out tax returns.

• Ban on claims for travel to or from homes which are not in or close to MPs' 
constituencies.

• Standards and privileges committee to consider stripping MPs of resettlement 
grant if they seriously breach the code of conduct.

• MPs to remain free to undertake some paid activity outside the House of 
Commons <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>, "within 
reasonable limits".

• All candidates at parliamentary elections to publish, at nomination, a 
register of interests, including the existence of other paid jobs and whether 
they intend to continue to hold them if elected.

• Ban on Westminster MPs simultaneously sitting in a devolved legislature.

• Independent regulator to be given statutory responsibility for setting MPs' 
pay levels and overseeing MPs' pensions as well as for dealing with expenses.

• Independent regulator to be given power to compel MPs to cooperate, require 
repayments and impose fines.
 