
On the strength of what he had achieved by his early 30s, Sir Neville 
Marriner, who has died aged 92, would have been remembered as a decent 
orchestral and chamber music violinist. But at 34 he made a brilliant career 
move that led to his becoming one of the world’s best-known conductors. His 
chamber orchestra, theAcademy of St Martin in the Fields <http://www.asmf.org/>
, not only inaugurated a fashion for long-winded ensemble titles, but shot 
straight to the top of its class, beating the Germans and Italians at their own 
game. To achieve this feat in Britain, a land not noted for its string playing, 
was extraordinary.

Recordings were vital to the success of the Academy of St Martin’s, which 
initially played only baroque music. When Marriner was invited by four 
colleagues to form the crack string band in 1958, he led it from the first desk 
asAdolf Busch 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748703296604576005193516575586> had 
done in the 1930s and 40s with his Chamber Players, and Felix Ayo was doing 
with I Musici. The original 12 musicians wanted the chance to make music 
democratically, as they suffered enough in their “day jobs” from the tyrannies 
of conductors.

The group, which drew on Marriner’s experience of playing in such chamber 
orchestras as the Jacques (founded by Reginald Jacques) and the Boyd Neel, met 
initially in his flat. But their keyboard player, John Churchill, who was 
director of music at the classical 18th-century church in Trafalgar Square, 
suggested they should give five concerts at St Martin’s in the 1958-59 season. 
The viola player Michael Bowie came up with the title Academy. The initial 
series went well, the BBC took note and a more ambitious series began on 13 
November 1959, now considered the Academy’s real starting point.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fsir-neville-marriner-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f1cb6bfe0f59cdb67cef23ab12198abe08fe6fb%2F0_204_5192_3115%2F5192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Neville%20Marriner%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fsir-neville-marriner-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Neville%20Marriner%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fsir-neville-marriner-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f1cb6bfe0f59cdb67cef23ab12198abe08fe6fb%2F0_204_5192_3115%2F5192.jpg>
 Neville Marriner, left, playing the violin in the mid-1960s. Photograph: Erich 
Auerbach/Getty Images 
Louise Dyer, an Australian sheep farmer and entrepreneur who ran the 
characterful record label L’Oiseau Lyre, was impressed by the first concert and 
offered a contract for six records. On 25 and 26 March 1961 the Academy 
assembled in Conway Hall to record works by Corelli, Torelli, Locatelli, 
Albicastro and Handel. Marriner had to buy gut E-strings because the violins 
sounded too shrill in the hall’s acoustic. Each player received £5, with no 
promise of royalties. Issued in 1962, the LP was well received, and that July a 
second programme was set down in Walthamstow Assembly Hall, east London. When 
Dyer died in 1962, Harley Usill’s enterprising Argo label took over the Academy.

The group’s LPs did so well that Marriner, with encouragement and coaching 
from the LSO’s conductor Pierre Monteux, began to exchange his bow for the 
baton. The Academy soon expanded to a full chamber orchestra and, with major 
studio contracts from Decca and later EMI, Philips and Sony, eventually became 
the most recorded orchestra of all, covering a vast repertoire from the Baroque 
to the moderns.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMQds1Jf5ZFQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMQds1Jf5ZFQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DMQds1Jf5ZFQ&media=>
 Sir Neville Marriner conducting 
By 1969 Marriner could give up playing in other orchestras and work full time 
with the Academy. The ultimate professional, he was able to attract the best 
players because they were aware that he knew what he was doing. Academy 
recordings were musicologically sound and technically polished. Thurston Dart 
played the harpsichord on some of them, even during his final illness, and 
soloists such asAlan Loveday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/02/alan-loveday-obituary> and Iona 
Brown 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/news/2004/jun/10/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries> 
– who in 1978 became Marriner’s successor in directing from the violin – lent 
further lustre to the lineup.

The Academy also toured worldwide and appeared at the large festivals, making 
a big impact at Salzburg under Marriner in 1982. In 1990 alone, the orchestra 
gave 114 concerts outside the UK with Marriner, and in 1993 it won a Queen’s 
award for export achievement. Meanwhile, in 1969 Marriner had taken over the 
Los Angeles Chamber Orchestra, which took him to California twice a year until 
1987.

Born in Lincoln to Herbert, a carpenter, and Ethel (nee Roberts), Marriner was 
taught the violin and piano by his father before opting for the violin and 
studying with Frederick Mountney. He was educated at Lincoln school and entered 
the Royal College of Music in London on a scholarship in 1939. His studies with 
Edward Elgar’s friend Billy Reed were disrupted by second world war service in 
Army reconnaissance (1941-43), but on being invalided out, after five months in 
hospital, he went back to the RCM. He then spent a year at the Paris 
Conservatoire, studying with the virtuoso violinist René Benedetti. After a 
year teaching music at Eton, he joined the Martin Quartet in 1949 as second 
fiddle to the Canadian violinist David Martin.

An even more powerful influence was Dart, in whose Jacobean Ensemble he played 
from 1951; with Dart and such enterprises as the American Vanguard record 
label, he was in at the beginning of the modern “early music” movement. He also 
founded the Virtuoso String Trio. But he earned much of his living playing in 
London orchestras: he was in the Philharmonia when Arturo Toscanini came to 
conduct in 1952 and he joined the LSO in 1954 as principal second violin, a 
post he held until 1969. In 1971 he made his debut with theNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> Chamber Orchestra. He worked 
with the Gulbenkian Orchestra in Lisbon and the Israel Chamber Orchestra in Tel 
Aviv, and in 1973 conducted the inaugural concerts of the Australian Chamber 
Orchestra in Sydney.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeM11qCS8kvc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeM11qCS8kvc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeM11qCS8kvc&media=>
 Sir Neville Marriner conducting 
In 1977 he made his New York Philharmonic debut with a Mozart programme; and 
he conducted the Detroit Symphony Orchestra a good deal. He also worked in 
Britain with the Northern Sinfonia from 1971, and from 1979 to 1987 was in 
charge of the Minnesota Orchestra. At the same time he conducted regularly in 
Germany, notably with the Stuttgart Radio Symphony Orchestra (1986-89).

From the late 70s he occasionally tackled opera, in both theatre and studio, 
and he mastered the central choral repertory: from 1975 the Academy had an 
associated chorus, founded by Laszlo Heltay. More recently Marriner freelanced, 
but in all the phases of his career he kept in touch with the Academy, only 
handing the music director’s baton to fellow violinist Joshua Bell in 2011, 
when he became the Academy’s life president. In 2014 Decca issued a 28-disc box 
of recordings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/13/neville-marriner-conductor-academy-st-martins>
 that he made from 1961 to 1982 for L’Oiseau-Lyre, Argo and ASV.

Marriner was not a “deep” conductor, but he was a very good one. His style 
mirrored his outward appearance, which was neat and dapper, and his manner, 
which was self-deprecating in an English way. If he lacked the ability of the 
greatest orchestral directors to see and convey a work as one massive entity, 
he was able to give each movement of a symphony or concerto a convincing shape.

His Bach, Vivaldi, Handel, Haydn and Mozart were buoyant and graceful; he 
brought expertise and intuitive understanding to 20th-century British string 
music; and some of his recordings of large works, such as Haydn’s Creation or 
Mozart’s Così Fan Tutte, have a sheen and glow that will keep them selling for 
years to come. It would be hard to beat his accompaniment to Viktoria Mullova 
in the Mendelssohn Violin Concerto.

For most of the 50s he taught the violin at the RCM, and he later helped many 
fledgling conductors. He was appointed CBE in 1979, knighted in 1985 and made 
Companion of Honour in 2015.

His first marriage to the cellist Diana Carbutt, by whom he had two children, 
Andrew, a clarinettist, who often worked with his father, and Susie, a writer, 
ended in divorce. In 1957 he married Elizabeth Mary Sims, known as Molly, whose 
hard work in the struggling early years of the Academy played a major role in 
its success.

Marriner is survived by Molly, Andrew, Susie, three grandsons, Douglas, 
Matthew and Milo, and a great-grandson, Frederick.
Tully Potter

John Amis writes: Not exactly the Algonquin, but a pleasant, cheap and not 
nasty eating place next door to the old Mercury theatre in Notting Hill Gate, 
west London, was where a handful of musos met most days for lunch in the 40s 
and 50s. Neville was there with his first wife, Diana, the broadcasterAntony 
Hopkins <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/06/antony-hopkins> and the 
soprano Alison Purves, the violinists Alan Loveday (soloist and leader of the 
Academy), Olive Zorian (the quartet leader, the leader of Benjamin Britten’s 
orchestra, and my wife), and sometimes Neville’s teacher and guru, the great 
Albert Sammons. Talk at lunch was funny and gossipy. Neville was sharp-edged, a 
good driver, a handyman, nifty at tennis, always lucky and good at cards. With 
the horn player Barry Tuckwell and clarinettist Gervase de Peyer, Neville (as 
principal second violin) was one of the new generation of players in the London 
Symphony Orchestra. They were too brilliant and reliable to get the sack, but 
they must have got near dismissal at times because they dared to challenge 
conductors.

During the war the Martin String Quartet, led by David Martin with Neville as 
its second violinist, had gigged for the Council for the Encouragement of Music 
and the Arts, playing in some places that had never had concerts.

It was a great moment for the quartet to be invited to play in the Aldeburgh 
Festival. Britten requested them to play a favourite quartet of his, the Verdi. 
This quartet has a finale that begins with a fugue, led by the second violin. 
Just before going on stage David said: “Now Neville, for God’s sake, don’t 
start off the fugue too fast.” Neville responded by beginning the fugue too 
slowly by half. Britten was not best pleased.

On marrying Diana, who became a bookseller specialising in incunabula, Neville 
found himself living in the G&T belt, sometimes finding that he was the only 
one not wearing an old school tie.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fsir-neville-marriner-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec737ac28371e868de6e26f5f434cb479c973273%2F0_139_5768_3461%2F5768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Neville%20Marriner%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fsir-neville-marriner-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Neville%20Marriner%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F02%2Fsir-neville-marriner-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec737ac28371e868de6e26f5f434cb479c973273%2F0_139_5768_3461%2F5768.jpg>
 Sir Neville Marriner at his home in London in 2008. Photograph: Sarah Lee for 
the Guardian 
Then came the request from his friend John Churchill to give a recital at St 
Martin in the Fields. He found that several of his string-playing friends had 
received a similar request. They all had to refuse because, straight our of 
college, they had not enough repertoire. Then Neville had the bright idea of 
them combining to make a tiny orchestra, where they would concentrate on 
not-too-demanding music of the 18th century – ice-cream composers, Neville 
called them: Corelli, Torelli, Albicastro, Vivaldi. Thus the Academy was born.

Fast forward to the new century. Neville’s hair had at last gone white, still 
playing a good game of tennis in his 80s in the garden court of the cottage on 
the Dorset-Devon border where he lived with his second wife, Molly. A good 
cook, a quick packer and a voracious reader, she shaped his career, managed his 
life and was good at social affairs. Neville no longer directed the Academy but 
had dates as a conductor, sometimes in three continents in as many weeks.

It was a life of music-making of the highest quality that gave pleasure to 
many. And if he excelled in the lighter classics on the whole, he could on 
occasion dig deep: he recorded a thrilling Eroica symphony, his Metamorphosen 
challenges Klemperer and Karajan in its emotional depth; and his set of the 
Handel Concerto Grossos is still the most satisfying in the catalogue.

• Neville Marriner, conductor and violinist, born 15 April 1924; died 2 
October 2016

• John Amis died in 2013

 * This article was amended on 4 October 2016. It originally said that the 
28-disc box released by Decca in 2014 included all the recordings that Marriner 
made from 1961 to 1982 for L’Oiseau-Lyre, Argo and ASV. There were other such 
recordings that it did not include.  