
“I’ve lost count of the number of times Ivan threatened to resign.” Thus is an 
adviser to David Cameron quoted in Tim Shipman’s indispensable book on the EU 
referendum,All Out War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/21/all-out-war-tim-shipman-the-brexit-club-owen-bennett-bad-boys-of-brexit-arron-banks-review>
. And now, at last,Sir Ivan Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
 has made good on his threats, stepping down from his position as the UK’s top 
diplomat in Brussels.

That he was due to leave in November does not soften the blow to Theresa May, 
nor diminish the embarrassment to her government. This year is all-important to 
her long-term Brexit strategy, and it has begun with an abrupt departure that 
she could well have done without.

Consider: the PM and her ministers await the supreme court’s ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/uk-supreme-court> on parliament’s right to 
debate article 50 – which she has repeatedly pledged will be triggered before 
the end of March. Before Christmas, she indicated to theCommons liaison 
committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/theresa-may-stumbles-on-a-question-of-thought>
 that she would be setting out a framework for Britain’s departure from the EU 
in the first months of 2017 – presumably, though not necessarily, in a speech. 
Hernew year message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2017/jan/01/theresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video>
 emphasised the need for national unity, as remainers and Brexiteers continue 
to squabble and fragment into groupuscules.

Some say Rogers signed his own P45 when he told ministers last year that a new 
trade deal might take a decade

Behind the scenes, No 10 officials have been engaged in heavy lifting to 
prepare for the official two-year negotiations with our soon-to-be former EU 
partners. To this end, the talented British ambassador to Brazil,Alex Ellis 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/people/alex-ellis>, takes over as director 
general in the Department for Exiting the European Union on 19 January. By 
temperament, May is a politician who likes smooth surfaces and calm 
deliberation. In this context, the sudden departure of Rogers is a brick thrown 
into the pond of her serenity.

Westminster conspiracists are busily concocting elaborate theories about 
“Ivexit”. Some say that Rogers signed his own P45 when he told ministers last 
year that a new trade deal with the EU might take adecade to conclude 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/eu-politicians-believe-trade-deal-could-take-decade-no-10-is-warned>
. Others whisper that personality was more important in this case than policy: 
that Sir Ivan, appointed by Cameron in 2013, could not get on with the new No 
10 and would never have lasted until November.

The truth probably lies somewhere between the two. A diplomat so well-versed 
in the silken culture and mores of Brussels – and so at home there – was always 
going to clash with a government embroiled in the atavistic politics of Brexit.

UK ambassador to EU quits amid Brexit row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
As a former home secretary, May is perfectly well-acquainted with the nuances 
and complexities of the EU. But she expected and required more from the UK’s 
permanent representative than to be reminded querulously of the obstacles to 
exit. As a prime minister who owes her job to a referendum that brought down 
her predecessor, she wanted the top diplomat in Brussels to offer solutions – 
and fast.

That said, Sir Ivan has long been a favourite (and useful) whipping boy for 
senior Tories. It suited them to roll their eyes, accuse him of going native 
and blame the failure of this or that negotiation upon his lack of patriotic 
fervour. Now they won’t have Rogers to kick around.

He will be replaced quickly enough, doubtless by someone billed by No 10 as a 
“safe pair of hands” – code for “more competent”. May will weather this 
particular squall. But a troubling question will linger and loom over the 
Brexit talks long after Sir Ivan has moved on: what if he was right?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fnigel-farage-calls-for-more-resignations-after-sir-ivan-rogers-quits-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigel%20Farage%20calls%20for%20more%20resignations%20after%20Sir%20Ivan%20Rogers%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fnigel-farage-calls-for-more-resignations-after-sir-ivan-rogers-quits-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigel%20Farage%20calls%20for%20more%20resignations%20after%20Sir%20Ivan%20Rogers%20quits%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fnigel-farage-calls-for-more-resignations-after-sir-ivan-rogers-quits-video&media=>
Nigel Farage calls for more resignations after Sir Ivan Rogers quits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/03/nigel-farage-calls-for-more-resignations-after-sir-ivan-rogers-quits-video> 