
Sir Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> has admitted to 
having reservations about accepting a knighthood because he was worried it 
would “distract” him from his goal of remaining the world’s No1 player and 
winning further grand slam titles.

Sport picture of the day: Andy Murray warms up in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/picture/2017/jan/10/sport-picture-of-the-day-andy-murray-warms-up-in-australia>
Murray received his knighthood in the new year’s honours list on the back of a 
sensational year for the Scot, one in which hereplaced Novak Djokovic at the 
summit of tennis’s global rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/05/andy-murray-becomes-tennis-world-no1-milos-raonic-walkover-paris>
,won Wimbledon for a second time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/andy-murray-wimbledon-make-sure-enjoys-title-miles-raonic-final-tennis>
,won another Olympic gold medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/andy-murray-beats-juan-martin-del-potro-rio-2016>
 and wasnamed BBC’s Sport Personality of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/andy-murray-wins-bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-2016>
. At 29 he became the youngest person in living memory, as well as the first 
active tennis player, to become a knight but came close to turning down the 
opportunity after it was presented to him via an email during a training camp 
in Miami last month.

“I got it when I woke up in the morning, just saying that I had been offered 
and [asking if I] would like to accept,” Murray said in an interview with The 
Times. “Obviously you think about something like that because it’s a big 
honour, but with that comes a little bit more responsibility. I’m still very 
young, I’m still competing and obviously don’t want anything to distract me or 
affect my performance on the court.”

Murray, whose 28-match, five-tournament winning streak came to an end on 
Saturday when he lost to Djokovic in the final of the Qatar Open, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/07/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-qatar-open-match-report>
 decided to accept the knighthood after speaking to people around him, 
including mother Judy and wife Kim but not brother Jamie, who found out only on 
the night of the announcement.

“I kept it fairly quiet,” said Murray, before going on to admit that he has 
found being referred to as ‘sir’ awkward. “A few of the players have been 
chatting to me about it and asking what do we call you,” he added. “Andy is 
fine”.

Meanwhile, Murray has strengthened his position as world No1 despite the 
weekend defeat to Djokovic in Doha due to the nature of the rankings.

Djokovic won the Qatar Open title last year and was defending 250 points so 
his tally remains the same while because Murray played in the Hopman Cup – a 
non-ranking exhibition event – the 150 points he won for finishing runner-up is 
added to his total, extending the gap to 630 points.

Murray is therefore guaranteed to be top seed for the Australian Open, which 
starts next week.
 