
STICKY TIMES

Having spent a good few years making a strong play for the highly coveted 
title of World’s Funniest Football Club, Arsenal have been toning down their 
act recently. There was a time when they had them rolling in the aisles and 
looked certain to be rewarded with a spot on Live at the Apollo, with critics 
raving about the routine that featured Wojciech Szczesny and Emmanuel Eboué 
trying to carry a pane of glass across their own penalty area during a match 
against Chelsea, only for playful scamp Sébastian Squillaci to nip in and tie 
their shoelaces together, a prank with disastrous consequences. Glass 
everywhere, another tap-in for Didier Drogba, 4-0 to Chelsea and it wasn’t even 
half-time. Brilliant. You couldn’t make that stuff up.

Ronald Koeman seeks Everton answers before transfer window opens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/ronald-koeman-everton-solution-transfer-window-arsenal>
But in a nod to noted Gunners fan and beloved Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, who 
famously decided back in 1976 that the possession of a sense of humour is 
immoral and wrong, Arsenal have become much more serious in 2016. That’s a 
disappointing development for fans of their old work, which was up there with 
the likes of Milligan, Cleese, Everett and Sessions, but good news for their 
chances of winning their first league title since 2004. They’ve had their game 
faces on all season, mostly keeping farce at bay, showing mettle in difficult 
moments and even avoiding their traditional November collapse, and they can 
return to the top of the table for at least 24 hours if they win at Everton on 
Tuesday night.

There’s a high probability of an Arsenal victory because, while the stony 
faces in the Goodison Park stands suggest otherwise, Everton have heroically 
been doing their bit to keep us entertained, with Ronald Koeman discovering 
that his defenders haven’t quite regained their confidence after experiencing a 
nervous breakdown under Bobby M last season. It’s one league win in 10 for 
Everton and Koeman is going to have a hard time justifying his £6m-a-year 
contract if Ramiro Funes Mori keeps slamming custard pies in Maarten 
Stekelenburg’s face. Everton defended miserably in Saturday’s 3-2 defeat at 
Watford and Koeman’sstill sore about it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/ronald-koeman-everton-solution-transfer-window-arsenal>
. “They got three goals and if you analyse them it’s not about football,” the 
Dutchman said. “The first is a long ball from the centre-back, a fight, a 
header, second ball, cross and goal. That’s difficult for us, that type of 
football. I understood the coach of Watford thought his team played like 
Barcelona on Saturday but I totally disagree.” Free comedy tip, Ronald: sarcasm 
is the lowest form of wit. The Fiver should know.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Gregg Bakowski from 7.45pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of Everton 2-2 Arsenal
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“Drink-driving is a serious crime and even though I was not intentionally 
consuming alcohol I accept the ban and fine and I would like to apologise for 
this situation” –Yaya Touré there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/yaya-toure-admits-to-drink-driving-but-denies-intentionally-consuming-alcohol-manchester-city>
, leaving The Fiver wondering how he didn’t deliberately imbibe and then drive 
while over the limit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fthe-fiver-everton-arsenal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d3822a71992c14931a70603737c6871a869823e%2F0_177_2272_1363%2F2272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Slamming%20custard%20pies%20in%20Maarten%20Stekelenburg%E2%80%99s%20face&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fthe-fiver-everton-arsenal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Slamming%20custard%20pies%20in%20Maarten%20Stekelenburg%E2%80%99s%20face&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fthe-fiver-everton-arsenal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d3822a71992c14931a70603737c6871a869823e%2F0_177_2272_1363%2F2272.jpg>
 Steam, not steaming. Photograph: Matt West/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
FIVER LETTERS


“I’m hoping it’s within your purview to entertain a complaint from an El 
Salvadoran-American from Brooklyn, USA! USA!! USA!!!. I’m a subscriber to the 
digital edition of The Guardian and I’ve been a Premier League fan for almost 
five years now. I never miss a Football Weekly podcast, etc. But I digress. One 
of the first things that first attracted me to the Premier League was the 
commentary. And I don’t just mean the accents. Although they’re quite 
enjoyable. I became totally turned off to American sports about 20 years ago. 
The commercials and constant idiotic drivel that passes for commentary drove me 
away. How refreshing it was to hear phrases like ‘pace on the wing’, ‘clinical 
finish’, ‘work rate’, ‘down tools’ and even single words such as ‘quality’, 
‘fixture’, ‘table’ and ‘pitch’. And ‘relegation’. What a concept! All of it a 
mixture of mystery and poetry befitting the land of Shakespeare. Justbrilliant! 
But there’s one phrase that really gets under my skin and irritates the hell 
out of me. It’s whenever someone says that a team ‘deserved to win’ when they 
haven’t actually won the match. Does the word ‘deserve’ have a different 
meaning in the UK, or what? The only time anyone should be allowed to say a 
team that has not outscored their opponent ‘deserved to win’, is when a referee 
clearly makes a bad call regarding the award of a penalty and the team loses 
the match as a result. That is it. Otherwise, if you don’t score more goals 
than the other team then you didn’t win and you didn’t deserve to win. You lost 
or it was a draw. Plain and simple. ‘Deserve’ ain’t got nuttin’ to do with it. 
Am I missing something? I don’t think so. Thank you for the opportunity to get 
that off my chest” – José E Gutiérrez.

“Can I be the first of 1,057 to offer consolation that this isn’t the only 
new-look fiver 
<https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2F5-animal-fat-bank-note-british-vegetarians-being-stupid-says-inventor&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEM_2E4MRfSKsdxjpB0NUpmPFw2WQ>
 that has fattened-up. With vomit-inducing content and a poorly considered 
appearance, I can only hope both go out of circulation as quickly as they 
appeared” – Alex Holmes (and no others).

“What is it with people and your new font? What’s not to like? It’s clear, 
slightly bold, no chance of misunderstanding … oh, OK, I see now” – Andy 
Birbeck.

“Why do you write that when Arsenal Wenger speaks he ‘parps’, ie sounds like a 
car horn? What car do you have? And why do you have a fixation with ‘do one’? A 
little slang goes a long way” – Roger Perry.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
also tweet The Fiver.Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … José 
E Gutiérrez.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/uk?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

He won the Ballon d’Or 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/cristiano-ronaldo-ballon-dor-fourth-lionel-messi>
 but is still feeling funky over those tax allegations. “Of course it has 
spoiled it a little bit,” he tooted. “I would be lying if I said it hadn’t. I’m 
not a hypocrite. I wasn’t pleased. The whole process in itself is hard and not 
only for me, but also for the people alongside me: my family, my son, all those 
who work with me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fthe-fiver-everton-arsenal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c418d7d4882580b91ca8e03760258f8a972e7e%2F0_0_3663_2267%2F3663.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Slamming%20custard%20pies%20in%20Maarten%20Stekelenburg%E2%80%99s%20face&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fthe-fiver-everton-arsenal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Slamming%20custard%20pies%20in%20Maarten%20Stekelenburg%E2%80%99s%20face&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fthe-fiver-everton-arsenal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37c418d7d4882580b91ca8e03760258f8a972e7e%2F0_0_3663_2267%2F3663.jpg>
 Ballon d’Or No4. Photograph: Angel Martinez/AFP/Getty Images 
Burnley boss Sean Dyche reckons the introduction of retrospective bans would 
rid football of diving within six months. “It’s gone too far. It’s ridiculous,” 
he growled. “Certain teams would have three or four players done immediately, 
from a warning in private to the manager, up to a three-game ban. It’s simple 
to officiate.”

Leicester’s Marc Albrighton is expecting the goals to flow from Jamie Vardy 
after his smiting of Manchester City. “He’s been the same old Jamie Vardy,”
cheered Albrighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/claudio-ranieri-leicester-city-two-big-battles-bournemouth-stoke-jamie-vardy>
. Uh-oh. “He’s a character, he’s confident, he’s everything you see out there. 
I’m sure Jamie will take confidence from that hat-trick and he’ll be on fire 
now.”

Chapecoense goalkeeper Danilo, who died in last month’s Colombian air crash, 
has posthumously beennamed Brazil’s player of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/danilo-chapecoense-goalkeeper-killed-plane-crash-brazil-player-of-the-year>
 after a vote by fans.

This is nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/afghan-boy-who-had-plastic-bag-messi-shirt-meets-his-idol>
.

A group of indignant County Durham schoolgirls have written to the FA 
complaining that a document aimed at increasing female participation in football
treats them like “brainless baby Barbies” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/schoolgirls-say-fa-paper-on-football-treats-them-like-brainless-baby-barbies>
. “If boys don’t need sweat towels we don’t need sweat towels. Yours angrily, 
Isabella (year 6),” read one part of the letter from pupils at Lumley junior 
school.

FA bods are getting it in the neck from Premier League overlord Richard 
Scudamore too, who’s less than chuffed at complaints about the league using its 
wealth to get its way. “It’s all a cheap shot, it’s all really unnecessary and 
I hope people see it for what it is,”he sniffed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/richard-scudamore-premier-league-football-association>
.

But, still, £400m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/football-association-clinches-400-million-nike-kit-deal-england-football-team>
!

STILL WANT MORE?

Pep, the alt-right, Michael Oliver’s Lynx shower gel and the Pengest Munch, 
together at last 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/dec/13/david-squires-on-pep-guardiola-tackling-and-manchester-city>
. Nicely done, David Squires.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fthe-fiver-everton-arsenal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc63c03c93911947e2d2d65531336666c9022d7ba%2F127_340_904_542%2F904.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Slamming%20custard%20pies%20in%20Maarten%20Stekelenburg%E2%80%99s%20face&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fthe-fiver-everton-arsenal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Slamming%20custard%20pies%20in%20Maarten%20Stekelenburg%E2%80%99s%20face&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fthe-fiver-everton-arsenal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc63c03c93911947e2d2d65531336666c9022d7ba%2F127_340_904_542%2F904.jpg>
 For starters. Illustration: David Squires for the Guardian 
Millwall are one step closer to a gentrification-led exit from their own 
backyard.Barney Ronay has the skinny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/13/millwall-the-den-development-compulsory-purchase-renewal>
.

The return of the  kin  … Phil Jones. By Jamie Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/13/phil-jones-manchester-united-old-trafford-england-ferguson-crystal-palace>
.

Paolo Bandini takes us through the latest battle to be Serie A runners-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/13/radja-nainggolan-strikes-to-give-roma-the-edge-as-juventuss-closest-challengers>
.

The state of Valencia. By Sid Lowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/valencia-sinking-la-liga-sid-lowe>
.

The state of Hamburg and Wolfsburg. By Rafa Honigstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/12/sv-hamburger-wolfsburg-bundesliga>
.

The last 16 of Big Cup gets a Michael Cox-ing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/12/champions-league-last-16-analysis>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>!

‘AND THEN THE NIGHTMARES COME’
 