
You certainly won't have a chance to miss the British weather if you visit 
Seattle: the drizzle will follow you there, and the locals will know you're an 
outsider straight away, since only tourists carry umbrellas. You'll also need 
to be able to recognise your skinny lattes from your tall mochas if you want to 
avoid being rumbled; in this town, mumbling 'small cappuccino, please' just 
doesn't cut the mustard. And if you do try to avoid Starbucks and go somewhere 
independent, the chances are you'll walk in and be greeted with a sign saying 
'We proudly serve Starbucks coffee'.

I began my trip with a five-hour 'Sightseeing in Seattle' tour. A look at a 
map will show you that Seattle is divided into districts, each one with its own 
individual character. Walking around is easy, and if your feet get tired, the 
public transport is free in the centre during the day, but $45 bought me a 
drive through all the districts and some of the city's parks, with other 
highlights including the Salmon Ladder, the Ballard Locks (linking Puget Sound 
to Lakes Union and Washington), a look at the houseboats made popular by 
Sleepless in Seattle, and a drive across a floating bridge to view Lake 
Washington itself. The tour guides will pick you up from any of the major 
hotels in downtownSeattle <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/seattle>, and 
drop you off wherever you like in the early evening: it's the only way to 
travel.

After this overview of the city, you can head out to explore on foot the parts 
which have taken your fancy. During the day, Pike Street Market is a must: you 
can listen to the singing fishmongers and pick up something tasty for 
breakfast. It has all the ingredients of a perfect market; great food, a view 
of the lake and mountains, flowers, music shops and galleries. For more serious 
shopping, take a walk to the nearby Westlake Centre and then hop on the 
Monorail, which will drop you off at the Seattle Centre in a couple of minutes.

Once there, you can while away an afternoon at the Experience Music Project 
(EMP), a strange building that apparently looks like Jimi Hendrix's smashed 
guitar from the air, although it's impossible to know that from ground level. 
Inside, the building is devoted to music, like the city itself (grunge was born 
in Seattle). If music's not your thing, there are plenty of other museums and 
galleries to visit in the city, and theSeattle <http://www.seeseattle.org/> 
website sometimes offers discount vouchers.

Next to the EMP stands the world-famous Space Needle. At 520 feet above 
sea-level you're in for an amazing view and, weather permitting, you should 
check it out once by day and once in the evening. If you are extremely lucky, 
you might even catch a glimpse of the stunning Mt Rainier (an active volcano in 
a national park). There is a revolving restaurant at the top: stop off if it 
isn't busy. I have to admit that the highlight of this particular jaunt for me, 
however, was overhearing a local say to her friend, 'Wow! Some of these people 
have come from a long way. Some of them are, like, from another state!'.

To the south-west of the city lies its oldest section, Pioneer Square. From 
here you can choose to take Bill Spiegel's legendary underground tour of the 
city or just wander around the boutiques and galleries. On the first Thursday 
evening of every month the galleries in this area hold late viewings (complete 
with canap√©s and music) and it's a great way to spend a couple of hours before 
going to eat.

You can catch a state ferry from Pier 52 on Elliot Bay, so carry your passport 
with you in case you feel the urge to hop on board and sail off to British 
Columbia. Alternatively, sit in the restaurants, eat freshly caught seafood and 
take in an amazing view of the Bay at night.

The place to hang out in the evenings is Broadway on Capitol Hill, to the 
north-east. I headed out there for early dinner at the Gravity Bar in Broadway 
market, and was taken aback by the choice from the juice bar and the incredibly 
tasty vegetarian food: this district is like a cleaner version of Camden Town. 
Alternatively, you can head out to Fremont for a glimpse of the Fremont troll 
and Lenin's statue, and a peep at a district that sees itself as funky and 
bohemian.

If you go to the parks, keep an eye out for bald headed eagles' nests. This 
city is green enough to attract wildlife and you also have the option to go 
whale watching or visit the dormant volcanoes or parks and spend time there so 
you have plenty of opportunity to make the most of your stay there.

Seattle is big enough and busy enough to keep any city-lover occupied - and 
it's right in the middle of some spectacular natural scenery, should you feel 
the need to escape. It's ideal for a long weekend stopover, but do yourself a 
favour and give yourself more time: you won't have any trouble filling it.

Useful links Washington State Tourism <http://www.tourism.wa.gov/> 
Mt Rainier National Park <http://www.nps.gov/mora/>
Whale watching <http://www.travel-in-wa.com/OUTDOOR/eco.html>
Experience Music Project 
<http://theguardian.com/travel/activities/culture/story/0,7447,414355,00.html>
Ballard Locks <http://www.ci.seattle.wa.us/tour/locks.htm> 
Museum of Flight <http://www.museumofflight.org/>
 