
After the seismic shocks of 2016, the year draws to a close with the folk of 
Richmond Park serving up something that feels more normal. They have given us a
Lib Dem byelection upset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/lib-dems-unseat-zac-goldsmith-in-richmond-park-byelection>
. The airwaves thrum to talk of “a shockwave” for the prime minster from 
triumphant Lib Dems. The response from the government is the customary shrug 
that one byelection “changes nothing”. It is like the old days again. Before 
2010 and the Lib Dem decision to go into coalition with the Conservatives, it 
was a deeply rooted tradition of British politics that disgruntled voters 
expressed their discontent with the larger parties by surging to the amber 
crowd at byelections. The Lib Dem byelection shock was one of the release 
valves of our unwritten constitution. It was as stitched into the fabric of 
British political life as the state opening of parliament.

Sometimes, the consequences have been worthy of the description “sensation”. 
When theTories lost Eastbourne to the Lib Dems in October 1990 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eastbourne_by-election,_1990>, it finally forced 
a conclusion on the minds of Tory MPs. The next general election was lost for 
so long as Margaret Thatcher remained leader. Eastbourne was a significant 
contributory factor to her defenestration from Number 10 a few weeks later.

The result from this leafy patch of south-west London is not a category one 
byelection. It is not going to change the prime minister. Richmond Park belongs 
to a lesser, but still significant, tier of byelections. These are results that 
change the political atmospherics and may be a harbinger of deeper realignments 
to come.

Tim Farron joyously proclaims: “We’re back.” It certainly looks true that the 
Lib Dems have returned as a force to be reckoned with by the other parties in 
some areas of the country. Under the radar of most of the media, Mr Farron’s 
party has been displaying twitches of life since the summer. They have clocked 
up gains in local council contests and secured a 19% swing in their favour at 
the expense of the Tories at theWitney byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/21/witney-byelection-lib-dems-tories-slashed-majority>
. The even better swing achieved by Sarah Olney in Richmond Park is the best 
evidence yet that the Lib Dems can attract support from voters in prosperous 
areas that want to stay in the European Union. Their decision to frame the 
Richmond Park contest as a mini-referendum on Brexit was clearly an astute call 
in an affluent seat that voted 69-31 for Remain. It was an additional bonus 
that the Tory incumbent was an Outer and Zac Goldsmith’s disguise as an 
“independent” was so see-through.

This will lift Lib Dem morale and likely boost the attention they receive from 
the media. That will influence the shape of the national conversation, 
especially about Brexit. The producers of theToday programme may be less 
inclined to groan when his publicists offer Mr Farron for interview, and 
bookers forQuestion Time may now be more minded to include a Lib Dem on the 
panel.

It will encourage the Lib Dems to double-down on their strategy of being the 
unequivocal voice of British pro-Europeans. According to the pollsters, only 
about a quarter of the total electorate say they agree with the Lib Dem call 
for a second referendum on Brexit. So that is a niche appeal. But for the Lib 
Dems, that is a very substantial niche, much larger than their current national 
poll rating.

I am warier of the claim that Richmond Park advertises the advantages of 
trying to broker the agreement of a broader “progressive alliance” to take on 
the Tories and Ukip. The Greens were smart to stand aside from this byelection. 
They weren’t going to win and their vote would have been squeezed. Their reward 
for getting behind Ms Olney is to bask in some reflected glory. There were 
Labour figures who urged their party to do the same and stay out of a contest 
they could not win. This was rebuffed by the party’s leadership. When this 
byelection was first called,I suggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/29/endorsed-by-ukip-backed-by-tories-independent-zac-goldsmith-is-a-fake>
 that this probably wouldn’t make much difference because British voters have 
loads of experience of byelections and understand the dynamics. So it proved. 
The Labour vote was crunched down to a deposit-losing level as Labour 
supporters switched behind the Lib Dem. Labour attracted fewer votes than it 
has members in the seat.

This indicates that Labour supporters are once again prepared, as they were 
not during the coalition years, to lend their votes to the Lib Dems when that 
is the best option for defeating a Tory. Tactical voting is back. It may also 
suggest that a “progressive alliance” is not going to come about as a result of 
a grand bargain imposed from above by party leaders, especially not when there 
is so little enthusiasm for that idea at the top of Labour. If a “progressive 
alliance” does take form, it is more likely to be the result of something more 
organic growing from the bottom up at constituency level.

Richmond Park will not stop Brexit, but it does throw further grit into Mrs 
May’s already hellishly fraught calculations. After months when debate within 
her party has been dominated by the hard Brexiters, Tory pro-Europeans are 
perking up. They can cite the byelection as evidence that this is not an 
electoral one-way street for the Conservatives. Richmond Park suggests that 
many Remain voters are not reconciled to Brexit, they can channel their anger 
electorally at the expense of the Tories and will be even more likely to do so 
if Mrs May pursues the harder versions of divorce from the EU.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lib%20Dem%20Sarah%20Olney%20beats%20Zac%20Goldsmith%20to%20win%20Richmond%20Park%20byelection%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lib%20Dem%20Sarah%20Olney%20beats%20Zac%20Goldsmith%20to%20win%20Richmond%20Park%20byelection%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video&media=>
Lib Dem Sarah Olney beats Zac Goldsmith to win Richmond Park byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/02/lib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video>
Her working majority in the Commons has just been reduced to 13, a reminder of 
the fragility of her position in parliament even before she has unveiled her 
plan for Brexit. Given the choice, no prime minister in full possession of her 
wits would want to embark on the most complex and contentious negotiation in 
our postwar history with such a precarious position in parliament. That argues 
for Mrs May cashing in her robust lead in the national polls and seeking a 
mandate while the economy is still relatively stable.

Against that is her aversion to risk and the substantial number of 
Conservative MPs who will fear a Lib Dem revival, especially in seats where 
there is a substantial Labour vote for Lib Dem challengers to squeeze. Quite a 
lot of the seats that the Lib Dems used to hold before the 2015 wipe-out now 
look winnable again. One clear consequence of Richmond Park is that 
Conservative MPs in Tory/Lib Dem marginals will become much more interested in 
the national poll rating of the Lib Dems. They will be watching that closely to 
see if the byelection win translates into a broader improvement in the party’s 
position.

It will give heart to Remainers, but they shouldn’t lose their heads

Cheers for Ms Olney’s victory have not been confined to the ranks of her 
party. For non-Brexit Britain more generally, it has been a tonic in an 
otherwise bleak year. But pro-Europeans need to be careful not to overstretch 
their interpretations of this result. A Remain constituency voted for a Remain 
candidate. That will give heart to Remainers, but they shouldn’t lose their 
heads. A Leave constituency voting for a Remain candidate would be much more 
interesting because it would be evidence of remorse among Brexit voters. That 
day could come if the economic consequences of Brexit are nasty and/or the 
terms of the divorce are palpably to the disadvantage of Britain. That day is 
not here yet.

Many parts of Britain are not at all like Richmond Park. This Thursday, we 
will get the result of another byelection, the contest inSleaford and North 
Hykeham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/nov/30/sleaford-lincolnshire-brexit-byelection-young-video>
, a very different part of England. I am not taking much risk with my 
reputation as a forecaster when I confidently predict that the Lib Dems will 
not win this Lincolnshire seat. Its vote in the referendum was a near mirror 
image of Richmond Park. Sleaford and North Hykeham cast 62-38 for Leave. Much 
of the interest here is whether Ukip can start making good on the claims of its 
new leader, Paul Nuttall, that the party can hoover up working-class Labour 
voters. Labour was second in the seat at the general election, with Ukip less 
than 1,000 votes behind. If Ukip overtakes Labour, it will be panic time among 
the party’s MPs. Many are already fearful that Labour will be scrunched from 
both ends as the Lib Dems steal middle-class, pro-Remain voters in the south 
and the cities while Ukip eats their working-class, pro-Brexit voters in the 
north, the Midlands and Wales.

A strong performance by Ukip in the Lincolnshire contest will have more people 
asking whether we are in the process of a big realignment of British politics. 
Is the old divide between left and right being transcended by a new faultline 
between Remainers and Outers?

The honest answer is that we don’t yet know. All we are doing at the moment is 
gathering clues. What we can say is who stands to lose and who to gain if this 
is happening. That polarisation would help the Lib Dems, the unequivocal party 
of Remain, and profit Ukip, the united party of Leave. For the larger parties, 
both split over Brexit, it would have nightmarish implications. For the Tories, 
it would be bad. For Labour, it would be worse. I’m not going to guess what 
result we will get from Sleaford and North Hykeham. I do suggest it will be 
worth staying up for.
 