
There is a lot of fake news around on social media these days, but there is a 
specific reason why we cannot be 100% certain that the owner of Snapchat has 
filed for an initial public offering (IPO), or flotation. Regulations in the US 
allow companies with revenues of less than $1bn (£800m) to keep the process 
private in its early stages. Snap, as the parent is called, falls into that 
category, thus the plan to go public has not been announced, merelyhinted at 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/15/snapchat-ipo-video-app-worth>
.

Hold on, you might say, if Snapchat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/snapchat> isn’t even bringing in 
$1bn-a-year in revenue how can it possibly be worth the rumoured $20bn-$25bn? 
Well, quite. This IPO takes us back to a world of hype in which heroic 
assumptions are made about a social media newcomer’s ability to attract 
advertising dollars.

Last time it was Twitter, which was going to be the next Facebook until it 
became clear it wasn’t. Twitter’s shares were priced at $26 at IPO in 2013, 
zoomed as high $70, but are now $19. The problem with Twitter as a vehicle for 
advertisers is exactlyas predicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2013/nov/06/twitter-ipo-madness-valuation>
: unlike Facebook, the medium is fast and furious and users tend to resent 
commercial intrusions.

Snapchat, which allows users to send disappearing messages from their 
smartphones, seems even less equipped to turn itself into an effective 
advertising billboard. Yet Wall Street seems similarly smitten by the statistic 
that Snapchat’s has 150 million daily users. It makes no sense. This is a 
four-year-old company with modest revenues (an estimated $350m for 2016) that 
is still creating its business model. Maybe it will be worth $20bn-$25bn if it 
can overcome the challenges – but the valuation would be absurd today.

Morrisons cosies up to Amazon

It’s a strange sort of “exclusivity” deal that allows you to jump into bed 
with whoever takes your fancy. But Morrisons insists itstie-up with Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/morrisons-expands-amazon-deal-offering-delivery-in-an-hour>
 doesn’t infringe upon the contract it signed with Ocado. In the new “Morrisons 
at Amazon” operation, it is acting as a wholesaler supplying the US titan. By 
contrast, Morrisons is the customer in the arrangement whereby Ocado operates 
the morrisons.com website.

Confused? One assumes David Potts, Morrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> chief executive, had his 
lawyers check every possible wrinkle before signing with Amazon. If he is 
indeed on solid ground, one can understand why Ocado’s share price tumbled 
8.5%. Life has become even trickier for the Hatfield-based technology whizzes.

Ocado still relies on one big supplier, Waitrose, for goods for its own online 
operation; but Waitrose operates a competing service and shows occasional signs 
of having itchy feet. Now Morrisons, the only firm to pay to use Ocado’s kit, 
is getting cuddly withAmazon <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon>.

On the plus side, “Morrisons at Amazon” seems aimed primarily at commuters who 
can’t be bothered to visit a shop on their way home and are willing to pay 
£6.99 to have their evening grub delivered within the hour. On the other hand, 
there is a free same-day offer for those prepared to wait a little longer and 
the range of Morrisons goods runs to “thousands” of lines. That, potentially, 
is more dangerous from Ocado’s point of view.

It is a trial, confined to “selected” postcodes in London and Hertfordshire, 
so could yet fizzle out. But it will probably make it harder forOcado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> to sell its services to those 
overseas retailers it has been wooing for ages. None has signed so far and now 
Morrisons has invented a new online model for supermarkets – being a wholesaler 
to Amazon.

Mind you, Potts shouldn’t spend too much time congratulating himself on his 
own cleverness. The point about being a wholesaler is that you can’t dictate 
retail prices. If Amazon tries to undercut Morrisons on Morrisons-branded 
goods, he has a problem. There is also a moral for all supermarkets: the 
Amazonian beast is inventive and intends to hang around.

RBS faces up to US Department for Justice

If freelance diplomat Nigel Farage wants to make himself properly useful maybe 
he could have a word with his American chums aboutRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>. The US 
Department for Justice will hit RBS with a fine of $5bn-$12bn, or possibly 
more, says James Leigh-Pemberton, head of the body that oversees the state’s 
stake in the bailed-out bank. The estimate tallies with the City’s guess of the 
penalty for mis-selling mortgage securities in the pre-crisis years.

Unfortunately, nobody’s diplomacy will make any difference. The justice 
department operates to its own rules and RBS is towards the back of the queue 
of miscreant banks, probably the worst place to be. The US banks settled first, 
for reasons that have never been explained.
 