
I knew Richard Rodney Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/richard-rodney-bennett> for only a little 
over 11 years, but his music has been part of my life from my early teens, when 
I was starting to write my first compositions.


He was a towering figure in British musical life. Premieres of his works were 
big events. He was acomposer, pianist and jazz musician 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/jul/02/richard-rodney-bennett-contemporary-music-guide>
 who was outrageously skilled in each of these categories. It seemed unfair 
that so much talent was given to just one man.

As a young and eager composer, I was obsessed with consuming as much music as 
I could get my hands on, and I even stole a score of Richard’s first symphony 
from my local library because I coveted it so much. I couldn’t get enough of 
his heady mix of strict serialism and sensuous orchestral sound. In the 1950s, 
he was one ofPierre Boulez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/10/pierre-boulez-appreciation-nicholas-kenyon-agent-provocateur>
’s few students; that alone was enough to give him god-like status. Then there 
was his translation – done with his friend, the pianistSusan Bradshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/feb/17/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries1>
 – of Boulez’s complex theoretical book on new music, a bible for young 
composers in the 60s.

So when I met him in a restaurant in New York just after 9/11, I was very 
nervous. Everyone, including my teacher and great friendOliver (Olly) Knussen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/15/when-oliver-knussen-benjamin-britten>
, told me we’d get on like a house on fire, but that made me even more 
apprehensive. What if we just didn’t hit it off?

What I remember from the first moment of eye contact was that Richard was a 
person I immediately felt comfortable with. I was dazzled by his amazing wit 
and humour. It’s a cliche, but here was somebody I felt I’d always known. Maybe 
it’s because I knew his music so well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Frichard-rodney-bennett-by-mark-anthony-turnage-total-immersion-barbican-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb07ba87b16bde08b96a364756856b71e0650af0e%2F0_97_1129_677%2F1129.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20much%20talent%20given%20to%20just%20one%20man%3A%C2%A0Richard%20Rodney%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Frichard-rodney-bennett-by-mark-anthony-turnage-total-immersion-barbican-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20much%20talent%20given%20to%20just%20one%20man%3A%C2%A0Richard%20Rodney%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Frichard-rodney-bennett-by-mark-anthony-turnage-total-immersion-barbican-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb07ba87b16bde08b96a364756856b71e0650af0e%2F0_97_1129_677%2F1129.jpg>
 ‘I couldn’t get enough of his music’ Mark Anthony Turnage on Richard Rodney 
Bennett. Photograph: Philip Gatward 
We met regularly in New York or London over the following years. He was and 
remains the funniest man I’ve ever met, never dull, always incisive and wise. 
In the first year of our friendship we emailed each other almost every day. He 
had this wicked way of writing that was sardonic but always kind. I would 
provoke him by just listing composers I knew would elicit a withering response 
because of what he considered their ineptitude. But when he loved a composer, 
such asWilliam Walton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/apr/01/symphony-guide-william-walton-first>
 orThea Musgrave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/feb/14/thea-musgrave-bbc-symphony-orchestra-barbican>
, he would be effusive in his praise. And if we started to talk about the 
conductorJohn Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/07/prom-67-john-wilson-orchestra-review-bernstein>
, you couldn’t stop him – Richard admired him greatly.

I saw him perform regularly, both solo and with other jazz singers. By his own 
admission, he didn’t possess the most spectacular singing voice, but his 
musical phrasing and the way he personalised each interpretation of every song 
is something I have rarely witnessed and will never forget.

Still, today, almost four years after his death, I miss him so much – his turn 
of phrase and his accent, with that slight American twang. I spent many hours 
grieving him at Olly’s house in Snape, Suffolk. We listened to a huge amount of 
his music that we knew, along with many new discoveries. There is so much 
incredible music he wrote across so many different genres, it’s almost 
bewildering. From numerous concerti for instruments from the guitar to 
saxophone, to chamber music and works for choirs – all composed with consummate 
skill. And all those film scores! Not justMurder on the Orient Express 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=myc3A4spmJQ>. I remember Oliver bought a rare 
copy of the film Figures in a Landscape and we marvelled at theinvention and 
modernity of the score <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pfhVndJ_1k4>. 

If he could read this now, he’d just say, “Oh Marky, don’t be silly,” and sigh 
enigmatically. What a talent, what a man.

 * The BBC Symphony Orchestra’s Total Immersion: Richard Rodney Bennett 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/r6rbj5/series/rhdg9r> is at the Barbican, London, 
on 27 November. Box office: 020-7638 8891.  