
People often ask me why I chose the cello. The answer is simple: in fact, the 
cello chose me.


 I attended a school with a strong choral tradition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/choral-music>. From a very early age, I sang 
in a choir and loved the wonderful collegiate feeling associated with group 
singing. I knew that music would always play an important part in my life and 
that I wanted to perform in front of an audience, but when I tried out the 
piano, the clarinet and, aged two and a half, the violin, I felt as if I had 
not found my right musical place. It was when I turned to the cello, however – 
at the age of four – that suddenly I felt immediately at home.The cello sound 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qWUDu1FpSIU> very closely recalls the human 
voice, so it felt instantly familiar to me: it seems to represent soprano, 
alto, tenor and bass voices all in one, a unifying quality which is very rare 
and special.

My other reason for loving this strange and beautiful instrument is that the 
cello just happens to fit my body shape very well. I felt comfortable with it 
from the very beginning. I have rather large hands with a wide span, a 
physicality much less suited to the violin (unlike my brother,Andrés 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/03/music-at-the-habsburg-court-review-capella-gabetta-umstatt-ragazzi-timmer-vivaldi>
, a fabulous violinist with whom I often perform).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqWUDu1FpSIU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqWUDu1FpSIU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqWUDu1FpSIU&media=>
 A taste of what’s to come …Sol Gabetta plays Elgar 
<https://youtu.be/qWUDu1FpSIU> 
I was struck by the delicate change of dynamics going on all the time in 
Elgar's score

What’s fascinating about the cello is its development throughout the ages. It 
had many lives before it become the modern instrument that we know today, such 
as viola da gamba and viola d’amore. Often regarded as the most “erotic” of 
stringed instruments, it was once known as the viola d’amore, which had 
sympathetic strings or resonance strings that vibrated in harmony with each 
other; “il love” represented by the strings being touched with the fingers and 
the bow.



While I admire and love the work of very many cellists who have gone before – 
from the titans of classical music such as Bach to Belgian Adrien-Francois 
Servals, Frenchman August Franchomme and more recently the Russian-born 
American cellist, Gregor Piatigorski – I’ve made a conscious decision not to 
have musical heroes. Instead, I have felt it important to find my own way and 
not to emulate someone else’s style or performance.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsol-gabetta-celebrates-the-cello-proms-2016-first-night-elgar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa00f59f353c42ca9f2c10a7cd788d53fde2fc088%2F0_0_2848_4288%2F2848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sol%20Gabetta%3A%20'The%20cello%20speaks%20with%20a%20human%20voice'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsol-gabetta-celebrates-the-cello-proms-2016-first-night-elgar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sol%20Gabetta%3A%20%27The%20cello%20speaks%20with%20a%20human%20voice%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsol-gabetta-celebrates-the-cello-proms-2016-first-night-elgar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa00f59f353c42ca9f2c10a7cd788d53fde2fc088%2F0_0_2848_4288%2F2848.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
I was all too aware of this, of course, in relation to the wonderful Elgar 
Cello Concerto with which I’ll have the honour of opening the BBC Proms 2016 
season, performing with the BBC Symphony Orchestra underSakari Oramo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/feb/23/oramo-new-bbcso-conductor>
. Elgar’s Cello Concerto is probably one of the most famous pieces of music in 
the world, yet when I embarked on my own recording career, I initially did not 
seek out this magnificent piece. As a young musician, I was aware too of the 
great legacy of the fabulousJacqueline du Pré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/from-the-archive-blog/2015/dec/01/jacqueline-du-pre-daniel-barenboim-interview-1969>
, who had made such a shattering and insightful reading of the work, and I knew 
that it would be important to bring my own energy to any future performance or 
recording. I could not resist for long, however, and as I got to know the piece 
intimately, I was struck by the delicate change of dynamics going on all the 
time in Elgar’s score and made that the cornerstone of my own interpretation. I 
think it is the very best concerto ever written for the cello: it is not just 
characterised by melancholy as many people tend to think, but rather there is a 
lot of fun in there too, especially in the fourth movement. While we still do 
not know enough aboutthe background to Elgar’s Cello Concerto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/dec/03/edward-elgar-cello-concerto-review-archive-1919>
 and much is left to speculation, we do know that the premiere was a 
catastrophe; that the conductor did not even want to rehearse the piece and 
that the whole experience left poor Elgar feeling disheartened and dispirited.

It is thrilling to see the BBC Proms give so much emphasis to the cello this 
year and I am delighted to see that there will be two world premieres for my 
beloved instrument this season –Huw Watkins’s Cello Concerto 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/e6bhn3>, and Charlotte Bray’s Falling in the Fire 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/eqcj5v>, both BBC commissions. I play both a 
Guadagnini <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giovanni_Battista_Guadagnini> with 
gut strings, dating from 1759, which has a warm, pure, almost transparent 
sound, and aGoffriller <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Matteo_Goffriller> which 
represents the other side of the cello sound range, being more muscular and 
robust.

I am moved time and again by how this instrument can sing: its soft, mellow 
sound represents a real grounding
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsol-gabetta-celebrates-the-cello-proms-2016-first-night-elgar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F744a4951bfc5c41404aa02713631cdd27f33c673%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sol%20Gabetta%3A%20'The%20cello%20speaks%20with%20a%20human%20voice'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsol-gabetta-celebrates-the-cello-proms-2016-first-night-elgar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sol%20Gabetta%3A%20%27The%20cello%20speaks%20with%20a%20human%20voice%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjul%2F14%2Fsol-gabetta-celebrates-the-cello-proms-2016-first-night-elgar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F744a4951bfc5c41404aa02713631cdd27f33c673%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Sol Gabetta with one of her beloved instruments. Photograph: Uwe Arens 
I am moved time and time again by this instrument and how it can sing in so 
many ways: while the violin carries a forward, brilliant sound and can soar to 
dizzy heights, for me the cello, with its softer, deeper, mellow sound, 
represents a real grounding; a safe base from which you have the freedom to go 
out and explore a magical world of sound.

 * Sol Gabetta performs the Elgar Cello Concerto at the First Night of the BBC 
Proms on 15 July <http://www.bbc.co.uk/events/ebgv2m#p040qk5y>. Sol Gabetta’s 
2CD set, Cello, was released on 8 July by Sony Classical 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Cello-featuring-Elgars-Concerto/dp/B01FLQTHL0/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1468512952&sr=8-1&keywords=sol+gabetta>
. Her new recording of the Elgar Cello Concerto with the Berlin Philharmonic 
and Sir Simon Rattle is due for release in the autumn.
 