
‘LAST WEEK I HAD THE STRANGEST DREAM, WHERE EVERYTHING WAS EXACTLY HOW IT 
SEEMED’

It takes only a cursory search of the maddeningly hyperactive entity known as 
Arsenal Twitter to read concerning suggestions that a conspiracy might be at 
work. Bayern in Big Cup! Again! Even though we didn’t even phone the group 
stage in this time! Why does nobody ever check those hot and cold balls? Not 
quite moon landings stuff and the only actual conspiracy, of course, is between 
Arsenal and the rest of Europe’s elite to ensure that this – along with an 
equally filling appetiser of PSG v Barcelona – is your lot year in, year out 
from hereon.

Arsenal drawn against Bayern Munich in Champions League last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/arsenal-drawn-against-bayern-munich-in-champions-league-last-16-draw>
It’s the European Super League you might not actually have wanted after all, 
but on the bright side there’s no guarantee it won’t be good fun. The scope for 
some “You guys again! Feel the force of this gif of a goal we once scored 
against you!” banter between the two club Twitter accounts is pretty broad. The 
promise of Arsenal heroically failing to chase down their first-leg deficit in 
the Round of Arsenal but doing so in such a manner that promises to definitely 
transform their season would also appear nailed on. But perhaps … and here’s 
the thing … Arsenal might even win this time, as Bayern have been a touch 
stuttery until the past couple of weeks and, while Carlo Ancelotti is a fine 
manager, his teams don’t quite have the identity that cows people into his 
thrall in the manner so often achieved by Pep Guardiola.

Playing at home second gives you a “psychological advantage”, according to 
Arsène Wenger, so something has clearly gone awry in Uefa’s cruel masterplan to 
evict Arsenal from the tournament yet again. All suitably amazing, intriguing, 
fascinating and all the other epithets stewed into meaninglessness by overuse 
when big guns are paired. Sevilla v Leicester is rather more novel, for the 
fact that Sevilla aren’t doing this in the Big Vase as much as the fact 
Leicester are here at all. And it is, when all is said and done, rather more 
pulse-racing than the match-ups in said Vase, whose major talking point appears 
to be the meeting of one expensive footballer and his much cheaper sibling. 
“Paul was already laughing and for sure his brother was also laughing,” was the 
glimpse afforded by José Mourinho into PogLife.

If golden eras had aligned, United v Saint-Étienne might have been one of 
those recurring Big Cup dreams come true – just like, say, Legia Warsaw v Ajax, 
which would once have felt like fair last-16 game on the highest stage but now 
just resembles a short stay of execution for somebody in the tier beneath. 
That’s the world we live in now, so it’s probably best not to whine overly at 
the broken record nature of Big Cup ties that a couple of decades of mass TV 
consumption has helped create and recreate. Let’s just sit back and enjoy the 
spectacles that unfold before us in February – and if you don’t want to know 
what happens next, just don’t wiki last season’s competition.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE TONIGHT

Join Nick Ames for coverage of Him v Lionel Messi and Them as the 2016 Ballon 
d’Or gong winner is announced. Coverage begins at around 6.30pm GMT. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“The pundits, former players most of them, forgot completely how it felt when 
they got criticised. Especially the Neville brothers; the one who was the 
manager he obviously should know that too much criticism never helps. But he is 
not interested in helping a Liverpool player I can imagine, but that makes the 
things he says not make more sense. He showed he struggled with the job to 
judge players so why do we let him talk about players on television?” –Jürgen 
Klopp’s a big fan of Gary Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/jurgen-klopp-attacks-neville-brothers-gary-phil-over-loris-karius-criticism>
, apparently.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffeel-the-force-of-this-gif-of-a-goal-we-once-scored-against-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fdb2cb4046df703d9ae4224a17c902feb36132d%2F0_163_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Something%20has%20clearly%20gone%20awry%20in%20Uefa%E2%80%99s%20cruel%20masterplan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffeel-the-force-of-this-gif-of-a-goal-we-once-scored-against-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Something%20has%20clearly%20gone%20awry%20in%20Uefa%E2%80%99s%20cruel%20masterplan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffeel-the-force-of-this-gif-of-a-goal-we-once-scored-against-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0fdb2cb4046df703d9ae4224a17c902feb36132d%2F0_163_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 An angry man, earlier. Photograph: Lindsey Parnaby/AFP/Getty Images 
FIVER LETTERS

“Giddy with festive vigour, I’ve just finished my list of Top 10 Terrible 
Things That Happened In 2016. Your typography tinkering came in at No7. 
(Recognition at last, eh?) It now takes me twice as long to not read The Fiver 
properly” – Jamie Harper.

“I’m looking forward to tomorrow’s letter from a group of old white men 
complaining thata group of old white men are in charge  
<https://www.google.com/url?q=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffootball-association-premier-league-parliamentary-committee-reform&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNGS-t7ZRicsQ5u5UMikqd6ETagxdg>
of the Vatican and that the Pope is Catholic” – Noble Francis.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
also tweet The Fiver.Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … 
Noble Francis.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/uk?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

NEWS, BITS AND BOBS

The Old Trafford boo boys are wasting their time by heckling Marouane Fellaini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/marounae-fellaini-can-deal-with-being-booed-by-manchester-united-fans-insists-phil-jones>
, reckons Phil Jones. “It is disappointing but he is a strong boy. He is 
mentally strong to cope with that, don’t worry,” Jones blootered.

Slaven Bilic has spoken of his grief following the twin bomb attack that 
killed 38 and injured more than 160 outside Besiktas’s stadium on Saturday night
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/west-ham-slaven-bilic-besiktas-bomb-attack-liverpool>
. The former Besiktas manager said: “It is very sad what is happening in one of 
the best cities and one of the best countries. The people are so warm and 
friendly and it is tearing me apart. Big condolences to the families of the 
victims.”

Three former chairmen are among the elderly white men claiming the FA is run 
by elderly white men and calling for government reform to the governing body. 
ButArsène Wenger thinks they should board the Do One Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/arsene-wenger-hits-out-at-idea-of-a-regulator-in-english-football-fa>
. “Football and politics should not deal together,” he parped. “There should be 
no government intervention, no legislation.”

Ronald Koeman reckons everybody at Everton is under-performing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/ronald-koeman-admits-everton-have-been-underperforming-during-poor-run>
, which seems a bit harsh on prolific programme sellers, jaunty mascots and 
dutiful stewards.

Ctrl C and Ctrl V’s Henrikh Mkhitaryan should be fit for Manchester United’s 
boxing day clash with Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/jose-mourinho-henrikh-mkhitaryan-fit-boxing-day-manchester-united-tottenham>
 after picking up ankle-knack against Spurs. “It looks like next match no but 
it looks like it is nothing dangerous or needing surgery, so hopefully we will 
have Micki [on] Boxing Day,” cooed José Mourinho.

And conservative legislators in Washington state have proposed a bill that 
would allow fans to bring guns into stadiums.Hmmm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/seattle-seahawks-stadium-guns-proposed-bill-firearms>
.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING

Join AC Jimbo and co for Football Weekly!  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/footballweekly>

STILL WANT MORE?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffeel-the-force-of-this-gif-of-a-goal-we-once-scored-against-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8933ce12f95ae328cc729d573c91b7dec7d08177%2F0_194_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Something%20has%20clearly%20gone%20awry%20in%20Uefa%E2%80%99s%20cruel%20masterplan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffeel-the-force-of-this-gif-of-a-goal-we-once-scored-against-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Something%20has%20clearly%20gone%20awry%20in%20Uefa%E2%80%99s%20cruel%20masterplan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Ffeel-the-force-of-this-gif-of-a-goal-we-once-scored-against-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8933ce12f95ae328cc729d573c91b7dec7d08177%2F0_194_3600_2161%2F3600.jpg>
 1980s Gary Lineker. Photograph: Getty Images 
Gary Lineker won the Golden Boot at a World Cup but he didn’t even make the 
top three in the 1986 Sports Personality of the Year awards.Steven Pye on 
Spoty’s presenter and other unlucky losers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/that-1980s-sports-blog/2016/dec/12/bbc-sports-personality-spoty-lineker-snooker-football>
.

Fragrant Italian Serie A commentary as Paolo Bandini looks back at the 
weekend’s clash between Torino and Juventus.And much else 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/torino-juventus-derby-serie-a-talking-points>
.

Antonio Conte made flatulant noises when told Chelsea may be punished for the 
brawl at the end of their game with Manchester City, but it’s no joke.Dominic 
Fifield explains why 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/chelsea-face-threat-of-a-premier-league-points-deduction-an-explanation>
.


Ten tablets of footballing wisdom right here.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/12/premier-league-10-talking-points-from-weekends-action>


In real football news, Jeremy Alexander explains why there’s no place like 
Home Parkas Plymouth Argyle head back to the top of League Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/football-league-blog/2016/dec/12/plymouth-argyle-doncaster-league-two>
.


Vote! Vote! Vote!  <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/champions-league-last-16-draw>
Have your say on which clubs are for the quarter-finals and which are destined 
for the Big Cup door marked Do One.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>!

TREASURE HUNT > PASS THE PARCEL
 