
In my early 20s I was a fashion editor at Elle and I used to go to her shop in 
the south ofParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>. She was married to 
Sam Rykiel then who was a very nice man and the father of the two children she 
had. She was already known, quite well established and I didn’t approach her 
because I was shy and young and on a magazine. She looked at you in quite a 
hard way and when I entered the shop I would worry when her eyes were upon me – 
maybe my tights were ripped or something.

She was more a friend of my first husband, [French publisher] Christian 
Bourgois, but I would see her at the Café de Flore sometimes. She used to go 
there for lunch very often. She would be upstairs and I would see her across 
the room. She created a hamburger without bread there and they put it on the 
menu in her name; Le Club Rykiel [It’s still there: “Sans pain ni mayonnaise 
avec ketchup et moutarde. €19.50”].

Sonia Rykiel, queen of knitwear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/oct/08/sonia-rykiel-queen-of-knitwear>
Her daughter worked with her a lot and a great thing that happened in her 
life, a beautiful thing, was that her son, who is blind, became a great 
musician. She was very brave with that child.

Her approach to fashion was quite realistic. She understood women and she 
wanted them to be happy and to look beautiful. We don’t have the same style you 
know, she is maybe more couture, more fun, more luxury, than me. She was a good 
designer, yes. She was “Madamoiselle Tricot’ – Miss Knitwear”. She was very 
good for knitwear. She was quite a figure on Saint-Germain-des-Prés. She always 
had a shop there and she lived not far away. She created a Parisian style I 
think and she has been copied a lot.

This article was amended on 11 December. Christian Bourgois was incorrectly 
spelled Christian Bourgeois. This has now been corrected
 