
South Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southafrica> have suspended 
their head coach, Ephraim “Shakes” Mashaba, 24 hours after he led them to a 2-1 
World Cup qualifying win over Senegal.

Goals from Thulani Hlatshwayo and Ajax Amsterdam’s Thulani Serero helped South 
Africa pick up three points in Limpopo on Saturday, with the former Sunderland 
striker Dame Ndoye replying forSenegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal>. That left Bafana level on 
points with Burkina Faso at the top of Group D after two rounds of matches but 
the real drama was reserved for after the final whistle.

I’m a team player for Liverpool and England, insists Daniel Sturridge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/13/im-team-player-for-liverpool-and-england-insists-daniel-sturridge>
Mashaba took almost an hour after the game to appear at the post-match press 
conference and then sparked controversy with his comments, which were believed 
to have been aimed at the South African Football Association (Safa) president, 
Danny Jordaan. Asked what the victory over Senegal meant to his side, Mashaba 
responded: “It’s a second lease of life. I was dead already.”

On Sunday Safa released a statement confirming that Mashaba would not travel 
with the team for Tuesday’s friendly in Mozambique due to “disciplinary 
reasons”.

“Safa has deemed it necessary to employ disciplinary measures after a 
regrettable incident at Peter Mokaba Stadium on Saturday,” read the statement.

“Assistant coach Owen da Gama will take charge of the team in the 
international friendly match against Mozambique on Tuesday in Maputo. As is our 
custom in matters such as these, the association will not be making any further 
comments on this matter out of respect for the dignity of the head coach and 
the association and the legally privileged nature of such proceedings.”

Mashaba, 66, was sacked as South Africa coach on the eve of the 2004 Africa 
Cup of Nations and is in his second spell in the post. He was heavily 
criticised after failing to qualify for the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations in Gabon.

Elsewhere Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> moved to the top 
of Group E on Sunday after beating Ghana 2-0 in Alexandria while Everton’s 
Yannick Bolasie scored the winner as Democratic Republic of Congo came from 
behind to beat Guinea and move level on points with Tunisia at the top of Group 
A.
 