
One thing has been missing from Southampton’s rise over recent years and this 
season would be a fine time to change that. The club have won promotions and 
plaudits since 2011, playing their way stylishly from League One to the upper 
reaches of the Premier League while becoming a model of shrewd development, but 
they have yet to garnish that progress with major silverware. AnEFL Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/efl-cup> triumph this season would put 
that right – and soften fears their progress is stalling.

Victory in the 2010 Johnstone’s Paint Trophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/mar/28/carlisle-southampton-johnstones-paint-trophy>
, a competition for lower league teams, was lovely and confirmed Southampton 
were on the way back but winning the EFL Cup this season would be cherished 
much more by a club that have not won a major trophy since the 1976 FA Cup. 
When Claude Puel picks his team for Wednesday’s semi-final first leg against 
Liverpool, he must do so with the conviction that the competition has become 
Southampton’s priority for this season.

José Fonte left out of Southampton squad for semi-final against Liverpool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/jose-fonte-out-of-southampton-squad-efl-semi-final-liverpool>
Their last two Premier League matches made sure of that, as defeats by Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/everton-southampton-premier-league-match-report>
 andWest Bromwich Albion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/southampton-west-bromwich-albion-premier-league-match-report>
 hobbled their chances of sustaining their upward trajectory in the top flight, 
in which they have finished eighth, seventh and sixth in the past three 
seasons. Puel must go for cup success.

The manager has rotated his lineups incessantly to contend with a Europa 
League campaign on top of a busy domestic schedule (the next match will be 
Southampton’s 31st of the season, Liverpool’s 26th) but he must deploy his 
strongest lineup againstLiverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>. That includes Nathan Redmond.

Not everyone agrees with that. To some Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> fans Redmond has become a 
focal point for frustration, almost a totem of their doubts about the club’s 
ability to keep regenerating the team despite bulk selling. Redmond certainly 
has not fulfilled the hopes invested in him yet. He is 22 and they are very 
high hopes.

Southampton raised eyebrows by paying £11m to sign Redmond last summer from 
Norwich City, where he had been an inconsistent performer in a relegated side 
but Puel,who was appointed a week after that signing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/30/southampton-claude-puel-first-team-manager-appoint>
, approved of the move, saying on the eve of this season that it was “a very 
good surprise to find that player here”. He then added a surprise of his own by 
comparing Redmond to a player he knew at Monaco, one Thierry Henry.

That comparison placed Redmond under more scrutiny and increased the interest 
in Puel’s attempt to turn him from a winger, who had scored seven Premier 
League goals before this season, into a prolific striker. In August he scored 
on his debutin a 1-1 draw with Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/southampton-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 but he has struck again only twice since then, having sometimes played 
centrally and sometimes out wide. Never mind Henry, at the moment Redmond does 
not even bear comparison to Theo Walcott. But he is worth persisting with.

There are certain qualities Redmond has that everyone can see. For a start he 
is an honest and tenacious worker. He is also very fast and an elusive 
dribbler. In those respects he is a suitable replacement for Sadio Mané at St 
Mary’s. But his goal against Watford was undoubtedly misleading and not only 
because it was a left-foot volley and his left foot is a part of his armoury 
that he could do with improving. More obviously it was misleading because for 
most of the season his shooting, and his passing around the box, has been 
erratic.

But that has been true about everyone at Southampton except Charlie Austin, 
who has scored far more goals (nine) than anyone else this season despite being 
out injured since early December.

Shane Long is a magnificent pest but hit and miss (and miss) in front of goal; 
Jay Rodriguez is still struggling for sharpness after all his injury trouble; 
Dusan Tadic is a dancer not a killer; and Sofiane Boufal barely had time to 
show how he struts his stuff before suffering another injury.

All in all, a lack of poise and sharpness in the box explains the paradox of 
Puel’s reign so far: he has made Southampton more exciting and attacking than 
they were under Ronald Koeman, yet only Middlesbrough and Hull have scored 
fewer goals than them in the Premier League. Puel remains convinced Redmond 
will deliver on his potential.

One of the reasons that Southampton hired him as a manager – and, indeed, one 
of the reasons why Porto approached him about replacing Jose Mourinho more than 
a decade ago – is that he has a good record of cultivating young players, often 
getting them to thrive in positions that had been previously been alien to 
them. An instructive example from his last job is Alassane Pléa, who, like 
Redmond, considered himself to be a wide player before Puel gave him a more 
central role at Nice. Pléa, who is a year older than Redmond, did well last 
season but has really come into his own this term, scoring abundantly just 
behind Mario Balotelli to help fire Nice to the top of Ligue 1.

Claude Puel helps Southampton forge thrilling new identity | Paul Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/22/sounthampton-claude-puel-manchester-city>
Puel has more than a hunch that Redmond can do something similar, he also 
evidence but – and here’s the rub - only from training so far. “He is a 
fantastic striker of the ball, he puts it wherever he wants in training,” said 
the manager before explaining that it was only a matter of time before the 
player reproduces his training ground insouciance in proper matches.

“He just needs to feel more relaxed in a role that he is still learning,” 
explained Puel. The thing is, the manager made that observation to L’Equipe in 
October and the player has yet to reproduce his training ground precision in 
matches.

The manager has kept faith with him, picking him for every league match for 
which he has been available, proving that he sees the player as part of 
Southampton’s spine along with Fraser Foster, Virgil Van Dijk and Oriel Romeu. 
Redmond, like those players, has been preserved for the Premier League so far, 
barely featuring in the EFL Cup run. On Wednesday Puel should change that 
policy. There is no better time than now for the player to start vindicating 
the manager’s belief in him.
 