
It was somehow typical of 2016 that on the morning after Andy Murray accepted 
the BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year award for a third time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/18/andy-murray-wins-bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-2016>
 in his career, the focus should switch so joltingly to a man whose strategic 
brilliance had produced an avalanche of Olympic medals and thefirst British 
winner of the Tour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/22/bradley-wiggins-tour-de-france-cavendish>
, but who was now seen trying topersuade a sceptical House of Commons select 
committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/19/team-sky-sir-dave-brailsford-culture-committee-british-cycling>
 that his team had no involvement with doping.

Andy Murray’s Sports Personality treble shows how he has won over the nation | 
Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/19/andy-murray-sports-personality-third-time>
The year has been a rollercoaster like no other before it, the highs (Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/16/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-world-no1-2016>
,Leicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/leicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri>
,Simone Biles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/03/simone-biles-gymnastics-america-rio-2016>
,the Chicago Cubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/03/chicago-cubs-world-series-championship-game-7-victory>
,Wales’s footballers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/07/wales-euro-2016-gareth-bale-portugal-cristiano-ronaldo>
, an unusuallystirring finish to cricket’s County Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/middlesex-yorkshire-county-championship-division-one-match-report-cricket>
) higher and the lows (state-sponsored doping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/more-than-1000-russian-athletes-benefitted-from-state-sponsored-doping>
,sexual abuse of young footballers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/sexual-abuse-football-andy-woodward-football-association>
,corruption within governing bodies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/michael-conlan-accuses-boxings-ruling-body-after-being-cheated-in-defeat>
, the plane crash thatkilled many of Chapecoense’s football team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/29/brazil-plane-crash-chapecoense-video-profile>
) lower. Now Sir Dave Brailsford, knighted for his services to British sport 
only four years ago, was being interrogated on his apparent failure to live up 
to the promises of transparency he made in 2010 whenlaunching Team Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2010/jan/04/team-sky-bradley-wiggins-cycling>
 on the back of a proven Olympic programme and pledging to win the Tour within 
five years with a clean British rider. His success with Bradley Wiggins in the 
2012 Tour, three years ahead of schedule, and with Chris Froome in three of the 
subsequent four editions of the race, and the clinical manner in which the 
richest team in the sport went about its business, created resentments that 
became the kindling for what could yet turn out to be a catastrophic 
conflagration, with the urgent gusts of social media fanning the flames, as has 
been the case in so many recent events.

What had brought Brailsford up before the select committee – along with Shane 
Sutton, his former right-hand man, and already controversial forallegedly 
making sexist remarks to the female cyclist Jess Varnish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/jess-varnish-shane-sutton-sexism-allegations>
 – was the activity of a team of Russian hackers calling themselves Fancy 
Bears, who had revealed, via Wikileaks,the details of therapeutic use exemption 
certificates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/tue-fancy-bears-wada-leaks> 
granted to leading athletes in many sports. Those namedincluded Wiggins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-interview-tues>, 
and the world was agog to see that he had been given permission for injections 
of a powerful corticosteroid with known performance-enhancing effects before 
three big races, ostensibly to mitigate the effects of summertime allergies.

Fancy Bears was taken by many to be a jokey nom de guerre for elements of the 
Russian security services and the revelations appeared to be a reprisal forthe 
ban on Russian athletes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/21/cas-upholds-ban-olympics-russian-athletes>
 competing in the Rio track and field events that followed the disclosure of a 
clandestine doping programme so ingenious and sophisticated that it made the 
old East German system look like meals on wheels.A report commissioned by the 
World Anti-Doping Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/04/richard-mclaren-ioc-wada-russia-rio-2016->
 from the Canadian law professor Richard McLaren, issued in two instalments, 
eventually implicated more than 1,000 athletes. The stories ofsecret rooms in 
the testing laboratory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/12/russian-doctors-athletes-evaded-doping-tests>
 and undetected fiddling with supposedly tamper-proof sample flasks cast 
retrospective doubts over the results from London’s 2012 Olympics and, in 
particular, the Winter Games in Sochi two years later, where Vladimir Putin’s 
showpiece facility on the Black Sea had provided the stage for 33 medal-winning 
performances by competitors from the host nation.

Wiggins: ‘I was paranoid about making excuses. It wasn’t something I was going 
to shout from the rooftops’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/30/bradley-wiggins-interview-tues> 
Wiggins had broken no rules but it seemed that he and his team may have pushed 
against the legal limits and perhaps ventured beyond the boundary of moral 
acceptability, and he responded by mounting a defence that some found 
unconvincing. The man who had become so distinctive as a national hero with a 
Tour and Olympic double in the summer of 2012 grew up in a time when doping was 
rife in cycling but he could never have dreamed, when he entered his first 
competition at the age of 12, that he would become a pawn in the geopolitic 
skirmishes of the 21st century.

In 2016, however, sport could do no more than mirror the world in which it 
exists. For every triumph and moment of grace in an overstuffed year, there was 
a looming shadow ready to cast its darkness over the celebrations. A further 24 
hours after Murray’s acceptance of his latest award came the news that another 
two-times Wimbledon singles champion, the 26-year-old Petra Kvitova,had been 
stabbed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/petra-kvitova-attacked-intruder-home-czech-republic-tennis>
 while attempting to defend herself against an intruder at her home in the 
Czech Republic; the injury was to the tendons of her playing hand, the left, 
requiring surgery that willkeep her out for six months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/petra-kvitova-focused-return-tennis-following-knife-attack-surgery>
.

Death claimed an unusually high number of the world’s major figures in 2016 – 
and sport was not exempt. As if to match the deaths ofFidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/26/fidel-castro-cuba-revolutionary-icon-dies>
,David Bowie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-at-the-age-of-69>
 andUmberto Eco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/20/italian-author-umberto-eco-dies-aged-84>
, it came up withMuhammad Ali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/muhammad-ali-dies>, Johan Cruyff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/mar/24/johan-cruyff-a-life-in-pictures>
 andArnold Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/26/arnold-palmer-us-golf-dies-aged-87>
. Each had changed his sport in a way that provided a handy metaphor for 
developments in society: civil rights protests and opposition to the Vietnam 
war (Ali), the baby-boomers’ drive for self-expression and freedom from archaic 
restrictions (Cruyff), the monetisation of leisure activities in a time of 
peace and prosperity for the white bourgeoisie (Palmer). Each, too, gave his 
name to the thing that symbolised his uniqueness. The Ali shuffle, the Cruyff 
turn, Arnie’s army: all part of history now, tales to be handed down by those 
lucky enough to have witnessed them at first hand, and then by those whom they 
told, perhaps blurring a little but still taking their place in an oral 
tradition that survives even in the digital age.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-review-sport-dichotomy-soaring-highs-desperate-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F761b75160340bd8cf9a87b2200dcca2f4f3e08af%2F0_0_3200_2066%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sport%20in%202016%3A%20a%20dichotomy%20of%20soaring%20highs%20and%20desperate%20lows%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-review-sport-dichotomy-soaring-highs-desperate-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sport%20in%202016%3A%20a%20dichotomy%20of%20soaring%20highs%20and%20desperate%20lows%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-review-sport-dichotomy-soaring-highs-desperate-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F761b75160340bd8cf9a87b2200dcca2f4f3e08af%2F0_0_3200_2066%2F3200.jpg>
 Well-wishers touch the hearse carrying the remains of Muhammad Ali during the 
funeral procession in June.
 Photograph: Adrees Latif/Reuters 
Although the creation of such legends is in part the job of sport, mostly it 
exists in order to give pleasure to its participants and relief to its 
onlookers from the travails and anxieties of everyday existence. In the latter 
respect it may be needed more than ever in the years ahead. And if there was 
something to be said on behalf of 2016, it was the clear evidence that there is 
no danger of a drying-up of the wellspring of miracles.

An Olympic year inevitably generates more than its fair share of those. The 
Olympic and Paralympic Games in Rio, prefaced byconcerns over their cost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/29/students-speak-the-rio-olympics-come-at-a-cost-to-brazils-poorest>
 to a city and a country with so many millions living in seemingly ineradicable 
poverty, produced an almost embarrassing haul of 214 medals for the 
lottery-funded Team GB: a staggering 8.3% of the available total. Too many to 
record individually, although it should be noted that the track cyclists Laura 
and Jason Kenny must now find a display case big enough to take theircombined 
collection of 10 gold medals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/17/laura-trott-jason-kenny-team-gb-cycling-gold-rush-olympics-rio>
 – and they have not finished yet.

Usain Bolt: ‘I feel good because I know I’ve done it clean’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/12/usain-bolt-feel-good-because-know-done-it-clean>
Rio also confirmed, almost superfluously, the greatness of Usain Bolt, giving 
hima trio of gold medals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/20/usain-bolt-wins-olympic-games-triple-treble-video-report>
 to match his triples in Beijing and London. Elaine Thompson came close to 
matching her fellow Jamaican,taking gold in the women’s 100m and 200m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/18/the-olympic-games-minute-2016-double-gold-for-elaine-thompson>
 but missing out by a third of a second when Jamaica finished behind the USA in 
the 4x100m relay.

For some observers, Mo Farah’s historic double 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/21/mo-farah-wins-the-double-double-gold-medals-video-highlights>
 in the 5,000m and 10,000m made him the pre-eminent British track athlete of 
all time, as well as the one whose touching and compelling backstory carries a 
special relevance to a world being reshaped by mass migration. But not even 
Farah could steer entirely clear of controversy, in his case engendered by 
accusations against his coach, Alberto Salazar,still lingering from 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/18/alberto-salazar-mo-farah-uk-athletics>
.

Russia’s gymnasts were allowed to compete in Rio and Aliya Mustafina took the 
women’s uneven bars title. But no one could match the way the 19-year-old 
Simone Biles,4ft 9in of spring-loaded genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/11/simone-biles-olympics-rio-2016-ideal-perfection-gymnastics>
, lit up the world with a series of incandescent displays that elevated her to 
a level populated by such names as Tourischeva, Korbut, Kim, Comaneci, Retton, 
Boginskaya, Khorkina and Miller. At the other end of the physical scale, the 
final of the men’s sculls drew less attention from the non-specialist audience 
but no event in the entire Games was more thrillingly, viscerally and closely 
fought: after an astonishing late attack, Damir Martin of Croatia lost by a 
thumbnail to Mahé Drysdale of New Zealand, the defending champion, and was the 
first to bestow the warmest and most unfeigned of congratulations on his 
conqueror.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-review-sport-dichotomy-soaring-highs-desperate-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5ae920fa453298a6752b8b6e5a3bc7fdc4e4754%2F119_0_3434_2062%2F3434.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sport%20in%202016%3A%20a%20dichotomy%20of%20soaring%20highs%20and%20desperate%20lows%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-review-sport-dichotomy-soaring-highs-desperate-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sport%20in%202016%3A%20a%20dichotomy%20of%20soaring%20highs%20and%20desperate%20lows%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-review-sport-dichotomy-soaring-highs-desperate-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5ae920fa453298a6752b8b6e5a3bc7fdc4e4754%2F119_0_3434_2062%2F3434.jpg>
 USA’s Simone Biles performs on the floor during the artistic gymnastics 
women’s apparatus final at the Rio Olympics. Photograph: Julio Cortez/AP 
If that was a shining example of sport at the highest level finding space for 
a sense of brotherhood, fraternal competition acquired a new and unforgettable 
dimension when Alistair Brownlee, a double Olympic triathlon champion, first 
caught his younger brother Jonny, close to collapse near the end of the final 
World Series round in Cozumel, Mexico,then carried him across the line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/19/alistair-brownlee-gives-chance-win-helps-brother-jonny-video>
. It would have been no surprise to find the Hollies’ He Ain’t Heavy, He’s My 
Brother topping the charts the following week.

Leicester City’s triumph: the inside story of an extraordinary season | Stuart 
James
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/leicester-city-title-inside-story-premier-league-champions-claudio-ranieri>
Leicester City’s success in vanquishing the big battalions was the best bit of 
image-enhancement the Premier League could have devised on the eve of its
obscene new television deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/10/premier-league-tv-rights-sky-bt>
: a real-life fairytale supervised by Claudio Ranieri, a man ofunfailing 
modesty, courtesy and charm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/02/claudio-ranieri-leicester-premier-league-champions>
. The deeds of the formerly unheralded Jamie Vardy, Riyad Mahrez and N’Golo 
Kanté were almost enough to make the nation forget the damage done to other 
historic clubs by such incompetent owners asRoland Duchâtelet at Charlton 
Athletic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/08/charlton-athletic-boycotts-roland-duchatelet-katrien-meire>
, Venky’s at Blackburn Rovers, Tony Fernandes at Queens Park Rangers,Massimo 
Cellino at Leeds United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/leeds-owner-massimo-cellino-banned-18-months>
 and the hedge fundSisu at Coventry City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/12/coventry-city-decline-despair-league-one>
.

Portugal’s victory at Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/10/france-portugal-euro-2016-match-report>
 rewarded the efforts of another underdog, all the more praiseworthy for the 
way Fernando Santos’s players overcame the loss of Cristiano Ronaldo, their 
captain and talisman, after only 25 minutes of the final against the hosts, 
France, refusing to allow their morale to crack in the way that Brazil had 
permittedNeymar’s absence to undermine them in the 2014 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/jul/05/world-cup-2014-brazil-emotion-all-change-neymar-absence>
. If anything, adversity was the making of a performance crowned by Éder’s 
decisive extra-time goal.

Wales and Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/28/wales-players-iceland-england>
, and their bands of wonderful supporters, had already given the tournament its 
flavour. By the time of their departure, at the semi-final and quarter-final 
stages respectively, the players of England were already on the beach or by the 
pool or wherever they had gone to wash away the humiliation ofa deserved 
last-16 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/england-iceland-euro-2016-match-report>
 at the hands of the representatives of 330,000 Nordic islanders. Elimination 
ensuredthe end of Roy Hodgson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/27/roy-hodgson-facing-end-england-manager-iceland-euro-2016>
, a decent man but never quite up to the job. The more bullishSam Allardyce 
replaced him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/22/sam-allardyce-appointed-new-england-manager-fa-confirm>
, thus realising his loudly proclaimed life’s ambition, but there was a sense 
of suppressed relief emanating from the FA bosses who, following a newspaper 
sting, acceptedhis resignation after only 67 days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/sam-allardyce-history-suspicion-dream-job-ended-67-days>
,one sketchy victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/04/slovakia-england-world-cup-2018-qualifier-sam-allardyce>
 and an outlay, all told, of around £4.5m. His replacement, the civilised but
untested Gareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/30/gareth-southgate-england-manager-man-for-the-times>
, duly went about the time-honoured business of creating unrealistic 
expectations with decent results in qualifying matches against minnows.

In what has been declared the first year of a new post-truth age, sport had 
its ration of fake news when the England rugby international James Haskell was 
maliciously declaredto have succumbed to a steroid overdose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/james-haskell-deny-claims-he-has-died-england-rugby>
. The babble of Twitter and Facebook may even have contributed to the decision 
by Nico Rosbergto retire 24 hours after winning the Formula One world title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/dec/02/nico-rosberg-announces-shock-retirement-from-f1-video>
; who could blame anyone for declining to remain any more than a day longer 
than necessary inside a world of fanboys and haters whose rancour drowns even 
the blare of racing engines? His team-mate, Lewis Hamilton, became the first 
driver to win 10 races in the season without also taking the championship, 
while in the motorcycle world Cal Crutchlow made himself the first Brit to win 
a top-tier race since Barry Sheene, and then did it again –both times on a 
second-tier machine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/26/cal-crutchlow-motogp-brno-richard-williams>
.

Cal Crutchlow’s MotoGP triumph in Brno deserves Olympian acclaim | Richard 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/26/cal-crutchlow-motogp-brno-richard-williams>
The final day of the dear old County Championship, a survivor of the analogue 
age forever under threat from modernity, resulted inMiddlesex clinching the 
title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/23/middlesex-yorkshire-county-championship-division-one-match-report-cricket>
 for the first time since 1993 by beating Yorkshire in front of 10,000 
spectators on a Friday evening at Lord’s, with only five overs of the season 
remaining. Somerset, the other contenders for the title when the day began, 
could only watch helplessly from the sidelines.

Cricket also provided one of three individual examples of excellence from the 
year that stand out in their very different ways – two of them spectacular, the 
other the essence of understatement. With West Indies needing 19 off the final 
over to beat England in the World Twenty20 final in Kolkata, the Barbadian 
all-rounder Carlos Brathwaite smashed four consecutive sixes off the bowling of 
Ben Stokes inthe most majestically brutal climax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/03/west-indies-win-world-t20-final-carlos-brathwaite-sinks-england>
 to a sporting contest ever witnessed outside a boxing ring. Second,Fiji’s 
joyful rout of Team GB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/11/fiji-great-britain-rio-2016-rugby-sevens-final>
 in the rugby sevens final in Rio: a lesson in initiative, inspiration, skill, 
courage and, oh, just about everything. Third, the contribution of Chris 
Robshaw – replaced as captain of the England XV after adisaster in the 2015 
Rugby World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/04/england-rugby-world-cup-stuart-lancaster-10-reasons>
 – to the team’s currentyear-long 13-match winning run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/03/england-australia-autumn-internationals-match-report>
, embracing anonymity and making himself as essential to the collective success 
as his blindside predecessor Richard Hill was to the World Cup winners of 2003.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-review-sport-dichotomy-soaring-highs-desperate-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b2eadc136947c890f7cf08487b61ff72a667313%2F0_0_3162_2252%2F3162.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sport%20in%202016%3A%20a%20dichotomy%20of%20soaring%20highs%20and%20desperate%20lows%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-review-sport-dichotomy-soaring-highs-desperate-lows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sport%20in%202016%3A%20a%20dichotomy%20of%20soaring%20highs%20and%20desperate%20lows%20%7C%20Richard%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-review-sport-dichotomy-soaring-highs-desperate-lows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b2eadc136947c890f7cf08487b61ff72a667313%2F0_0_3162_2252%2F3162.jpg>
 Vatemo Ravouvou of Fiji evades Dan Bibby of Great Britain during the men’s 
rugby sevens gold medal match in Rio. Photograph: Stephen McCarthy/Sportsfile 
via Getty Images 
Dylan Hartley, the man selected by Eddie Jones to replace Robshaw as captain, 
performed valiantly and behaved impeccably throughout the unbeaten 
international year but then ended it witha reckless tackle on a Leinster 
opponent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/northampton-leinster-european-rugby-champions-cup-match-report>
 on his return to Northampton colours.The resulting ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/14/dyland-hartley-banned-six-weeks-available-six-nations-rugby-union>
 took his career aggregate of suspensions to 60 weeks: more than an entire year 
of the 30 he has so far spent on earth, all imposed for various forms of 
unacceptable violence.

England report card: five areas to focus on before the Ashes series next 
winter | Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/20/england-india-test-series-alastair-cook>
Leadership on the field is also an issue for England’s Test cricket team after 
a bruising4-0 series defeat in India 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/20/england-india-test-series-alastair-cook>
. A good start to the year, with series victoriesagainst South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/16/stuart-broad-six-wickets-england-south-africa-series-win>
 on tour andSri Lanka at home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/13/england-sri-lanka-third-test-match-report>
, was followed bydrawn series against Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/england-pakistan-10-wicket-defeat-fourth-test-series-drawn>
 at home andBangladesh away 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/oct/30/bangladesh-v-england-second-test-day-three-live>
. Now Alastair Cook will spend the holiday decidingwhether to step aside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/20/alastair-cook-refuses-discuss-future-england-captain-fifth-test-india>
 and allow his vice-captain, Joe Root,to take over 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/21/joe-root-england-cricket-captain-paul-farbrace-alastair-cook>
, giving the Yorkshireman the summer meetings with South Africa and West Indies 
in which to get his bearings before setting off to retain the Ashes in 
Australia. Eoin Morgan captained England’s ODI squad toa series defeat in South 
Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/14/south-africa-england-fifth-odi-match-report>
 and home wins against Sri Lanka and Pakistan beforedeclining on security 
grounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/andrew-strauss-disappointed-eoin-morgan-alex-hales-bangladesh>
 to travel to Bangladesh, allowing Jos Buttler to lead the team toanother 
series victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/england-bangladesh-third-odi-match-report>
.

Finally, a normally reliable source suggests Bernie Ecclestone will at last be 
stepping down from his role as the supreme dictator of Formula One in the early 
weeks of next year, at the age of 86. But, given he is on such excellent 
personal terms with both Donald Trump (“His election is the best thing that 
could have happened to the world”) and Vladimir Putin (“He gets the job done – 
he should be running Europe”), it is hard to imagine him passing up the chance 
of joining them to form a troika bent on world domination. Either way, it’s 
something to look forward to in 2017.
 