
When “Marmitegate” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/tescos-chief-warns-global-brands-weak-pound-marmitegate>
 broke in November, many small business owners may have felt the issues of a 
weakening pound had been a little over simplified. However, it was 
representative of what has been a tough year for British businesses trying to 
deal with rising costs in the midst of a dip in consumer confidence following 
the Brexit vote.

Not only have imported goods and services become more expensive as the pound 
has dropped in value, this year has also seen two major amendments to 
employment law. The national living wagebecame a legal requirement in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/may/03/employers-taking-drastic-steps-to-cope-with-national-living-wage>
 and currently stands at £7.20 an hour for staff aged 25 and over, rising to 
£7.50 from April 2017. At the same time, many SMEs are now required to 
contribute to workplace pensions. Business rates are alsoexpected to rise for 
some 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/sep/30/entrepreneurs-biggest-business-rates-change-generation-london>
 in 2017.

Entrepreneurs face biggest business rates change in a generation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/sep/30/entrepreneurs-biggest-business-rates-change-generation-london>
It was this combination of extra staffing costs that prompted Samantha 
Coldbeck, owner of the Wharfedale convenience store in Hull, to look at till 
records and bills to figure out where her business could operate more 
efficiently.

“We saw we were taking a lot of money in our last hour of being open in the 
evening but when we examined the takings more closely, it was typically 
low-margin business, like people paying utility bills and topping up their 
mobile phones,” she says.

“In the early morning, though, we’d have a queue of people outside waiting for 
their breakfast and coffee, which has a far higher margin. So we made a simple 
decision. We now open the shop an hour earlier, at 5.30am, and close an hour 
earlier, at 9.30pm. We swapped a low-margin hour for a much higher-margin hour. 
We’ve managed to absorb a 6% rise in wage bill by increasing revenue by 8%.”

Nick Shanagher, managing director of Newtrade, a publisher in the independent 
retailer sector, says Coldbeck’s experience is typical. “Our research has shown 
many retailers are struggling to pass on rising costs, particularly with a rise 
in price-marked products,” he says. “So many are working harder at establishing 
what people want to buy and when so they can work more efficiently.”

Cost rises through tinted glasses
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Frising-business-costs-pivot-minimum-wage-efficiency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b1f03bde60a8c89de065eef73523ac7a6f7ce8c%2F169_0_1105_663%2F1105.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spread%20the%20word%3A%20rising%20business%20costs%20are%20manageable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Frising-business-costs-pivot-minimum-wage-efficiency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spread%20the%20word%3A%20rising%20business%20costs%20are%20manageable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Frising-business-costs-pivot-minimum-wage-efficiency%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b1f03bde60a8c89de065eef73523ac7a6f7ce8c%2F169_0_1105_663%2F1105.jpg>
 Dhruvin Patel, founder of Ocushield. 
It was not this year’s rise in staffing costs that had the biggest impact on 
optometrist Dhruvin Patel’s startup,Ocushield <https://www.ocushield.com/>, 
which specialises in blue-tinted phone screen protectors that reduce eye 
strain. The fall in the pound meant the screens were around 20% more expensive 
to import from China.

Patel had to decide whether to pass on or absorb the additional cost. A little 
over a month ago, he decided the answer was to maintain prices but start 
charging for delivery, which he claims has not adversely affected sales. At the 
same time, he added blue-tinted spectacles to the company’s range – which have 
a higher profit margin.

“In a way, the weak pound has helped us grow faster. We were likely to move 
into glasses at some stage, but the rise in our import costs forced us to act 
earlier than anticipated,” says Patel.

“At the moment, the glasses are non-prescription and so are meant for people 
who don’t need glasses but work at a computer screen for much of the day. It’s 
moving us forwards, though, to the point where we will also start selling 
prescription blue-tinted glasses which will have an even higher margin for us. 
We think it’s only going to be a few months before most of our revenue comes 
from glasses rather than the screen protectors, so it’s been a positive move 
for us.”

The good news, then, is that rising costs can sometimes awaken a business to 
an area where resources could be better optimised or new opportunities grasped. 
But according to Bivek Sharma, head of small business accounting at business 
analysts KPMG, entrepreneurs need the right attitude.

Turn a cashflow crisis into an opportunity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/nov/25/opportunities-cashflow-crisis-entrepreneur-small-business-diversification>
“Cost increases are never welcome news but they can spark serious efficiencies 
in the long run,” he says. “Business owners rarely have time to look at costs, 
yet when price volatility takes a chunk out of margins, they are forced to 
examine their processes and look for leaner alternatives. The best approach is 
to take this opportunity to re-engineer the cost base rather than be tempted to 
clamp down on investments.”

It was while going through this process that Olly Culverhouse discovered a new 
business, almost by accident. He had found the cost of signing up new clients 
to his web development company, which is no longer operating, was getting out 
of hand. It was not just the paper, ink and stamps but the administration costs 
of staff drawing up, sending out and then chasing agreements each day. It made 
him ask his development team to come up with a digital means of agreeing 
contracts with clients and hisSignable <https://www.signable.co.uk/> business 
was founded three years ago.

“Things were going well but we were facing increasing competition at the same 
time as it was costing us a few hundred pounds a month just to handle the 
paperwork,” Culverhouse says.

“So we developed an app so contracts could be signed digitally. Immediately 
clients loved it and started asking to use it for their customers. We were 
facing such tough competition in web development that it just seemed the right 
way to go. Within a year to 18 months, it was far more profitable than the web 
company we’d been running, so we let that run down.”

Against an economic backdrop which means few firms are willing to risk raising 
prices, despite staff and supplier cost going up, British SMEs can at least 
take solace that rising bills can sometimes be a blessing in disguise.

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 