
Many a British leader has propped up the bar of the Plough at Cadsden, a tiny 
hamlet near Princes Risborough, Buckinghamshire, since it opened its doors in 
the 16th century. They include Harold Wilson, Edward Heath – who locals say 
called in for a swift one on his way home one day – and the Camerons, who
famously left their then eight-year-old daughter Nancy behind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/jun/11/david-cameron-daughter-behind-pub>
 after a visit in 2012.

The Plough, with its exposed brick walls and low-hanging wooden beams, is a 
hilly stroll away from Chequers, the official country residence of the prime 
minister, after all. Describing itself as “probably the most famous pub in 
England”, it sits in a small valley just beside the Ridgeway, an ancient 
footpath considered to be Britain’s oldest road. And on Tuesday afternoon, as a 
dense December mist descended on the inn and its surrounding woodlands and 
green fields, the phones started ringing off the hook.

Hours earlier, it was reported that the tavern had been sold by its long-time 
owner, Steve Hollings,to Chinese investors for an undisclosed fee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/chinese-firm-pub-david-cameron-xi-jinping-pint-plough-cadsden>
. The news came a little more than a year after Cameron and the Chinese 
president, Xi Jinping, sealed the UK and China’s “golden” friendshipover a fish 
and chip supper and a pint of Greene King IPA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/22/david-cameron-xi-jinping-village-pub-drink-pint>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fdavid-cameron-treats-chinas-xi-jinping-to-pint-of-ipa-and-fish-and-chips-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Cameron%20treats%20China%E2%80%99s%20Xi%20Jinping%20to%20pint%20of%20IPA%20and%20fish%20and%20chips%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fdavid-cameron-treats-chinas-xi-jinping-to-pint-of-ipa-and-fish-and-chips-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Cameron%20treats%20China%E2%80%99s%20Xi%20Jinping%20to%20pint%20of%20IPA%20and%20fish%20and%20chips%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fdavid-cameron-treats-chinas-xi-jinping-to-pint-of-ipa-and-fish-and-chips-video&media=>
David Cameron treats China’s Xi Jinping to pint of IPA and fish and chips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/oct/23/david-cameron-treats-chinas-xi-jinping-to-pint-of-ipa-and-fish-and-chips-video>
Since that day, the Plough has become a symbol of warming but controversial 
diplomatic relations between the two countries, as well as a tourist attraction 
for Chinese visitors who are keen to sample the classic British food and beer 
on offer.

Paul Hackett, who became manager of the pub two weeks ago, said Hollings and 
his wife, Sharon, sold the pub because “they’d been here for 18 years, they 
wanted to retire and enjoy the fruits of their labour”.

According to Hackett, many Chinese tourists come to the pub on a regular basis 
and have their photos taken next to the picture of their president. “We’ve got 
28 tourists coming in just on Thursday,” he said. “I think maybe the Chinese 
look at their politicians slightly differently than we do.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fstaff-cameron-xi-pub-plough-cadsden-bought-chinese-nothing-will-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f8349528273a62111dad443f1ff212080e706a8%2F448_612_2388_1433%2F2388.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Staff%20at%20Cameron%20and%20Xi%20pub%20bought%20by%20Chinese%20say%20nothing%20will%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fstaff-cameron-xi-pub-plough-cadsden-bought-chinese-nothing-will-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Staff%20at%20Cameron%20and%20Xi%20pub%20bought%20by%20Chinese%20say%20nothing%20will%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fstaff-cameron-xi-pub-plough-cadsden-bought-chinese-nothing-will-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f8349528273a62111dad443f1ff212080e706a8%2F448_612_2388_1433%2F2388.jpg>
 David Cameron and Xi Jinping outside the Plough during their visit in October 
2015. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
The attraction, he added, was that it was “a nice pub with a beautiful 
atmosphere and clientele. You could be walking across the Ridgeway and could 
come in here and have a pint of ale. That’s paradise,” he said.

Which is perhaps why the Plough has always been a watering hole to the 
well-heeled and famous.Its website <http://theplough.pub/> says it “regularly 
hosts a variety of local celebrities from the world of film, television and the 
music industry”, and even appeared in theMidsomer Murders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/sep/17/tv-detectives-midsomer-murders-barnaby>
 TV series.

I’m a Labour supporter but Cameron is a lovely man. In his last couple of 
months as PM he was coming down here often
Freya Pharo 
“It shouldn’t lose any of its magic,” Hackett said, addressing concerns that 
the pub’s atmosphere would change with its owners. “Steve and his wife were 
very central to the success of the pub because they were the personality of the 
pub. Successful pubs revolve around landlords, and I think the new owners will 
find somebody who will come and love it as much as they did.

“How it operates day to day won’t change. I’ve had a few negative comments 
from locals only because they didn’t understand what happened. Most of the 
regulars were already aware that Steve had sold it – people who weren’t 
regulars were concerned, but only because people don’t like change.

“If somebody were to say ‘do you think it’s going to change into a Chinese 
restaurant’, I’d think it was a ridiculous comment. I was talking about it with 
the fish men today, we don’t bat an eyelid, because in the same way we go 
‘let’s go and have a Chinese’, I’m sure the Chinese go ‘let’s go out and have 
an English’.”

Freya Pharo, who has been bar manager at the Plough for the past eight months, 
was also unconcerned about potential changes. “I’m in control of all front of 
house, the plan is to keep it exactly the same as it is,” she said. “I know how 
it was run when Steve was here, so I can keep things the same as they’ve always 
been.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fstaff-cameron-xi-pub-plough-cadsden-bought-chinese-nothing-will-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e4b4f9c925395ce5fc1761d9707e1f15540e82%2F0_128_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Staff%20at%20Cameron%20and%20Xi%20pub%20bought%20by%20Chinese%20say%20nothing%20will%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fstaff-cameron-xi-pub-plough-cadsden-bought-chinese-nothing-will-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Staff%20at%20Cameron%20and%20Xi%20pub%20bought%20by%20Chinese%20say%20nothing%20will%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fstaff-cameron-xi-pub-plough-cadsden-bought-chinese-nothing-will-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01e4b4f9c925395ce5fc1761d9707e1f15540e82%2F0_128_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The pub has been inundated with Chinese tourists since Xi’s evening there. 
Photograph: Chris Radburn/PA Archive/PA Images 
Pharo said the pub had not changed much since she started working there last 
year. “I’ve had many conversations withDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>,” she recalled. “I’m a 
Labour supporter but he’s a lovely man. In the last couple of months when he 
was prime minister he was coming down here often. When he did people acted 
normally, you’d see heads turning but that’s it. He wasn’t here as prime 
minister, he was just here for a drink with his family.”

Pharo was interrupted in the middle of her sentence by the phone ringing 
again. “We don’t really have a landlord at the moment,” she told the caller. 
“We’ve got owners ... Well you can’t, they’re inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> at the moment.”

She put the phone down and turned back to continue: “There’s nowhere else in 
the area particularly local to here. We’re kind of in the middle of nowhere,” 
she said. “The regulars have been coming here for years, this pub is like its 
own community. We have people who come here daily, there’s about 20 to 30 of 
them who are here every night. Mostly men over 40, but it varies. There’s Ben 
who is 23, and Stuart, who comes in with his 18-year-old son. Friday nights are 
the big get-together, when the blokes all bring their wives along, it’s the end 
of work and everyone comes down to the pub.”

Hackett and Pharo were jovial as they prepared the bar for its evening 
opening. We briefly discussed the pub’s history, including reports that in 1643 
a wake was held here for John Hampden, one of the MPs whose arrest by King 
Charles I sparked the English civil war, by his Greencoats regiment, who called 
in while escorting his body back to the family home at Great Hampden from Thame 
in Oxfordshire, where he died following the Battle of Chalgrove Field.

Then there is the mystery of Halina Żaboklicka, a Polish woman whose treasured 
letters were found in the pub’s old barn during a clear-out in 1995 by the then 
owners Jo Dorkings and Joe Stephens. The letters were stuffed into a handbag 
hiding in the corner of the room along with documents and photographs, and next 
to it was a Polish army uniform and two cameras.

Żaboklicka was in her early 20s and was an Auxillary Territorial Service 
member during the second world war, according to her Polish identification 
number. The date of her letters ranged from 1942-46. “They never figured out 
why she ended up at Cadsden,” Pharo mused.
 