
Stagecoach <https://www.theguardian.com/business/stagecoachgroup> has said 
that lower fuel prices are encouraging consumers to choose car and air travel 
over buses and trains, weighing on its first-half revenue growth.

The bus and rail group that operates South West Trains and Megabus said the 
trend was evident in both its UK and US businesses, but long-term prospects for 
public transport were positive.

Shares rose 2% after Stagecoach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/stagecoachgroup> reported a 1.6% increase 
in revenue to £2bn in the 26 weeks to 29 October, while pre-tax profit dipped 
to £89.5m from £90.8m in the same period last year.

“Across all of our divisions, we have continued to see subdued revenue trends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/sep/28/stagecoach-slides-on-worries-about-rail-and-bus-slowdown>
 relative to the stronger growth we have delivered over the last 10 years or 
so,” the company said.

“In the UK and North America, we have seen revenue growth in both the bus and 
rail sectors affected by sustained low fuel prices that have resulted in 
heightened competition from cars and airlines.”

Operating profit within its UK rail business more than halved over the period 
to £20.5m. Stagecoach said the division had been hit by a poor operational 
performance fromNetwork Rail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/network-rail>
.

The company, which operates Coach USA and Megabus in North America, said 
expectations for adjusted earnings in 2016-17 were unchanged, and recommended 
an interim dividend of 3.8p a share, up 8.6%.

Martin Griffiths, the chief executive, said he was confident in the long-term 
outlook for the group, and for public transport, and the business would 
continue to invest.

He said: “We are pleased with the performance of the business in the face of a 
challenging and uncertain political and economic environment. We see positive 
long-term prospects for public transport.


“There is a large market opportunity for modal shift from cars to public 
transport against a backdrop of population growth, urbanisation, technological 
advancements, and increasing pressure to tackle road congestion and improve air 
quality.”
 