
Standard Chartered <https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered> 
Bank was one of the biggest casualties in yesterday's stock market sell-off 
despite reporting 2006 profits ahead of expectations at $3.18bn (£1.62bn), up 
19% on a year earlier.

Shares in the Asia-focused bank fell by 3.9% to £14.50 amid hectic selling in 
Shanghai and other China-related markets prompted by fears of interest rate 
rises and measures to curb economic growth.

Peter Sands, the chief executive who took over in a surprise management 
shake-up last November, shrugged off the market turmoil, saying the bank would 
continue to invest heavily in China, where it opened its first branch in 
Shanghai in 1858.

"Over the last year we doubled our revenue and tripled our profits in China. 
This year we will be investing heavily into the consumer market and we hope to 
be operating from 40 locations by the end of the year." The bank has licences 
to operate in 22 territories within China.

On an underlying basis - stripping out big purchases in Korea, Taiwan and 
Pakistan in the last two years - profits were up 11% on the year to $2.69bn. 
City analysts raised concerns about fast-growing costs, up 17% in 2006 and 
likely to outstrip income growth in the first half of 2007.

Bad debts at the bank swelled to $629m last year from $319m in 2005, largely 
because of credit card defaults in Taiwan. The country is experiencing a debt 
hangover after an explosion of credit card issuance.

In recent years the bank has been transformed through a series of 
acquisitions, but Mr Sands said acquisitions would only play a "supporting 
role" in future growth.

Standard Chartered remains the subject of takeover speculation itself, 
frequently named as a potential bridgehead to China for bigger rivals such as 
Citibank or JP Morgan Chase. Despite yesterday's share price falls it remains 
one of the most highly-rated banking stocks in the world.
 