
After treading a gilded path to his seventh US Open final, Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic> stumbled, literally, in 
sight of the prize as Stan Wawrinka found the strength and conviction to beat 
the world No1 in four pulsating sets – the last of them wreathed in controversy 
– on a warm September night.

Patrick McEnroe, commentating in the ESPN box, shared the cynical displeasure 
of most onlookers when the defending champion, who appeared to be cramping, was 
granted a dubious medical timeout to have his toes tended to midway through the 
fourth set, shortly after being broken.

Novak Djokovic pushes use of trainer to limit before US Open final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/novak-djokovic-trainer-use-stan-wawrinka-us-open-final>
It appeared to be a risible manipulation of the regulations, which say 
timeouts can only be taken for an “acute medical condition that requires 
immediate attention”. Wawrinka did not seem impressed, seeking assurance from 
the tournament referee, Brian Earley, that all was above board – and shooting 
his opponent a knowing glance.

“Sorry, man,” Djokovic said to Wawrinka. For what, one wondered? They had been 
playing for three hours and 23 minutes, by a distance Djokovic’s longest match 
of the tournament.

“That was another example of a complete abuse of the rules,” said McEnroe. 
“It’s up to the officialsto do something about it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/novak-djokovic-trainer-use-stan-wawrinka-us-open-final>
, and they just don’t have the guts to do it.”

Otherwise, the final was a minor classic. Wawrinka won his third major 6-7, 
6-4, 7-5, 6-3 in just under four hours, with several passages of glorious 
tennis from both players.

“I don’t know what’s happening right now. Novak, you’re a great champion,” 
Wawrinka said after the match. “We know each other since many, many years. I 
had the chance to practise with him and play him in big matches. This is 
amazing. I came here not expecting to win it, but I was trying to win every 
match. I am completely empty. I had to bring everything today.”

Djokovic paid tribute to his opponent after the match. “I cannot tell you that 
[about their exchange at the net]. It was a friendly chat. Congratulations 
Stan. You were the more courageous player in the decisive moment and you 
deserved to win this title. He was the better player, tougher mentally. It was 
a fantastic couple of weeks for me. I didn’t know if I should come a few weeks 
before because I suffered physically.”

In the last 50 men’s slams, only the Argentinian Juan Martín del Potro here in 
the 2009 final, has broken the hegemony of the old world, as George Bush Jr 
used to call it – and, in another all-European final, Switzerland prevailed 
over Serbia. It was Wawrinka’s first US Open, to go with titles in Melbourne 
and Paris, and his fifth victory in 23 matches against the world No1. Under the 
circumstances, it might have been the most satisfying.

When Wawrinka beat Djokovic to win the French Open last year, he trusted his 
strong right arm, the one tattooed with Beckett’s famous “fail better” quote. 
It did not click immediately there or here – but nor did it fail him when it 
mattered. After dropping the first set, he not only avoided embarrassment, he 
crushed the Serb to win. It was an extraordinary fightback.

The heatwave finally broke, the lightest of zephyrs soothing the finalists’ 
brows in ideal conditions, with the roof open and the court playing a little 
more quickly than in the humid conditions that had prevailed for much of the 
tournament.

As at Roland Garros, Wawrinka started nervously, spraying shots everywhere, 
and Djokovic hit an ominous rhythm to go 3-0 up in under 10 minutes. But 
Wawrinka kept faith in his ground strokes, almost disregarding the 
circumstances. Where Gaël Monfils had tried to rope-a-dope Djokovic in the 
semi-finals, Wawrinka was still going for the knockout.

The champion inexplicably dropped his guard. A 134mph serve earned Wawrinka a 
tie-break after he had played much of the set on his heels, but Djokovic played 
some sublime shots to take the set in his ninth shootout win over Wawrinka in 
10 such contests, this time giving up just a single point.

He moved to the second set comfortable in the knowledge that he was 51-0 at 
this tournament after winning the first set. Yet there was something in the 
still, early evening air to suggest drama.

As he did in Paris, Wawrinka drew that single-handed backhand from its 
scabbard and painted the deuce corner on his way to saving three break points 
for 3-1 up just under the hour. Djokovic prowled the baseline, breathing hard 
and looking as if he was enduring some sort of private hell. Perhaps he was.
Tennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> at this level is no picnic.

The Swiss, whose serve has been such a weapon here, hit his fourth double 
fault, and was hanging on at 4-1.

Djokovic broke back but gestured angrily towards Boris Becker and his team as 
Wawrinka held to love for 5-4. A blistering forehand down the line earned 
Wawrinka two set points in the 10th game. Djokovic saved one of them to win a 
tense rally with a deft volley, but he shoved a forehand wide and they were a 
set apiece.

The world No1 smashed his racket to smithereens during the break. Who could 
blame him?

Wawrinka saved three break points to hold at the start of the third after 
nearly two hours of tennis.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fstan-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-us-open-final-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d8c112bf1c9105408f07cb86ad59b98532006f9%2F0_124_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stan%20Wawrinka%20beats%20Novak%20Djokovic%20in%20four%20sets%20to%20take%20first%20US%20Open%20title&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fstan-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-us-open-final-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stan%20Wawrinka%20beats%20Novak%20Djokovic%20in%20four%20sets%20to%20take%20first%20US%20Open%20title&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fstan-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-us-open-final-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d8c112bf1c9105408f07cb86ad59b98532006f9%2F0_124_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Stan Wawrinka and Novak Djokovic embrace at the end of their match at Flushing 
Meadows. Photograph: Chris Trotman/Getty Images for USTA 
At about this point in his semi-final against Monfils, Djokovic was almost out 
on his feet in the oppressive heat and humidity. Still, he had played only 
eight hours and 58 minutes getting to the final, through 13 completed sets, 
because three of his six matches were incomplete due to a walkover and two 
retirements; Wawrinka endured nearly twice that: 17 hours and 54 minutes 
through 23 sets.

Yet there was little between them in stamina and strength as each sought to 
win another two sets, preferably in a row. When the world No3 broke in the 
second game of the third set, the odds swung sharply in his favour. Djokovic 
knew he was in trouble. Bundled out early at Wimbledon when ambitions of a 
calendar slam were still alive, and hobbled since with injuries to wrist, elbow 
and both shoulders, the proudest of champions would not lie down, though. He 
broke back and after two-and-a-half hours, they were level again, a set each 
and 3-3.

A quarter of an hour later, Djokovic held to love for the sixth time, to stay 
in the set, but his level dropped at 6-5 and a loose backhand gave Wawrinka set 
point. Djokovic sliced a backhand wide – and the noise level in the arena went 
rock-concert crazy.

All tournament, Djokovic has had to receive treatment for some complaint or 
other. At 30-30 on his serve in the second game of the fourth set, he doubled 
up in pain after belting a forehand from deep, clutching at his groin. Two 
points later, Wawrinka broke him for 2-0.

Wawrinka broke to love, but Djokovic did not immediately seek medical 
assistance before the fourth game, perhaps suspecting it was cramp that had cut 
him down – and that is not treatable, as it is considered a failure in 
condition. He was desperate and somehow fought through three deuce points to 
hold.

Then the trainer emerged, Djokovic took off his shoes and asked for a callus 
to be clipped from under the big toe of his left foot, as well as a quick 
manicure of the toes on his right foot.

Refreshed, Djokovic returned to the court, and was not moving like someone 
with tender feet. He grabbed his 16th and 17th break points – but could not 
reap a dividend. And there weren’t too many people in the arena who had much 
sympathy with him. At the 2-5 changeover, the trainer re-emerged to treat 
Djokovic’s feet again.

He held, somehow, again moving with freedom, and went up two points as 
Wawrinka served for the title and his girlfriend, Donna Vekić, could barely 
watch as he struggled to deuce. The Swiss won an epic rally to get to match 
point with a gentle dab, Djokovic sprawled on hands and knees at the back of 
the court – and Wawrinka raised his arms in triumph as his opponent’s final 
shot drifted long.

Djokovic was defensive later in explaining the timeouts. “Just the toenails 
were off and bleeding. Yeah, it was quite painful to move around. You know, I 
tried.” He added: “The toe just happened today. Some other injury that was, you 
know, very serious at the time. I really didn’t know whether or not I’m going 
to come, to be honest. Decided like eight, nine days before the start of the 
Open, just to try. To play finals, it’s quite amazing.”

Asked if he were cramping in the final set, he replied. “No.”

Did he think it was fair to take it before Wawrinka’s next serve? “I was 
allowed, so I took it.” Was he surprised? “Why would I be surprised if I was 
allowed?” Because, it was pointed out, the rules stipulate a timeout was 
reserved for “an acute medical condition”. He replied, “It was. I don’t want to 
talk about this and you guys think I’m finding excuses. It’s just not 
necessary. I was allowed, so I took it.”

Asked if the rules should be looked at, given the suspicion that some players 
are abusing them, he said, “We’ll talk about it, sure. If players bring that up 
to the table, you know. You know, I didn’t have any I guess major complaints 
about that against me or me against any other player. If there are ... if this 
is a debate and players think there should be something changed in the rules, 
of course we are there to discuss. Will bring this up to the council soon I 
guess if this is a big deal.”

What a fortnight it has been. It began with Phil Collins, of Chiswick and 
Miami, singing In the Air Tonight (rather well), an apt choice to mark the 
opening of the new roof, and culminated before play on Sunday with Norm Lewis’s 
rich baritone embracing the national anthem, after a moment of silence to mark 
the 15th anniversary of 9/11, as members of the US Marine 6th Communications 
Battalion 
<http://www.marforres.marines.mil/Major-Subordinate-Commands/Force-Headquarters-Group/6th-Communication-Battalion/>
, Brooklyn, drew the Stars and Stripes across the court.

They do have a sense of occasion in this noisy old town, and they were 
rewarded with a final that had pretty much everything.
 