
Stan Wawrinka’s softly spoken demeanour could not be more at odds with his 
explosive tennis, which might be why he is often ignored in discussions about 
probable winners of the four majors, even this week in Paris, where he isthe 
reigning champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/07/french-open-2015-stanislas-wawrinka-novak-djokovic-win>
.

The conversation usually revolves around Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>, and with good reason, given 
he is an almost unbackable favourite in every tournament and leads the world 
rankings by a record 8,715 points from Andy Murray.

Wawrinka, a likely semi-final opponent for Murray, has had to live all his 
career in the shadow of Roger Federer –absent from a major for the first time 
since 1999 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/19/roger-federer-pulls-out-french-open>
 – and so has self-deprecation as a guiding theme in his ambitions. He plays 
Djokovic’s compatriot Victor Troicki in the fourth round on Sunday and, given a 
surge in form this week, should be upbeat about his chances of getting to the 
final weekend. He is having none of it.

French Open 2016: Djokovic v Bedene, Tsonga out, and more – day seven live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/may/28/french-open-serena-williams-novak-djokovic-day-seven-live>
“I’m too far from thinking about winning here,” he told ITV. “I honestly only 
start thinking that when I am playing in the final. It would be great to play 
Andy. We have so many matches against each other, always special. He’s an 
amazing athlete. It would be in the semi-final but I’m quite far from that now.”

Wawrinka was as surprised as anyone (except Murray, it transpires) when Rafael 
Nadal withdrew with torn tendons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/27/rafael-nadal-pulls-out-french-open-wrist-injury>
 in his left wrist on Friday. “I didn’t expect that,” he said. “It’s really sad 
for him and the tournament. That’s a tough injury.”

There was another high-profile casualty on Saturday when the sixth seed, 
Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, retired injured from his third-round match against Latvia’s 
Ernests Gulbis. The Frenchman, who reached the semi-finals here last year, was 
leading 5-2 when a problem with his left knee forced him to quit.

But Wawrinka is awake to the remaining challenges and, having steadily 
rediscovered his form here after a run of ordinary performances, he agrees this 
might be a turning point in the game, with Federer also missing because of 
injury and the younger players starting to go deeper.

“There are quite a lot of new young players, like [Dominic] Thiem, [Alexander] 
Zverev, [Borna] Coric. It’s good. I quite like it because I can still play them 
before I retire. I’m closer to the end than the beginning so I have to enjoy it 
while I can.”

Before the rain hit on Saturday it was Thiem’s turn to move away from the 
hunting pack with a sound 6-7, 6-3, 6-3, 6-3 win over his rival and friend 
Zverev on Court Suzanne Lenglen. For many it was a dress rehearsal of future 
finals, featuring two players of immense promise and composure.

“I knew already before the match that it’s gonna be a very tough one,” said 
the 23-year-old Austrian. “Such a great player, Sascha. I think the little 
difference today was maybe the three years’ age difference.”

It was an astute call by Thiem. He knows the teenagers are still growing, 
physically and in their tennis acumen, so he expects to prevail. But there is 
very little between any of them.

“There are many things [that have changed in the past year]. I think the 
biggest is the physical part. Physically I belong at the top, which was not 
like this the last year. Especially in the grand slams, [fitness] is really 
important.

“I feel fine. As long as everything is in Europe, no long flights, no jet lag, 
it’s not that tough. At the beginning of the year, when you fly around, one jet 
lag after another, then it’s becoming really tough.”

Whether they are ready to fill the gap left here by Nadal and Tsonga is not 
quite nailed on yet, however. In front of Thiem on Monday stands Marcel 
Granollers, the experienced Spaniard who benefited from the walkover created by 
Nadal’s exit. He will be no pushover, having tuned up with wins over Nicolas 
Mahut and Fabio Fognini.

What did Thiem think when he heard the news that the nine-times champion Nadal 
was out and he was going to be facing a less daunting Spanish inquisition? “I 
tried not to focus on that. I didn’t think about it at all. Just wish Rafa all 
the best.”

He said, too, that there were no thoughts of the future beyond this 
tournament. “Today was the third round for us, the chance to get into the 
second week, which I made once in my career [and Zverev has yet to do]. We were 
both really focused on this match. This battle of the future – we didn’t really 
have that in mind.”

As for the reality beyond the nice sentiments, Thiem will know he has been 
handed a wonderful opportunity to reach the quarter-finals of a grand slam 
tournament. After that, nobody knows.
 