
The world No4, Stan Wawrinka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/stanislas-wawrinka>, has become the latest 
high-profile competitor to pull out of the Olympic tennis event. The Swiss 
player, who is reportedly struggling with a back injury, joins his compatriot 
Roger Federer in withdrawing, in another blow to Rio 2016

A statement issued by Wawrinka’s management company said: “After a medical 
examination by his doctor in Geneva the current world number four has to 
withdraw from the Olympic Games, which will start in Rio de Janeiro later this 
week.

Bob and Mike Bryan to miss Rio Games over health concerns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/30/bob-bryan-mike-bryan-pull-out-rio-olympics>
“Stan Wawrinka felt increasing pain during the tournament in Toronto and 
therefore travelled back to Switzerland in order to consult with his doctor for 
a complete check-up. Following analyses and a MRI scan, local overstress was 
discovered and he was advised to reduce his physical activity for an 
undetermined period during which he will undergo further examinations.”

Switzerland had harboured hopes of medal success in singles and doubles, with 
Federer planning to partner Martina Hingis in the mixed doubles.

But the 17-times grand slam champion brought an early end to his season last 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/26/tennis-rio-olympic-games-roger-federer-out-knee-injury>
 in order to recover fully from knee surgery in February and now Wawrinka has 
joined him on the sidelines.

Wawrinka said: “I’m very sad. I was really excited about playing in Rio. After 
Beijing and London I was very much looking forward to playing in my third 
Olympic Games. I wish all the Swiss athletes the best of luck throughout the 
coming weeks.” Wawrinka and Federer won gold in the men’s doubles in 2008, with
Federer taking silver in the singles four years later in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/05/andy-murray-olympic-gold-great-britain>
.

Half of the men’s top 10 will be absent from Rio, with Tomas Berdych and Milos 
Raonic withdrawing because of fears over the Zika virus and Dominic Thiem also 
choosing to skip the event, while there are also question marks over Rafael 
Nadal’s fitness following a wrist injury.
 