
A Melbourne Stars XI who found Big Bash League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/big-bash-league> success in Hobart will 
undergo a forced reshuffle to make way for returning star Kevin Pietersen.


The side opened their season with a seven-wicket win over Hobart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/hobart> Hurricanes at Bellerive 
Oval on Monday night and allrounder Glen Maxwell admitted it will be tough to 
pick who misses out next round.


Australia have the better of Pakistan on rain-drenched first day in Melbourne 
| Russell Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/australia-have-the-better-of-pakistan-on-rain-drenched-first-day-in-melbourne>
“It’s a good headache to have when he comes back,” Maxwell said of Pietersen, 
who missed the franchise’s start of BBL06 as he returned to England to enjoy 
Christmas with his family.


“We’ll all shuffle around and we’ll see what happens, I have no idea what’s 
going to happen.”


Maxwell contributed an unbeaten 58 with the bat at Bellerive helping the 
visitors to 3-191, eclipsing the Hurricanes’ 4-188 with more than two overs to 
spare after Hurricanes captain Tim Paine had hit a blistering 91, combining 
with George Bailey (74 not out) for a 145-run partnership.

Paine’s knock – including 11 boundaries and a six – produced his highest BBL 
score.


Bailey was also entertaining, clearing the boundary four times.


“Credit where credit is due. This is wonderful T20 batting,” former Stars 
international Kevin Pietersen tweeted, as the hosts finished at 4-188.

Opening veteran batsman Rob Quiney blasted 75 and England import Luke Wright 
added a handy 48 as Stars reeled in their target.


Despite being on the other side of the world, Pietersen has remained 
instrumental in team decisions.


“We’re all looking forward to seeing him here and seeing the impact he has on 
the competition because last year was outstanding,” Maxwell said.


“Anytime you have a guy with the calibre of (Pietersen), it can only help the 
team.”


Paceman Ben Hilfenhaus was the pick of bowlers for the Stars, taking 3-38 
against his former side.


Maxwell (1-12) claimed the scalp of Sri Lankan superstar Kumar Sangakkara (15).

The Stars next meet the Renegades at the MCG in the cricket version of a 
Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> derby.
 