
Midnight in the desert. With a group of eight, I am huddled around a telescope 
150 times stronger than the naked eye, staring at the night sky. From a 
dazzling mass of stars, we zoom in on individual pricks of light: a single 
star, a double, a nebula, a cluster, even a galaxy. Heading outside and looking 
up, constellations emerge from the crowded heavens, sketched out to us by a 
powerful laser.

Dark sky reserves have sprouted up everywhere from Northumberland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/oct/27/star-camp-stargazing-kielder-observatory-northumberland>
 to Namibia. But for the ultimate stargazing experience, the Atacama desert in 
northern Chile has the clearest night skies on Earth. It is high, dry (one of 
the driest places in the world) and unpolluted. Several top-level observatories 
have set up home here, and tourists are hot on their tail.

Rock of ages: Chile’s Quezala canyon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/aug/23/atacama-desert-chile-canyon-rock-art>
“Astro-tourism is completely new,” says astronomer Bill Dent, who has worked 
in Chile for six years. “You didn’t get it 10 years ago.”

An increasing number of night-time tours cater for this new-found interest, 
including the one I’m on, run byTierra Atacama <http://www.tierraatacama.com/> 
and based in the oasis town of San Pedro de Atacama. But for real astronomy 
buffs, there is a new attraction that is even more exciting. The revolutionary
Alma <http://www.almaobservatory.org/> observatory, the world’s largest 
astronomical project, opens for tours next month. Alma captures star and planet 
formations billions of light years away, so you are viewing the dawn of the 
universe. Using an array of 66 antennae that together make up the equivalent of 
a 10-mile-long telescope, it can uncover details with at least 10 times more 
resolution than the Hubble space telescope.

The drive to Alma HQ, 20 miles north-east of San Pedro, winds past spiky 
cardon plants and wild donkeys. Soon, the land has a red tinge, pocked with 
craters and crevasses, and the Liscar volcano smokes on the horizon. It’s as if 
you’ve arrived on Mars.

The public tours will take place at the Operations Support Facility (OSF), at 
an altitude of 2,900 metres, where a visitors’ centre is being built. Guests 
will also visit the laboratory and control centre, and the hangar where the 
antennae are made and repaired. There are always a couple of antennae being 
worked on, faces upturned to the scorching sun like overgrown Wall-Es. There 
are plans for an on-site hotel and an Alma museum down in San Pedro.
 The geysers at El Tatio. Photograph: Ben Pipe Photography/Corbis 
As this is a radio telescope, not an optical one, there is no nighttime 
stargazing at Alma – you come here in dazzling daylight to be wowed by the 
scale, the site and the cutting-edge science. And don’t expect to get up close 
and personal with the telescope. Visitors won’t ascend to the Chajnantor 
plateau at 5,000 metres, where most of the antennae are sited – and for good 
reason. I’m allowed up, under strict medical supervision, only to be rushed 
straight back down, wired to an oxygen canister, when the altitude took its 
toll. (Oxygen saturation levels must be more than 80%; mine plummeted from 96% 
at 4,000 metres to 68% at 5,000.)

Still, there is plenty to see at the OSF, and the views over Chile’s Valley of 
the Moon are spectacular. Dent is convinced the tours will prove 
popular. “Astronomy is fun for more people than particle physicists,” he says. 
“Everyone can look up at the sky. It has an immediate appeal, especially for 
kids.”

Back in San Pedro, you can visit the wonderful little Meteorite Museum 
<http://www.museodelmeteorito.cl/>, housed in two geodesic domes, which 
conducts stargazing tours. All the meteorites on display were found in the 
Atacama desert and you can even touch some of the 4½-billion-year-old rocks. 
The town is a gateway to many of the desert’s natural attractions. I visit the 
El Tatio geysers, a sunrise spectacle of erupting water, steam and hot volcanic 
mud, and take a dip in the thermal pools. Then there are the salt flats, the 
lagoons, Death Valley, the flamingo reserves …
 The adobe church of San Pedro de Atacama. Photograph: Richard Nowitz/Getty 
Images/National Geographic 
San Pedro’s dusty streets may be thronged with tourists, but it is still an 
appealing, easygoinghuaso (cowboy) town: one-storey adobe buildings, a leafy 
main square with an archetypal Andean church; an excellent archaeological 
museum.

Chela Cabur is the best bar (really the only bar, because at all the others 
you have to order food). It is decorated with football shirts and vintage film 
posters, and only serves beer; themicheladas (beer with lemon juice and salt) 
are medicinal on a hot day.Ayllu 
<http://www.ayllu.cl/restaurante/restaurant-solar.htm> is a good spot for 
dinner, slightly off the main drag on Toconao Street. You can sit in the 
courtyard around a brazier and eatllama a la pobre – fatty, tender llama meat 
on the bone, served with chips, fried eggs and onions. For a twist on the 
Chilean (and Peruvian) national drink, try arica rica cocktail – a pisco sour 
topped with a fragrant desert herb.

The Brecon Beacons' Dark Sky Reserve: five ways to see it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/21/brecon-beacons-dark-sky-reserve>
There are scores of places to stay, from dirt-cheap hostels to seriously 
luxurious hotels.Hotel Altiplanico 
<http://www.altiplanico.cl/en/altiplanico-san-pedro-de-atacama/> is on the 
deluxe end of the spectrum, but without the sky-high prices. It is designed 
like a traditional village: my room is an adobe hut with a straw roof, a sunny 
terrace and an outdoor shower. At night, the grounds are deliberately dimly 
lit. I don’t need to be armed with a telescope or up a mountain – I simply sit 
on my terrace and marvel at the peerless Chilean night sky.

• The trip was provided by Rainbow Tours (020-7666 1260, rainbowtours.co.uk 
<http://www.rainbowtours.co.uk/country/chile-holidays/>). A tailormade 
eight-day trip costs from £1,995pp, including two nights’ B&B in Santiago and 
four in the Atacama desert, return flights from ondon, transfers, tours of El 
Tatio geyser and Alma. Alma tours are free and can be booked at
almaobservatory.org <http://www.almaobservatory.org/en/about-alma/visits>
 