
Stephen Mangan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/stephen-mangan>, Mike 
Bartlett and a new environment-themed project from Katie Mitchell will all 
feature in the Royal Court's springâ€“summer season next year.

Mangan will star in Birthday by Joe Penhall 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/birthday>, a new play about the 
early stages of parenthood. It will be directed by Roger Michell, returning to 
the Royal Court afterTribes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/oct/21/tribes-review-royal-court-london>
. Another Penhall script,Haunted Child 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/haunted-child>, opens at the Court 
in December.

Mitchell's new project, slated for July, will see her collaborate with 
Professor Stephen Emmott <http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/people/semmott/>, 
head of computational science at Microsoft Research, to explore possible 
futures of the environment.

Alongside the previously announced In Basildon by David Eldridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/10/seven-new-plays-royal-court>, 
which opens in theJerwood Theatre Downstairs 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/about-us/conferences-and-hires/jerwood-theatre-downstairs/>
 in February, the Court will also stage a refreshed, recast production of Mike 
Bartlett'sLove Love Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/mar/20/love-love-love-review>, which 
has been touring the UK.

The theatre will host its first Young Writers festival 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/playwriting/the-studio/young-writers-festival/>
 since 2009 and, interestingly, playwrights who have presented work there in 
previous years dominate the season more broadly.

In addition to Penhall, who debuted work at the Court in 1994, Bola Agbaje 
<http://www.bolaagbaje.com/> and Nick Payne 
<http://www.curtisbrown.co.uk/nick-payne/>, who also had early work programmed 
within Young Writers festivals, will bring new pieces into theJerwood Upstairs 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/about-us/conferences-and-hires/jerwood-theatre-upstairs/>
. In January,Rafe Spall will star in Payne's Constellations 
<http://royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/constellations?tab=3>, which takes in 
quantum theory and free will, whileAgbaje's Belong, a co-production with 
British African company Tiata Fahodzi 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/belong>, will open in April.

The festival, which was first held in 1973, features new plays by actors Luke 
Norris 
<http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/36978/company-members/luke-norris.html> and 
Hayley Squires <http://www.castingcallpro.com/uk/view.php?uid=278834>, which 
were selected from more than 300 submissions by playwrights aged between eight 
and 25.

Norris's debut play Goodbye to All That 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/goodbye-to-all-that>, which examines 
the enduring nature of love, will be directed by Simon Godwin in the Jerwood 
Upstairs in February, followed byVera Vera Vera 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/vera-vera-vera>, Squires's first 
ever submission to the theatre, which will be directed by Jo McInnes. It 
focuses on the aftermath of a British soldier's death in Afghanistan.

Vivienne Franzmann's second play, The Witness 
<http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/the-witness>, will premiere Upstairs 
in June, also directed by Godwin. The play, which explores the UK's 
relationship with Africa, follows Franzmann's nomination for the Charles 
Wintour award forMogadishu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/feb/01/mogadishu-review> at the Lyric 
Hammersmith and Manchester Royal Exchange.
 