
Hundreds of authors including Stephen King, Colm Tóibín, Lydia Davis and 
Geraldine Brooks <https://www.theguardian.com/books/geraldine-brooks> have 
signed a statement in which they “oppose, unequivocally, the candidacy of 
Donald J Trump for the presidency of the United States”.

Launched on Tuesday by the writers Mark Slouka and Andrew Altschul, already 
signed by more than 450 authors 
<http://lithub.com/an-open-letter-to-the-american-people/>, the statement has 
now been posted on website ipetitions andhas won more than 6,000 signatories 
<http://www.ipetitions.com/petition/WritersOnTrump>, spanning some of the 
biggest names in US literature, from Pulitzer winners Jennifer Egan, Brooks and 
Junot Díaz to bestselling and acclaimed writers including Amy Tan, Anita 
Shreve, Michael Chabon, Dave Eggers, Cheryl Strayed and Curtis Sittenfeld.

Lionel Shriver: Donald Trump's too far-fetched for fiction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/11/lionel-shriver-donald-trumps-too-far-fetched-for-fiction>
Pitched as an “open letter to our fellow Americans”, the statement sees the 
writers affirming their belief “that any democracy worthy of the name rests on 
pluralism, welcomes principled disagreement, and achieves consensus through 
reasoned debate”, and that “American history, despite periods of nativism and 
bigotry, has from the first been a grand experiment in bringing people of 
different backgrounds together, not pitting them against one another”.

They write “that knowledge, experience, flexibility, and historical awareness 
are indispensable in a leader”, and that “neither wealth nor celebrity 
qualifies anyone to speak for the United States, to lead its military, to 
maintain its alliances, or to represent its people”.

“Because the rise of a political candidate who deliberately appeals to the 
basest and most violent elements in society, who encourages aggression among 
his followers, shouts down opponents, intimidates dissenters, and denigrates 
women and minorities, demands, from each of us, an immediate and forceful 
response. For all these reasons, we, the undersigned, as a matter of 
conscience, oppose, unequivocally, the candidacy of Donald J Trump for the 
presidency of the United States,” the writers conclude.

JK Rowling defends Donald Trump's right to be 'offensive and bigoted'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/17/jk-rowling-defends-donald-trumps-right-to-be-offensive-pen-america>
On Facebook, Slouka said that he and Altschul first wrote a statement of 
principles about 10 days previously, “out of desperation to do/say something 
about the rise of Donald J Trump”. After receiving an “overwhelming” response 
from “household names and non-household names alike”, they went public with it 
on Tuesday. “I actually believe that Trump’s presumptive nomination represents 
a potential pivot point for this nation. A tricky pivot point. Hopefully, you 
agree,”wrote Slouka <https://www.facebook.com/MarkSlouka/>, urging others to 
sign the statement.
 