
I have to admit I saw the film (Stand by Me 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0092005/>) before I read the book. I was maybe 
30-years-old at the time, and that opening scene: five kids in a tree house 
dreaming of the summer, not knowing that their plans had been scuppered before 
they’d even descended back to the ground – struck a chord.

When I picked up Stephen King’s Different Seasons 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/different-seasons.html> a couple of years 
later and read ‘The Body’ (one of four novellas in the book), I didn’t realise 
it was the same story, but it reeled me into a tale of coming–of-age and of 
innocence, and, just like the film had, it made me feel like I was 11 again.

 I often think I was the luckiest kid. I loved school – they really were the 
best years of my life – and I was lucky enough to know it at the time. I use 
the memories every day I write. Like the main character of The Body, Gordie, 
I’d sit and tell stories to my mates: tales of ghosts in church halls; how I 
had a bionic heart to help me run fast; how I sailed a raft down the river Avon 
and ended up in Japan. And I’d sit in the teacher’s chair at lunchtime and 
pretend I had my own chat show. I’d chat to Muhammad Ali and my mates would sit 
there, waiting to see if they would be the next guest on. I loved sitting in 
that chair, huddled with my friends around an invisible fire.

Are books better than films?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/06/discussion-books-better-than-films-adaptations>
 However, I wasn’t completely like Gordie. He seemed to want to sit back and 
observe, while I was happy to be in the middle of the action. I was no action 
hero; I was partially deaf and pretty fat, but it didn’t seem to matter. I 
talked a lot and made people laugh which, combined with my place on the school 
rugby team, got me a free pass out of most detentions. Not that I did 
purposefully bad things, just things I thought were funny, for example stuffing 
foam under my shirt to muscle up like the PE teacher, for example. (I am truly 
sorry though, Mr Edmondson. You were my favourite English teacher, and still I 
mimicked your whistle.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fstephen-king-the-body-stewart-foster-bubble-boy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc3c3e860ab7f48cacea52ac71a64ea36aedce20%2F0_0_2848_4272%2F2848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20King's%20The%20Body%20made%20me%20feel%20like%20I%20was%2011%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fstephen-king-the-body-stewart-foster-bubble-boy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20King%27s%20The%20Body%20made%20me%20feel%20like%20I%20was%2011%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fstephen-king-the-body-stewart-foster-bubble-boy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc3c3e860ab7f48cacea52ac71a64ea36aedce20%2F0_0_2848_4272%2F2848.jpg>
 Stewart Foster: I hated the last day when four of us jumped off the school 
wall and shouted “We’re free!” because while they walked off, I found myself 
looking back at the main gates, wishing they’d let me back in. Photograph: PR 
 Mr Edmondson encouraged me to let my imagination go. I think I could write 
pretty well even then, or maybe it was just that I knew how to tell a story. 
Mates would look forward to me reading out my stories, especially when they 
were acrostic and spelt out something rude. Being able to write helped with 
other lessons too, as I swapped poems and short stories in return for completed 
biology and chemistry homework. I got the best deal for sure.

 It was never a hardship to write. I’d walk home with friends, telling them 
stories on the way, and by the time I reached my bedroom I’d have lines of 
poetry in my head; about the troubles in Ireland, the Falklands War, me being 
overweight, and the scariness of a sixth former at school dying of AIDS. I 
wrote about the first two inWe Used to Be Kings 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/we-used-to-be-kings-2.html> and the sense of 
sadness and the loss of the sixth former I never knew, is inThe Bubble Boy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/401108/>. Gordie does 
much the same with the kid who died on the railway line.

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 As I went through my teenage years, a lot of my friends went their separate 
ways. We were still in the same class, but the kids I played Top Trumps with 
when we were eleven turned into skinheads, mods and punks, or became obsessed 
with Star Wars and James Bond. But I was still loving school, and the stories, 
and I hated the last day when four of us jumped off the school wall and shouted 
“We’re free!” because while they walked off, I found myself looking back at the 
main gates, wishing they’d let me back in.

 So here I am, 40 years later, a writer like Gordie, and those stories once 
locked away are coming back to life. I went back to uni to do a creative 
writing degree and I found it amazing that, after all those years, I was the 
same character in class again. The BA was great, the MA less so. I was far more 
comfortable writing and studying with young students than with adults the same 
age as me, but I had an audience again and I’m so grateful because without 
readers, there would be no writers. Or, as Gordie wrote, “secrets stay locked 
away, not for the want of a teller but for the want of an understanding ear.”

You can buy Stewart Foster’s Bubble Boy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/401108/> from the 
Guardian bookshop.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fstephen-king-the-body-stewart-foster-bubble-boy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d48322e7e83fbe18b5e81805b9e0cb0f42dee7b%2F0_0_1535_2339%2F1535.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stephen%20King's%20The%20Body%20made%20me%20feel%20like%20I%20was%2011%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fstephen-king-the-body-stewart-foster-bubble-boy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stephen%20King%27s%20The%20Body%20made%20me%20feel%20like%20I%20was%2011%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fstephen-king-the-body-stewart-foster-bubble-boy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d48322e7e83fbe18b5e81805b9e0cb0f42dee7b%2F0_0_1535_2339%2F1535.jpg>
 Photograph: PR  