
Uncertainty over the outlook for the UK economy after the Brexit vote in June 
has sent the pound plummeting to levels not seen since the 1980s.

After the initial falls, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>’s announcement that she would 
trigger article 50 by March and continuing talk of a hard Brexit piled more 
pressure on sterling. As did an emergency cut in interest rates from the Bank 
of England, the effects of which were exacerbated by the Federal Reserve’s move 
to raise US borrowing costs.

Since the EU referendum, sterling has lost more than 17% of its value against 
the dollar and about 10% against the euro.

The slump has been a mixed blessing for Britain’s leading companies, with some 
clear winners and losers.

Winners

Businesses which make most of their money overseas are the most obvious 
beneficiaries of sterling’s slide, since their earnings are now worth more when 
translated back into pounds.

The luxury goods group Burberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup>, which generates about 85% 
of its sales abroad, has emerged as a clear winner, with overseas revenues 
bolstered even as its UK costs remain fixed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsterling-pound-slide-winners-losers-2016-uk-companies-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef55cba2b0fec276c5ca7fb4aa6bb326cd914003%2F0_0_3499_2215%2F3499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sterling's%20slide%3A%20winners%20and%20losers%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsterling-pound-slide-winners-losers-2016-uk-companies-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sterling%27s%20slide%3A%20winners%20and%20losers%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsterling-pound-slide-winners-losers-2016-uk-companies-brexit-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef55cba2b0fec276c5ca7fb4aa6bb326cd914003%2F0_0_3499_2215%2F3499.jpg>
 Burberry runway show. The luxury goods retailer has benefitted from the 
pound’s decline. Photograph: Suzanne Plunkett/Reuters 
The icing on the cake is the weak pound attracting a growing number of 
overseas tourists, from China and elsewhere, to the UK keen to snap up its 
trademark checked scarves and camel trenchcoats.

 Burberry said this week the pound’s decline had lifted sales to tourists in 
its London stores by 30% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/oct/18/ftse-100-jumps-as-inflation-rises-but-burberry-slumps-7-after-update>
. Its shares have jumped by about a third since referendum day, adding more 
than £1.5bn to its market capitalisation.

Associated British Foods 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/associatedbritishfoods> expects to 
benefit from the rising value of the euro against the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/07/primark-owner-buoyed-by-stronger-euro>
. This will lift overseas profits, which last year made up half of the total, 
once they are translated back into sterling, and boost margins at ABF’s sugar 
business, although the group’s Primark fashion chain’s UK profit margins are 
taking a hit from the pound’s fall because clothes are largely bought in 
dollars.

Mining groups listed on the London Stock Exchange but with operations 
everywhere from Australia to South America are also toasting the weak pound. 
Commodity prices are quoted in dollars, which lifts the value of the metals 
they mine in pound terms and boosts their profits. On top of that, precious 
metal miners such asRandgold Resources and Fresnillo have benefited from the 
recent strength of gold and silver, seen as havens in times of uncertainty.

Other global businesses such as pharmaceuticals GlaxoSmithKline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/glaxosmithkline> and AstraZeneca 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/astrazeneca> benefit from the exchange of 
overseas earnings into pounds, and are also supported by the relatively stable 
outlook for their businesses (threats by the US to clamp down on supposedly 
excessive prices notwithstanding.)

Banks have had a more mixed time. Again overseas earners are to the fore, with 
HSBC, which makes around three quarters of its profits in Asia, and Barclays 
gaining ground. HSBC has had a hefty £37bn added to its stock market value 
since the referendum. Banks focused on the UK, such as Royal Bank of Scotland 
and Lloyds Banking Group have performed less well.











Bookmakers have benefitted too, recording their biggest non-sporting event 
ever at the referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/22/eu-referendum-is-bookies-biggest-ever-non-sporting-event>
, with punters placing £100m in bets. Most punters bet Britain would stay in 
the EU.

Losers

The companies most obviously hit by the falling pound are those most exposed 
to the UK economy, with the cost of imported goods rising just as demand seems 
set to weaken. If consumers are faced with having to pay more in the shops, 
they are likely to be more cautious with their spending.

Supermarkets are facing increasing price pressures, as shown in the so-called 
Marmitegate dispute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/tesco-unilever-resolve-marmite-dispute-price-supermarket>
 between Britain’s biggest grocerTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> and consumer goods giant Unilever. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsterling-pound-slide-winners-losers-2016-uk-companies-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a6e324caaf6d469b57b79bee22ad2282089f97c%2F0_0_5642_3761%2F5642.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sterling's%20slide%3A%20winners%20and%20losers%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsterling-pound-slide-winners-losers-2016-uk-companies-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sterling%27s%20slide%3A%20winners%20and%20losers%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsterling-pound-slide-winners-losers-2016-uk-companies-brexit-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a6e324caaf6d469b57b79bee22ad2282089f97c%2F0_0_5642_3761%2F5642.jpg>
 Unilever and Tesco clashed over plans to increase Marmite prices by 10%. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Unilever <https://www.theguardian.com/business/unilever> raised prices on a 
range of products, from Marmite to Cif, by about 10% and halted deliveries to 
Tesco when the supermarket refused to accept the rises. This left Tescoshort of 
several popular household brands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>
. Although thedispute was resolved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/tesco-unilever-resolve-marmite-dispute-price-supermarket>
 within days it is a sign of things to come in what is already a cut-throat and 
price-driven sector.

Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Looking forward 
into 2017, the sector faces a new challenge from the rising cost of imported 
food, thanks to the fall in sterling, which will probably apply pressure to 
margins against such a competitive backdrop.”

Staying on the high street, Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sports-direct-international> issued 
another profit warning in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/sports-direct-profit-warning-15m-sterling-slump>
 – its third of the year – after it lost £15m in the currency markets as a 
result of the overnight“flash crash” in the value of sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/confusion-as-pound-falls-10-in-insane-asian-trading-and-no-one-knows-why>
.

Next <https://www.theguardian.com/business/next> estimated in August that its 
clothing prices would rise by up to 5% next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/next-expects-higher-profits-despite-tougher-trading-conditions>
 due to the pound’s decline. Its chief executive, Lord Wolfson, said the cost 
of buying goods from abroad in sterling had risen by 9% for next year’s 
fashions, although some of thehit would be offset by weakness in other 
currencies and its ability to squeeze better deals from suppliers.

House prices are flat or falling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/houseprices> as the weak pound dents 
consumer confidence and Brexit uncertainty pushes buyers out of deals. 
Housebuilders are facing weaker demand just as costs are rising.Bellway said 
some of its suppliers were likely to raise their prices 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-eu-bellway-idUKKCN12I0F9> due to the 
higher pound.

Suppliers of imported timber have indicated that prices could rise by 10%. 
About 70% of Bellways’ materials are sourced from Britain, with 20% coming from 
Europe. “I’m sure we’re going to have what we would call some sort of Unilever 
moments with some of our suppliers,” the chief executive, Ted Ayres, told 
Reuters.

Shares in the building sector have been under pressure since the referendum, 
with Britain’s biggest quoted housebuilder,Persimmon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/persimmon>, losing 15% of its market 
value since the vote, equivalent to more than £1bn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsterling-pound-slide-winners-losers-2016-uk-companies-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe329347b9a3d02984f7f89a1531d93e8631018db%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sterling's%20slide%3A%20winners%20and%20losers%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsterling-pound-slide-winners-losers-2016-uk-companies-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sterling%27s%20slide%3A%20winners%20and%20losers%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fsterling-pound-slide-winners-losers-2016-uk-companies-brexit-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe329347b9a3d02984f7f89a1531d93e8631018db%2F0_374_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Currency movements have had a negative impact on airlines. Photograph: Alamy 
Airlines are also suffering, as the falling pound makes travellers more 
reluctant to venture abroad and consumers decide to conserve their cash.Ryanair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ryanair> recently warned that full-year 
profits would be lower than expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/ryanair-warns-fall-in-pound-will-hit-profits>
, whileEasyJet suffered its first fall in annual profits for six years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet> due to the weak pound and 
discounting fares. EasyJet expects another drop in the current financial year. 
Currency movements cost the airline £88m as the pound’s decline against the 
dollar increased fuel costs.




 