
Cash will probably be a novelty in the future, so imagine, then, that in the 
rare instance you handle some $20s, the combover etched on every crisp bill is 
that of former president Donald J Trump.


Absurd? Had you asked pundits during the 1824 presidential campaign whether 
General Andrew Jackson’s mug would ever grace America’sthird-most popular 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2015/04/21/100s-closing-in-on-1s-for-most-common-currency.html>
 greenback, they would have called you insane. The Washington political 
establishment believed that Jackson’s short temper, reckless disregard for 
political niceties and desire to insult (or shoot) his enemies meant he simply 
wasn’t presidential material. Yet in 1828 – four years after he won the popular 
vote but,through quirks of the system <http://www.ushistory.org/us/23d.asp>, 
lost the election, the American people – fed up with back-room “politics as 
usual” – propelled Jackson to the White House for the first of two terms.

Last August, when the Trump campaign seemed like a sideshow, I compared him to 
theKnow-Nothing Millard Fillmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/18/donald-trump-immigration-know-nothing-dangerous-republicans>
. Now I realize that Trump is actually the true heir to Andrew Jackson. On 
Super Tuesday, the man who claimed he could “stand in the middle of Fifth 
Avenue and shoot somebody and [not] lose voters 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/01/23/politics/donald-trump-shoot-somebody-support/>,” 
firmly moved from the category ofpolitical theater 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/huffington-post-defends-donald-trump-entertainment-coverage-policy-despite-founders-2110246>
 to being the presumptive Republican nominee.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-florida-hillary-clinton-super-tuesday-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20uses%20Super%20Tuesday%20victory%20speech%20to%20take%20aim%20at%20Clinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-florida-hillary-clinton-super-tuesday-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20uses%20Super%20Tuesday%20victory%20speech%20to%20take%20aim%20at%20Clinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-florida-hillary-clinton-super-tuesday-video&media=>
Trump uses Super Tuesday victory speech to take aim at Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/mar/01/donald-trump-florida-hillary-clinton-super-tuesday-video>
The Jackson era gives us some clues as to what might happen if Trump actually 
wins the White House.

Like Trump, Jackson was a mean-spirited “outsider”. As president, he destroyed 
America’s central banking system 
<http://www.neh.gov/humanities/2008/januaryfebruary/feature/king-andrew-and-the-bank>
, and he forcibly deported Native Americans from Georgia to Oklahoma along the
Trail of Tears 
<http://www.cherokee.org/AboutTheNation/History/TrailofTears/ABriefHistoryoftheTrailofTears.aspx>
, an action just short of genocide. He distrusted most politicians (he 
regretted not being able tomurder his own vice-president 
<http://mentalfloss.com/article/57837/quotable-andrew-jackson-12-old-hickorys-best-lines>
), and disliked the “rich and powerful” – despite being a rich and powerful 
slave-owner himself – who “too often bend the acts of government to their 
selfish purposes”.

Jackson rose to prominence following the Battle of New Orleans in the War of 
1812 and the first Seminole war in Florida. He may have been a war hero, but 
his public notoriety also includedkilling a man in duel 
<http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/andrew-jackson-kills-charles-dickinson-in-duel>
 in 1806 for insulting his wife, and hewasn’t taken seriously 
<http://millercenter.org/president/biography/jackson-campaigns-and-elections> 
by his presidential competitors. Former presidentThomas Jefferson told Daniel 
Webster 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=1049AAAAYAAJ&lpg=PA279&ots=ZkAL005Nt6&dq=%22I%20feel%20much%20alarmed%20at%20the%20prospect%20of%20seeing%20General%20Jackson%20President%22&pg=PA279#v=onepage&q=%22I%20feel%20much%20alarmed%20at%20the%20prospect%20of%20seeing%20General%20Jackson%20President%22&f=false>
:

I feel much alarmed at the prospect of seeing General Jackson President. He is 
one of the most unfit men I know of for such a place. He has had very little 
respect for laws and constitutions … [and] his passions are terrible. When I 
was President of the Senate, he was Senator; and he could never speak on 
account of the rashness of his feelings. I have seen him attempt it repeatedly, 
and as often choke with rage. He is a dangerous man.

But where Jefferson saw Jackson’s passions as terrible, the electorate viewed 
them as a virtue – much like Trump supporters are embracing his “tell it like 
it is 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/why-trump-may-be-winning-the-war-on-political-correctness/2016/01/04/098cf832-afda-11e5-b711-1998289ffcea_story.html>
” style. Similarly, just as our modern Congress isbeloved by no one 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/186581/congress-job-approval-rating-slips.aspx>, in 
the 1820s popular feelings toward Washington’s elite were much the same. As 
Jacksonwould later say <http://avalon.law.yale.edu/19th_century/jackson1.asp>, 
the point of government is that it is “administered for the good of the people, 
and is regulated by their will”. He railed against professional politicians, 
whom he considered “demagogues 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=eXq1BgAAQBAJ&lpg=PA79&dq=jackson%20cheat%20the%20people%20out%20of%20their%20constitutional%20rights%2C%20by%20a%20caucus%20of%20congressional%20members&pg=PA79#v=onepage&q&f=false>
”. He would later go on to write a book titled The World is Governed Too Much, 
which might as well be the tagline of 2016 Republican party.

What will the Republican establishment do this year if Trump continues to 
march toward the nomination? The more he’s criticized, the stronger he appears 
to become, and the closer we come to returning to the worst excesses of 
Jacksonian democracy – where populism is valued over all else and professional 
lawmakers are seen as enemies to be vanquished.

If Trump is our new Andrew Jackson – and if he loses this year – what does 
that mean for 2020? A lot can happen between now and then, but if Trump’s base 
feels disenfranchised by a Democrat in the Oval Office and by a Republican 
party they feel has subverted the will of the people, there’s no reason not to 
expect a galvanized Trump campaign the next time around.

The 1824 election killed the Democratic-Republicans as a political party; 2016 
may well kill theRepublican party as we know it 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/how-donald-trump-is-destroying-the-republican-party/2015/12/28/747668f6-ad9e-11e5-9ab0-884d1cc4b33e_story.html>
. Where Jackson had his Trail of Tears, Trump will have hisMexican wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/25/us-president-donald-trump-first-100-days-election-2016>
; where Jackson dismantled the Second Bank of the United States, Trump might
take on the Federal Reserve 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/02/24/news/economy/donald-trump-federal-reserve-audit-the-fed/>
. Jackson – even when he was right – bullied members of Congress, and Trump 
will undoubtedly do the same. Some of Jackson’s racism can be explained away by 
the times in which he lived. But what about Trump’s?

There are plenty of reasons to be scared of a Trump presidency, and it is 
worth remembering that if history does indeed repeat itself first as tragedy 
and then as farce, somedayDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will get his face on the 
money, too.

 * Trump follows a long tradition of American politicians saying xenophobic 
things. Can you guess who said the following lines? “Indians and wolves are 
both beasts of prey, though they differ in shape.”  Andrew Jackson  Woodrow 
Wilson  Donald Trump  George Washington “When the government says it can't keep 
people out of the U.S., what it means is that it won't keep people out. And why 
should we be surprised? We've seen our borders routinely ignored.”  Mike 
Huckabee  Ben Carson  Jeb Bush  Donald Trump “African Americans watch the same 
news at night that ordinary Americans do.”  Joe Scarborough  Bill Clinton  John 
F Kennedy  Donald Trump  “I wonder if President Obama would have attended the 
funeral of Justice Scalia if it were held in a Mosque?”  Mitch McConnell  
Donald Trump  Ann Coulter  Mike Huckabee  “As far as lenity can be extended to 
these unfortunate creatures I wish you to do so; subordination​ [of slaves]​ 
must be obtained first, and then good treatment.”  Andrew Jackson  King Leopold 
 Donald Trump  Robert E Lee “The white men were roused by a mere instinct of 
self-preservation—until at last there had sprung into existence a great Ku Klux 
Klan, a veritable empire of the South, to protect the Southern country.”  
Donald Trump  Woodrow Wilson  Strom Thurmond  William Faulkner "When reporters 
act like jerks, you need to treat them that way."  Maurice Sendak  Donald Trump 
 Chris Christie  Dick Cheney “The system perpetuates itself as these young men 
father children whom they have no intention of caring for, by women whose 
welfare checks support them. Teenage girls mired in the same hopelessness lack 
sufficient motive to say no to this trap. Answers to our problems won't be 
easy, my friends. We can start by dismantling a welfare system that encourages 
dependency and subsidizes broken families.”  Dan Quayle  Paul Ryan  Donald Trump
 Ronald Reagan “I have no purpose to introduce political and social equality 
between the white and black races. There is a physical difference between the 
two which, in my judgment, will probably forever forbid their living together 
on the footing of perfect equality”  Aaron Burr  Scott Walker  Donald Trump  
Abraham Lincoln "Unemployment insurance is a pre-paid vacation for freeloaders."
 George W Bush  Mitt Romney  Ronald Reagan  Pat Buchanan  You got…  
Congratulations! You are ace at telling the difference between 19th, 20th, and 
21st-century bigotry.  Congratulations! You are ace at telling the difference 
between 19th, 20th, and 21st-century bigotry.  Congratulations! You are ace at 
telling the difference between 19th, 20th, and 21st-century bigotry.  
Congratulations! You are ace at telling the difference between 19th, 20th, and 
21st-century bigotry.  Your ability to divine who has said terrible things in 
American history has roughly equal odds to a coin toss.  Your ability to divine 
who has said terrible things in American history has roughly equal odds to a 
coin toss.  Your ability to divine who has said terrible things in American 
history has roughly equal odds to a coin toss.  Your ability to divine who has 
said terrible things in American history has roughly equal odds to a coin toss. 
 You probably think too highly of people. People are terrible.  You probably 
think too highly of people. People are terrible.  You probably think too highly 
of people. People are terrible.  Challenge your friends Submit answers  