
“Never let a crisis go to waste” has always been one of the European Union’s 
guiding principles. What about five simultaneous crises? Today, the EU faces 
what Frans Timmermans, theEuropean commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> vice-president, 
describes as a “multi-crisis”: Brexit, refugee flows, fiscal austerity, 
geopolitical threats from east and south, and “illiberal democracy” in central 
Europe. Rather than wasting its crises, the EU could be laid to waste by them.

If so, Brexit will be the detonator for that demolition. By legitimising the 
concept of an EU breakup, and so turning a fantasy among political extremists 
into a realistic option of mainstream politics throughoutEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, Brexit threatens to trigger an 
irresistible disintegration process. It will also transform economics, by 
paralysing the European Central Bank in the next euro crisis. The ECB can 
always defeat market speculation, but it is powerless against breakup pressures 
from voters.

The EU urgently needs to put the genie of disintegration back in its bottle. 
That means persuading Britain to change its mind about Europe, which, according 
to conventional wisdom on both sides of the English Channel, is impossible. But 
many “impossible” things are happening in politics nowadays.

The referendum majority on 23 June was much narrower than that in Scotland’s 
2014 independence referendum, or the negative votes on EU treaties in Ireland, 
Denmark and the Netherlands, all of which were subsequently reversed. More 
important, the 52% who voted for Brexit were sharply divided in their aims, 
with some prepared to accept economic sacrifice for a “hard Brexit” - total 
separation from Europe - and others hoping for a “soft Brexit” that would 
minimise the impact on the UK economy.

According to post-referendum polling, three-quarters of leave voters expect 
Britain’s economy either to strengthen or to be unaffected by Brexit, and 80% 
believe the government will have more money to spend on public services as a 
result of their vote. Brexit voters are so optimistic because they were told - 
most prominently by the foreign secretary, Boris Johnson - that Britain could 
have its cake and eat it, a new deal that would preserve all of the economic 
benefits of EU membership with none of the obligations or costs.

The return of fiscal policy – a step in the right direction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/26/the-return-of-fiscal-policy-a-step-in-the-right-dorection>
When these expectations are disappointed, public opinion will change. Already, 
66% of voters say 
<http://whatukthinks.org/eu/questions/should-the-british-government-prioritise-maintaining-access-to-the-single-market-or-restricting-the-freedom-of-movement-when-negotiating-the-uks-withdrawal-from-the-eu/>
 that maintaining market access is more important than restricting immigration 
if Britain is unable have both. This directly contradicts the prime minister 
Theresa May’s stated priorities, and probably explains why she refuses to talk 
about her Brexit strategy.

Because public expectations of an economically innocuous soft Brexit will be 
impossible to reconcile with the rejection of all EU obligations demanded by 
the Conservative party’s hard Brexit faction, May cannot win. Whichever course 
she chooses, she will antagonise half her party and a large proportion of 
Brexit supporters, not to mention the 48% of voters who want to stay in the EU.

Once this backlash starts, plenty of ambitious Conservative politicians whom 
May purged from government will be eager to exploit it. George Osborne, 
immediately sacked as chancellor when May took office, has already thrown down 
the gauntlet,challenging her democratic mandate 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-politics-37452356>: “Brexit won a majority. Hard 
Brexit did not.” Even the weakness of Britain’s opposition parties works 
against May, allowing opponents to plot against her, secure in the knowledge 
that they are unlikely to lose power.

All this implies that British politics will become very fluid as economic 
conditions deteriorate and voters start to change their minds. The EU should 
encourage such second thoughts, which means that it must stop treating Brexit 
as inevitable and instead offer the possibility of a compromise that would meet 
British voters’ concerns, but only on the condition that Britain remains in the 
EU.

The obvious way to accomplish this would be to conclude an EU-wide agreement 
on greater national control over immigration and other symbolic issues related 
to national sovereignty. Such an agreement need not be seen as a concession to 
British blackmail if it were extended to all EU countries and presented as a 
response to public opinion throughout the union.

By making a virtue of its response to democratic pressures, the EU could 
regain Europe-wide support. To send a positive message to voters European 
leaders will, however, have to rediscover the knack for pragmatic compromise 
and inter-governmental bargaining that used to be the hallmark of EU diplomacy.

For starters, defusing both Brexit and the refugee crisis will require some 
modest changes in immigration and welfare rules. Such reforms, which would be 
popular in almost all member countries, need not conflict with the EU’s 
founding principles if they preserve the right to work throughout Europe, but 
return some control over non-economic migration and welfare payments to 
national governments.

German business leader issues warning over post-Brexit trade with UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/29/german-business-leader-warning-brexit-trade-uk>
Second, the interaction of the refugee and euro crises demands new fiscal 
rules. Dealing with immigrants is expensive and should ideally be funded by 
mutually guaranteed EU bonds. Alternatively, Mediterranean countries must be 
offered budgetary leeway, in exchange for assuming frontline responsibility for 
immigration controls.

Third, the need for immigration reform, combined with “illiberal democracy” in 
central Europe, calls for changes in EU spending priorities and foreign policy. 
Poland and other countries will accept restrictions on their citizens’ mobility 
only if offered additional structural funds and stronger security cooperation. 
Such incentives, in turn, could provide more levers to ensure respect for human 
rights.

Finally, restoring the EU’s democratic legitimacy means ending the 
institutional tensions between the eurozone and the broader union. The EU 
authorities must acknowledge that many member countries will never join the 
euro, which means abandoning their rhetoric about a “two-speed Europe,” with 
all heading – whether at high or low speed – toward the “ever closer union” 
that a single currency implies. Instead, the EU must reshape itself into two 
concentric circles: an inner core committed to deeper integration, and an outer 
ring whose voters have no interest in a single currency and a shared fiscal 
space.

Such reforms may seem impossible, but EU disintegration seemed impossible 
before the Brexit vote. In revolutionary periods, the impossible can become 
inevitable in a matter of months. This week, former French president Nicolas 
Sarkozycalled unexpectedly 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-09-28/candidate-sarkozy-calls-for-new-eu-treaty-fresh-u-k-referendum>
 for a new European treaty and a second British referendum on its EU 
membership. In Europe, a revolutionary period has begun.

• Anatole Kaletsky is chief economist and co-chair of Gavekal Dragonomics. A 
former columnist at the Times, the International New York Times and the 
Financial Times, he is the author ofCapitalism 4.0, The Birth of a New Economy 
<http://www.publicaffairsbooks.com/book/paperback/capitalism-40/9781586489625>.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>

 