
An old lady in her late 80s 
<http://www.royal.gov.uk/hmthequeen/hmthequeen.aspx> doesn't like dissonant 
music. It's hardly the most astonishing sentence one could write. Many old 
people probably share her distaste. But when the old lady in her late 80s is 
Queen Elizabeth II it's the sort of revelation that sparks interest and debate.

That's especially true when the news comes from the man who holds - though 
only until he steps down in March - the ancient titleMaster of the Queen's Music
 
<http://www.royal.gov.uk/TheRoyalHousehold/OfficialRoyalposts/MasterofTheQueensMusic.aspx>
. SirPeter Maxwell Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/aug/20/peter-maxwell-davies-music-guide>
 - plain Max to the musical world - spills this particular can of royal beans 
in an interview with the Times today. "It would be foolish not to take on board 
that the Queen doesn't like dissonant music. She has stated that very plainly," 
he is reported as saying.

Actually, it's hardly a revelation. It has long been widely inferred - even if 
not precisely known - that the Queen isn't big on music of any kind at all, so 
Max's comments that he would be a fool to rub her up the wrong way by composing 
dissonant music for royal occasions don't change the way we think about the 
Queen and her hinterland. The truth is that she has never shown any great 
interest in classical or popular music either.

All this fits with the image that we have of the Queen as essentially an 
unintellectual person â€” the image that Alan Bennett so artfully overturned in 
his bookThe Uncommon Reader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/29/uncommon-reader-alan-bennett-review>
, in which Her Maj suddenly gets an interest in the novel and discovers the 
world of Ivy Compton-Burnett and Jean Genet. The equivalent would be if she 
suddenly started turning up unannounced at London Sinfonietta concerts or at the
Huddersfield Festival <http://www.hcmf.co.uk/>, which as far as I know she 
never has.

But it would be a mistake to suppose that the Queen is a musical philistine. 
There's no evidence of that, and she has, from time to time, been exposed to a 
lot more live music than most people. She may not have fallen in love with what 
she's heard, but it doesn't necessarily follow that she knows nothing. After 
all, not all of us have the connection that comes with having someone like Max 
(and, before him, Malcolm Williamson and Arthur Bliss) whom we appoint to write 
music for us.

Benjamin Britten <http://www.brittenpears.org/> was never Master of the QM, 
but the Queen undoubtedly recognised the stand-out importance in British life 
of the principal British composer of the postwar era.She is thought to have 
disliked Britten's Coronation opera Gloriana in 1953 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gloriana> - as many others did too at the time - 
but it did not deter her from putting the seal of approval onBritten's 
Aldeburgh festival by opening the Snape Maltings concert hall in 1967 
<http://www.aldeburgh.co.uk/about_us/britten_aldeburgh_festival> and then 
returning to reopen it in 1970 after the hall was badly damaged by fire.

The truth, as one would expect from her role in life, is that the Queen is a 
cultural conservative. So are most of her family, with arguable exceptions like 
her cousin the Duke of Kent, who is to be seen at chamber music concerts at the
Wigmore Hall <http://www.wigmore-hall.org.uk/> quite often. Her mother, the 
Queen Mother, was more musical than her father, and her eldest son, Prince 
Charles, has Edwardian tastes in music (he made a TV documentary about Hubert 
Parry <http://www.johnbridcut.com/filmdetail.php?film=4>) as in most other 
things. They may not know much about music, but they know what they like and - 
even more - what they dislike.
 