
Samantha Stosur <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/samantha-stosur> cursed 
herself on match-point but had no regrets as she went down swinging in her 
latest frustrating home tournament failure.

So often overcome by local expectations, Stosur again stumbled out of the 
blocks at the Brisbane International on Monday, giving up a break in the final 
set, to fall to world No7 Garbine Muguruza.

But it wasn’t due to an attack of nerves or failing to handle the pressure as 
the two heavy-hitting baseliners slugged out a captivating two hour 45 minute 
affair at Pat Rafter Arena before Muguruza pounced to win 7-5, 6-7 (2-7), 7-5.

Bernard Tomic crashes out of Brisbane International in opening round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/02/bernard-tomic-crashes-out-of-brisbane-international-in-opening-round>
In a replay of last year’s French Open semi-final, Stosur fought back superbly 
after losing the opening set to gain control, only to lose it again against the 
fourth-seeded Spaniard.

It was the Queenslander’s third first-round exit in seven appearances in 
Brisbane, where she’s never passed the second round, but it was among her best 
performances at home as she played with aggression.

The chief frustration was succumbing after being poised for victory at 4-2 up 
in the third, before losing her serve as the French Open champion attacked and 
turned the momentum.

Stosur cursed after she hit a simple forehand passing shot into the net on 
match point – continuing a seven-match losing singles streak stretching back to 
the second round of the US Open.

“I think today I played much, much, much better than what I played at the end 
of last year,” she said. “So there’s lots of positives to take from that.

“I’m really pleased with the way I played and competed and what I was able to 
do out there

“I want to be that aggressive player.”

The 32-year-old, the oldest player in the tournament, was also left to rue 
missing three set points in the opener, as Muguruza reeled off eight of the 
next nine points.

Stosur called for new coach Josh Eagle at the break and the advice worked as 
she upped her aggression and went on to dominate the second-set tiebreaker and 
then broke immediately in the third.

Muguruza was highly relieved after scrapping her way back into the 
high-quality match.

“I think she played very well today,” the Spaniard said. “She served like a 
beast. My spirit was at the maximum level.”

Muguruza’s victory continued the success of the women’s seeds on day two of 
the tournament as Svetlana Kutznetsova, Roberta Vinci and Elina Svitolina also 
enjoyed first-round wins.

Sixth-seeded Svitolina cruised past Olympic champion Monica Puig 6-3, 6-3 to 
set up a second-round clash with American Shelby Rogers.

World No9 Kutznetsova also had little trouble in swatting aside American 
Louisa Chirico 6-2, 6-4, while Italian Vinci was pushed hard by qualifying 
lucky loser Kateryna Bondarenko 7-6 (7-4), 6-7 (4-7), 7-6 (7-5).

Meanwhile, 16-year-old qualifier Destanee Aiava looks poised to defeat 
American Bethanie Mattek-Sands but will have to wait until Tuesday to finish 
the job.

Heavy rain forced their match to be suspended with Aiava ahead 2-6, 6-3, 3-0 
(40-15).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstosur-out-pulsating-clash-brisbane-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbebf9ba4aef2db19362a3c38379ed303d0693a1a%2F0_100_4096_2725%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stosur%20succumbs%20in%20pulsating%20clash%20at%20Brisbane%20International%2C%20Barty%20faces%20Kerber&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstosur-out-pulsating-clash-brisbane-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stosur%20succumbs%20in%20pulsating%20clash%20at%20Brisbane%20International%2C%20Barty%20faces%20Kerber&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fstosur-out-pulsating-clash-brisbane-international%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbebf9ba4aef2db19362a3c38379ed303d0693a1a%2F0_100_4096_2725%2F4096.jpg>
 Ashleigh Barty celebrates after winning her first round match against 
Aleksandra Krunic. Photograph: Dave Hunt/EPA 
Ashleigh Barty is relishing a “perfect” chance to measure herself against 
world No1 Angelique Kerber after making light work of her first-round Brisbane 
International opponent.


Barty opened her 2017 campaign by defeating Serbian qualifier Aleksandra 
Krunic 6-2, 6-2 in just 66 minutes at Pat Rafter Arena.


It means the 20-year-old wildcard recipient will now face Kerber in what 
shapes as the ultimate test of Barty’s professional tennis comeback.


“It’s just a perfect way to start the summer,” Barty said.


“What an opportunity it is to test yourself against the very best.


“I have never played Angie before. It’s just exciting for me to get an 
opportunity for me to play against the No1.


“Last Australian Open, I was fortunate to play Serena. It’s exciting now to 
get a crack at Angie.”


Kerber lost last year’s final in Brisbane, but went on to win the Australian 
Open, US Open and collected an Olympic silver medal as the German improved her 
world ranking by nine places.


Barty took a break from tennis in 2014, saying she fell out of love with the 
sport, and played cricket in the Women’s Big Bash League in 2015-16 for the 
Brisbane Heat.


She made a return to tennis last year but struggled with an arm injury, but is 
already the fifth-ranked Australian in the world, and had no issues in 
dispensing with Krunic, the world No141.


“I have my best memories on this court, one of my favourite courts in the 
world,” Barty said.


“It was nice to just go out there and blow out a few cobwebs, really.


“(There’s) nothing quite like stepping out onto your home court and playing a 
first night session of a premier event, the first of the year.”
 