
The weather report said clear skies and a 9.30 sunset, so I drove to the lake. 
The western sky was wild, the sun brilliantly diffuse behind flings of cloud 
and fat vapour trails.

Tonight's strawberry moon solstice: last seen during 1967's summer of love
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/shortcuts/2016/jun/20/strawberry-moon-solstice-parking-charges-stonehenge>
If the lake were calm the water might mirror the light and make the solstice’s 
half-night brighter still. In December, I was in north Scotlandnear the 
opposite pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/28/highlands-flow-country-solstice-bog>
of this seasonal tilt: 17 hours of black night, no moon. Tonight, reversed. But 
this night wasn’t really about seasonal parallels. The last time there was a 
full moon on the summer solstice, in 1967, this lake wasn’t here.

The shout of wetland birds leads between trees to the water. Soon, deep red 
floods the low branch gaps of the oaks at my back, in the sky above them the 
glow of unseen fire. Then the moon. It rises opposite, swollen and translucent, 
over rolls of land on the east shore. A strawberry moon. Not for colour but, so 
said Native Americans, signalling the start of the picking season.

With Rutland Water’s completion in 1978 this unremarkably pretty landscape 
gained a fine feature. It’s an important wetland now. Ospreys, lapwings, 
binoculars, bikes. It’s happily busy a lot of the time. But it’s peaceful at 
night, the water a shimmer where once there would have been black, bar the odd 
electric light from Nether Hambleton. The strawberry moon they saw in 1967 
would be the village’s last. This one, Rutland Water’s first.

Rough waters ahead for Rutland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2005/aug/15/water.business> 
The moon <https://www.theguardian.com/science/moon> sharpens as it rises and 
brightens for a few glorious degrees, throws a brilliant streak on to the 
water, then blurs behind high cirrus.

It’s buggy, so I leave the shore and the rioting birds. Away from the water I 
lie near a horse chestnut and watch the sky.


The lightest night of this year couldn’t be any lighter. The haggles of cloud 
in the western sky settle to swept strokes, the tree-line stark against a 
fading stripe of bright gradually moving north, north-east, east, and 
intensifying to dawn. Soft light, soft dark; mediated by the wandering moon, 
neither wants to commit as they face off across the sky. Tonight, neither wins.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 