
THE HOME OF THE BRAVE

The Fiver has never been 100% fit to be published but that has never held it 
back. When it has been held back it’s been purely because of faults by other 
people, such as defective techies or the owners of provocatively open 
off-licences. The Fiver is staunch. The Fiver refuses to be denied. The Fiver 
would run through brick firewalls for its reader. This spam’s got napalm.

The Fiver, in short, is a winner. It never knows when it’s beaten, would put 
its head down where others dare not put their rubbish bins and it simply 
doesn’t take “you have insufficient funds to complete that transaction” for an 
answer. What we’re trying to say here, reader, is that The Fiver is The Special 
One’s idea of a champion tea-timely football email. Because The Special One has 
no time for bloodless yellow-bellies, the sort of losers who would let a lack 
of fitness prevent them from competing repeatedly at the highest level of 
professional sport.


Luke Shaw expects to be fit for Manchester United v Arsenal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/luke-shaw-fit-manchester-united-arsenal-clash-after-international-break-jose-mourinho>
When considering the non-availability of Luke Shaw and Chris Smalling for 
Manchester United’s trip to Swansea on Sunday, The Special One noted with a 
snarl that there is a “difference between the brave, who want to be there at 
any cost, and the ones for whom a little pain can make a difference”. 
Successful management is all about taking care of details. Or ignoring ones you 
don’t like.

It should be stressed at this point that Mourinho is speaking from experience. 
During his own playing days he often … hold on, let’s just back out of that 
sentence and try again. Mourinho has a long history of overcoming adversity, 
from pernickety officials to conspiring United Nations relief agencies, and his 
suffering for the sake of the people who depend on him continues right up to 
the present day, ashe battles his way out of his five-star hotel hell every 
morning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/25/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-manager-disaster-hotel>
 and drives without incident to Manchester United’s training ground. “For the 
team you have to do anything,” as The Special One has said.

Now consider what the England manager Caretaker Gareth has said about all 
this. He has spoken up with understanding for Smalling, who has played several 
matches this season with pain-killing injections, and for Shaw, a 21-year-old 
who suffered a double leg fracture when playing for United 14 months ago. “If 
Shaw wasn’t fit to play – and he was with us in September under Sam [Allardyce] 
and was feeling problems with the leg back then – there’s clearly something,” 
said Southgate. “After an injury as severe as that we have to handle that with 
care … If they haven’t played there’s obviously something wrong … obviously 
it’s a difficult one because I don’t know the reason for the comments José’s 
made.” The reason for the comments José’s made is that he’s a man after The 
Fiver’s own heart, which, it should be noted, can be anyone’s after a few tins. 
And the reason Southgate won’t win a trophy is that he’s sensible, balanced and 
humane. And the manager of England.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Follow the draw for the Women’s Euro 2017 finals with Paul Doyle at 5pm GMT! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“The disciplinary committee does not disregard the fact that the high-risk 
game took place without any violent incidents because of Dresden’s efforts” – 
faint praise from German FA suits before whacking Dynamo Dresden with a €60,000 
fine for their fans’ lobbing of a severed bull’s head on to the side of the 
pitch in their cup match witheveryone’s favourite German energy drink promoter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/dynamo-dresden-fined-fans-severed-bulls-head-pitch-red-bull-leipzig>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-fiver-suffering-for-the-sake-of-the-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74d8e5356ada36d48ba71c8e2d4e1b987fac97e8%2F0_2077_2798_1679%2F2798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suffering%20for%20the%20sake%20of%20the%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-fiver-suffering-for-the-sake-of-the-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suffering%20for%20the%20sake%20of%20the%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-fiver-suffering-for-the-sake-of-the-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74d8e5356ada36d48ba71c8e2d4e1b987fac97e8%2F0_2077_2798_1679%2F2798.jpg>
 The offending ‘missile’. 
FIVER LETTERS

“Surely a swashbuckling Liverpool side is buckling their swashes rather than 
swashing their buckles? I know I’m probably just goading better pedants than I 
as I’ve looked up swash and learned it can mean ‘to swagger, make noisy 
movements or move with a splashing sound’. A top pedant – ie someone with more 
time on their hands than me – will pull this all together and explain how any 
of the above might then be linked to ‘buckling’. I also accept that a 
‘buckleswashing hero’ sounds nowhere near as romantic as the reverse equation. 
Very interestingly, the SWASH™ Washing System may be something for club 
laundries to consider as it apparently means you can ‘say goodbye to excessive 
washing, ironing and dry cleaning’; possibly offering an alternative to the 
current policy (for clubs with massive kit deals) of simply giving away dirty 
shirts to opponents or lucky children” – Bryan Matthews (and no other 
finger-twiddling pedants).

“I’m gonna guess that the Deacon Jones involved in celebrity carpeting 
[yesterday’s Fiver] isn’t the late, legendary member of theFearsome Foursome 
<http://blog.aarp.org/2013/06/04/deacon-jones-nfl-hall-of-fame-defensive-end-dies-at-age-74/>
. Too bad. I would’ve loved to see his reaction if Mourinho posted a negative 
review about an installation” – Mike Wilner.

“At least twice now you’ve used the word Ivorian in recent editions, and it 
makes me wonder if a new brand name for your good selves isn’t in order. I’d 
like to suggest you self-identify as Fivorian, seeing as you live up there in 
your Fivery Towers” – Craig McLaughlin.

“Can I be one of 1,056 AFC Wimbledon fans (well a couple anyway) to point out 
that East Kilbride should calm the heck down and Ajax should pass on the crates 
of beer – while throwing in a few extra crates – to recognise that the win 
record belongs to the Dons. AFC Wimbledon achieved a record unbeaten run of 78 
league matches, from 26 February 2003 to 27 November 2004 - and it included 32 
consecutive wins. And yes, the Combined Counties Premier Division does count. 
East Kilbride need to put their beer away and admit they were beaten to it more 
than a decade ago by a bunch of southerners. You’re welcome to pass my details 
on to Ajax should they wish to send me a crate or two of ale for pointing out 
their error” – Alec Brown. (Over to you Edwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/east-kilbride-27-wins-ajax-edwin-van-der-sar>
).

“Reading about Olivier Giroud’s childhood fear of Alf (yesterday’s Quote of 
the Day) got me reading up on that long lost 80s classic. And the parallels 
between Giroud and Alf are striking. According to the internet, Alf was ‘played 
for comedic value’ just like Giroud does for Arsenal, in one episode Alf was 
moved from ‘his initial quarters … to the attic’, just like Giroud has been 
moved from the first-team to the bench and Alf has an aunt called Wagner just 
like … OK, last one was a bit of a stretch” – Mario Michael.

“May I be the first of many to point out to Richard Smith (yesterday’s 
letters) that although he recalls that thrown objects travel in a parabolic arc 
they actually don’t. Mr Stanley should have told him that they travel in an 
ellipse like all orbits but that a parabola model is used as it is 
mathematically much easier and good enough for most purposes. Please insert 
your own quip about lack of accuracy, discounting drag, not being good enough 
and The Fiver” – Chris Richardson (and no other science bods).

“The Fiver often enough name-checks the NME in its late-70s pomp, and clearly 
there’s a deliberate effort to build up an in-language like the NME had at a 
that time. Indeed, you work very very hard on it. The number of times I’ve seen 
Taxpayers FC and Him and $exually Repressed morris-dancing Fiver and the rest I 
can’t count. But you know what else the NME did? At the end of every year they 
published a long list titled ‘These we have loved (to death)’ and listed their 
favourite 50 catchphrases and in-words of the last year. Having done so, they 
never used them again, forcing their writers to remain fresh and relevant and 
inventive and not labour the joke too too long. In this too The Fiver might 
profitably imitate the NME” – Peter Newall.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
letter o’the day is Alec Brown, who receives a copy of Football Manager 2017 
<http://www.footballmanager.com/games/football-manager-2017> from those good 
people at Football Manager Towers, and it’s out now! We’ve got plenty more 
copies to give away, so if you want one, keep the letters coming.


RECOMMENDED LISTENING

Join AC Jimbo and co for the latest thrilling instalment of Football Weekly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/audio/2016/nov/03/tottenham-troubles-and-city-slickers-beat-barca-at-last-football-weekly-extra>
. And Producer Ben tells us there are still the last few tickets available for 
the London Palladiumlive show on 15 November 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/football-weekly-live-in-london-26602443625>
.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email – is expensive, but supporting us isn’t. If you 
value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS FEDERATION AWARDS

The Football Supporters Federation have announced the shortlists for their 
annual awards in association with Virgin Media and as is customary, The Fiver 
hasn’t been nominated in a single category. Nevertheless, we’re pleased to 
pretend we’re pleased that Football Weekly has been nominated for the gaudy 
Best Podcast bauble, Big Paper has been nominated for the Best Big Paper gong 
while Proper Journalists David Conn and Owen Gibson are both up for Best 
Writer. You know what to do – vote early and vote often in these and other 
categoriesby clicking on this link 
<https://www.surveymonkey.co.uk/r/fsf-awards-2016>.

BITS AND BOBS

A high court judgment in which the current England assistant, Sammy Lee, was 
found to have knowingly given false evidencehas been upheld by the court of 
appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/07/england-sammy-lee-bolton-transfer-deal-appeal-court>
.

Kevin Stewart, Trent Alexander-Arnold and Ben Woodburn have scribbled their 
names all overnew long-term Liverpool contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/klopp-delighted-liverpool-deals-ben-woodburn-kevin-stewart-trent-alexander-arnold>
. “News like today makes it exciting for me,” cheered Jürgen Klopp because, 
well, just because.

Roy Keane has shown typical diplomacy in trying to diffuse the brewing club v 
country row with Everton over their treatment of O’Ireland players. “Why do we 
need a good relationship with Everton?” he said, while deleting R Koeman from 
his WhatsApp group. “Listen, they’re lucky to have the Irish lads they’ve got 
there. Everton traditionally have always had brilliant Irish players doing well 
for the football club, so they shouldn’t be so quick to stop Irish players 
coming to play for [O’] Ireland.”

Charlie Adam has got the funk on with Wee Gordon for picking recently retired 
and then un-retired Scott Brown in the Scotland squad. “I understand he’s got 
50 caps and he’s done well for his country but once you retire let somebody 
else have an opportunity, because they’ve been waiting for an opportunity for a 
long time. I won’t retire, I won’t retire,”he roared, perhaps into a highland 
glen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/08/charlie-adam-hits-out-scott-brown-scotland-squad-england-world-cup>
.

Neymar, his parents and two Barcelona executives should stand trial for 
alleged corruption-knack,according to Spain’s high court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/07/neymar-should-stand-trial-for-alleged-corruption-spain-high-court-barcelona>
.

Italy coach Giampiero Ventura has right royally effed off The Fiver’s 
flag-waving-Humvee-driving make-us-great again-in-fact-no-don’t American 
cousin, Yankee Doodle Fiver, by saying he didn’t pick MLS goal-magnet Sebastian 
Giovinco in his most recent squad because he doesn’t think much of soccerball.
“The reality is that he plays in a league that doesn’t matter much,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/07/sebastian-giovinco-italy-giampiero-ventura-mls>
 oofed Ventura.

And this week’s Inter manager is Steffano Pioli. His first match in charge 
will be the small matter of the Milan derby.

STILL WANT MORE?

David Squires on football, fury and poppies (part III). Enjoy. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/nov/08/david-squires-football-poppy-fury-season>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-fiver-suffering-for-the-sake-of-the-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80903009c3d944b363e8e3cd1914f5586459c242%2F101_885_1848_1108%2F1848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Suffering%20for%20the%20sake%20of%20the%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-fiver-suffering-for-the-sake-of-the-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Suffering%20for%20the%20sake%20of%20the%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-fiver-suffering-for-the-sake-of-the-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80903009c3d944b363e8e3cd1914f5586459c242%2F101_885_1848_1108%2F1848.jpg>
Thirty years ago Northwich Victoria drew with Conference leaders Maidstone 
despite including three fans in their starting XI – one of whom had spent the 
afternoon in the pub.Rob Smyth tells a terrific forgotten story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/the-forgotten-story-of-the-pie-and-pints-match>
.

The revamped Leyland DAF Cup is completely brillia … ah. Hang on, let’s have 
another go at that. The revamped Sherpa Van Trophy is complete and utter 
rubbish – and here’s why,writes John Ashdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/08/efl-trophy-football-league-failure>
.

Simon Burnton’s “real” Premier League table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/08/premier-league-table-liverpool-top-burnley-west-ham>
 will make Hammers fans as unhappy as they have been with their new home at 
times this season.

Is the USA! USA!! USA!!!’s dalliance with the Premier League coming to an end? 
Dave Caldwell tests the temperature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/08/premier-league-viewing-figures-usa-decline>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


SEE YOU TOMORROW, IF THERE IS A TOMORROW
 