
Britain’s 145,000 pubs, clubs, hotels and restaurants sold less beer than 
supermarkets and off-licences last year – for the first time since industry 
records began.

Of the 44m hectolitres (7.74bn pints) of beer sold in the UK during 2015, 51% 
was sold in the off-trade, which is dominated by large supermarkets, according 
to theBritish Beer and Pub Association <http://www.beerandpub.com/> (BBPA). The 
remaining 49% was sold through pubs, clubs and other licensed premises.

Venues where drinkers can buy and consume beer have been steadily losing 
ground to supermarkets for many years. This is due to being unable to compete 
with aggressive promotions, especially on popular lager brands. In 2000, more 
than two-thirds of beer was drunk in pubs and other on-trade locations, while 
the figure was almost 80% in 1990.

This weekend, Tesco was selling “slab” packs containing 18 cans of Stella 
Artois for £14 
<http://www.tesco.com/groceries/product/browse/default.aspx?N=4293220949+4294963453&Ne=4294793660>
, equivalent to about £1 a pint, while Asda was offering a similar multipack of
20 Carlsberg cans for £10 
<https://groceries.asda.com/product/canned-lagers/carlsberg-lager/910000347418>
, equivalent to 65p a pint.


According to the BBPA, the average pub price of a pint of draught lager is in 
a range between £2.40 and £4.70 – 38% higher than a decade earlier. A pint of 
bitter has seen similar rises, up from £1.80-£2.56 in 2006 to £2.05-£3.90 this 
year.

As well as more drinkers opting to buy supermarket beer to drink at home, 
changing tastes in pubs and bars have also had an impact on beer sales in 
recent years. The popularity of wine has been steadily building, while cider 
and alcopops have fluctuated in and out of fashion, on each occasion taking 
market share from traditional beer choices.

Within pubs, there has also been winners and losers among the different types 
of beers on tap. The BBPA figures were published on Monday in a new statistical 
handbook. This showed that draught lager still dominates, accounting for 27.9% 
of UK beer sales last year, though this figure has fallen from 33.4% a decade 
earlier. Sales of cask ale have held up well, rising from 7.3% of all beer 
sales in 2010 to 8.2% five years later.
Percentage of total UK beer sales 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/sep/2016-09-25T15:25:14/embed.html>
Overall, the amount of beer drunk in the UK last year was 44m hectolitres and 
has remained close to that level for the last four years. Before that, beer 
consumption declined by more than 12% between 2006 and 2009, due to factors 
including increased duty, the smoking ban in pubs and shrinking disposable 
incomes.

The number of pubs in Britain, however, has not stopped declining. There were 
just 50,800 public houses opening their doors last year, down from 58,200 a 
decade earlier.

Latest figures suggest the average Briton drinks the equivalent of 67.7 litres 
(119 pints) a year, slightly less than the European average of 72 litres. It is 
also considerably less than the 107 litres a head consumed in Germany and the 
144 litres a head consumed in the Czech Republic.

 The BBPA called on the chancellor, Philip Hammond, to repeat George Osborne’s 
surprise cut to beer duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/mar/20/beer-tax-cut-budget-alcohol> three 
years ago to boost the pub trade. It said: “Duty is 54% higher than it was in 
2000, despite recent cuts. Much more work needs to be done to cut beer duty in 
the UK, still a staggering 14 times that of Germany.”
 