
So you thought 2016 was an unpredictable bastard. Now meet 2017, his wilder 
sister. This is the year thatBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> turns from conjecture into 
trajectory. The process of departure will start to happen when Mrs May delivers 
her “Dear Jean” letter to the EU, the piece of paper that formally notifies the 
commission that Britain wants a divorce.

It is conceivable that this could be delayed by the verdict on the 
parliamentary process that theSupreme Court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/05/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-live-updates>
 will deliver later this month. But Article 50 is going to be triggered in the 
next 12 months, with consequences that the best minds in politics, diplomacy 
and trade can only guess at.

Before that, in less than three weeks’ time, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> gets his fat fingers on the 
nuclear biscuit. One of the most inexperienced and erratic personalities ever 
to occupy the Oval Office – and that’s the PG version of his character – will 
take office at a time of severe geopolitical turbulence.

The agonies of Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/i-couldnt-take-anything-except-dignity-people-aleppo-syria-on-fleeing-city>
 are part of a wider proxy war in the Middle East in which Russia, Turkey, 
Iran, Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states are all participants.North Korea has 
nuclear warheads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/un-north-korea-sanctions-nuclear-test>
 and ambitions to be able to land one on mainland United States. As if that 
wasn’t a sufficiency of unpredictability, there will be criticalelections in 
Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/angela-merkel-expected-stand-for-re-election-germany>
 and France, the EU’s two most significant actors. Voters in the Netherlands 
and probably Italy will also have an opportunity to join the insurrection 
against the status quo that delivered the Brexit vote and the Trumpquake. In 
the most apocalyptic scenario for Europe, the eurozone begins to disintegrate, 
followed soon afterwards by the EU itself.

The conventional wisdom still maintains that this won’t happen because Marine 
Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/08/marine-le-pen-says-no-free-education-for-children-of-illegal-immigrants>
 will be defeated in the final round of voting for the presidency of France. 
The consensus view also tips Angela Merkel to receive a favourable answer when 
she seeks a fourth term from German voters. Optimists will be expecting to 
arrive at the end of 2017 to find columnists debating the unexpected resilience 
of European liberal democracy and pronouncing that we have passed “peak 
populism”. This is likelier to be the case if the nasty economic side-effects 
of Brexit become palpable to Britons and President Trump starts to get 
unpopular with those who put him in office. He is already unpopular with the 
larger number of Americans who never wanted him in the White House.

Whether your forecast of the future leans to the optimistic or the pessimistic 
probably says more about your personality than it does about what is going to 
happen. Let’s be honest. No one should be terribly confident that they know 
anything after a 2016 that confounded the expectations of pundits, pollsters, 
financial markets and the voters themselves. The only truly robust prediction 
that I make about 2017 is that sensible people are going to be a lot more 
cautious about making predictions. Pundits have been marking the turn of the 
year by listing their forecasting turkeys. Pollsters are conducting another 
round of postmortems about what went wrong for them. Mainstream politicians are 
agonising about the lessons to be learned from their failures.

There is one exception to this nervousness. Stock markets, especially those in 
London and New York, are celebrating. While most of us look anxiously upon 
stormy waters, markets apparently see only tranquil seas ahead. TheFTSE-100 
ended the year at a new high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/30/ftse-100-2016-all-time-high-dollar-earners-donald-trump>
. The US indices have been anticipating President Trump by surging to record 
levels. A most remarkable signal is coming from theVIX Index 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/quote/VIX:IND>, sometimes called the “Fear Index” 
because it is a gauge of how much investors are prepared to pay to insure 
themselves against shocks. The hoariest of the cliches about financial markets 
is that they hate uncertainty. Yet we begin a year pregnant with perils with 
the Fear Index at exceptionally low levels.

Stock markets are not buoyant because they have a superior window into the 
future. Their predictive powers were among the most useless in 2016. Markets 
bet that Hillary Clinton would become the 45th president of the United States. 
The night of the Brexit referendum began with the value ofsterling rising 
<http://time.com/4379556/sterling-high-brexit/> against the dollar, so 
convinced were most traders that Britons would vote to stick with the EU. When 
these “unthinkables” then happened, markets responded with an instant panic 
plunge before bouncing back. The “Trump trade” powering Wall Street is based on 
an assumption that he will do all of the semi-sensible things he has suggested 
to boost the US economy, while fulfilling none of the reckless campaign 
promises that would derail it. Share prices are also being driven by salivation 
that he will deliver the lavish tax breaks he promised corporate America. A man 
who ran against Wall Street – andpainted his opponent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jun/21/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-economy-us-election-live>
 as a creature of the financial elite – is now being loved by Wall Street. It 
is not a coincidence, as old Marxists used to say, that his proposed cuts to 
personal taxation would shower cash on the already wealthy.

You will have spotted the contradiction between what markets expect and what 
he promised. He secured the White House by harvesting the discontent of working 
and middle-class Americans, whose living standards have fallen or been frozen 
in the past decade.Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>
 finds herself in Number 10 for not dissimilar reasons. Many Britons used the 
Brexit vote to express their anger that the economy was not working for them. 
There are myriad accounts of why large segments of the electorate in many 
developed democracies are rebelling against the status quo. Nearly all place 
economic grievances at the heart of it. More sophisticated accounts recognise 
other factors. Discontent about levels of migration. Distrust of mainstream 
politicians. Fear of terrorism. A reaction against the cosmopolitan complexity 
of the early 21st century. The inability of lacklustre centrists to find a 
vision or language that could compete with the potency of cheap tunes such as 
“Take Back Control!” and “Make America Great Again!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsurging-stock-markets-donald-trump-conman-theresa-may-phoney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff584ccba046be1a94fdaaf7f72e7ad5cddc53235%2F0_260_5288_3172%2F5288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Surging%20stock%20markets%20say%20Trump%20is%C2%A0a%20conman%20and%20May%20a%20phoney%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rawnsley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsurging-stock-markets-donald-trump-conman-theresa-may-phoney%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Surging%20stock%20markets%20say%20Trump%20is%C2%A0a%20conman%20and%20May%20a%20phoney%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rawnsley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fsurging-stock-markets-donald-trump-conman-theresa-may-phoney%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff584ccba046be1a94fdaaf7f72e7ad5cddc53235%2F0_260_5288_3172%2F5288.jpg>
 ‘Theresa May says she gets it: the fruits of prosperity have not been 
equitably divided.’ Photograph: WPA Pool/Getty Images 
There are many sources of what I have called the Age of Rage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/11/campaign-to-stay-in-europe-wrapped-in-union-jack>
, but the other discontents are entangled with or sharpened by the fundamental 
one. People feel worse off. Since the financial crisis, the most important fact 
of political life has been anaemic growth in most western countries, 
accompanied by wages that have stagnated, declined or improved only feebly for 
millions. This discontent has spread to quite a lot of those who have actually 
done OK since the Great Crash of 2007-09. They have nevertheless felt worse 
off, because the rewards of prosperity have been disproportionately and
conspicuously enjoyed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/sir-philip-green-yacht-bhs-frank-field-pension-scheme>
 by the very top slice of society. There are many ways of dissecting the Brexit 
vote, but the starkest is by income. In every income group in Britain bar the 
most affluent ABs, there was a majority for leaving the EU. Donald Trump would 
not have acquired the White House had not an important section of the 
working-class vote withheld its support from his opponent or transferred it to 
him. The biggest shift of ex-Obama voters to Trump came among those earning 
less than $30,000 – £24,000 – a year.

Theresa May says she gets it: the fruits of prosperity have not been equitably 
divided. She has spent a lot of the time since she moved into Number 10 talking 
about the reform of capitalism. “A change is going to come,”she declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-consigns-cameron-to-history-in-populist-speech>
 at the Tory party conference. In amore recent speech, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/14/theresa-may-gives-her-first-foreign-policy-address-as-pm-video>
 to the City at Mansion House, she defined her task as ensuring that the 
profits from globalisation were spread more widely and fairly. She put herself 
on the side of “people on modest to low incomes in rich countries like our own” 
who “see their jobs being outsourced and their wages undercut”. That echoed 
Donald Trump when he used hisvictory speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/donald-trumps-victory-speech-in-full-video>
 to acclaim what he called “the forgotten men and women of our country” and 
vowed that his presidency would ensure that they “will be forgotten no longer”.

In both cases, the implied promise is that there will be a reordering of the 
distribution of profits. Those who own and manage assets will be obliged to 
take a diminished share so that a greater slice of the rewards can be enjoyed 
by workers.

What are stock markets telling us when they respond to Mr Trump and Mrs May by 
sending share prices to record highs? They are telling us that they think that 
the British prime minister is a phoney and the incoming American president is a 
conman. They are wagering that President Trump will betray the poorer voters 
who helped put him in the White House. They are betting that Theresa May will 
not deliver for the less affluent Britons whose Brexit votes helped elevate her 
to Number 10. That’s what the cash is saying. The “forgotten men and women” of 
America will be no better remembered in theTrump cabinet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/donald-trump-cabinet-climate-deniers-conspiracy-wealth>
 of tycoons. Mrs May’s “just about managing” will find out she is all jam 
tomorrow, never today.

The money temples are almost certainly right in their assessment of Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. Theresa May has the 
coming year to try to prove the markets wrong about her.
 