
Sussan Ley may lose her job as health minister over her use of travel 
allowances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-stands-aside-health-minister-travel-claims-investigated>
 but far worse for her constituents is her health policy. I know. I live in her 
electorate.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sussan%20Ley%20steps%20aside%20during%20investigation%20into%20taxpayer-funded%20travel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sussan%20Ley%20steps%20aside%20during%20investigation%20into%20taxpayer-funded%20travel%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video&media=>
Sussan Ley steps aside during investigation into taxpayer-funded travel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-steps-aside-investigation-taxpayer-funded-travel-video>
The electorate of Farrer is located in south-west New South Wales. It’s the 
second largest in the state, some 120,000 sq km; only Parkes in the north is 
bigger. It is rural and conservative. The median weekly household income is 
$935.

Since its creation in 1949 it has been held by only four MPs, all from the 
conservative side of politics: three Liberals and a National. It is so “safe” 
for the Coalition that when the Labor candidate withdrew before the election he 
wasn’t even replaced. As of 2001, it has been held bySussan Ley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sussan-ley>.

Crossbenchers pledge to reform expenses as Sussan Ley scandal widens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/crossbenchers-pledge-to-reform-expenses-as-sussan-ley-scandal-widens>
Given the party’s long history with the region and Ley’s 15-year tenure as its 
MP you would assume the electorate’s particular issues would be well known. 
Being a rural electorate bordered in the south by the Murray River you would be 
correct in assuming one of the top issues is irrigation and water rights – and 
the be-hatted Barnaby Joyce has done a good job representing those interests in 
the media.

The other, less remarked upon, and arguably more pressing issue is healthcare. 
You can’t farm when you are dead, as the saying goes. It’s a well-known and 
regrettable fact that people from lower socio-economic backgrounds, a category 
to which most rural Australians belong, have worse health outcomes than their 
city cousins. Why then, is the government, with a health minister with a rural 
background, intent on making healthcare less affordable to those already 
struggling?

When the $5 Medicare co-payment was scrapped after being widely derided as 
unfairly targeting the poor, the government sought to maintain the spending cut 
that went with it by freezing the GP rebate. It was revealed in November that
this freeze resulted in a drop in bulk billing rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/medicare-bulk-billing-drop-shows-gps-cannot-absorb-rebate-freeze-says-ama>
.

Reliable bulking billing can be the difference between affording to go to the 
doctor and not, doubly so for people with chronic illness or those on a limited 
income such as the pension and disability payments or Newstart.

I have muscular dystrophy, a muscle weakening disease that, among other 
things, means that I need to use a wheelchair. It also means that in my 32 
years, I’ve had hundreds of doctor visits and appointments across the entire 
spectrum of the health system. I know what’s it like to travel for hours to see 
specialists in the city because they simply do not exist in my electorate. I 
also know that to even get a appointment with a specialist you must be referred 
by a GP. Which means another appointment.

Knowing this makes these cuts to frontline services even more egregious. More 
expensive GP visits coupled with the fact rural people, particularly men, are 
less likely to go to the doctor early, hints at a looming health crisis in 
Farrer and electorates like it.

However, to say the savings being made in health unfairly target the poor is 
to only see half of the picture. More troubling is where these savings are 
being made, not just at the bottom end, but at the frontline: preventative 
health.

The two most recent and visible of the many changes to health have been the 
removal of blood sugar testing strips from the PBS and the increased cost of 
pap smears. The sugar testing strips are mostly used by those with 
diet-controlled diabetes. Diabetes overwhelming affects those from low 
socio-economic backgrounds; it is especially prevalent in Indigenous 
Australians. The other recent change is government funding for pathology 
services needed for pap smears will be cut, and those amounts will likely be 
passed on to women. Poor women. The savings rely on it.

The position of the health minister and her government is that savings must be 
made in health and they have decided to achieve this by pricing the poor out of 
GP services and preventative health.

Fiona the Unemployed Bettong visits Centrelink to discuss her debt notice | 
First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/fiona-the-unemployed-bettong-visits-centrelink-to-discuss-her-debt-notice>
 Should Ley meet her downfall, it should not be because of dodgy travel 
expenses orsocialist conspiracy, as fellow public money spendthrift Bronwyn 
Bishop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/bronwyn-bishop-blames-socialists-for-criticising-sussan-ley-over-expenses>
 has suggested. Nor even for the policies she introduced as health minister – 
some other Liberal health minister would be equally bad.

No, her downfall should come from assuming her seat is so safe that her 
constituents can be ignored and taken for granted. It should be for assuming 
that our health – my health, the health of the people I know – can be chiseled 
away without consequence.

The people of Farrer live with Ley’s decisions, and increasingly we die with 
them. Sure, dropping $800,000 on an impulse apartment purchase looks bad, and 
it is. But it looks even worse when you’re standing in line to drop $60 for the 
sugar strips that keep you alive.

It’s hard to be even angry. You can only get angry at the unexpected. Anyone 
paying attention saw this coming. GPs and the AMA warned us but they were 
ignored. People of the Farrer electorate know what that’s like. So I’m not 
angry. Besides, anger – much like this government – is bad for your health.

 * This story was amended on 11 January 2017 to correct the size of the 
electorate of Farrer.  