
Can access to water and sanitation be secured now for future generations? We 
don’t have a choice; sustainability must be at the heart of all efforts to 
deliver these services.

This was the central message of a panel discussion hosted by the Guardian at 
the annual World Water Week conference in Stockholm, Sweden. The panel was 
organised in association with the Stockholm InternationalWater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/water> Institute (SIWI) and supported 
by Fundación Femsa, which works to create programmes around conservation and 
the sustainable use of water.

The sustainable development goals (SDGs) – an ambitious agenda for social, 
environmental and economic change – were adopted by world leaders at the United 
Nations general assembly in September 2015. The agenda sets a target of 
“ensuring the availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation 
for all” by 2030.

Around the world, 650 million people lack access to safe water and 2.3 billion 
people live without adequate sanitation. Without action, these numbers will 
grow as the global population increases. Another 1.5 billion people will live 
on this planet by 2030, according to the UN.

Better and faster
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsustainability-in-the-pipeline-securing-water-and-sanitation-for-the-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4e718a368642b8efa67e05fc1e8c1cfb44880d7%2F0_236_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sustainability%20in%20the%20pipeline%3A%20securing%20water%20and%20sanitation%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsustainability-in-the-pipeline-securing-water-and-sanitation-for-the-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sustainability%20in%20the%20pipeline%3A%20securing%20water%20and%20sanitation%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsustainability-in-the-pipeline-securing-water-and-sanitation-for-the-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4e718a368642b8efa67e05fc1e8c1cfb44880d7%2F0_236_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 People crowd around a municipal tanker to fetch water in New Delhi, India. 
Photograph: Anindito Mukherjee/Reuters 
The question, therefore, of providing water and sanitation services 
sustainably is non-negotiable. The real challenge, the panel agreed, is how to 
deliver them more efficiently.

“We have to do things better and faster,” said Alejandro Jiménez, water, 
sanitation and hygiene (Wash) specialist at SIWI. “Faster, because we will not 
achieve access for all at this rate of implementation. And better, because at 
present we cannot keep services functional once they are constructed.”

Sergio Campos, chief of the water and sanitation division at the 
Inter-American Development Bank, agreed. In Latin America and the Caribbean, he 
said, the challenge is not reaching the 30 million people who lack access to 
safe water and the 100 million people who don’t have adequate sanitation, but 
ensuring a sustainable and continuous service.

How capturing rain could save Mexico City from a water crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/06/capturing-rain-save-mexico-city-water-crisis>
“Around 90% of people in our region live in urban areas and we haven’t been 
able to cope with population growth and rapid urbanisation,” he said. 
“Maintenance of the existing infrastructure has been systematically deferred 
and 35 to 60% of potable water is lost through leakages.”

Investing in the social, as well as the physical, infrastructure is one way of 
securing water and sanitation over the long term, said Mariano Montero, 
director of Fundación Femsa. “By social infrastructure we mean empowering 
people to own the project,” he explained. “We can’t just give a community a 
solution that we think is best. They have to participate and invest in that 
solution. Even if they don’t have money, they can invest by putting labour into 
the process.”

New ways of thinking

Innovation will be key to the sustainable development of water and sanitation 
access, said Jayanthi Iyengar, senior vice-president and chief innovation and 
technology officer at Xylem, an American water technology provider. “I don’t 
think we need to invent new technologies … but we do need innovation around how 
to accelerate their deployment.” Iyengar added that technology would be 
particularly useful in detecting water losses and recycling water, but that 
consumers needed to be educated in innovative ways.

“One of our surveys in California shows that where people understand what’s 
involved in water recycling, they are much more willing to accept it. We went 
from a 42% to 89% acceptance rate, as soon as people had information on the 
treatment processes,” said Iyengar. The same survey also found that more people 
are supportive of the term “purified water” than “recycled” or “reclaimed 
water”.

Live Q&A: $114bn a year needed for water and toilets – where will it come from?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/08/live-qa-114bn-a-year-needed-for-water-and-toilets-where-will-it-come-from>
But any programme of change needs funding. The millennium development goal 
(MDG) on water sought to halve the proportion of the population without 
sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation between 2000 and 
2015. Annual expenditure to meet this goal was $35bn (£26.5bn). By contrast, 
$115bn (£87bn) will be needed per year to meet the SDG – sustainable and 
equitable access for all.

Where will this money come from? “The starting point is a complete change in 
mindset,” said Bill Kingdom, global lead for water supply and sanitation at the 
World Bank’s Water Global Practice. “Many of our clients are dependent on money 
coming from above. They spend it and then they stop [programmes] because 
there’s no more money.”

Instead, said Kingdom, budget holders must find ways to allocate money more 
efficiently.

Making water affordable

Both Montero and Kingdom agreed that financial sustainability is critical for 
water and sanitation access to be secured indefinitely. “I feel that we’re not 
doing our jobs unless clients can move to self-financing over the long-term,” 
said Kingdom. In the US, for example, the water service is publicly managed and 
provided but 100% privately financed. “It is decades down the road, but that’s 
where I feel we should be moving.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsustainability-in-the-pipeline-securing-water-and-sanitation-for-the-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7eec785b0df097dcb15b9ce283cc6a196675a8c4%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sustainability%20in%20the%20pipeline%3A%20securing%20water%20and%20sanitation%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsustainability-in-the-pipeline-securing-water-and-sanitation-for-the-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sustainability%20in%20the%20pipeline%3A%20securing%20water%20and%20sanitation%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsustainability-in-the-pipeline-securing-water-and-sanitation-for-the-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7eec785b0df097dcb15b9ce283cc6a196675a8c4%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 A woman is shown how to fetch water from one of the ATM-style water dispensers 
in the Mathare slums in Nairobi, Kenya. Photograph: Daniel Irungu/EPA 
Tariffs are one way a water utility could become self-financing and afford 
service improvements, but many people don’t pay water bills because their 
service is bad. In this instance, said Kingdom, utilities have to invest in 
delivering a better service before they enforce tariffs. “In Karnataka [India], 
we converted a highly intermittent supply – there was water for just a couple 
of hours every few days – into a continuous supply. Now everyone pays their 
water bill,” he said.

But wherever the money comes from, it must be found quickly. “We’re already 
one year into the SDGs. If we carry on with business as usual for the next 
year, that’s two years gone and the $115bn needed a year becomes $127bn [£96bn] 
for the remaining 13 years – so our problem just gets bigger and bigger,” said 
Kingdom.

Water security for all? We need these five organisational changes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jul/19/water-and-sanitation-for-all-we-need-these-five-organisational-changes>
The panel agreed that strong governance is critical for countries to ensure 
sustainable access to water and sanitation for all. The success of countries 
like Singapore, South Korea and Malaysia in achieving the MDGs on water and 
sanitation has been attributed to the fact that their heads of state were fully 
supportive of the notion of universal access. Effective leadership can also 
attract the investment needed to provide sustainable access. “In terms of a 
financial borrowing entity, water companies look pretty impressive,” said 
Kingdom. “They have a natural monopoly on a product that is essential for life. 
That’s a pretty good business case for lending money, as long as the governance 
is improved.”

But ensuring access to water and sanitation does not need to be done in 
traditional ways. In cities around the world, millions of people rely on an 
intermittent piped supply or are not connected to a water or sewerage network 
at all. Instead, they will often buy water from informal vendors and pay to 
have their sewerage removed from pit latrines.

“How can the water sector integrate these informal vendors into the formal 
system, to make sure that the service provided is up to the standard people 
deserve?” asked one audience member.

“It’s important to understand what all parts of the sector are doing and map 
out who is doing what,” said Jiménez. “We don’t need to provide a whole 
sewerage network for the city, for example, when 10% of it is covered by 
informal providers … We should see what existing providers can do and try to 
make a mix of services that can be progressively improved and help deliver 
solutions to all,” he said.

Hardest to reach
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsustainability-in-the-pipeline-securing-water-and-sanitation-for-the-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F273194189854a7aa0dc5b0b41c389c091d40a08c%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sustainability%20in%20the%20pipeline%3A%20securing%20water%20and%20sanitation%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsustainability-in-the-pipeline-securing-water-and-sanitation-for-the-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sustainability%20in%20the%20pipeline%3A%20securing%20water%20and%20sanitation%20for%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fsustainability-in-the-pipeline-securing-water-and-sanitation-for-the-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F273194189854a7aa0dc5b0b41c389c091d40a08c%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 A man from the indigenous community of Pacayita collects water to irrigate a 
papaya field in Masaya, Nicaragua. Photograph: Oswaldo Rivas/REUTERS 
The panel also addressed the different levels of water and sanitation coverage 
between urban and rural areas. Data published by the WHO/Unicef joint 
monitoring programme at the end of the MDG period revealed that eight out of 10 
people without access to an improved drinking water source live in rural areas, 
and only 51% of the global rural population have access to an improved 
sanitation facility (one that hygienically separates human waste from human 
contact), compared to 82% of the world’s city-dwellers.

“When you look at rural areas of Latin America, people have the same level of 
coverage today that urban areas had 25 years ago,” said Campos.

“Investment in basic infrastructure has been concentrated in major capitals. 
Now we need to invest in small towns and medium-to-large cities so that people 
there have access.”

The panel also agreed that the hardest to reach – including people living in 
rural areas, the poorest and most vulnerable, ethnic minorities and indigenous 
peoples – should be prioritised in this new era of ensuring sustainable access 
to water and sanitation.

“There is a huge problem with discrimination and cultural understanding of 
different values,” said Jiménez. Providing water and sanitation access to these 
people is more than just having a few more people to serve, it’s part of a 
mind-shift to accommodate services to the aspirations of the people.”

The global water crisis in 13 photographs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/mar/22/world-water-day-global-crisis-13-photographs>
Panel

Eliza Anyangwe (chair), freelance journalist, the Guardian

Mariano Montero, director, Fundación Femsa

Alejandro Jiménez, programme manager, Wash specialist, Stockholm International 
Water Institute

Sergio Campos, chief, water and sanitation division, Inter-American 
Development Bank

Jayanthi Iyengar, senior VP and chief innovation and technology officer, Xylem

Bill Kingdom, global lead water supply and sanitation, Water Global Practice, 
World Bank

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.
 