
Johanna Konta <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/johanna-konta> has been 
denied a place at the WTA Finals at the 11th hour, after Svetlana Kuznetsova 
won the Kremlin Cup in Moscow to leapfrog the Briton in the race for 
qualification.

On the eve of the season-ending showpiece in Singapore, which features the top 
eight players in the world, Kuznetsova, the top seed and defending champion, 
overwhelmed the naturalised Australian Daria Gavrilova in straight sets, 6-2, 
6-1.

Kyle Edmund misses out on first ATP Tour final in Gasquet defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/22/kyle-edmund-loses-richard-gasquet-semi-final-european-open>
Kuznetsova’s success leaves Konta, who has been named the most improved player 
on the WTA Tour 
<http://www.wtatennis.com/news/article/5993863/title/konta-wta-most-improved-player-of-the-year>
 this year afterbreaking into the top 10 for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/08/johanna-konta-beats-madison-keys-china-open>
 and reaching theAustralian Open semi-finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/28/johanna-kontas-fairytale-australian-open-run-ended-by-angelique-kerber>
, to rue the abdominal strain that forced her to withdraw from the Hong Kong 
Open and has kept her sidelined since. She had previously been in pole position 
to complete the lineup at the eight-woman WTA Finals after Serena Williams 
pulled out with a shoulder injury.

Konta, seemingly fit again after appearing on the practice courts in 
Singapore, where she participated in the buildup to the event, could yet 
feature as first alternate in the event of any further withdrawals.

In the meantime, however, the ninth-ranked Kuznetsova will board a flight to 
Singapore, bruised but buoyed after a hectic week that has brought four wins in 
four days and 470 ranking points, enough to edge Konta out of the frame by 95 
points.

“I was trying not to think about Singapore all week,” said Kuznetsova. “I was 
playing match by match and I’m so happy to win.”

With prize money of more than $150,000 on offer for each group win at the 
round-robin event, Kuznetsova’s second successive title on the indoor hard 
courts of Moscow’s Olympic Stadium could yield a return far beyond the$141,700 
cheque <http://www.kremlincup.ru/db/aboutcup/33/> she picked up for claiming 
her second tournament victory of 2016.

The Russian will line up in white group, alongside second-seed Agnieszka 
Radwanska, whom she will face on Monday in her first match, as well as the 
French Open champion, Garbiñe Muguruza, and the US Open finalist Karolina 
Pliskova.

The Red group is headlined by the world No1, Angelique Kerber, with Simona 
Halep, Madison Keys and Dominika Cibulkova completing the field.

Kuznetsova, a former French and US Open champion, overwhelmed the Moscow-born 
Gavrilova – who at the age of 22 was contesting her first WTA Tour final – in 
just over an hour.
 