
True, a lot of the Ones to Watch at SXSW 2013 <http://sxsw.com/> – from DIIV 
to Danny Brown, Death Grips to Flaming Lips – are either established or 
American, or both. And yet the festival is still the industry's most 
prestigious annual showcase for new and emerging talent from all over the world 
and the place to be for any aspiring British act. So here are 10 touted UK 
artists to see over the next few days in Texas.

Tuesday 12 March

Young Fathers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/nov/27/new-band-young-fathers> (11.10pm, 
the North Door)
Described by NME as "the best Scottish rap group of all time" and by New Band 
of the Day as the missing link between Death Grips and De La Soul, Young 
Fathers came straight outta Edinburgh a few years back, but are only now 
starting to make waves, on the back of their signing to the well-regarded 
Anticon label. In fact, they don't regard themselves as a hip-hop act at all, 
but as pop boys, an odd thing to say, perhaps, given the harshness of some of 
their music. But actually, despite sharing textures and rumbling sonics with 
leftfield/post-rock outfits, there is an attention to the chant-worthy chorus 
that suggests a wider audience isn't an impossibility.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfoNJGsGwczw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfoNJGsGwczw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FfoNJGsGwczw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Watch here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=foNJGsGwczw>

Wednesday 13 March

Syd Arthur <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/feb/15/new-band-syd-arthur> 
(3pm, South Congress)
Formerly known as Grumpy Jumper, Syd Arthur – comprising a violinist called 
Raven Bush, who just happens to be Kate Bush's nephew – are throwbacks to the 
early 70s Canterbury scene when outfits such as Caravan, Gong and Soft Machine 
made a sound that combined psychedelia, jazz and progressive rock. There are 
traces, too, of folk and world music in Syd Arthur's repertoire, while the band 
themselves – who actually live in Canterbury – use the term "psychedelic funk". 
And it's true: some of the songs on their 2012 album On an On, because of Liam 
Magill's soulful vocals and the band's jittery rhythms, do sound a bit like 
Jamiroquai jamming with Jethro Tull. But you know what? It works.

Dan Croll <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/nov/08/new-band-dan-croll> 
(Red 7 Patio, 9pm)
He does folk, he does electro, he's got links with the Communion 
<http://www.communionmusic.co.uk/> contingent and the digital realm. He's 
Liverpool's new boy wonder, and according to his latest single he's goingFrom 
Nowhere <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KYdB3rectmc> to the toppermost of the 
poppermost. He's even had the approbation of Paul McCartney, who had a 
one-to-one with theLiverpool Institute for the Performing Arts 
<http://www.lipa.ac.uk/> graduate during which he gave his demos the 
thumbs-aloft treatment, despite Croll being more of a fan of Burt Bacharach 
than the Beatles. By the way, don't be fooled by the Buddy Holly specs – he's a 
former nightclub bouncer and rugby-playing hard-nut who gave up the sport to 
pursue a career as the missing link between Beck and Beirut, Jake Bugg and Joe 
Mount.

Thursday 14 March 14

Chvrches <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jun/26/new-band-churches> (Red 
7 Patio, 12.30am)
One of several Brit buzz bands at SXSW, Chvrches are finally breaking cover 
after their emergence as quintessential blog mysteriosos, with several highish 
profilegigs under their belts 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2013/mar/01/chvrches-live-review-ica-churches> 
and numerous festival appearances in place for the summer. Live, Lauren 
Mayberry is proving anything but enigmatic and aloof, joking with the audience, 
although that voice is no laughing matter: it has an ethereal quality to match 
the shimmery electro-pop of her male allies, Martin Doherty and Iain Cook. 
Chvrches make challenging chart music, apparently influenced equally by Lil 
Wayne and Laurie Anderson, which sounds far-fetched until you've heard their 
hip-hop hard beats, ravishing melodies and thrillingly tremulous vocals.

Peace <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jan/16/new-band-peace> (Mohawk, 
3.30pm)
Give Peace a chance: the Birmingham band have a vocalist with the gruff 
charisma of Ellery Roberts fromWu Lyf 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/nov/26/wu-lyf-ellery-roberts-quits> and a 
rhythm section with the sexy propulsion of Vampire Weekend. They're one of the 
BBC Sound of 2013 ones to watch, but they topped even that accolade with a New 
Band of the Day feature that hailed their guitar sound as phosphorescent and 
their beats as baggy. "Dark melodic indie techno" is the band's own, rather 
more sensible description of what they do. With an NME tour alongside Palma 
Violets, Miles Kane and Django Django under their belts, chances are their SXSW 
set will capitalise on their already considerable success.

Reading on mobile? Watch here 
<http://www.muzu.tv/peace/follow-baby-music-video/1766255/#>

Friday 15 March

Disclosure <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2011/jul/07/new-band-disclosure> 
(La Zona Rosa, 10pm)
The south London duo have signed to PRM, Jessie Ware's label, and they've just 
had aNo 2 hit 
<http://www.factmag.com/2013/02/10/disclosures-white-noise-reaches-2-in-the-uk-singles-charts/>
, so hugeness evidently beckons. But first, the SXSW test, to establish whether 
Guy and Howard Lawrence, the first siblings of post-2step pop, can make their 
soulful dance music, heavy on the samples and programming, work live. Then 
again, bringing DJ culture to the land of EDM won't be quite the stretch it 
once was. Not that these boys, one of them still in his teens, operate in the 
same brain-bashing realm as Skrillex and the like: theirs is a more subtly 
stirring and emotionally satisfying experience than that. But still fully 
expect to work up a decent sweat, especially when they do White Noise.

Reading on mobile? Watch here 
<http://www.muzu.tv/disclosure/white-noise-music-video/1764289/#>

Laura Mvula <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/oct/23/laura-mvula-new-band> 
(Hype Hotel, 11pm)
Of all the many post-Winehouse female singer-songwriters out there, Laura 
Mvula is probably the most interesting, which is to say, the least Amy-like, 
the one guilty of messing most with the formula. She's a graduate of 
Birmingham's Conservatoire, and her classical training means the music she is 
making has more in common with baroque pop than retro-soul. So much so that, 
for all the strengths of her voice – a flexible instrument, as rich and 
resonant as you could want – it's really the unusual song structures and florid 
arrangements that stand out. Indeed, hearing the music's idiosyncratic rhythms 
and complex harmonies, reviewers have been moved to compare Mvula to Nina 
Simone singing extracts from Brian Wilson's SMiLE opus.

Savages <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/25/new-band-savages> (Club 
de Ville, 11pm)
There will be queues round the block for this one. Savages are one of those 
new groups getting furiously touted out of all proportion to the amount of 
music available: to date, two studio tracks by this London band have been 
heard, plus one live EP. But when they're as jarringly intense asFlying to 
Berlin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Np6z6o3iVUQ> and Husbands 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ddnemvOVXEo>, it's enough. Where post-punk 
meets riot grrrl, Savages' music, as the NBOTD column put it, "makes us dream 
of what it must have been like to have been around to hear, in real time, the 
debut releases by Public Image Ltd, Magazine, Siouxsie and the Banshees and Joy 
Division, to feel, as those incredible records hit the shops, that unearthly 
power and sense of a transmission from a satellite reality." Get there early.

Bondax (La Zona Rosa, 12.20am)
Beat scientists with heart, this duo come from Lancaster way. George Townsend 
and Adam Kaye, still only 18, grew up listening to folk, indie, electronica and 
dubstep, their early-teen tastes ranging from John Martyn to James Murphy. This 
goes some way towards explaining their sultry and melodic but insistent and 
intricately produced grooves. They're hi-tech but slow-tempo, although ambient 
chill-out this is not. In a way, think disco – with all the luscious female 
vocals that implies (sampled, naturally) – only at a lower bpm rate than usual. 
There are other forays into, variously, house, techno and dubstep territories, 
but always the accent is on melody and romancing a crowd. Their aim, they say, 
is to achieve mainstream recognition on a Moby/LCD scale. They're moving in the 
right direction.

Palma Violets 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/may/17/new-band-palma-violets> (Club De 
Ville, 1am)
Along with Savages this London four-piece are probably the British band 
saddled with the heaviest weight of expectation, which could make their SXSW 
appearance either a crushing disappointment or the launchpad for international 
acclaim. Their debut single, Best of Friends, was voted track of the year by 
NME's critics. Channelling all the right noises – from the Clash to Echo and 
the Bunnymen all the way up to Wu Lyf – they have the raucous energy of a good 
old-fashioned boyband, the sort that wield guitars, bass and drums with violent 
imprecision. And they've got the louche allure of the Libertines. Now they've 
just got to decide whether to re-enact the same old shambling melodramas as 
Doherty and Barat et al, or to try something new.

Reading on mobile? Watch here 
<http://www.muzu.tv/palma-violets/best-of-friends-music-video/1548312/#>
 