
If artist Zhang Huan were to become mayor of a Chinese town he would change 
two things. “First the public toilets,” he says, jutting a finger into the air. 
“Second, the museums.”

Zhang wants to use his rock-star status to promote Chinese culture and to 
sanitise Chinese cities. But building more – and better – toilets is no mere 
case of urban planning. For Zhang, toilets are politics. They are poetry. They 
are art.

In 1994, the then 29-year-old recorded his performance piece 12 Square Metres 
on black and white film. To mimic the putrefying conditions in Chinese toilets 
Zhang sat naked, his head shaved, in a prison-like space. Caked in fish oil and 
honey he waited for the flies to feed. They crawled into his mouth, up his 
nose, into his ears and his eyes. For one hour exactly Zhang remained still. 
Then he stood up, walked slowly to a nearby pond, and submerged himself.

“That toilet was my life,” recalls Zhang, noting the poverty of his childhood 
in rural Henan province and the sparseness of his digs in an artists’ community 
on Beijing’s outskirts in the 1990s. Public toilets swarmed with shit and 
flies. Indoor plumbing was then, and remains for many today, a luxury.

For Zhang, however, times have changed. He is now an internationally renowned 
artist who has been represented by Pace Gallery, New York, since 2007. He 
employs more than 100 full-time assistants (during busy periods this can rise 
to 200) who churn out industrial-sized artworks in his 75,000 square foot 
Shanghai studio.

He continues to surprise, moving from painting to performance to sculpture. 
This week Zhang is in Australia to promoteSydney Buddha 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2015/sydney-buddha>, his majestic ode to 
eastern spirituality. Standing over five metres tall in Carriageworks’ 
cavernous central hall, it is his largest installation in Australia to date.

Two Buddhas, representing permanence and transience, face each other. One, a 
hollow aluminum mould, shimmers in beams of sunlight. Its tranquil head lies 
severed at its feet. The second buddha is a casting of the first’s interior and 
is created from 20 tonnes of incense ash sourced from Shanghai temples. As time 
passes, it will eventually crumble.

“For me [the ash] is souls,” explains Zhang, sitting next to his creation and 
opening his palms in a gesture of prayer. “This is my Buddha flying here to 
bless the people and the city.”

Otherworldly, maybe. But Zhang, who is taut and wiry with an open unlined face 
far more youthful than his 50 years, is also funny and humble. For the launch 
he is dressed entirely in shades of grey, from his hiking shoes to his cap to 
his grey polo shirt, the collar upturned. There are traces of the grace and 
physical poise that made his performance pieces as a young man beautiful: as he 
talks, he sits bolt upright, sometimes resting his toes on pointe like a ballet 
dancer.

Zhang was born Dong Ming, meaning “eastern brightness”, in 1965 to 
factory-worker parents a year before the cultural revolution erupted. 
Embarrassed by his revolutionary name (an homage to Chairman Mao) he changed it 
when he moved to Beijing in the 1990s to study at the Central Academy of Fine 
Arts.

There, living with other poor migrants and artists, he created angst-ridden 
performance pieces that brimmed with pain and a meditative masochism. That 
Zhang – the rebellious, dirty, daring artist who hung naked from the ceiling of 
his studio, suspended in chains, with his blood dripping on to a pan below 
where it slowly cooked – is gone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsydney-buddha-artist-zhang-huan-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420782907261%2F19da3885-2e43-4d2f-8438-ac7c469f9499-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sydney%20Buddha%20artist%20Zhang%20Huan%20on%20Chinese%20dreams%20and%20toilets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsydney-buddha-artist-zhang-huan-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sydney%20Buddha%20artist%20Zhang%20Huan%20on%20Chinese%20dreams%20and%20toilets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsydney-buddha-artist-zhang-huan-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420782907261%2F19da3885-2e43-4d2f-8438-ac7c469f9499-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Sydney Buddha at Carriageworks. Photograph: Susannah Wimberley 
Buddhism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/buddhism> provides a link. In his 
previous works Zhang emulated the mental fortitude that monks seek by enduring 
extreme physical tests. The art, to many, seemed perplexing and subversive. He 
says his parents thought it “dangerous and that I was mad” and that for a long 
time they had no idea what he did. In 2014 a program about him that aired on 
the Discovery Channel in Asia was banned in China “because some people cannot 
accept it”.

Zhang only rediscovered Buddhism as a full way of life when he moved back to 
Shanghai from New York in 2006 after eight years living in the US. Now it 
informs everything: from the tools he uses, including ash, to the subjects he 
sculpts. He sees his task to help promote president Xi Jinping’s “Chinese 
dream”. Zhang insists: “We have to revive all our traditional ancestors’ 
culture and art.”

Savvy, and commercially viable, Zhang has ridden the wave of the Chinese art 
boom. (It has no signs of slowing down: he is designing a flagship 
store-cum-art gallery for a Chinese diamond company.) Embracing this side of 
things has inevitably led to a dulling of his edge. Zhang recently packed his 
teenage son off to a London boarding school with the advice: help others, study 
hard and “avoid traffic, sex, girlfriends and drugs”.

Back in Carriageworks, the disintegrating ash Buddha, surrounded by swirls of 
incense, is a reminder of Zhang’s own fluidity and fortune. “I always believed 
in the traditional Chinese doctrine: that you keep changing and this is the 
rule of the universe,” asserts the artist. “I feel I am so lucky to change from 
a mad man to a man with good food and a family man, to have my children. I feel 
that Buddhism has blessed me.”

Zhang is carefully weighing up how to spend his next 30 years – and how to 
stretch them out to feel like 300. One idea is to abandon art to become a monk; 
another is to spend 10 years doing 10 exhibitions in 10 of the world’s most 
important museums. Another is to become mayor. Because, as Zhang notes, there 
is a lot to do. While New York snoozes, “China never sleeps.”

• Sydney Buddha <http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2015/sydney-buddha> is at 
Carriageworks until 15 March.Sydney festival 2015 
<http://www.sydneyfestival.org.au/2015/> runs from 8 to 26 January at venues 
citywide. Find all Guardian Australia’s coveragehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sydney-festival-2015>
 