
Let’s get this clear: Tchaikovsky’s Pathétique Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UcJzjB8bwqE> is not a musical suicide note, 
it’s not a piece written by a composer who was dying, it’s not the product of a 
musician who was terminally depressed about either his compositional powers or 
his personal life, and it’s not the work of a man who could go no further, 
musically speaking. It shouldn’t even be called the Pathétique, strictly 
speaking, with its associations of a particularly aestheticised kind of 
melancholy. Tchaikovsky himself, having supposedly approved his brother’s 
Russian word Патетическая (“Patetitčeskaja”) for the work (a better translation 
of which is “passionate” in English), and having decided against calling the 
piece “A Programme Symphony”, sent his publisher the instructions that it was 
simply his Sixth Symphony in B Minor, dedicated to his nephew Bob Davydov. 
That’s how the piece appeared when Tchaikovsky himself conducted the premiere 
in St Petersburg on 28 October 1893. It was only in its first posthumous 
performance, three weeks later, that it was called the “Pathétique”, a moniker 
that has stuck ever since.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfRvrDWzJpew&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfRvrDWzJpew>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DfRvrDWzJpew&media=>
Instead, the Sixth Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fRvrDWzJpew> is a 
vindication of Tchaikovsky’s powers as a composer. It is the piece that he 
described many times in letters as “the best thing I ever composed or shall 
compose”, a work whose existence proved to him that he had found a way out of a 
symphonic impasse, which represented a return to the heights of his achievement 
as a composer – away from what he thought of as the numbing, written-by-numbers 
populism of his ballet The Nutcracker or the trivial “pancakes” of the piano 
pieces he was also writing in 1893 – and brought a deep, personal satisfaction 
that he hadn’t felt in years. Having recently sent the score of the Sixth 
Symphony to his publisher, his brother remembered “I had not seen him so bright 
for a long time past”.

And yet the Sixth Symphony is about death. It’s the fulfilment and 
tranfiguration of a programme that Tchaikovsky had sketched for a Symphony in E 
Flat Major that he discarded in 1892 (whose first movement he reworked as his 
Third Piano Concerto <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5u42YZAfRzA>). “The 
ultimate essence … of the symphony is Life. First part – all impulse, passion, 
confidence, thirst for activity. Must be short (the finale death – result of 
collapse). Second part love: third disappointments; fourth ends dying away 
(also short).” While that isn’t a precise description of what became the Sixth 
Symphony, in the broadest sense of a symphony whose final image is of musical, 
emotional, and physical collapse – as it is in the Sixth’sAdagio lamentoso 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x2tTfTVzD0M> fourth movement – there is a clear 
connection. It’s also the closest we have to a revelation of the programme 
behind the Sixth Symphony, which Tchaikovsky told his beloved nephew Bob was 
there in the music, but which would remain a secret.

But frankly, there’s no need for the divulging of anything more 
programmatically specific. That this is a piece about a struggle between the 
life-force and an inevitable descent to an exhausted physical and emotional 
demise is obvious to anyone who has heard it and lived through it. This 
symphony finally faces the fate that stalks Tchaikovsky’sFourth 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f8sSlPmVM78> and Fifth 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wPpaJML_EP8> symphonies (the motto themes of 
both symphonies stand for the destiny of their symphonic heroes) but which 
their frenetic, bombastic concluding movements attempt to dodge. In the Sixth, 
Tchaikovsky meets that inexorable descent head-on, and in so doing he creates a 
new shape for the symphony, in one of the most audacious and boldest 
compositional moves of the 19th century. That slow, lamenting finale 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W7uymxxUPZE> turns the entire symphonic 
paradigm on its head, and changes at a stroke the possibility of what a 
symphony could be: instead of ending in grand public joy, the Sixth Symphony 
closes with private, intimate, personal pain.

Which might have some saying: Exactly! That’s why this symphony is a 
reflection of Tchaikovsky’s autobiography! He must have been 
depressed/suicidal/about to become the victim of an anti-homosexual secret 
court (one of the more recent and most ludicrous theories behind Tchaikovsky’s 
death on 5 November 1893, nine days after he had premiered the Sixth Symphony) 
to have composed this! And there’s more: the Russian Orthodox Requiem chant 
even makes a blatant appearance in one of the most dramatic coups-de-théâtre in 
the first movement! You see? He knew he was dying!

To which the only possible rejoinder is: I’m afraid that’s nonsense. To take 
some examples from elsewhere in musical history: many of Rachmaninov’s pieces 
are haunted by the Dies Irae plainchant, that symbolic intonation of impending 
fate, and yet even after writing a piece calledThe Isle of the Dead 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MVZWoE3_l4I>, he kept on living; Berlioz’s 
music too is full of intimations of mortality, but he kept going for decades 
after dreaming of his own execution in hisFantastic Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=blDPW0XKoOE>; Beethoven didn’t expire after 
just after he faced the limits of human mortality in theMissa Solemnis 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3u1EduLH7L8>; and even Mahler remained alive 
just after he had just crossed the border into silence at the end of hisNinth 
Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zHXJw9avAn0>. In fact, if every 
composer, author, painter, or poet had died after making their greatest works 
about death, none of them would have been around for very long. It is pure, 
tragic coincidence that Tchaikovsky should die of cholera a few days after 
conducting the Sixth Symphony at the age of just 53 – a piece, to reiterate, 
that he actually composed in good mental and physical health – but that’s all 
it is. We do this symphony a terrible injustice if we only see and hear it 
through the murky prism of myth, story, and half-truth that now swirls around 
accounts of what happened in the composer’s final days.

So yes, this symphony is about a battle between a stubborn life-energy and an 
ultimately stronger force of oblivion that ends up in a terrifying exhaustion, 
but what makes the piece so powerful is that it’s about all of us, not just 
Tchaikovsky. And that’s because of how Tchaikovsky makes the musical and 
symphonic drama of the piece work. So when you’re listening to the performances 
below, hear instead how the cry of pain that isthe climax of the first movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UcJzjB8bwqE> is a musical premonition of the 
inexorably descending scales of the last movement, and howthe second movement  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x2tTfTVzD0M>makes its five-in-a-bar dance 
simultaneously sound like a crippled waltz and a memory of a genuinely sensual 
joy. Listen to how theMarch of the third movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lioGWy9sETw> creates a seething superficial 
motion that doesn’t actually go anywhere, musically speaking, and whose final 
bars create one of the greatest, most thrilling, but most empty of victories in 
musical history, at the end of which audiences often clap helplessly, thinking 
they have arrived at the conventionally noisy end of a symphonic journey. But 
then we’re confronted with the devastating lament of the real finale, that
Adagio lamentoso <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x2tTfTVzD0M>, which begins 
with a composite melody that is shattered among the whole string section (no 
single instrumental group plays the tune you actually hear, an amazing, 
pre-modernist idea), and which ends with those low, tolling heartbeats in the 
double-basses that at last expire into silence.

That silence was its own kind of victory for Tchaikovsky. He knew this piece 
marked a new high-watermark in his confidence as a composer, and that he had 
re-invented the symphony on his own terms, and for so many composers who came 
after him. Mahler, Shostakovich, Sibelius, and many others could not have 
composed the symphonies they did without the example of Tchaikovsky’s Sixth. 
It’s just a terrible fluke of fate that this was his last symphony, and not the 
beginning of what could have been his most exciting creative period as a 
composer.

Five key recordings

Evgeny Mravinsky/Leningrad Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UcJzjB8bwqE>: perhaps the most unflinchingly 
intense recording ever made of this symphony.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZgCDbhhubeM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZgCDbhhubeM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZgCDbhhubeM&media=>
Mikhail Pletnev/Russian National Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tchaikovsky-Symphony-Path%C3%A9tique-Pyotr-Ilyich/dp/B000027JET/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1408958086&sr=8-1&keywords=tchaikovsky+pletnev+pathetique>
: Pletnev’s interpretative imagination blazingly illuminates Tchaikovsky’s 
unique symphonic structure.

Valery Gergiev/Kirov Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tchaikovsky-Symphony-Juliet-Fantasy-Overture/dp/B000031X7X/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1408958056&sr=8-3&keywords=tchaikovsky+kirov+gergiev>
: one of the most white-hot of Gergiev’s recordings - and therefore, one of the 
most white-hot recordings, ever!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ6xMu79ZHvQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ6xMu79ZHvQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJ6xMu79ZHvQ&media=>
Andris Nelsons/City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J6xMu79ZHvQ>: the pick of recent recordings, 
with Nelsons’s in-the-moment brilliance and the CBSO’s collective virtuosity.

Paul Kletzki/Philharmonia Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tchaikovsky-Symphony-Pathetique-Audio-Cassette/dp/B00I1LKO4M/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&qid=1408952588&sr=8-4&keywords=tchaikovsky+pathetique+kletzki>
: apologies for the sentimentality, since it’s hard to get hold of now, but 
this is the - I think! - fantastically emotionally raw recording I grew up 
with, and which still defines the piece for me – it might for you, too.

Myung-Whun Chung conducts Tchaikovsky’s Pathétique Symphony with the Seoul 
Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/august-27/15030> on 27 August at the 
Proms.
 