
Igor Stravinsky, symphonist. Not exactly the first thing that comes to mind, 
and yet Stravinsky wrote five pieces that include "symphony" or "symphonies" in 
the title. Four are masterpieces (Symphonies of Wind Instruments 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jIqpMeI5ww4>, the Symphony of Psalms, Symphony 
in C <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kIFH62Sk47Q> and Symphony in Three 
Movements <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nIgur3mNCQ8>), and one – the early 
Symphony in E Flat Major he wrote as a student – is a piece of juvenilia but is 
still scandalously neglected in the concert hall. If you don't know it,listen 
to it here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rmwLN2nhs1U> – top tunes; clear, 
brazen orchestration; and some firebrandish over-ambition, it's all there; and 
is proof of how much Stravinsky owed to his teacher and mentor, Rimsky-Korsakov.

But this week's piece is one of those later works of Stravinsky's that does 
strange things with the symphonic form. TheSymphony of Psalms 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RgVL_n8RXng> is, for me, one of the most deeply 
moving and genuinely spiritual pieces Stravinsky ever wrote, but to understand 
why, we need to examine, and quite possibly overturn, some conventional ideas 
about the music Stravinsky was writing at this period of his life.

The Symphony of Psalms was a commission to celebrate the 50th anniversary of 
theBoston Symphony Orchestra <http://www.bso.org/> in 1930. The orchestra 
wanted something symphonic, and Stravinsky's publisher wanted something 
popular. Stravinsky gave them both – but not in the way either party could 
possibly have envisaged. "I took the word, not in the publisher's meaning of 
'adapting to the understanding of the people', but in the sense of 'something 
universally admired'," he said. That's how Stravinsky thought of the Psalms he 
sets in each of the Symphony's three movements, and especially Psalm 150 in the 
final movement, which is by far the longest of the three, with its vision of a 
world celebrating God through music.

Stravinsky had apparently already had the idea of composing a piece that would 
include the psalms in an orchestral context, but he didn't want to follow in 
anyone's footsteps. "I even chose Psalm 150 in part for its popularity, though 
another and equally compelling reason was my eagerness to counter the many 
composers who had abused these magisterial verses as pegs for their own 
lyrico-sentimental 'feelings'. The Psalms are poems of exaltation, but also of 
anger and judgement, and even of curses." The two earlier movements set texts 
of human penitence , sinfulness and longed-for salvation: the sinner's cry to 
be heard in the first movement, the "new song" forged after the Lord has hauled 
the psalmist "out of a horrible pit, out of the miry clay" in the second.

The secret of this 23-minute work's symphonism is its relationship between 
chorus and orchestra. Stravinsky composed for them so that "the two elements 
are on an equal footing, neither outweighing the other". He said he wanted "to 
create an organic whole without conforming to the various models adopted by 
[symphonic] custom, but still retaining the periodic order by which the 
symphony is distinguished from the suite."

The music of this period of Stravinsky's life is called neo-classical, which 
suggests an often ironic or coldly knowing refraction of past forms and manners 
through the prism of Stravinsky's way of hearing, seeing and imagining. But 
that's the idea I think you need to chuck out when you're listening to the 
Symphony of Psalms. There are references to previous styles and modes of 
musical discourse in the piece – especially the double fugue of the second 
movement, with a dense contrapuntal texture in the choir and the orchestra and 
a first melody that flirts with a memory of the main subject of Bach's Musical 
Offering – and there are moments that resonate with Stravinsky's recent music, 
such as his opera-oratorioOedipus Rex 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YIdimmUtYOI>. But it's the new sounds, forms 
and shapes of the Symphony of Psalms that define the piece as a profoundly 
unironic, essentially sincere expression of Stravinsky's unique approach to the 
psalms, the symphony and even his faith (he was an observant Orthodox believer 
at this time in his life).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7AEyByiiN7g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7AEyByiiN7g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F7AEyByiiN7g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The first noise the Symphony makes <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7AEyByiiN7g>
 crystallises the sharp directness of its soundworld: an E minor chord played 
by the orchestra of two pianos, harp, woodwind, brass and low strings (there's 
no room for violins or violas in this symphony, those conventional carriers of 
symphonic line and melody – the choir, in a sense, takes their place). There's 
an octatonic skirl in the oboe and bassoon (a way of splitting the 12 notes of 
the chromatic scale into alternating intervals of semitone and tone), and the 
symphony is propelled into life.

The choir's first entry sounds like a stern lament with the altos' severe yet 
keening line before the whole choir cries out in desperation. The whole of this 
short movement is laceratingly unsentimental, but there's a vivid emotional 
power to its final, major-key cadence, as the choral voices long for their 
non-existence, a time when they will "be no more".

It's music that offers the opposite of easy spiritual comfort, and the second 
movement is no different <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iPUuICl9Mk4>. After a 
long instrumental exposition of the orchestra's fugue ("altogether too obvious, 
too regular and too long", Stravinsky felt, later in his life), there are 
moments of depictive as well as structural power in the choir's music: the way 
the voices build their lines on top of one another when the words talk of 
"setting my feet upon a rock", and above all, the massive and shocking 
fortissimo of the "new song" the psalmist wants the Lord to put in their mouth. 
Again, it's the unflinching power of Stravinsky's setting that's so striking: 
it may not be "lyrico-sentimental" but it is, definitively, expressive – to use 
a word Stravinsky didn't like much.

The setting of Psalm 150 in the finale 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xPNrvzdn3qI> is the most original movement in 
the symphony. It's a contrast between two kinds of time, and two wildly 
differentiated sorts of music: the slow, circling sighs and breathtaking 
evocation of static, infinite timelessness that you hear at the start of the 
movement, and fast, violent shock of the music that comes next. There's an 
animal ferocity in this faster music: Stravinsky's vision of praising God takes 
in desperation and even savagery.

One section of this music is also inspired by a specific image Stravinsky had, 
"a vision of Elijah's chariot climbing the heavens. Never before had I written 
anything quite so literal as the triplets for horn and piano to suggest the 
horses and chariot." And it's the contrast between the two kinds of music that 
defines this final movement, and makes its coda – which returns to and extends 
the slow music you've heard at the start and briefly, shockingly, in the middle 
of the movement – so moving.

Moving? Absolutely. This final music of the Symphony of Psalms, as Stravinsky 
creates repeating cycles of different metre and phrase, gives us a glimpse of a 
kind of musical eternity in the choir's praise of the Lord. And it's precisely 
in that alchemical combination of the music's objective, hieratic construction 
and its clarity and directness that its expressivity lies. Stravinsky famously 
said music was "powerless to express anything at all", but that's only one side 
of his aesthetics.In his series of lectures at Harvard 
<http://www.amazon.com/Poetics-Lessons-Charles-Norton-Lectures/dp/0674678567>, 
he suggested that the real nature of his music was to do with sublimated, 
"Dionysiac" feeling in combination with "Apollonian" order. "What is important 
for the lucid ordering of the work – for its crystallisation – is that all the 
Dionysiac elements which set the imagination of the artist in motion and make 
the life-sap rise must be properly subjugated before they intoxicate us, and 
must finally be made to submit to the law: Apollo demands it." Contained by the 
Apollonian clockwork of the cycles of time and the new-fangled symphonic 
discourse of this final movement, Dionysus – paradoxically – dances, prays, and 
curses all the more vividly and powerfully.

Five key recordings
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRgVL_n8RXng%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRgVL_n8RXng%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FRgVL_n8RXng%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Columbia Symphony Orchestra/Igor Stravinsky: Stravinsky's own recording gives 
the lie to the idea that this music is cool, arch, or ironic: this is a raw, 
visceral performance.

London Symphony Orchestra/John Eliot Gardiner 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Stravinsky-Symphony-Psalms-Boulanger-L/dp/B001N2W83G/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1390301384&sr=8-2&keywords=john+eliot+gardiner+stravinsky+symphony+of+psalms>
: Gardiner's laser-like lucidity reveals the explosive power of Stravinsky's 
Psalms.

Berliner Philharmoniker/Pierre Boulez 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Stravinsky-Symphony-Psalms-etc-Igor/dp/B000031X7Y/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1390301420&sr=8-1&keywords=pierre+boulez+stravinsky+symphony+of+psalms>
: Boulez approaches the Symphony as an Apollonian expression rather than 
Dionysiac dance.

Berlin Radio Symphony Orchestra/Riccardo Chailly 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Stravinsky-Symphony-Berlin-Radio-Chorus/dp/B001VV263G/ref=sr_1_fkmr3_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1390301453&sr=8-2-fkmr3&keywords=riccardo+chailly+stravinsky+symphony+of+psalms>
: a rigorously unsentimental performance that sears with energy.

London Symphony Orchestra/Leonard Bernstein 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Symphony-Psalms-1948-version-Alleluja/dp/B005M47UW0/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1390301759&sr=8-2&keywords=leonard+bernstein+stravinsky+symphony+of+psalms>
 Bernstein takes longer over the Symphony than anybody else in this list, but 
long-breathed love never curdles into mawkishness.
 