
A notional “symphonic principle” has implicitly underscored much of the 
discussion of the pieces in this series thus far. The idea of symphonic 
“integrity” (another word that needs to be in quotation marks!) is often 
contrasted in music-historical writing with its orchestral antipode in the 19th 
century, “programme music” - music that sets out to tell an “extra-musical” 
narrative, such as attempting to describe a work from literature, or a natural 
phenomenon, or a painterly image in sound; as if the former were the one true 
faith of music history, and the latter were a somehow less “pure” (quotation 
marks again, sorry) form of music.

Now, I hope I’ve demonstrate that those boundaries are much more fluid than 
that simple-minded distinction suggests, and that symphonies that are supposed 
bulwarks of “purity” or “integrity” are as porous to meanings, interpretations, 
and story-telling – often more so! – than orchestral pieces that really do set 
out to tell a story, whether a pre-existing one, such asTchaikovsky’s Manfred 
Symphony, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=INceRhl05mo> or a new narrative, say 
Strauss’s Sinfonia Domestica <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ANmiGCLWA_w>. And 
more than that, I hope this series, above anything else it might do, has 
demonstrated how the “symphonic principle” is always about telling stories and 
doing cultural work; and that any symphony – even the most apparently abstract 
– is never, ever, about just pushing notes around a piece of paper in a 
hermetically sealed cultural vacuum, but is an active engagement with the world 
of the composer who wrote it, the time and place it was written in, the way 
it’s been received, and the range of its interpretations.

All of which is a monumental upbeat to this week’s symphony: Liszt’s Faust 
Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=le8BdI8C-_E>. This even more 
monumental work – it’s about 75 minutes long - was inspired by Goethe’s Faust, 
and each of the three movements is an epic depiction and conjuring of one of 
the characters from the defining work of German romanticism: Faust, Gretchen, 
and Mephistopheles. In each movement you will hear a crystallisation of the 
particular character.The first music to be played  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=le8BdI8C-_E>in the Faust movement sounds out 
an existential ennui in a searchingly chromatic melody, a tune – and it really 
is a tune! – that includes all 12 pitches of the chromatic scale, a melody 
written in 1854, nearly 70 years before Schoenberg’s serialism. Faust’s music 
moves through nostalgia and heroism in the enormous, half-hour-long drama of 
this movement.Gretchen’s music <http://youtu.be/le8BdI8C-_E?t=31m22s> in the 
almost equally long second movement is pastoral, dream-like, and diaphanous; 
and then inthe third tableau <http://youtu.be/le8BdI8C-_E?t=54m39s>, Mephisto’s 
is a warped, Satanic, but thrilling corruption and distortion of Faust’s music. 
And all that sound and fury comes before the most remarkable passage in the 
symphony, music that presages Wagner’s music of the Ring Cycle and Parsifal, 
and without which there would be a gaping hole at the heart of 19th century 
music: theChorus Mysticus <http://youtu.be/le8BdI8C-_E?t=1h11m> that Liszt 
added to the piece in 1857, for a choir of male voices and a solo tenor who 
sings words from end of the second part of Faust, Goethe’s invocation of and 
paean to the Eternal Feminine.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm30ybpo3MUY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm30ybpo3MUY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm30ybpo3MUY&media=>
Liszt – older than Wagner by just two years, his future father-in-law, the 
greatest piano virtuoso of all time, yet still in thrall to Wagner’s musical 
magnetism - played this piece and hisDante Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k8huOjLi2YE> to him in 1856. Wagner was 
obviously so inspired by what he heard that he nicked whole ideas from it - its 
thematic material, harmonic flexibility, and orchestrational sensuality - in 
everything from Die Walküre to Tristan und Isolde, from Siegfried to Parsifal. 
And if you're minded, you can hear pre-echoes of Bruckner’s harmonic language 
in the Faust Symphony, as well as Mahler’s emotional intensity, and even of the 
expressionist angst of the turn of the century as well. Liszt’s Faust is a 
genuinely prophetic piece.

But there’s a bigger issue at stake in Liszt’s symphony, which returns us to 
the programme music vs symphonic music debate. For Liszt, his orchestral music 
– including his tone-poems as well his symphonies on Faust and Dante – wasn’t 
an attempt to do something “extra-musical”, in the sense of relying on outside 
sources - stories or images or plays - for its expressive concentration. 
Instead, they are proof of what Liszt felt the true power of music could be: 
that it could do something much more elemental than simply represent or stand 
metaphorically for ideas or emotions – it could actually embody them as 
experiences. Music, for Liszt, possessed a magical power that could transcend 
other art-forms bybecoming the sublime, otherworldly, and transcendent 
encounters that painting or literature could only symbolise. Which all means 
that the Faust Symphony’s daemonic power is definitively, inherently 
intra-musical as opposed to “extra-musical” - and it expands the definition and 
reach of the symphony at the same time. It’s an essential piece for this 
series, in other words!

Five key recordings
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dle8BdI8C-_E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dle8BdI8C-_E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dle8BdI8C-_E&media=>
Boston Symphony Orchestra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=le8BdI8C-_E>/
Leonard Bernstein <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=le8BdI8C-_E>: Bernstein’s 
performance doesn’t just wear Faust’s heart on his sleeve; he proves the power 
of the piece as programme-transcending masterpiece.

Royal Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/A-Faust-Symphony-Alexander-Young/dp/B002XCP9FE/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1404078245&sr=8-2&keywords=beecham+liszt+faust>
/Thomas Beecham 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/A-Faust-Symphony-Alexander-Young/dp/B002XCP9FE/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1404078245&sr=8-2&keywords=beecham+liszt+faust>
: Beecham did more than any conductor to make the Faust Symphony part of the 
repertoire again, after decades of absence: his uniquely compelling advocacy 
tells you why it worked!

BBC Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Liszt-F-Symphonic-Poems-Symphony/dp/B001MVUYPW/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1404078291&sr=8-1&keywords=liszt+faust+bbc+philharmonic>
/Gianandrea Noseda 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Liszt-F-Symphonic-Poems-Symphony/dp/B001MVUYPW/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1404078291&sr=8-1&keywords=liszt+faust+bbc+philharmonic>
: Noseda plays the original version, without the chorus, which leaves the final 
transcendent moments to the orchestra alone - it will sound truncated to anyone 
who is used to the chorus, but Noseda makes as good a case as possible for 
Liszt's initial intentions.

Chicago Symphony Orchestra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3ZUQ7yZTFco>/Georg 
Solti <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3ZUQ7yZTFco>: Solti’s performance is 
full of clarity and colour – and diabolical violence, too, when the last 
movement requires it.

Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B004ZVXN18/ref=dm_ws_sp_ps_dp?ie=UTF8&qid=1404078390&sr=8-1-fkmr0>
/Daniel Barenboim 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B004ZVXN18/ref=dm_ws_sp_ps_dp?ie=UTF8&qid=1404078390&sr=8-1-fkmr0>
: not just a master of Liszt’s piano music, Barenboim makes the case for Liszt, 
symphonist, in a performance that never indulges in the big moments, but 
creates real dramatic momentum.
 