
The clue’s in the title, surely: Janáček’s Sinfonietta 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PScaxSwGa6o> is precisely that; an orchestral 
divertissement and an occasional entertainment rather than an actual 
“symphony”. If you think that a piece that begins and ends with a phalanx of 
military fanfares, performed by an additional ensemble of13 brass players 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NCXRqgXiARA> - including nine trumpets – can’t 
possibly be taken seriously as one of the 20th century’s most compelling 
symphonies, then look away now. But I’m here to make the case for Janâček’s 
work (one of his final masterpieces, premiered in 1926, two years before his 
death) as the product of a unique approach to symphonic form, for the 1920s – 
or indeed for any other time.

Some background before we get to the music. The Sinfonietta is among the only 
orchestral pieces – and it’s certainly the best of an admittedly small field – 
to have been composed for a “gymnastic festival”, a movement called“Sokol” 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sokol> that celebrated youth, sport and 
independent nationhood. That self-confident nationalism, of which Janâček was a 
lifelong proponent, is symbolised by the work’s dedication, to the 
“Czechoslovak Armed Forces”, and with music that he said embodied the ideals of 
“contemporary free man, his spiritual beauty and joy, his strength, courage and 
determination to fight for victory”. It might seem an uncomfortably bellicose 
sentiment today, but that spirit of earthy independence is a crucial part of 
the musical fabric of the Sinfonietta, not least in those fanfares that open 
the work and crown its five-movement progress20 minutes later 
<http://youtu.be/PScaxSwGa6o?t=21m16s>. This is music that Janâček wanted 
ideally to be played by a military band like the one he'd heard a few years 
prior to the composition of Sinfonietta, and whose music he wrote down in the 
composing notebook he took everywhere with him. If you had to perform the 
Sinfonietta without a military ensemble, Janâček said (as it almost always is 
in concert halls these days), make sure the brass players sound as rough, 
brash, and bright as an army band. (And given what happens when you ask a 
massed group of trumpeters togive it laldy <http://laldy.com/>, they usually 
do!...)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKLUKx6qPlXE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKLUKx6qPlXE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKLUKx6qPlXE&media=>
There’s another layer of association in this music, since the titles of the 
individual movement refer to places in Brno, the city where he grew up. (Watch 
Janâček’s fellow Brno-ian, conductor Jakob Hruša,here 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uciNH5hCCvI> on how he hears the movements of 
Sinfonietta relative to the places they’re inspired by: the Castle, the Queen’s 
Monastery, Brno’s bustling street life and its town hall.) But in a similar 
alchemy to the way Janâček’s operas work, it’s the way that he manages to turn 
these profoundly local and personal ideas and inspirations into something 
universal – or at least, something that communicates as vividly to us now as it 
did back in 1926 in its first performance in Prague – that makes the piece so 
immediately powerful.

And that’s because of the way Janâček’s music moves and works in time. Yes, 
the fanfares are unmistakable and irresistible when you hear them for the first 
or the 500th time, but Janâček’s musical thinking is working on multiple layers 
simultaneously. On one hand, the jump-cuts and juxtapositions of Janâček’s 
music, the way he repeatslittle cells of music 
<http://youtu.be/PScaxSwGa6o?t=2m26s> and then without warning moves to a new 
idea, means that you experience a continuous sense of surprise and suspense 
when you hear this piece. That kind ofcinematic editing and shuffling of 
musical time <http://youtu.be/PScaxSwGa6o?t=6m10s> seems to be the opposite of 
the conventional symphonic principle, substituting a logic of surreal colours, 
unpredictable textures and even less predictable timing for the development, 
argument, and discourse of proper symphonic behaviour. But Janâček’s music is 
doing something else, too, sincethe thematic material 
<http://youtu.be/PScaxSwGa6o?t=17m3s> you hear throughout the piece is 
connected through a subtle web of musical family relationships, with many of 
the tunes closely related to the opening fanfare idea, so that its return at 
the end of the whole work seems not just likea glorious, riotous coda to the 
Sinfonietta <http://youtu.be/PScaxSwGa6o?t=22m21s>, but the conclusion of a 
mysteriously compelling - and yes, "symphonic" - process.

Yet it’s the surprises I think you will remember the most if you haven’t heard 
this Sinfonietta before, such asthe manic trombone solo 
<http://youtu.be/PScaxSwGa6o?t=11m38s> in the middle of the third movement, or 
the wild interjections of the cellos and basses near the start ofthe fourth 
movement <http://youtu.be/PScaxSwGa6o?t=14m6s>, which angrily dismiss yet 
another tattoo from a solo trumpet, orthe sensual melancholy 
<http://youtu.be/PScaxSwGa6o?t=17m3s> that starts the final section, with a 
fragment of melody in the flutes answered by a sighing consolation in the 
strings. And if you’ve heard the piece in the concert hall, you can’t forget 
the sheer, blazing thrill of that coruscating brass sound at the very end of 
the work. But don’t just take my word for it, askHaruki Murakami 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harukimurakami>, who used the Sinfonietta as 
the musical leitmotif of his novel1Q84 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/1Q84-Books-1-2-3/dp/0099578077/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1400477134&sr=8-1&keywords=murakami+1Q84>
, after which sales of the piece shot up in Japan. Told you this piece 
transformed the local into the universal.

Five key recordings


All of these performances are variously dazzling and revealing; magnificent as 
they are, they should be upbeats for where the Sinfonietta is at its best, in 
live performance.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPScaxSwGa6o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPScaxSwGa6o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPScaxSwGa6o&media=>
Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra/ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PScaxSwGa6o>
Mackerras <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PScaxSwGa6o>

City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra/Rattle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PScaxSwGa6o>

Bamberg Symphony Orchestra/ 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sinfonietta-Taras-Bulba-F%C3%BCchslein-Suite/dp/B000FA593I/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1400477225&sr=8-1&keywords=jonathan+nott+janacek+sinfonietta>
Nott 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sinfonietta-Taras-Bulba-F%C3%BCchslein-Suite/dp/B000FA593I/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1400477225&sr=8-1&keywords=jonathan+nott+janacek+sinfonietta>

London Symphony Orchestra/Abbado 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Jan%C3%A1cek-Sinfonietta-Hindemith-Symphonic-Metamorphoses/dp/B0048L0NAY/ref=sr_1_sc_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1400477245&sr=8-2-spell&keywords=claudio+abbado+anacek+sinfonietta>

Czech Philharmonic Orchestra/ 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Janacek-Sinfonietta-Martinu-Symphony-Fantasticke/dp/B001MVW7BQ/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1400477305&sr=8-2&keywords=belohlavek+janacek+sinfonietta>
Belohlavek 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Janacek-Sinfonietta-Martinu-Symphony-Fantasticke/dp/B001MVW7BQ/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1400477305&sr=8-2&keywords=belohlavek+janacek+sinfonietta>
 