
Something a little different this week. Get your ears around the ferocious and 
concise drama of Nikolai Myaskovsky'sTenth Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UZLJodf-5FA>, a truly remarkable document of 
early 20th century symphonic history in terms of its sounds, structure, energy, 
musical language, formal compression, and even in terms of the performers for 
whom it was written. But I hope this short, sharp blast of Soviet-era 
symphonism by an unjustly neglected composer, who contributed more to the 
symphonic canon in terms of sheer number of pieces than Shostakovich, 
Prokofiev, and Rachmaninov combined, will whet your appetite to discover more 
Myaskosky - not leastthe rest of his 27 symphonies 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e8-AafmnI_0&list=PL4AB596488BB318DB>.

Myaskovsky <http://www.myaskovsky.ru/?id=32> is the missing link in the story 
of the Russian symphony in the 20th century. Born in 1881, the year before 
Stravinsky, he's the bridge between Tchaikovsky and the modernist symphonists 
such as Prokofiev and Shostakovich, and was regarded as the "the musical 
conscience of Moscow" throughout the Soviet period by his fellow composers.

Like every other Russian creative artist, he was deeply affected by the 
regime, steering a course between official approbation (he won the Stalin Prize 
six times, and in his12th Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a5OMmD8pVTY> 
wrote music honouring the inspiring topic of the Collectivisation of Farming) 
and denouncement: after the Zhdanov decree in 1948, which he called 
"hysterical", Myaskovsky was censured, along with Shostakovich, Khachaturian, 
and Prokofiev.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJY0QM1qlu7U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJY0QM1qlu7U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FJY0QM1qlu7U%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
But Myaskovsky's example for his fellow composers and musicians in the 20s, 
30s, and 40s, above all as a teacher at the Moscow Conservatory from 1921, was 
as a creative figure whose life was dedicated to realising a uniquely diverse 
vision of what the Russian symphony could be. His symphonies don't generally 
have an explicitly social or political function. They inhabit their own world 
of personal musical exploration, and veer from expressionist modernism to 
high-romantic lyricism, from epic grandeur – as in his6th Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3QxQhCjGmSs>, the longest he wrote, arguably 
his most ambitious achievement, to dark, disturbing emotional intimacy, like 
the opening of thesingle-movement 13th 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6r-stSy57nc>. These pieces were enormously 
influential on younger generations: asMurray McLachan says in this perceptive 
article <http://www.myaskovsky.ru/?id=52> on Myaskovsky's music, Sviatoslav 
Richter, Sergei Prokofiev, and many other musical luminaries would play 
Myaskovsky's latest symphonies as soon as they were available in piano 
arrangements, to find out what the prodigious symphonist had just discovered.

Myaskovsky's 10th <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UZLJodf-5FA>, composed in 
1927, was premiered the following year by one of Soviet Russia's most 
fascinating musical institutions -Persimfans 
<http://www.trivia-library.com/b/history-of-the-greatest-conductorless-orchestra.htm>
, the "The First Conductorless Symphony Ensemble", founded by Lev Tseitlin, 
which lasted for a decade from 1922 (and whichwas revived in 2008 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V26Qhb0A2yQ>). It's a brilliant, and as far as 
I'm aware, unique idea - a full-size symphony orchestra that operated without a 
maestro, a vision of a genuinely un-hierarchical, quasi-communist music-making. 
But I'm not surprised that thePersimfans 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Persimfans> performance of the 10th was something 
of a disaster: Miaskovsky's music, cast in a single, 17-minute movement, 
presents huge technical challenges for its large orchestra (as you can see from
the score <http://en.scorser.com/S/Sheet+music/miaskovski+symphony/-1/1.html>); 
if you throw into the mix that the players have to get it all together without 
somebody on the podium coordinating the symphony's shocking changes of tempo, 
texture, and mood, and the sheer, violent energy of its fast music, the result 
must have been chaotic.

The piece has a programmatic inspiration in Pushkin's poem The Bronze Horseman 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Bronze_Horseman_(poem)> and Alexander's 
Benois's <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Alexandre_Benois_004.jpg> 
illustrations of the story, in which a young man's betrothed is drowned in the 
flooding of St Petersburg of 1824; after cursing the statue of Peter the Great 
at the fate that befell her, the young man is then chased through the streets 
by the statue which has come to life and pursues him to his own watery doom in 
the river Neva. You'll hear the horses, the fear, and the monumentality of the 
story in Myaskovsky's music, but this isn't a Straussian attempt to translate a 
story as precisely as possible into sound. Instead, Myaskovsky takes the 
fatalistic implacability of the story as his starting point, and throws us 
right into a ferocious drama, putting you under the horse's hooves afterjust a 
few seconds <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UZLJodf-5FA> of marmoreal 
chromaticism in the low strings, woodwind, and brass, as if the statue has 
already started to chase us.

Myaskovsky's harmonic language is a uniquely distinctive amalgam of 
late-romantic density with expressionist acerbity - which music-jargonese is 
better experienced in the actual sounds of the symphony. The furious opening is 
contrasted with brief sections of slower lyrical uneasiness, a melody that
starts in the oboe <http://youtu.be/UZLJodf-5FA?t=2m30s>, and which you can 
hear as symbolising the man's grief, or his beloved's watery demise. But the 
"Allegro tumultuoso" - which really is tumultuous - soon returns, and it 
develops with snarling intensity, and as well as its rhythmic sound and fury, 
it creates a harmonic pincer movement with musical lines that converge from the 
very top and bottom of the orchestra, a realisation of a musical vice, like the 
fate that ensnares the hero of Pushkin's story.

Myaskovsky ramps up the tension even further in a chaotically fast and 
chromaticallywild fugue <http://youtu.be/UZLJodf-5FA?t=7m58s>, the music 
chasing its own tail, faster and faster, before the marmoreal music we heard 
right at the start is unveiled in its true, terrifying guise. There's a memory 
of thehaunted lyricism <http://youtu.be/UZLJodf-5FA?t=12m30s> of the slower 
tune before the Allegroadvances on us again 
<http://youtu.be/UZLJodf-5FA?t=13m47s>. The victim's demise is consummated in 
music of massive, loud intensity and then ofeerie, spectral nostalgia 
<http://youtu.be/UZLJodf-5FA?t=15m11s>, before the symphony's final gestures of 
orchestral onslaught, made all the more frightening with the silences that 
Myaskovsky composes around his gigantic blocks of brass sound and 
guillotine-like chords.

Myaskovsky himself wrote to Prokofiev that the symphony was "as massive as if 
it were made of iron". The brilliance of the piece is to compress that iron 
until it's white-hot with blazing musical imagination. (And Myaskovsky had good 
personal reasons to find this musical ferocity, this simultaneous scream 
against inevitable fate and stat(u)e-based violence: his father had been 
murdered in 1921 by Red Army zealots for wearing Tsarist insignia.) It's no 
surprise it's one of composerOliver Knussen's favourites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/jan/15/bbcso-knussen-review> to 
conduct: there's a lot to be inspired by in Myaskovsky's Tenth – and a lot to 
discover in the other 26, too!

Key recording
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fghbr1vj9u7g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fghbr1vj9u7g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fghbr1vj9u7g%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
There are a handful of other recordings, but Evgeny Svetlanov's with the 
Russian State Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Miaskovsky-Complete-Symphonies-Nos-27/dp/B000XCTD5S/ref=sr_1_sc_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1392581908&sr=8-1-spell&keywords=miaskovsky+symphoniy>
 is the most compressed, and the most violently, compellingly realised.
 