
“It’s really wartime music – a great deal of it incubated when I used to go up 
night after night in the ambulance wagon at Ecoivres and we went up a steep 
hill and there was wonderful Corot-like landscape in the sunset. It’s not 
really lambkins frisking at all, as most people take for granted.”

Ralph Vaughan Williams <http://www.rvwsociety.com/images2012/bio_pics/army.jpg>
 was talking about one of his most controversial and misunderstood pieces,A 
Pastoral Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vD-yJ66Qses>, his third, 
which he completed in 1922. It’s easy to see where the confusion comes from: 
here is that master of nostalgic evocation calling a piece “pastoral”, 
immediately asking audiences to hear it – you’d have thought – as the acme of 
all things quaintly, gently rustic, the sound of an imagined idyll of English 
landscape turned into sound.

So perhaps the symphony’s mixed reception is partly Vaughan Williams’s own 
fault: had he originally called it simply Symphony No 3, he wouldn’t have 
planted that pastoral seed in the minds of his listeners and his critics.
Constant Lambert <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ruBr-tCFxuE>said that its 
four movements <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7MWsJDh_nm4> – nearly all of 
them slow, lyrical, and strange – have a “particular type of grey, reflective, 
English-landscape mood [that] outweighed the exigencies of symphonic form”.

But it’s not just Vaughan Williams’s testimony that should make us realise 
that the landscape of A Pastoral Symphony isn’t some Arcadian part of Surrey – 
if it is about landscape at all, it’s rather the blasted terrain of the fields 
of horror of thefirst world war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/firstworldwar>. In fact, throughout this 
symphony there’s a disturbing doubleness, in which images and ideas that are 
usually thought to provide consolation instead suggest emotional instability 
and ambiguity. The pastoral title is, I think, almost ironic, since what 
Vaughan Williams is doing in this piece is turning the idea on its head, so 
that instead of being a source of comfort, this pastoral is instead a 
confrontation with loss, with lament, with death. And it’s also a genuinely 
adventurous attempt to write a kind of symphony that no-one had attempted so 
completely before, the secret of which lies in another interpretation of 
Lambert’s idea that the piece rethinks those “exigencies of symphonic form”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFWJwgmeCF5I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFWJwgmeCF5I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFWJwgmeCF5I&media=>
More on that later, but first, let’s hear the Pastoral as critique of the 
pastoral. The most obvious wartime memorial in the piece is thetrumpet cadenza  
<http://youtu.be/vD-yJ66Qses?t=13m18s>in the second movement, a dream of a Last 
Post-like fanfare that drifts into the music’s consciousness. In the frame of a 
pastoral, this military reminiscence is already seemingly out of place, and in 
fact there’s a specific memory that Vaughan Williams is invoking. In that 
“Corot-like landscape” that he saw during the war: “A bugler used to practise 
and this sound became part of that evening landscape and is the genesis of the 
long trumpet cadenza in the second movement of the symphony”. You would have 
thought this obvious reference would have alerted the symphony’s early 
listeners to the real location of this music, in the wake of the First World 
War, but that’s only the clearest of many ways in which the idea of the 
pastoral is subverted.

More generally, there’s the continual elusiveness of the music, something you 
hear from the start ofthe first movement 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UT8Wwohbdqc>. Vaughan Williams’s harmonic 
idiom in this symphony is continually slipping from one tonal centre to 
another, from one “mode” to another (different divisions of the scale), so 
that, for all the music’s superficially quiescent surface, there’s an 
unsettling feeling to the way the symphony moves. There are melodies and 
motives you’ll certainly recognise and hold in your brain when you’re listening 
to the piece, and there’s a network of connections between the main ideas in 
the piece that stretches across all four movements. Yet moment by moment, 
Vaughan Williams makes the ground slide beneath your ears, so to speak: and 
it’s not just the harmony, it’s the music’s hauntingly subtle orchestration, 
too, in which instrumental timbres seem to melt into one another.

Even the third movement <http://youtu.be/vD-yJ66Qses?t=18m15s>, which 
functions as a kind of scherzo in the symphony, manages to throw you off 
balance with its lopsided dance rhythms, and especially theweightless music  
<http://youtu.be/vD-yJ66Qses?t=22m40s>of Mendelssohn-like gossamer that ends 
the movement, suspending you in the ether rather than placing down on the 
earth. Butthe final movement  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7MWsJDh_nm4>is 
the quintessence of the symphony, with yet more slow, subtly tortured music 
framed by two solos from a wordless soprano, marked “distant” in the score, and 
often performed offstage. AsDaniel Grimley 
<http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=IBRzav2pL9AC&pg=PA147&lpg=PA147&dq=british+modernism+dan+grimley+vaughan+williams&source=bl&ots=p-llmM_1vw&sig=hZmtTrgR4wJ8RblAuXfkS-uLaj4&hl=en&sa=X&ei=6mXoU62IA6iR0QWL3IDYDw&ved=0CCYQ6AEwAQ#v=onepage&q=fairy&f=false>
 shows in a brilliant essay on A Pastoral Symphony, this solo line moves from 
“relative stability to complete harmonic ambiguity”. And yet, the effect in 
performance is singularly devastating. After the symphony has wrenched itself 
to its most insistent and loudest climax, the music’s return to this lamenting 
song for the soprano is all the more moving. It is the sound of absence somehow 
made present, music that echoes with the lives lost in those French fields, and 
it’s the distillation of a pastoral symphony that’s really an anti-pastoral.

Which finally bring us back to Constant Lambert: in situating his symphony in 
this mode of slow, reflective concentration, Vaughan Williams risked forfeiting 
this piece’s “symphonic” credentials. Yet in its “critique and reimagining of 
the pastoral”, as Grimley has it, Vaughan Williams not only vindicated his 
personal vision, and the pain of his wartime experiences, but achieved a new 
idea of the symphony, too.

Five key recordings

 * Adrian Boult/London Philharmonic Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UT8Wwohbdqc>

 * André Previn/London Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Williams-Symphony-No-Pastoral-No-4/dp/B000026FBF/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1407749567&sr=8-1&keywords=andre+previn+vaughan+williams+pastoral>

 * Roger Norrington/London Philharmonic Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vD-yJ66Qses>

 * Bernard Haitink/London Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Symphony-No-3-Haitink-Roocroft/dp/B00000630I/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1407749626&sr=8-1&keywords=haitink+vaughan+williams+pastoral>
 * V 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/music/tomserviceblog/2014/aug/11/vaughan-williamss-a-pastoral-symphony-his-war-time-anti-pastoral>
ernon Handley/Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cd3nWm2PitI> 
Andrew Manze conducts Vaughan Williams’s A Pastoral Symphony at the BBC Proms  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/august-17/15100>on Sunday 17 August 
with the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra.
 