
It's not even called a symphony, I hear you cry! Well, maybe, but John Adams's 
 <http://www.earbox.com>Harmonielehre 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AUiv0jJl9zU> is, as I will now attempt to 
argue, one of the most significant and sophisticated commentaries on and 
embodiments of symphonic thinking of the late 20th century. For a start, it's 
cast in three large movements, it includes references and reimaginations of 
Mahler, Sibelius, and Wagner, and for all its diversity of soundworld and 
musical material, it creates a single musical and dramatic arc in its 40 
minutes that is definitively symphonic. And just because something isn't called 
a "symphony" doesn't mean it isn't one!

Adams's title comes from Schoenberg's great harmony textbook 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Harmonielehre-Arnold-Schoenberg/dp/370240029X/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1394450514&sr=8-1&keywords=schoenberg+harmonielehre>
, an essential musical tome that gives you the keys not to a theory of 
composition-with-12-tones (Schoenberg's serialism in other words), but to tonal 
harmonic practice from Palestrina to Bruckner. In a way, it's a book that's 
proof positive of one of Schoenberg's maxims, that there's still a lot of great 
music to be written in C major. Adams's piece is an attempt to do just that 
(well, in E minor and E flat major…), yet as well as its passages that are 
clear love-songs to symphonic and Wagnerian late-romanticism, his Harmonielehre 
("Harmony Lesson", composed in 1985 when Adams was in his late 30s), is full of 
surreal dreams and post-minimalist rhythms, glitter, and energy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAUiv0jJl9zU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAUiv0jJl9zU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FAUiv0jJl9zU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It opens <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AUiv0jJl9zU> with a battering ram of 
E minor chords. Actually, that's not quite the right image: the 39-fold 
repetitions of E minor at the start of Harmonielehre were inspired by a dream 
Adams had of a huge tanker in San Francisco Bay. Watching this sea-borne 
behemoth, Adams dreamt that it suddenly took off "like a rocket ship with an 
enormous force of levitation". The next morning, Adams conceived the opening of 
the piece, the explosive propellant for his own symphonic rocket, which was a 
commission from the San Francisco Symphony for a large-scale work. Until the 
dream, Adams was in the throes of writer's block, a scarring experience that 
the slow second movement, The Anfortas Wound, commemorates and transcends: 
Adams makes clear references to the emotionally bleak opening ofSibelius's 4th 
Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zl_q1QDkiiw> at the start of the 
movement <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pBl31SSU1FY>, and its climax is a 
rewriting <http://youtu.be/FygogByf6K0?t=2m20s> of the terrifying chord that 
screams out in pain in the Adagio ofMahler's 10th Symphony 
<http://youtu.be/8PQT5IK8mwA?t=18m13s>. 

There are two other catalysts for the composition of Harmonielehre. There was 
another dream, of Adams's infant daughter careering round the cosmos on the 
back of a flying medieval theologian, Meister Eckhardt, which inspired the 
ethereal music that opensthe third movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v6EtcjOhdA8>. The other was the epiphany of 
Adams's relationship with late romanticism, and especially Wagner. In the 
context of the West Coast of America in the late 1970s and early 80s, Wagner 
was as uncool as it got. Adams's reputation as a young composer was founded on 
the way he had taken the example of Steve Reich and Philip Glass's as the 
inspiration for his own resuscitation of tonality, most notably inShaker Loops 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r0H2K07m01Y> and the ecstatic choral writing of 
Harmonium <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HZjjN1Z1S9k>. But the prospect of a 
properly symphonic canvas to work on presented a new challenge: for Adams, it 
was never enough simply to "repeat the theme/Repeat and repeat again, as the 
pace mounts", as William Carlos Williams's text puts it in Steve Reich'sThe 
Desert Music <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hHMBoDoFwj0>. What Adams wanted in 
his music was some of what he heard in Wagner'sGötterdämmerung 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RMn9fObPH7g>: "The harmonies, restless and 
forever migrating to a new tonal center, moved between tension and resolution 
in an uncanny way that constantly propelled the listener forward … This was not 
just music about desire. It was desire itself. The emotional and sensual power 
it possessed was inescapable."

Achieving that in Harmonielehre meant, for Adams, aping the style and manners 
of late romantic music, and not just through quasi-quotations. Listen to music 
like the achingly expressivelyrical theme <http://youtu.be/AUiv0jJl9zU?t=6m10s> 
at the centre of the first movement, which apart from the post-minimalist 
filigree of some of its orchestral decoration, sounds like a theme culled from 
Mahler's or Zemlinsky's or the romantic Schoenberg's workshop, circa 1900. But 
the atmosphere of the music's relationship with these earlier traditions is 
never cool, detached, or distancing. As Adams himself says, "This is a work 
that looks to the past in what I suspect is a 'postmodernist' spirit, but … it 
does so entirely without irony." Adams wants Harmonielehre to be felt as 
genuinely emotional, genuinely affecting, genuinely symphonic. And through all 
the craft - the artifice, if you will - of his composition, I think he manages 
it: if you know your Sibelius and your Mahler, the slow movement will bring 
more than a twinge of recognition, but you don't need to know either to feel 
the music's expressive power.

It's the same at the end of the piece, in which Adams stages an epic battle 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MB4aJVdEpzI> between the work's main keys. As 
he says, "in a more traditionally worked-out piece, there would be a modulatory 
sequence that would present the outcome in a rather dialectical way. But in 
this case, I simply place the keys together, as if in a mixer, and let them 
battle it out. And finally E-flat wins through its strength, and this moment 
seems likean epiphany <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MB4aJVdEpzI>." Is Adams's 
epiphany of late 20th century symphonism yours too? You decide.

Four key recordings

Rattle's is the one for me, but see what you reckon!

City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra/Simon Rattle 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Adams-Orchestral-Works-John/dp/B000002RU2/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1394449708&sr=8-2&keywords=john+adams+harmonielehre>

San Francisco Symphony/Edo de Waart  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Harmonielehre-John-Adams/dp/B000005IXN/ref=sr_1_5?ie=UTF8&qid=1394449708&sr=8-5&keywords=john+adams+harmonielehre>

San Francisco Symphony/Michael Tilson Thomas 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Adams-Harmonielehre-Short-Ride-Machine/dp/B0074B2MV8/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&qid=1394449708&sr=8-4&keywords=john+adams+harmonielehre>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FjmDBO-T9nio%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FjmDBO-T9nio%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FjmDBO-T9nio%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Finnish Radio Symphony Orchestra/Peter Oundjian 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jmDBO-T9nio>
 