
“You’re a little dull/ My dear Pompeo/The ways of the world/Go study them”. 
The words of the aria,“Un bacio di mano” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pn4Ww17oXko> (“A kiss on the hand”), composed 
as an insert for Pasquale Anfossi’s opera Le gelosie fortunate by Mozart in 
1788, to words probably by Lorenzo da Ponte. And what, pray, has that got to do 
withMozart’s C Major Symphony K551 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d5UHKFI25YE>
, known since the early 19th century as the “Jupiter”? Well, rather a lot, 
actually: the music that accompaniesthose words 
<http://youtu.be/pn4Ww17oXko?t=22s> in the aria also makes a cheeky and 
unexpected appearancejust before the end of the first section 
<http://youtu.be/O-tuoUD86YI?t=2m30s> of the first movement. This is a 
self-quotation that’s completely unnecessary according to the tonal and 
harmonic drama of the symphony so far. Mozart has got himself into the right 
key, he’s done all the hard work of modulating from C major to G major, and 
he’s already written one of the most memorable first sections to a symphony 
that anyone had conceived up to this point, the summer of 1788. So why risk 
interpolating yet another tune into the concatenation of ideas that he’s 
already given his listeners, and asked his orchestra to dramatise; and a 
melody, what’s more, that comes from a different expressive world, the low 
comedy ofopera buffa as opposed to high-minded symphonic discussion? Mozart 
puts the whole structure of this movement on the line, seemingly for the sake 
of a compositional joke. It’s a piece of postmodernism avant la lettre, and the 
kind of thing that Beethoven, for all his iconoclasm, hardly risked in the same 
way in his symphonies.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd5UHKFI25YE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd5UHKFI25YE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dd5UHKFI25YE&media=>
This musical intervention is usually passed over in the way the symphony is 
performed and heard today. It’s as if this music has become too familiar, so we 
don’t often hear what I think the Jupiter symphony is really about. For me, this
C major symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AOy_fTkt-U8> is written at 
the furthest edges of the possible for Mozart, in terms of seeing just how many 
different expressive and compositional contrasts he can cram into a single 
symphony. And he’s not doing that for the sake of reconciling these opposites 
or to create a greater unity (the kind of thing that we like to imagine Mozart 
was up to, because we prefer to think of him as a romantic idealist  
<http://us.123rf.com/450wm/hakne/hakne1205/hakne120500013/13455364-vienna-austria--march-31-2012-statue-of-wolfgang-amadeus-mozart-in-burggarten-in-vienna-monument-was.jpg>
rather than an 18th century humanist). Rather, I think he’s trying to achieve a 
complexity of emotional experience and richness of invention that is poised – 
sometimes on this side, sometimes on the other! – of a musical cliff-edge of 
coherence. A bit like the mixed metaphors of that sentence; what I mean is that 
this is a symphony of extremes, something that’s symbolised in the 
juxtaposition of the martial and the plangent in the two ideas you hear in the 
symphony’s very first four bars (Nikolaus Harnoncourt 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zK5295yEQMQ> dramatises that initial collision 
best of all in his recording.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzK5295yEQMQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzK5295yEQMQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzK5295yEQMQ&media=>
But back to that interpolatory opera buffa melody: listen to what René Jacobs 
<http://youtu.be/d5UHKFI25YE?t=2m27s> does in his performance with the Freiburg 
Baroque Orchestra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d5UHKFI25YE>, slowing the 
music right down to force you to be conscious of how weird this moment actually 
is, before speeding up to the “correct” tempo. In fact, Jacobs is only 
restoring the tune to the speed you would hear the melody at when it’s sung as 
an aria, making us aware that something from another world has landed in the 
world of the symphony. And Mozart’s secret is only revealed after you’ve heard 
the repeat of the first section.In the central part of the movement 
<http://youtu.be/d5UHKFI25YE?t=5m56s>, this innocent little tune is exposed to 
all of the contrapuntal experience Mozart can muster, so instead of opera 
buffa, the tune is forced into a crucible of highfalutin compositional mastery 
and chromatic intensity. It’s a fulfilment of the prophecy of the words that 
originally accompany this music in Anfossi’s opera (they’re initially a warning 
about the fickleness of beautiful women, a trope of 18th century operatic 
stories); an exhortation to “study” and to be immersed in the “ways of the 
world”. It’s an intertextual gag of the highest musical and dramatic subtlety.


And that kind of compositional and expressive high-wire act is what defines 
this symphony, all the way through. There isn’t time or space here to wax 
lyrical about the expanded song-form <http://youtu.be/zK5295yEQMQ?t=13m40s> of 
the slow movement - among the most achingly sensual pieces of instrumental 
music that Mozart ever wrote, and certainly the most precipitously emotionally 
ambiguous slow movement in his symphonies; or to expound upon how thechromatic 
descent <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZR7xDdg9tMU>of the opening tune of the 
Menuetto is a transformation of an idea you’ve heard in the first movement (the
second main melody <http://youtu.be/O-tuoUD86YI?t=1m23s> of the Allegro vivace, 
since you ask), or how the trio section <http://youtu.be/ZR7xDdg9tMU?t=2m17s> 
is an artfully artless prefiguration of the main motif of the finale 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rETZaTRFHe8>. 

However, I do have to tell you about that final movement. Famously, this Molto 
Allegro fuses sonata form with fugue; that’s to say, it fuses the 
high-watermark of late 18th century practice in instrumental music with the 
most prestigious, and most compositionally involved, form of counterpoint in 
earlier music: the fugues of the Baroque, like those by Bach and Handel, that 
Mozart knew and loved. But that’s not, in itself, an original idea – and 
neither is the four-note melodic tag (C-D-F-E) that is catalyst for this 
explosion of contrapuntal mastery. Mozart borrowed his supposed symphonic 
innovation from the Haydn brothers, Joseph (the famous one) and Michael (less 
famous, but equally influential on Mozart). We know that Mozart wanted to hear 
the latest fugues from Michael’s symphonies, which were written in Salzburg, 
and he asked his father to send them to him. That means he would have known the 
finale ofMichael’s 28th Symphony <http://youtu.be/sLarvZaji54?t=14m41s>, with 
its obsessive fugato, also in C major; probably the fugue that crowns his 34th, 
in E flat major; and quite possibly another fugue-finale from his 39th 
symphony, also in C major, composed just a few months before Mozart’s. The 
similarities between Michael’s 29th and 39th, and Mozart’s 41st are sometimes 
startling, as you can hear. Even more shocking, have a listen to this, the 
final movement ofJoseph’s 13th Symphony <http://youtu.be/cuNezzDXNSw?t=15m17s>, 
written in 1764. There’s the very same four-note idea used as the basis of a 
contrapuntal work-out of a symphonic finale. There ain’t nothing so old – or so 
new – as a fugato-style finale.

And that four-note motif has a history, and not just in Mozart’s own music 
(you can hear it most clearly in the Credo of hisMissa Brevis K192 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gi0zDlA0GTY>, and in his 1st 
<http://youtu.be/b4IXXpTHjok?t=6m28s> and 33rd  
<http://youtu.be/dZkWjXbRFcA?t=3m>Symphonies) and that of his contemporaries. 
In fact, it goes back to a 13th-century hymn attributed to Thomas of Aquinas, 
Pange Lingua 
<http://www.cengage.com/music/book_content/049557273X_wrightSimms/assets/more/18_Desprez.html>
, whichJosquin des Prez  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=goMeBZt5JZA>used as 
the basis for probably his last Mass setting in 1515. Since then, the four-note 
melody at the start of the third line of the original hymn (which Josquin 
employs as acontrapuntal catalyst <http://youtu.be/goMeBZt5JZA?t=54s> in his 
Kyrie) has turned up throughout musical history, especially as a fugal 
inspiration. That includes its use by Johannes Fux, the 17th and 18th century 
composer and theorist, in his famous textbook of musical polyphonyGradus ad 
Parnassum <http://www.opus28.co.uk/Fux_Gradus.pdf> (which Mozart knew, and used 
in his own teaching of his English pupil, Thomas Attwood).

Which all means that Mozart’s composition of the finale of the Jupiter 
Symphony is a palimpsest on music history as well as his own. As a musical 
achievement, its most obvious predecessor is really the fugal finale of hisG 
major String Quartet K387 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hQMbo-WzqDc>, but 
this symphonic finale trumps even that piece in its scale and ambition. If the 
story of that operatic tune first movement is to turn instinctive emotion into 
contrapuntal experience, the finale does exactly the reverse, transmuting the 
most complex arts of compositional craft intopure, exhilarating feeling 
<http://youtu.be/zK5295yEQMQ?t=31m16s>. Its models in Michael and Joseph Haydn 
are unquestionable, but Mozart simultaneously pays homage to them – and 
transcends them. Now that’s what I call real originality.

Five key recordings

Freiburg Baroque Orchestra/ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d5UHKFI25YE>René 
Jacobs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d5UHKFI25YE>: music-making that 
restores the shock of the new to Mozart’s symphony. Quite right, too.

Chamber Orchestra of Europe <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zK5295yEQMQ>/
Nikolaus Harnoncourt <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zK5295yEQMQ>: Harnoncourt 
is scarcely less imaginative than Jacobs, and finds details in the part-writing 
of the finale that no-one else reveals.

Royal Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mozart-Symphony-Bassoon-Concerto-Clarinet/dp/B00005NW09/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1401035793&sr=8-2&keywords=beecham+mozart+jupiter+royal+philharmonic>
/Thomas Beecham 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mozart-Symphony-Bassoon-Concerto-Clarinet/dp/B00005NW09/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1401035793&sr=8-2&keywords=beecham+mozart+jupiter+royal+philharmonic>
: OK, so Beecham doesn’t do the repeats, as he should do, but the warmth and 
subtlety of his Mozart are second to none.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaJyrRuvo2sg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaJyrRuvo2sg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaJyrRuvo2sg&media=>
Scottish Chamber Orchestra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aJyrRuvo2sg>/
Charles Mackerras <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aJyrRuvo2sg>: unfailingly 
satisfying symphonic logic from Mackerras and the SCO.

Staatskapelle Berlin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lF7QxBkmlXE>/Richard 
Strauss <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lF7QxBkmlXE>: irresistible wildness 
(the speed, and the variation of tempo,in the finale! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AOy_fTkt-U8>) and lucidity in Strauss’s 1926 
performance, and some astonishing playing.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQiEnIHTwXX8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQiEnIHTwXX8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQiEnIHTwXX8&media=> 