
Polish composer Witold Lutosławski 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/jan/15/contemporary-music-guide-witold-lutoslawski>
 may well not have approved of my attempt to talk about hisThird Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k0aJHZ7LBMc>, one of the few postwar pieces 
that managed to invent a discourse that’s at once a rejection of symphonic 
conventions yet is also a bracing renewal of the idea of “the symphony”. 
Premiered in 1983 by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and George Solti, it's 
music that’s definitively “symphonic” even if it doesn’t sound like many – or 
any – previous works in the genre.


My nervousness is because Lutosławski (who died in 1994) always resisted 
attempts to connect his life’s work with the circumstances of is creation, 
either in terms of his personal life or the broader context of the precipitous 
Polish politics through which he lived. But his Third Symphony was composed and 
premiered at a time when Lutosławski’s involvement in Polish public life had 
been suspended, when he was growing more sympathetic to and supportive of the 
Solidarity movement. Having been Poland's most feted and most powerful 
figurehead as composer, conductor and creative, Lutosławski left the public 
stage in Poland when martial law was declared in the country in December 1981, 
the same period in which the Third Symphony was being written and prepared for 
its premiere; after which, Lutosławski accepted an award from Solidarity’s 
Committee for Independent Culture later in 1983.

If you do want to hear the Third Symphony as a kind of protest piece, there 
are some musical catalysts that might support your interpretation: listen to 
the way the piece starts, with ahammered-out, four-fold repetition 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k0aJHZ7LBMc> of a unison E. That can’t help 
but remind you, surely, of the symphony that started off this whole series,
Beethoven’s Fifth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/sep/16/symphony-guide-beethoven-fifth-tom-service>
, and its supposed “fate knocking at the door” connotation (although that’s 
just another interpretative can of worms, as we know!). Lutosławski’s gesture 
of implacable force and violence recurs throughout the opening minutes of the 
symphony, contrasting with passages of filigree fragility, which are squashed 
into submission by the repetitions of those four notes – which are also the 
last sounds you hear in the piece, half an hour later. But that’s just the 
start of this potential interpretative journey. The narrative of the symphony 
can sound like a search for a freedom of expression which is progressively 
achieved – in moments like thismagnificently searching melody 
<http://youtu.be/k0aJHZ7LBMc?t=24m14s>, one of the great lyrical moments in 
post-war music, I think, reclaiming and redefining what a genuinely moving 
non-tonal musical melody can be – and then revoked, stamped out, by the 
violence of the rest of the orchestra; and then the final repetition of that 
four-note fist of fate.

 And even more powerfully, there’s Lutosławski’s unique musical grammar of 
sections of “ad libitum” or“controlled aleatoricism” 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Witold_Lutos%C5%82awski> (sections in which 
individual players are rhythmically un-coordinated, but in which the pitch 
field they have to play, and the character, and the overall affect of the 
music, are defined by the composer – in fact, there’s more “control” here than 
“chance”, but the idea of a musical individualism, of a multitude of separate 
voices as opposed to a mono-dimensional musical collectivism still stands), 
contrasting with “ad battuta” – conventionally defined, obey-the-conductor 
passages. That’s a suggestive musical parallel, surely, between the ideas of 
totalitarian control and democratic freedom, especially given how Lutosławski 
characterises the music he writes for these different kinds of orchestral 
music-making.

With all of those suggestive grounds for interpretation, perhaps it’s no 
surprise that one critic at the Chicago premiere said that the piece was 
“exactly what might be expected of a Polish composer at the moment”, in voicing 
the people’s protest at military rule. And there then came a revealing glimpse 
that Lutosławski was not – for perhaps the first time – completely ruling out 
any extra-musical interpretation of his symphony. AsAndrzej Chłopecki 
<http://warszawska-jesien.art.pl/en/wj2013/program-i-bilety/work/359836504> 
reports, following the first performance, Lutosławski told a group of Polish 
musicologists:

“If we agree that music can mean anything extra-musical, it nevertheless 
remains ambiguous meaning. But man has a single soul and whatever he 
experiences in life must have some influence on him. If man has a single 
psyche, then the world of sounds, despite its autonomy, is still a function of 
that psyche. So I would limit myself to stating that if the last movement of 
the symphony makes the impression it makes and keeps the listener in suspense, 
it is certainly not by chance. I would admittedly feel honoured if I managed to 
express something connected not only to my personal experience but also to that 
of other people.”

Now that’s something: Lutosławski always wanted his music to communicate with 
his listeners (he talked about writing music as “soul-fishing” for like-minded 
sensibilities in the world), but he seems to go further here, knowing that 
“other people” in Poland in 1983 would surely mean the symphony resonated with 
a broader social political discourse about freedom and repression in people’s 
“psyches”.

Well: maybe. The point is, the problem with these descriptive words is that 
they limit the Third Symphony's interpretation and the way the piece can be 
imagined. Which is not to say those things aren’t a legitimate way of thinking 
about the symphony’s drama, but they are consequences of Lutosławski’s unique 
symphonic solutions rather than the reason for it. This is music of virtuosic 
compositional coherence and expressive diversity. The coherence is important, 
since Lutosławski spent his life finding and refining a musical language that 
could be as malleable and communicative as the tonal system, but one which had 
to be fit for purpose as a new, modernist musical idiom.

But the range of expression is even more important. Lutosławski describes the 
structure of the symphony with words of fastidious jargonistic neutrality:

“The work consists of two movements, preceded by a short introduction and 
followed by an epilogue and a coda. It is played without a break. The first 
movement comprises three episodes, of which the first is the fastest, the 
second slower and the third is the slowest. The basic tempo remains the same 
and the differences of speed are realised by the lengthening of the rhythmical 
units. Each episode is followed by a short, slow intermezzo. It is based on a 
group of toccata-like themes contrasting with a rather singing one: a series of 
differentiated tuttis leads to a climax of the whole work. Then comes the last 
movement, based on a slow singing theme and a sequence of short dramatic 
recitatives played by the string group. A short and very fast coda ends the 
piece.”

That bland architectonic crib-sheet can’t prepare you for the impact of what 
you’ll experience in the Third Symphony. (Or perhaps it enhances the shock of 
what you hear - maybe that’s the cunning expressive ploy of Lutosławski’s 
prose.) But I wouldn’t attempt to try and figure out where you are according to 
his scheme if you’re listening to the piece for the first time. Instead, it’s 
better to thrill to the play of juxtaposition and contrast that’s happening 
moment-by-moment in this symphony; something that paradoxically adds up to what 
should be an overwhelming cumulative experience, above all by the time you get 
to thatbreathtakingly dynamic coda <http://youtu.be/k0aJHZ7LBMc?t=28m34s>. And 
if you’re returning to this most convincing of post-tonal symphonies, you’ll 
find that the more you enter its symphonic labyrinth, the more you’ll discover. 
Back to that thorny question of interpretation for the final time: the deeper 
you go into its musical mysteries, the more profoundly expressive, and the more 
resonatingly meaningful, you’ll find it. That’s an expansion rather than 
limitation of its meaning - and Lutosławski surely wouldn’t have wanted to 
complain about that!

Three key recordings

The composer’s own recording has a unique authority, but there’s a more 
visceral drama in Wit’s performance, and refinement and tensile strength in 
Salonen’s interpretation.

Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra/ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k0aJHZ7LBMc>
Witold Lutosławski <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k0aJHZ7LBMc>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNK8gvqWEFpk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNK8gvqWEFpk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNK8gvqWEFpk&media=>
Los Angeles Philharmonic/ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NK8gvqWEFpk>
Esa-Pekka Salonen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NK8gvqWEFpk>

Polish National Radio Symphony Orchestra/ 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Lutoslawski-Symphony-Paganini-Variations-Paroles/dp/B0000014DP/ref=sr_1_6?ie=UTF8&qid=1402283598&sr=8-6&keywords=antoni+wit+lutoslawski+symphony>
Antoni Wit 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Lutoslawski-Symphony-Paganini-Variations-Paroles/dp/B0000014DP/ref=sr_1_6?ie=UTF8&qid=1402283598&sr=8-6&keywords=antoni+wit+lutoslawski+symphony>
 