
There are many specifically musical reasons why this apparently 
unselfconscious piece ought to be part of this series on its own terms, but my 
reason for includingMozart’s A Major Symphony, K201 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=252rUDLTkMs> in the series is a simple one. 
This was the first piece of music that I ever heard in an orchestral concert, 
and it was an experience that had the immediacy of an epiphany, a revelation of 
a new world of feeling and being. Not that I thought any of that consciously 
when I heard it played by the Scottish Chamber Orchestra, conducted by Richard 
Hickox, in the early 1980s; but this music symbolises, for me, the potential 
power of the musical experience and the start of a never-ending journey of 
discovery.

This symphony might have changed my own musical history, but I'm not going to 
argue that it changed musical history from the moment it was first written, in 
Salzburg in early 1774 by the18-year-old Mozart 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=juMDUtIWnto>. It’s music that crystallises the 
young man’s emerging compositional self-confidence, and that shows him 
spreading his wings in symphonic music just as he had already started to do in 
the opera house and in his chamber music. It’s a work that sums up everything 
he had heard and learnt about symphonic form up to this point in his life (the 
influence ofJC Bach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/apr/14/johann-christian-bach-g-minor-symphony-op-6-no-6>
 was still crucial for him, whose music he had first heard as a child in 
London) but which is much more than the sum of those influences, and is 
something that only Mozart could have written. Fornot-quite-but-almost 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-GlYCO5TI7o> the first time, this is Mozart’s 
individual symphonic voice that you hear loudly and clearly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjuMDUtIWnto&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjuMDUtIWnto>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjuMDUtIWnto&media=>
Or rather, softly and sensually <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=juMDUtIWnto>. 
The first movement opens with the opposite of the grand rhetorical flourish 
that the vast majority of contemporary symphonies (includingMozart’s own 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YLmmnGV_x-Q>) start with. The first thing you 
hear is a soft, descending octave in the first violins, the simplest of musical 
ideas, and a stepwise progression up the first four steps of the A major scale 
– along with a little chromatic agitation - over some serenely, almost 
ecclesiastically sonorous polyphony in the lower strings.This theme is then 
repeated <http://youtu.be/juMDUtIWnto?t=17s>, loudly, and with the addition of 
a canon: two beats later, the violas and cellos have the same theme as the 
violins, but at the third and fifth of the chord rather than the tonic - which 
means there’s a greater harmonic and contrapuntal richness than when we first 
heard the melody. In the space of 30 seconds or so, Mozart has used an enormous 
arsenal of sophisticated compositional techniques to create a miniature 
symphonic drama.

And that’s just the first theme. What’s wonderful about this symphony is how 
much Mozart is clearly enjoying himself, in theextra melody 
<http://youtu.be/juMDUtIWnto?t=1m16s> he composes at the end of the first 
section of the first movement, a joyous little tune that symbolises the sheer 
invention of this symphony; in thecontrapuntal conversation 
<http://youtu.be/6a-gWkl7Yp4?t=1m54s> between the violas and the cellos and 
basses in the movement’s central section; and in thecheekily inventive coda 
<http://youtu.be/6a-gWkl7Yp4?t=4m14s>, with its chromaticism and, again, its 
counterpoint, this time in an outrageously fulsome four parts.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6a-gWkl7Yp4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6a-gWkl7Yp4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6a-gWkl7Yp4&media=>
It’s worth remembering at this point that Mozart, like all talented 
18-year-olds, would not have been thinking of himself as anything less than the 
fully-formed article as a composer. This wasn’t a transitional work for him, or 
a piece that heralded his maturity – all that’s mere historical hindsight. Aged 
18 he was already an astonishingly experienced composer, writing the most 
expressive and adventurous instrumental music he had ever composed. That sense 
of confidence radiates throughthe slow movement 
<http://youtu.be/6a-gWkl7Yp4?t=4m52s>, a languidly beautiful pastoral piece in 
D major, coloured by the soft-focus glow of muted strings, which creates a 
nocturnal world of expressive and even erotic pleasure. There are hints, too, 
of mysterious shadows in the moonlight, in the low-register trills 
<http://youtu.be/juMDUtIWnto?t=9m12s> in the violins in the middle of the 
movement, and the splinters ofhigh-register interruption 
<http://youtu.be/juMDUtIWnto?t=10m21s>, also in the violins, just after the 
main melody has been reclaimed.

All that, and a brilliant, undance-ably imaginative Menuetto 
<http://youtu.be/252rUDLTkMs?t=20m36s> third movement, and a finale of 
unstoppably dazzling energy, which, played atthe right tempo 
<http://youtu.be/6a-gWkl7Yp4?t=16m9s> – it’s marked “Allegro con spirito”, 
after all – ought to have a tempestuous and sometimes rustic wildness, 
climaxing in anotherbreathtaking little coda 
<http://youtu.be/6a-gWkl7Yp4?t=20m7s>, which begins with a thrilling unison 
statement of the theme, and includes some raucous horn-calls and a rocketing 
string line before the final chords. Actually, you know what, I’ve changed my 
mind: this piece really is a symphonic and historic epiphany, whether you’re 
seven years old or 107! Enjoy.

Two key recordings


I’ve only chosen two performances here, from extreme ends of orchestral 
performance practice: the first, byHerbert von Karajan and the Berlin 
Philharmonic 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mozart-Symphony-No-29-No-33-No-35/dp/B00H9N3IPA/ref=sr_1_15?ie=UTF8&qid=1399285103&sr=8-15&keywords=karajan+mozart+symphonies>
 (the first three movements only, bizarrely, are onYouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=juMDUtIWnto>) was the single most played tape 
of my childhood, and I still think the performance stands out for its warmth, 
sensuality, and character (one tiny example: listen to the way those Berlin 
Phil second violins and violas luxuriate in the richness of the polyphony right 
at the start! - they don’t make ‘em like that any more, more’s the pity). See 
what you think; and then, from the other end of the spectrum, there’s
Christopher Hogwood and the Academy of Ancient Music 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mozart-Symphonies-Nos-25-29/dp/B001CRGRWU/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1399285169&sr=8-3&keywords=hogwood+mozart+29>
, playing the symphony with all the repeats, as I now realise it should be - 
and with tremendous insight and energy, too. The whole thing is on YouTube,with 
a scrolling full score, here <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O8tHmKBsqBY>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO8tHmKBsqBY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO8tHmKBsqBY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO8tHmKBsqBY&media=> 