
Paris, spring 1778. The 22-year-old Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2014/01/30/uk-austria-mozart-salieri-idUKBREA0T18920140130>
 is in the city with his mother. A performance of hisSinfonia Concertante 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sinfonia_Concertante_for_Four_Winds_(Mozart)> has 
been - he claimed - sabotaged by an Italian composer,Giuseppe Cambini 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giuseppe_Cambini>, and so to make amends, the 
director of the public concerts seriesConcert Spirituel 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concert_Spirituel>, Joseph Legros 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Legros>, asks Mozart to write a new 
symphony. It's a chance for the young composer to make his mark as a newly 
mature musician with a public to whom he last performed as an infant prodigy on 
his family's lengthy tour of Europe's courts, when he and his sister were 
paraded in front of Europe's aristocrats

Father Leopold isn't with his son this time, having stayed at home in Salzburg 
to appease their employer,Count Colloredo 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Count_Hieronymus_von_Colloredo>. In Paris, 
Mozart's mother 
<http://www.mozartforum.com/images/Anna_Maria_Mozart_(Mother)_1775.jpg> is very 
sick, and she will die shortly after the premiere of this new symphony, his 
31st, still known as the "Paris".

This D major symphony, K297, <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NNQuYPGdqiI> is a 
unique document in Mozart's symphonic canon not just for what the 
three-movement work does musically, but for what it tells us about how Mozart 
played with his audience's expectations and reactions, how he consciously 
manipulated them to achieve the biggest possible effect on Paris's most 
prestigious stage for instrumental music.

He had no great opinion of Frenchman. He played through his new symphony in 
private to two friends before the premiere, and wrote to his father: "They both 
liked it very much. I too am very pleased with it. But whether other people 
will like it I do not know … I can vouch for the few intelligent French people 
who may be there; as for the stupid ones – I see no great harm if they don't 
like it. But I hope that even these idiots will find something in it to like; 
and I've taken care not to overlook thepremier coup d'archet [A fancy term that 
simply means all the instruments playing together at the start of a symphony, 
one of the contemporary fashions of the Concert Spirituel.] … What a fuss these 
boors make of this! What the devil! – I can't see any difference – they all 
begin together – just as they do elsewhere. It's a joke."

And indeed, the opening movement <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HMXiEcmb0as> 
of the Paris symphony is one of the grandest, most thrilling sounds Mozart ever 
made from an orchestra. He revelled in the fact that he could use clarinets for 
the first time in a symphony, having heard the new instrument for the first 
time in Mannheim, where he had toured before coming to Paris; there are horns, 
trumpets, and timpani, and a full compliment of woodwind – flutes, oboes, 
clarinets, and bassoons, the biggest orchestra Mozart had used in a symphonic 
context. The very opening is almost a parody of thatcoup d'archet, a unison, 
forte D in the first two bars that releases its tension in an orchestral 
firework of an excitably ascending scale in semiquavers in the third bar, and 
the whole movement is magnificently, swaggeringly confident.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1r-6FDUOwqY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1r-6FDUOwqY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F1r-6FDUOwqY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
In the first performance on 18 June (after a dress rehearsal that appalled 
Mozart with the (s)crappiness of the orchestra - "I've never heard worse 
playing in my life!" - and which made him unsure whether even to turn up for 
the concert) the Allegro impressed the public with more than its idiot- and 
crowd-pleasing opening. He wrote to Leopold, "In the middle of the opening 
Allegro there was a passage that I knew people would like; the whole audience 
was carried away by it, and there was tremendous applause. But I knew when I 
wrote it what sort of an effect it would make, and so I introduced it again at 
the end, with the result that it was encored." Now, that's fascinating 
testimony for what it reveals about this Parisian audience, who weren't only 
clappingbetween the movements to try and get them encored, but within them, as 
well. There's debate about exactly which passage Mozart means – Nikolaus 
Harnoncourt reckons it could be the beautifully scoredfew bars here 
<http://youtu.be/NNQuYPGdqiI?t=2m20s>, with a pizzicato bass line underpinning 
a subtly changing harmony in the strings and sustaining chords in the 
woodwinds, Mozart scholar Stanley Sadie thought it could bethis place 
<http://youtu.be/NNQuYPGdqiI?t=2m55s>, from a little later in the movement, 
with its chromatic lyricism; I reckon it could have been thisforcibly 
impressive music <http://youtu.be/NNQuYPGdqiI?t=7m7s>, which rejoices in all 
the glorious noise Mozart can make from his luxurious orchestral forces.

In fact, the whole symphony is a kind of negotiation and collaboration with 
ways of listening. TheAndante <http://youtu.be/NNQuYPGdqiI?t=9m15s> exists in 
two versions, after Legros complained that the first one had too many ideas in 
it, so Mozart wrote another for when the symphony was repeated on 15 August. 
No-one's sure which is the first and which the second, but it seems likely the 
more elaborate movement in 6/8 is the original, and it's this that's usually 
played: you can listen to the alternate version,in 3/4 time, here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jqSsorVKE3I>. 

The finale proves the point most of all. Here's Mozart again: "They liked the 
Andante, too, but most of all thefinal Allegro 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tAYRY6weijA>. I'd heard that all final 
Allegros, like all opening Allegros begin here with all the instruments playing 
together, generally in unison [another blessedcoup d'archet, in other words], 
and so I began mine with just the 2 violin, piano for the first eight bars – 
immediately followed by a forte; the audience (as I expected) said 'Shh!' at 
the piano – then came the forte. The moment they heard the forte, they started 
to clap. I was so happy that as soon as the symphony was over I went off to the 
Palais Royal and had a large ice, said the rosary, as I'd vowed to do, and then 
went home." More audience intervention as part of the symphony's power, and 
even, its composition: Mozart says he "expected" the audience to say "Shh!". 
Mozart is also playing with rhythm as well as dynamicat the start 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tAYRY6weijA> of this movement: the first 
violins are syncopated above the burble of the seconds, which means that the 
forte seems to come in a beat early when you first hear it. That only amplifies 
the pleasure of surprise of this music, something Mozart absolutely calculated 
to achieve.

But the finale is also a miniature masterpiece because of how it layers some 
brilliantly worked counterpoint underneath the surface of its public spectacle. 
Mozart composes afantastic fugato <http://youtu.be/tAYRY6weijA?t=1m40s> in the 
central section of the movement, music that must have tested the togetherness 
of the Parisian orchestra, and which would have gone over the heads of the 
"idiots" in his French audience. A contemporary review, almost certainly of the 
Paris symphony, remarked, "the composer obtained the commendation of lovers of 
the kind of music that interests the mind without touching the heart." That 
sort of thing would become a critical commonplace in contemporary accounts of 
Mozart's music - that it simply contained too many ideas, too much variety, too 
much content. No matter. Mozart had skillfully managed to win over the idiots 
and the savants of his Parisian audience, and written his grandest work of 
instrumental music so far.

Five key recordings 

All of them grandly, virtuosically, and occasionally stentorian-ly magnificent!

Nikolaus Harnoncourt/Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Symphonies-29-31-Mozart/dp/B000000SK9/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1391422843&sr=8-1&keywords=harnoncourt+mozart+paris>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlQHEZ3x4Cf8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlQHEZ3x4Cf8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FlQHEZ3x4Cf8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Christopher Hogwood/Academy of Ancient Music 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mozart-Symphonies-symphonic-Schröder-Hogwood/dp/B000004CYS/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1391422879&sr=8-1&keywords=hogwood+mozart+paris>

Charles Mackerras/Scottish Chamber Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mozart-Symphonies-symphonic-Schröder-Hogwood/dp/B000004CYS/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1391422879&sr=8-1&keywords=hogwood+mozart+paris>

Karl Böhm/Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mozart-Symphonies-Nos-Paris-Jupiter/dp/B00000E4CV/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1391422929&sr=8-1&keywords=bohm+mozart+paris>

Daniel Barenboim/English Chamber Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mozart-Symphonies-29-31-33-Prague/dp/B000EMSPME/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1391422976&sr=8-3&keywords=barenboim+mozart+symphonies>
 