
This week, a piece that's simultaneously a war symphony, a document of the 
violence and intensity and emotion of the times in which it was written, and 
one of the most bracing revelations of what its composer thought as the 
self-sustaining, organically-generating powers of symphonic discourse: Danish 
composer Carl Nielsen'sFourth Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WkEBPND8N94>, "The Inextinguishable", composed 
from 1914-1916, and premiered in Copenhagen that February.It opens 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WkEBPND8N94> with one of the most electrifying 
jolts of energy in symphonic history, and it continues with the same 
irresistible dynamism for the next 35 minutes or so (or about 31 if you'reColin 
Davis 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Nielsen-Symphonies-Nos-LSO-Davis/dp/B004DKDO3I/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1393831837&sr=8-1&keywords=nielsen+davis+4+and+5>
, with the London Symphony Orchestra, in one of the work's most terrifyingly 
energetic performances).

This symphony is the definitive embodiment of Nielsen's 
<http://aviagemdosargonautasdotcom.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/carl-nielsen.jpg>
 essential compositional thinking about music. Writing about this piece 
himself, Nielsen explained what it meant to him, and what it was supposed to 
achieve. It's worth quoting in full:


Music is Life. As soon as even a single note sounds in the air or through 
space, it is result of life and movement; that is why music (and the dance) are 
the more immediate expressions of the will to life.

The symphony evokes the most primal sources of life and the wellspring of the 
life-feeling; that is, what lies behind all human, animal and plant life, as we 
perceive or live it. It is not a musical, programme-like account of the 
development of a life within a limited stretch of time and space, but an 
un-programme-like dip right down to the layers of the emotional life that are 
still half-chaotic and wholly elementary. In other words the opposite of all 
programme music, despite the fact that this sounds like a programme.

The symphony is not something with a thought-content, except insofar as the 
structuring of the various sections and the ordering of the musical material 
are the fruit of deliberation by the composer in the same way as when an 
engineer sets up dykes and sluices for the water during a flood. It is in a way 
a completely thoughtless expression of what make the birds cry, the animals 
roar, bleat, run and fight, and humans moan, groan exult and shout without any 
explanation. The symphony does not describe all this, but the basic emotion 
that lies beneath all this. Music can do just this, it is its most profound 
quality, its true domain … because, by simply being itself, it has performed 
its task. For it is life, whereas the other arts only represent and paraphrase 
life. Life is indomitable and inextinguishable; the struggle, the wrestling, 
the generation and the wasting away go on today as yesterday, tomorrow as 
today, and everything returns. Once more: music is life, and like it 
inextinguishable.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FNYrCiE7U0_0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FNYrCiE7U0_0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FNYrCiE7U0_0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Nielsen's words are as passionate as they are contradictory. His vivid 
analogies for the elemental life-force channelled by the symphony are, in fact, 
viscerally and programmatically descriptive – all those humans and animals 
grunting and exulting. And despite his forcefully held assertion that this 
isn't "programme music", Nielsen wants the Fourth Symphony to stand, 
ironically, for an even more concrete idea that the extra-musical ideas of a 
"programme": he wanted the Inextinguishable to be a manifesto for what he 
thought of as the fundamental life-force of music, which is both a massively 
ambitious idea, and a pretty huge aesthetic and philosophical project too. It's 
a metaphor, in other words. And as for being "completely thoughtless", Nielsen 
immediately contradicts himself by comparing the piece's construction to the 
decidedly "thoughtful" processes that engineers go through when they're 
erecting flood defences. No matter: it's partly because the symphony inhabits 
such a precipitous boundary of symphonic and musical thinking, because Nielsen 
wants this music to bear the freight of ultimate musical responsibility – 
proving the supra-human powers of music itself, while also being a convincing 
symphony on its own terms - that it's so compelling.

It's one of the ironies of this piece that music that's so inherently dynamic 
and ever-changing should actually be about the large-scale repetition of a 
passage of"glorioso" <http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=4m5s> (as it's marked in 
the score) music, which you initially hear as the climax of the first section 
of the opening Allegro. It's also the first movement's coda 
<http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=10m30s>, and this thrillingly life-affirming 
music, celebrating and adorning a descending major scale, crowns the trajectory 
of the whole piece at theend of the finale 
<http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=34m58s>. But these passages are rare moments of 
stability that are wrested from surroundings of teeming, ever-evolving 
diversity. Thatvery opening <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WkEBPND8N94> of the 
piece is made from an explosive friction of musical elements that creates the 
material of the rest of the whole allegro. It's music that's propelled by the 
least stable interval in the tonal composer's symphonic arsenal, the tritone – 
the aggravating "devil in music <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tritone>", as the 
medievals called it, one semitone smaller than a fifth – which you hear pounded 
out in the timpani part, and as a melodic figure in the woodwinds.

It's a typical Nielsen texture of musical ideas that don't blend or coalesce 
into a serene whole (his conception of the orchestra is the diametric opposite 
of Sibelius's meltingly atmospheric orchestration, his fellow Scandinavian 
symphonist with whom Nielsen is often – wrongly - compared). Instead, they keep 
their individual identity even within the whole orchestral texture. You hear a 
similar phenomenon in thegunshot-like viola writing 
<http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=5m45s> that interrupts and catalyses the central 
section of the movement. But the symphony's single greatest moment of textural 
surprise is thefortissimo violin line <http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=17m15s> 
that marks the start of the slow movement, coming after the strangely childlike
intermezzo movement <http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=12m7s>that plays second (all 
four movements play continuously, as if the energy of the music can't be 
contained by stops or silences, and has to run on into the next movement).

The slow movement begins with music that sounds like a scream, which is at 
last quietened by asoulful violin solo <http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=20m12s>. 
Yet that mood doesn't last long, and another declamation in the woodwinds, an
obsessive, nagging, fortissimo theme <http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=21m58s>, is 
the grit in the symphonic oyster that produces the ratcheting up in tension 
that leads to the finale.

The centre of the fast  final movement <http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=27m37s> 
is a battle betweentwo sets of timpani <http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=28m46s> 
(the second has been silent until this point in the symphony). The two players 
(the second player is supposed to sit "directly opposite Timp. 1, at the edge 
of the orchestra near the audience", the score says) belt out competing sets of 
tritones; andall of the timpani's music <http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=32m53s> 
in this movement dissonates with the rest of the orchestra. As if they hadn't 
guessed, Nielsen tells the timpanists in the score to play throughout with "a 
certain menacing character".

In 1923, British critic Ernest Newman heard these passages as "spasmodic 
explosions [which] made us think the air raids had come again", and accused the 
whole symphony of being "half abstract, half programmatic", and "not 
sufficiently blending the two in one consistent, homogeneous tissue". Newman - 
possibly rightly - hears the violence of the piece as an echo of the terrible 
war years, and what he thinks of as a negative is really a positive: thank 
goodness Nielsen wasn't trying to create a symphony of consistency or 
homogeneity.

At the end of the symphony, when that gigantic peal of E major rings out 
<http://youtu.be/WkEBPND8N94?t=34m12s>, and with even those pesky timpani 
playing in the right key, I have a sense that the symphony's drama isn't truly 
over. The sonic scars of those abrasive battles between the timpani and the 
orchestra haven't healed by the time that "glorioso" coda is upon you. The 
irrepressible life-force of this symphony, at once creative and destructive, 
can't be closed off so easily. Nielsen's symphony is, finally, true to its huge 
ambitions, because the energy it releases can't be contained by its borders. A 
performance of the Inextinguishable should leave you battered yet uplifted, 
dazed but thrilled.

Five key performances 

London Symphony Orchestra/Colin Davis 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Nielsen-Symphonies-Nos-LSO-Davis/dp/B004DKDO3I/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1393831837&sr=8-1&keywords=nielsen+davis+4+and+5>
: Davis's late discovery - in his 80s - of Nielsen is an explosive revelation. 
He conducts here one of the quickest Inextinguishables you'll ever hear.

San Francisco Symphony Orchestra/Herbert Blomstedt 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WkEBPND8N94>: Blomstedt's is a safe 
recommendation – perhaps a wee bit too safe for this dangerously energetic 
music.

Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra/Herbert von Karajan 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Symphony-4-Inextinguishable-Nielsen/dp/B00008FJCE/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1393832932&sr=8-3&keywords=nielsen+karajan>
: a magnificent Karajanisation of this symphony – no one has languished more 
over its Glorioso music.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Falmj-hjgiIM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Falmj-hjgiIM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Falmj-hjgiIM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra/Osmo Vänskä 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Nielsen-BBC-Scottish-Symphony-Orchestra/dp/B0045W9BRM/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1393832959&sr=8-1&keywords=nielsen+vanska>
: Vänskä's is a brilliant balance of the chaotically energetic and the 
analytically precise.

London Symphony Orchestra/Ole Schmidt 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Nielsen-Complete-Symphonies-1-6-Carl/dp/B00005V43B/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1393832994&sr=8-2&keywords=nielsen+schmidt>
: Schmidt's recording has an entirely appropriate roughness and violence in its 
soundworld.
 