
Virtual reality technology has allowed people to relive weddings, scale Mount 
Everest and visit Olympic venues from their living rooms. At Brooklyn’s 
Prospect Park on Saturday, the emerging technology took New Yorkers inside the
Orion Nebula <http://earthsky.org/space/orion-nebula-jewel-in-orions-sword>, 
the gaseous cloud of dust and evolving stars some 1,500 light years away. The 
VR installation was part of theHubble Cantata 
<http://www.bricartsmedia.org/events-performances/bric-celebrate-brooklyn-festival/hubble-cantata-tigue>
, an hour-long composition for orchestra, 100-voice chorus, soloists and 
narration, by composerPaola Prestini  <http://paolaprestini.com/>and librettist 
Royce Vavrek 
<http://www.operanews.com/Opera_News_Magazine/2015/4/Features/The_Kaleidoscopic_World_of_Royce_Vavrek.html>
.

Staged at the BRIC Celebrate Brooklyn  
<http://www.bricartsmedia.org/events-performances/bric-celebrate-brooklyn-festival>
concert series, the cantata’s climatic moment came in its last five minutes, 
when audience members were cued to slip their phones into free cardboard VR 
headsets that were distributed at the gates. As the narrator, astrophysicist
Mario Livio <http://www.mariolivio.com/>, poetically described the life and 
death of stars, attendees shifted in their seats, craned their necks and even 
stood to view the three-dimensional renderings of Hubble photographs, directed 
by Eliza McNitt.

The free performance, which also included three-dimensional sound piped over 
20 loudspeakers, wasn’t entirely glitch-free. With 6,182 attendees (6,000 were 
expected), the venue ran short on VR headsets, and the Wi-Fi was halted by the 
rush of last-minute app downloads (people were encouraged to download it in 
advance). But the event also demonstrated that classical musicians aren’t 
content with sitting on the sidelines as more pop and rock artistsget involved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/04/virtual-insanity-vr-new-frontier-music-videos-waves>
 with VR videos.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2PVGbVZYCR8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2PVGbVZYCR8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2PVGbVZYCR8&media=>
“A lot of opera companies are starting to think in technological ways but VR 
hasn’t been done in this way yet,” said Prestini, who studied composition at the
Juilliard School <http://www.juilliard.edu/> in New York and is the executive 
director ofBrooklyn’s National Sawdust <https://nationalsawdust.org/> arts 
space. On Sunday, the musicians recorded the score for a planned app re-release 
as well as a commercial recording. Prestini is also talking with other venues 
including the Sydney Opera House and the Kennedy Center in Washington DC.

At least a half-dozen professional orchestras have created 360-degree films 
for use with VR headsets, among them, the Los Angeles Philharmonic, London 
Symphony Orchestra and Toronto Symphony Orchestra. Most aim to replicate a 
concert hall experience, whether on stage – so the viewer can hover over a 
violin section or an oboe soloist – or in the audience, where the 360-degree 
view also includes rows of empty seats.

Last year the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra in Australia hired Jumpgate, an 
Australian VR studio, to create a stage-view, 360-degreeperformance video 
<https://youtu.be/LZlNCAGWtwE> of Sibelius’s Finlandia. Created using a rig of 
16 GoPro cameras in front of conductor Guy Noble, the video has been 
distributed through YouTube and Facebook (it can be viewed using a headset or 
on a desktop computer). Vincent Ciccarello, the symphony’s managing director, 
says the goal is to build awareness for the orchestra, but he also envisions 
educational applications. “The new augmented reality possibilities are mind 
boggling,” he says, referring to the technology that fuses the digital world 
with the real world. “Imagine being able to play alongside professional 
musicians.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fsymphonies-in-space-orchestra-virtual-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f12d444761c7b93691a29c7b4524a92b804982a%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Symphonies%20in%20space%3A%20orchestras%20embrace%20virtual%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fsymphonies-in-space-orchestra-virtual-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Symphonies%20in%20space%3A%20orchestras%20embrace%20virtual%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fsymphonies-in-space-orchestra-virtual-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f12d444761c7b93691a29c7b4524a92b804982a%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 The audience were invited to don VR headsets in the work’s final five minutes. 
Photograph: David Andrako 
Similar in concept is a 360-degree rehearsal film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h04kcCSkGaY> of Tchaikovsky’s Sixth Symphony 
created by the Toronto Symphony Orchestra with the Canadian studio VR 
Cinematic. Orchestra officials say they hope to find a sponsor to fund a mass 
purchase of Google’s $15 cardboard viewers, which could be delivered to 
schools, nursing homes or community centers. Until then, headset adaptation is 
“biggest limitation to this technology”, says Michael Morreale, the orchestra’s 
manager of digital content.

Orchestras will also need to connect with the younger consumer groups 
<http://fortune.com/2016/01/05/virtual-reality-game-industry-to-generate-billions/>
 who tend to show a stronger interest in VR. So far, web traffic for most 
orchestra VR videos has been modest, generating a few thousand clicks on 
YouTube.Drew McManus <http://www.adaptistration.com>, a Chicago-based orchestra 
consultant, questions whether performing arts organizations “would be better 
served by redirecting those resources toward improving the infrastructure of 
their existing online efforts, such as their website, online ticketing and 
database management.”

But advocates see greater creative possibilities beyond concert films. 
“There’s no doubt that virtual reality is a very profound tool that’s going to 
have a major effect on art-making in the future,” saidEdward Bilous 
<http://edwardbilous.com/>, the director of Juilliard’s Center for Innovation 
in the Arts. “I think the breakthroughs are in true VR, in which the 
participant can really interact and shape and direct the content of the 
experience. That’s still a bit down the corner.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fsymphonies-in-space-orchestra-virtual-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39516143aba0f34d35e09ceb484740b24900dc72%2F0_295_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Symphonies%20in%20space%3A%20orchestras%20embrace%20virtual%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fsymphonies-in-space-orchestra-virtual-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Symphonies%20in%20space%3A%20orchestras%20embrace%20virtual%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fsymphonies-in-space-orchestra-virtual-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39516143aba0f34d35e09ceb484740b24900dc72%2F0_295_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Tigue, the opening act for the Hubble Cantata. Photograph: David Andrako 
Last year the American violinist Tim Fain worked with Jessica Brillhart, a VR 
film-maker at Google, on the 360-degree short film,Resonance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qECnb4CT-9c>. The vaguely surreal film shows 
Fain performing an original composition against several backdrops, including a 
graffiti-tagged empty warehouse, a barnyard and a church, with directional 
sound guiding the viewer through each new space. Filmed usingJump 
<https://vr.google.com/jump/>, a new camera rig intended to create a greater 
sense of depth, it has drawn over 420,000 views since November.

The short film used in the Hubble Cantata was a three-month undertaking, 
involving seven artists from the VR studiothe Endless Collective 
<http://www.theendlesscollective.com/>. They were tasked with ensuring that the 
textures in the clouds looked realistic and the surfaces on the Hubble had just 
the right reflectivity. Prestini acknowledged the popular appeal of the 
telescope’s photographs. “People have such a personal relationship to them,” 
she said. “In our lifetime we’ve grown with these images and our knowledge of 
the universe has expanded with them. I was really wary of how we would use the 
images. The last thing you’d want to do is make it look like a screensaver.”

Duncan Ransom, the Endless Collective’s creative director, sees the project in 
a tradition of “space opera” or movies like 2001: A Space Odyssey. “Opera is a 
very classical art form and combining it with cutting-edge VR – there’s no 
better reason for mixing things up,” Ransom said.
 