
Imagine if events hadn’t intervened, and Beethoven had stuck to his original 
plan, and hisThird Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kNBBIzi-eKA> had 
been called the “Bonaparte”. Imagine the reams of interpretation and analysis 
that would have gone into aligning the piece with the Napoleonic project, its 
humanist ideals and its all-too-human historical realisation. Yet that is what 
Beethoven wanted the piece we know now as the Eroica symphony to be: this 
piece, during its composition and at its completion in 1804, and even when he 
was negotiating its publication, was a piece for and aboutNapoleon 
<http://europeanhistory.about.com/od/bonapartenapoleon/a/bionapoleon.htm>. 
Beethoven designed the piece as a memorial to the heroic achievements of a 
ruler who he hoped would go on to inspire Europe to a humanist, libertarian, 
egalitarian revolution. That’s why the piece, you could say, describes 
Napoleon’s heroic struggles (the hugefirst movement 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W-uEjxxYtHo>), then narrates the sorrow of his 
death in grand public style (thefuneral march 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6l_bPmJifV4> slow movement), and, with the 
open-air energy and teeming imagination of thescherzo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u0eWcb1_uGM> and finale 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IJ1xqShTQCc>, demonstrates how his legacy and 
spirit were to have lived on in the world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F05%2Fsymphony-guide-beethovens-third-eroica-tom-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F4%2F1407166684581%2F026026d1-6f07-4326-9ec0-5a8ac1659433-1937x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Symphony%20guide%3A%20Beethoven's%20Third%20('Eroica')&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F05%2Fsymphony-guide-beethovens-third-eroica-tom-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Symphony%20guide%3A%20Beethoven%27s%20Third%20%28%27Eroica%27%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2014%2Faug%2F05%2Fsymphony-guide-beethovens-third-eroica-tom-service%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F8%2F4%2F1407166684581%2F026026d1-6f07-4326-9ec0-5a8ac1659433-1937x2040.jpeg>
 Beethoven by Andy Warhol. Photograph: Andy Warhol Foundation/Corbis 
Instead, the story of how the piece’s original dedication to Bonaparte 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symphony_No._3_(Beethoven)#mediaviewer/File:Eroica_Beethoven_title.jpg>
 was defaced by Beethoven is the stuff of symphonic legend, based on Ferdinand 
Ries’s memory of what happened when he told the composer thatNapoleon had 
styled himself Emperor in May 1804 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/08/Jacques-Louis_David,_The_Coronation_of_Napoleon_edit.jpg>
. With that Napoleon became, for Beethoven - as Ries reports the composer 
saying - “a tyrant”, who “will think himself superior to all men”. (In fact, 
it’s even more complicated than that, since Beethoven the apparently great 
revolutionary was also willing to change the symphony’s dedication in order not 
to jeopardise the fee due from a royal patron 
<http://www.beethovenseroica.com/Pg2_hist/history.html>.) Yet that scrawling 
out of Napoleon’s name doesn’t change the specificity of Beethoven’s 
inspiration in writing this symphony, the longest and largest-scale he had ever 
been composed, and the profound human, philosophical, and political motivations 
behind the musical innovations of this jaw-dropping piece.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DREHdv4KhMJM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DREHdv4KhMJM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DREHdv4KhMJM&media=>
And it’s those novelties that usually inspire the panegyrics with which the 
Eroica is often described: the shattering dissonances and rhythmic dislocations 
ofthe first movement <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=REHdv4KhMJM>, the 
expressive grandeur and terror ofthe funeral march 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IVNKNz-lc6k>, the ludicrously challenging horn 
writing ofthe scherzo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zXVDDHB3ybU>, the 
gigantic expressive range – from comic to tragic to lyrical to heroic – inthe 
fourth movement <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VJXAVf_FdTU>, a set of 
variations that in one fell swoop reinvent the symphonic finale in a way that 
arguably only the last movement of Beethoven’s Ninth comes close to.

And yet, these musical revolutions are not so - well, revolutionary as they 
might at first seem. In this piece as much as anything he composed, Beethoven 
didn’t want to compromise his music’s communicative power. For his music to 
sound its message of change, to inspire audiences to consider a new world-view 
just as they are also asked to participate in a new scale of symphonic drama, 
Beethoven needed to make sure he was taking his listeners with him. Which is 
why this vastly complex piece is also completely clear in its structure and in 
its extreme states of expressive character.

Think about the first movement <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=InxT4S6wQf4>: 
yes, its scale of thought and ambition are unprecedented when you consider the 
whole structure, but on the level of its themes and their working out, 
Beethoven’s music is built on simple, graspable ideas: those two E flat major 
thunderbolts with which the symphony opens (Beethoven’s initial thought was 
actually to start with a dissonance, as he had done at the start of his First 
Symphony), and the undulating arpeggio in the cellos that starts out so 
serenely but which soon introduces a foreign note, a C sharp, the grit in the 
oyster that signals this movement’s emotional and harmonic ambition. The most 
radical moments are shocking when heard in isolation, like thegrinding harmonic 
clash <http://youtu.be/K56RTB09DX0?t=5m44s> at the centre of the movement which 
seems to bring the music to a shrieking, shuddering impasse; or the enormity of 
the movement’s coda, turned by Beethoven into another opportunity to develop 
and explore his themes rather than simply to tie the room together with a 
handful of clichéd closing gestures. And there’s also a moment that made Hector 
Berlioz – otherwise Ludwig van’s greatest admirer – splutter with indignation 
that “if that was really what Beethoven wanted … it must be admitted that this 
whim is an absurdity”; the passage when the horn seems to announce the return 
to the main themea few bars early <http://youtu.be/K56RTB09DX0?t=8m53s>. It is 
what Beethoven “really wanted”, but Berlioz’s comments remind us just how weird 
it actually is.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De5BqkXjk2c8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De5BqkXjk2c8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3De5BqkXjk2c8&media=>
Yet when you hear a performance such as Frans Brüggen’s 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Symphonies-Live-Rotterdam-2011/dp/B008L1GZOK/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1407140745&sr=8-1&keywords=bruggen+beethoven>
 with the Orchestra of the Eighteenth Century, orOtto Klemperer’s 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Symphony-Leonore-Overtures-Nos/dp/B00005YUB9/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1407140834&sr=8-1&keywords=klemperer+beethoven+3>
 with the Philharmonia (strange bedfellows, you might think – one a period 
instrument guru, the other a big-band maestro of the old-school - but both 
create a mighty, granite-hewn first movement) it’s not so much the individual 
moments that take your breath away, but the cumulative momentum that builds 
from the first bar to the last. That’s the real revolution in the first 
movement of the Eroica symphony, and the fact that this implacable musical 
force should have been inspired by the representation of a great man’s works 
only makes it more remarkable: this movement is the definitive symphonic 
alchemy of musical structure and poetic meaning.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2s-0xuWSRCk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2s-0xuWSRCk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2s-0xuWSRCk&media=>
As is the rest of the symphony. One thought to guide you through the next 
three movements from the funeral march to the explosion of joy in the final 
bars: this music is simultaneously rigorously symphonic yet novel in its 
cavalcade of dramatic and expressive characters. The achievement of the Eroica 
is not that Beethoven “unifies” all of this diversity, but rather that he 
creates and unleashes a symphonic energy in this piece that both frames and 
releases this elemental human drama. It’s that mysterious momentum that is the 
true “heroism” of this symphony, so that the victory at the very end of the 
piece doesn’t just stand for Napoleon, or Beethoven, but for the possibilities 
of the symphony itself, which is revealed as a carrier of new weight and 
meaning as never before in its history. What started out as a (pre-) memorial 
to a great man and his humanist ideals turns into an essential embodiment of 
symphonic life-force.

Five key recordings

Roger Norrington/London Classical Players 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Complete-Symphonies-Ludwig-van/dp/B00005A9O0/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1407140100&sr=8-3&keywords=norrington+london+classical+players+beethoven>
: this performance still breathes the air and energy of a performance practice 
revolution in action.

Nikolaus Harnoncourt/Chamber Orchestra of Europe 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Complete-Symphonies-Robert-Holl/dp/B000095IUM/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1407140064&sr=8-1&keywords=harnoncourt+beethoven+eroica>
: less iconoclastic than Norrington’s period instruments, Harnoncourt’s 
recording still thrills with discovery, as he takes the lessons of the 
historically informed movement to the modern instruments of the COE players.

Otto Klemperer/Philharmonia Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Symphony-Leonore-Overtures-Nos/dp/B00005YUB9/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1407140028&sr=8-1&keywords=klemperer+beethoven+3>
: an interpretation that locks you into a mighty symphonic momentum from the 
first chord to the final coda.

Frans Brüggen/Orchestra of the Eighteenth Century 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Symphonies-Live-Rotterdam-2011/dp/B008L1GZOK/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1407139979&sr=8-1&keywords=bruggen+beethoven>
: period instruments maybe, but Brüggen’s performance has a gigantic structural 
and emotional power.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzd6-KOgK3wU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzd6-KOgK3wU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dzd6-KOgK3wU&media=>
Arturo Toscanini/NBC Symphony Orchestra (1939) 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Complete-Symphonies-Selected-Overtures-Cycle/dp/B00DJSUO74/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1407139922&sr=8-1&keywords=toscanini+1939+beethoven+cycle>
: not just the uncompromising Toscanini of implacable energy, there’s a 
flexibility and lyricism here that makes the music flow as well as foment a 
symphonic revolution.

Mark Elder conducts Beethoven’s Eroica Symphony at the BBC Proms on 9 August  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/august-09/15002>with the Hallé 
Orchestra.
 