
Let’s begin at the end. The final page 
<http://www.johnwesleybarker.com/blog/files/mahlers9th_1.jpg> of the last, 
cataclysmically slow movement of Mahler’s Ninth Symphony is one of the most 
famouslydeath-haunted places <http://youtu.be/wWxX-kf-2MI?t=1h18m10s> in 
orchestral music, a moment in which the music slowly, achingly, bridges the 
existential gap between sound and silence, presence and absence, life and 
death. The very last bar is even marked, pianississimo, with a long pause – 
“ersterbend” (dying), as if its message wasn’t already clear enough.

As musical ideas that have dominated this movement, the whole symphony, and 
even other works by Mahler, dissolve into the ether – becoming slower, quieter, 
emptier, and more stunningly, breathtakingly etiolated and gossamer-thin in 
sound and substance – it all amounts to convincing evidence to supportLeonard 
Bernstein’s view <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xDW1qQYcjto>, shared by many 
of his conductor colleagues and listeners, too, that this music stands for a 
whole suite of deaths. There's Mahler’s own, since this is his last completed 
symphony, after he had witnessed the death of his daughter and when he knew 
that his life would be cut short by his heart condition. There's the death of 
tonality, which – in the musical context of 1910, this piece emblematically 
signals. It even heralds the death throes of the figure of the artist as hero 
in European culture.

The rest of the symphony, according to another Bernsteinian point of view, 
prefigues the jackboots of the world wars. And when you listen toBernstein 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wWxX-kf-2MI>, or Claudio Abbado 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sob-klZZ7Fw>, or Herbert von Karajan 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NwwhZGtcnSM>, or the majority of contemporary 
interpreters <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3GwrgASjQ9I> of the Ninth 
Symphony, you are given no choice but to go on a journey through the veil to a 
glimpse of some other realm beyond worldly experience. I’ve described the end of
Abbado’s performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/jan/20/claudio-abbado-lucerne-festival-orchestra-tom-service>
 with the Lucerne Festival Orchestra, and the minutes of silence that follows 
it in this live recording, as one of the most revelatory, transformative 
experiences of my musical life. And I’m confident it will be for you as well 
when you watch the performance.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS8YUIG3YgxQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS8YUIG3YgxQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS8YUIG3YgxQ&media=>
Yet there is another way of thinking about this music, and there’s another way 
ofconducting it <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3eUKpw21ASc>, hearing it, and 
experiencing it. It turns on whether you think of this piece as a hymn to the 
end of all things, or instead, as anultimately affirmative 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ugsts4senWA> love-song to life and to 
mortality. (It can be both at the same time, of course, but bear with me.) The 
reason that performance is so important in this piece is that a conductor’s 
view of the music, especially that final, slow movement, can take the symphony 
in different directions. Bruno Walter, a close friend of Mahler’s who conducted 
the Ninth’s posthumous premiere in 1912, performed and recorded the piece with 
Vienna Philharmonic in 1938.His finale <http://youtu.be/3eUKpw21ASc?t=52m12s> 
takes just over 18 minutes, whereasBernstein with the Israel Philharmonic 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mahler-Symphony-Philharmonic-Orchestra-Bernstein/dp/B00FW67Q04/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1406540289&sr=8-1&keywords=mahler+9+bernstein+israel>
 takes half an hour. (It’s pure speculation, but Walter may have conducted the 
piece even more swiftly in 1912, since his interpretations tended to get slower 
in his later musical life.) That goes beyond a mere difference of tempo, it 
makes the piece a radically different musical and emotional entity. Listen to 
the very opening of both performances to hear what I mean:Walter’s almost 
vibrato-less violins <http://youtu.be/3eUKpw21ASc?t=52m12s> make a single 
phrase out of that ascent to the turn figure that will dominate the whole 
movement, in a breath that you could sing. But Bernstein and his players wring 
a feverish intensity from every note, and they turn that opening idea into a 
catalogue of trauma instead of a single musical statement – and so it goes on, 
throughout the movement.

The finale is only the most extreme example of a tendency you can hear 
throughout the symphony. Seemingly, there’s much more evidence to support the 
hymn-to-death approach:the halting rhythm 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3eUKpw21ASc> you hear right at the start of 
the symphony in the horn, which becomes a massively disturbing dark fanfare in 
the rest of the huge first movement, has been interpreted as a transliteration 
of Mahler’s faltering heartbeat,the rustic-grotesque 
<http://youtu.be/OeMLZR2xsRM?t=28m25s> of the scherzo is a sort of surreal, 
Brueghel-esque dark pastoral, and the third movement, theRondo-Burleske 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I6U_PVHmtgs>, spits out its contrapuntal 
ferocity with sardonic energy, in what could be Mahler’s “screw-you guys” to 
those who said he couldn’t write polyphony (in fact this whole symphony sounds 
out Mahler’s most subtle polyphony of motive, theme and harmony, in ways that 
really do prefigure Schoenberg's and Webern’s music of the late 19-teens).

But consider this: the sighing idea that you hear in the second violins at the 
start of the symphony,two notes and an interval (F sharp-E) 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q6zVcO3VxVc> that are at the heart of the 
opening movement and the whole symphony’s melodic material, is connected to 
something rather surprising:a waltz by Johann Strauss 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a-L1cQKSm-I> that Mahler certainly knew, 
called Enjoy Life. Mahler makes the thematic link explicit later on in the 
movement, and clearest of all in its closing bars (listen to this excellent 
summary of the connections made bythis YouTube user 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oxrklvp0_WE>) and he does so with tenderness 
rather than irony. The trauma ofthe climaxes 
<http://youtu.be/wWxX-kf-2MI?t=18m22s> in this unprecedented first movement is 
not in doubt, but what’s at stake is what they mean: are they the sounds of a 
catastrophe that’s about to happen? Or are they the result of a life-force 
straining every fibre of its being to resist the inevitable, and to relish 
instead the fragility of life’s pleasures? There is the same dichotomy at play 
inthe scherzo <http://youtu.be/wWxX-kf-2MI?t=30m53s>, in which you can 
interpret the tensions between playfulness and warped, hobbled dance-rhythms as 
a struggle to hold on to an elusive, simple joyfulness. And in the 
Rondo-Burleske, in the middle of the storm of counterpoint, there are 
epiphanies of stillness and visionary escape, asthe solo trumpet 
<http://youtu.be/wWxX-kf-2MI?t=50m18s> calls out a melodic figure that will go 
on to define the next, final movement.

All that means there’s another way of thinking about the finale 
<http://youtu.be/wWxX-kf-2MI?t=56m27s>: it’s music that tries not to depict a 
musical or philosophical death, but instead, does everything it can to hold on 
to existence. On that last page, there’s a quote from the fourth of Mahler’s
Kindertotenlieder <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aSsWZpW7Axc>, accompanying 
the words “the day is beautiful”. Again, it’s an image of hanging on to the 
beauties of life even in the face of death, rather than a morbid fascination 
with what lies beyond.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF3DHYRMoTN4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF3DHYRMoTN4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF3DHYRMoTN4&media=>
Yet whatever decisions conductors make about Mahler’s Ninth Symphony, it’s up 
to us listeners to make of the piece what we want. And what’s thrilling about 
this music, and the performances below, is that it can be more than one thing 
simultaneously. One final thought, maybe the most obvious of all: far from 
going gently into a sort of pre-deathly contemplation, Mahler was full of 
plans, action, and music in the years when he was writing the Ninth Symphony. 
He was taking up his post at the Metropolitan Opera in New York, writingDas 
Lied von der Erde <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m_Qg7g3ehY8>, preparing for 
the premiere of theEighth Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KugLAIzW3u8>
, and writing, but not completing, what would truly be his last symphony,the 
Tenth <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lbaFjfT9D6E>. That’s another danger of 
thinking about that last page of the Ninth Symphony as the end of Mahler’s 
compositional life. It’s not: for Mahler, and maybe for us, it should be an 
insight into life – albeit a life transformed after the intensity of what 
you’ll have been through after listening to any complete performance of his 
symphony – rather than a leaving of it.

Five key recordings

1. Bruno Walter/Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3eUKpw21ASc>: From 1938, this recording lives 
and breathes a Mahlerian performance practice that we can now only distantly 
recreate. It’s essential listening.

2. Leonard Bernstein/Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mahler-Symphony-No-9-The-Originals/dp/B002UIWSL4/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1406539054&sr=8-1&keywords=mahler+9+berlin+bernstein>
: One of the most highly-charged of Bernstein’s Mahler performances, and his 
only appearance with Karajan’s Berliners – the electricity of the encounter 
thrills and disturbs through every note.

3. Claudio Abbado/Lucerne Festival Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mahler-Symphony-No-9-DVD-NTSC/dp/B004DIPLOK/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1406539805&sr=8-1&keywords=mahler+9+abbado+lucerne>
: A performance that both travels to another realm of experience, but is also 
full of an irresistible worldly love, of lyricism, of earthiness, of energy.

4. Jonathan Nott/Bamberg Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Symphony-Bamberger-Symphoniker-Bayerische-Statsphilharmonie/dp/B002I9SVPC/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1406539838&sr=8-1&keywords=mahler+9+nott>
: It’s conducted and played with fastidious and immaculate attention to detail, 
but Nott’s performance also reaches the heights of Mahlerian emotion and 
extremity.

5. Roger Norrington/Stuttgart Radio Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ugsts4senWA>: This won’t be to everyone’s 
tastes, but it’s an important and radical vision of this symphony, stripped not 
just of vibrato, but any emotional histrionics. And Norrington’s tempos and 
timings are closer to Walter’s than anyone else’s – but still not quite as 
quick …

• Donald Runnicles conducts Mahler's Ninth Symphony 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/august-04/14986> at the BBC Proms on 
4 August with the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra.
 