
When was the last time you heard César Franck's Symphony in D Minor 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=1sqmhOIw9vw> on an orchestral programme? I'm 
prepared to be proved wrong, but it's my hunch that it's been many years since 
Franck's only symphony (probably the only work by a Belgian that will appear in 
this series, although I'm braced for a further riposte about the great Belgian 
symphonists as well!) has been performed recently your favourite orchestra, in 
the UK at least.

This neglect would have come as a major surprise for audiences, orchestras, 
and conductors even a generation ago, when Franck's work was one of the 
fixtures of the symphonic canon, a piece that every conductor, from Furtwängler 
to Karajan, from Klemperer to Bernstein, had to prove themselves in, and which 
audiences loved to hear. What's happened? Why has Franck's last major work 
fallen so sharply out of fashion? A piece that is arguably the summation of his 
life in music, a piece that attempts an ambitious fusion of French and German 
musical traditions at a time when to do so was politically and aesthetically 
controversial - anything that smacked of rapprochement with German 
sensibilities was seen as unpatriotic in the wake of the Franco-Prussian war.

The currently fashionable criticism of the 1888 work is summed up by its early 
detractors such as Charles Gounod, who called it "incompetence pushed to 
dogmatic lengths", and Maurice Ravel, who criticised the work's stodgy 
orchestration. Charles Lamoreux rejected it for performance in his concert 
series, the most important in Paris, and so the premiere had to be given by 
students of the Conservatoire where Franck was professor. Factionalism and 
feuding defined the reaction to that 1889 performance: Franck's pupils,Vincent 
D'Indy <http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/287288/Vincent-dIndy> among 
them, were in raptures, while others censured the symphony because it "outraged 
the formalist rules and habits of the stricter professionals and amateurs 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symphony_in_D_minor_(Franck)>".

The problem nowadays is that we can't, or don't, hear the implicit radicalism 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=m6IbfFXNsjA> of Franck's symphony, instead 
imagining that the work is the acme of late-19th century lugubriousness; a 
symphony that's worthily crafted and finely wrought, but expressively inert; 
the equivalent in sound of a mediocre lump of Gothic revival architecture.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnYqOfdFtUwQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnYqOfdFtUwQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnYqOfdFtUwQ&media=>
But listen to the piece <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=nYqOfdFtUwQ> (which 
apparently outraged his irredeemably conservative wife, who railed against its 
morally compromising sensuality and passion!) without those preconceptions. I 
think you'll discover in Franck's music a convincing answer to how the streams 
of French imagination and clarity might be aligned with a German, 
post-Wagnerian harmonic language. The result, alongsideSaint-Saëns's Organ 
Symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/feb/25/symphony-guide-saint-saens-organ-tom-service>
, is French music's most significant late-19th century symphony.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1sqmhOIw9vw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1sqmhOIw9vw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1sqmhOIw9vw&media=>
And yet Franck's symphony starts <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=1sqmhOIw9vw> 
with a veiled - or actually pretty obvious - homage to German music, to 
Beethoven's last quartet. Franck's opening theme is a rewrite of the 
questioning phrase to which Beethoven appended the words, "Muss es sein?" 
("Must it be?") in the last movement ofhis final string quartet 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=4GmF1RdcRdg>. Franck's theme, marvellously mobile 
in its modulatory potential, sets out, in its slow tempo, much of the material 
that the whole huge first movement will be based on. Transposed into an 
Allegro, you hear the same motto idea of the very opening, before the slow 
music is repeated in a new key. After its stormy beginning, the allegro proper 
climaxes in two radiant themes, both in F major, the first gently lyrical, and 
the second radiantly joyous. It's a feature of this symphony that while Franck 
is an inveterate modulator - his harmonies often shift like quicksand, 
something you hear particularly in the central development section of this 
movement, which starts with a startling move from F major to B major, achieved 
in just a few bars - his tunes are remarkably stable, like this joyous melody 
that's the reward for all that symphonic sound and fury. The lugubrious 
intensity of that slow introduction isn't easily forgotten, however, and it 
returns to catalyse the reprise of the movement's main themes, and after 
another appearance of that radiant tune, the movement ends with a vision of the 
slow motto theme, now in a major key.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dtce-NA5nljM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dtce-NA5nljM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dtce-NA5nljM&media=>
But we're not through yet: the central movement 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=tce-NA5nljM> of the symphony is a hybrid of slow 
movement and scherzo, which starts with a gentle thrumming of pizzicato strings 
and harp before another of Franck's best tunes, this time for cor anglais. 
(This caused a bit of a stushie at the premiere, when some wag, criticising 
Franck for his colouristic adventure, apparently asked whether Haydn and 
Beethoven had ever used a cor anglais in their symphonies - forgetting that 
Haydn's 22nd symphony has prominent parts for two cor anglais.) This is a 
melody whose chord progressions sound to my ears like an unconscious memory of 
the ancient hymnVeni, Veni, Emmanuel <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=wE6BzoMt0Ro>
, which Franck, one of the world's greatest ever organists and improvisers, 
would have known. (It's also, incidentally, a melody that subconsciously 
influencedThomas Adès 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Thomas-Ades-Noises-Conversations-Service/dp/0571278973/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1398675688&sr=8-1&keywords=ades+full+of+noises>
 in the second movement of hisAsyla <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=oSQUKVXI4Ik>
.) Through metrical magic, turning slow music into fast and back again, Franck 
elegantly elides scherzoid music with this haunting tune, just another 
candidate in this symphony for an irrepressibly infectious ear-worm.

But the memory of even that cor anglais tune is erased by the melody Franck 
gives us atthe start of the finale <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=nYqOfdFtUwQ>, 
an outpouring of genuine joyousness that dynamises the whole piece. Franck uses 
this tune as the start of a process that subtly reviews the progress of the 
entire symphony, since melodies from the previous movements return throughout 
the fabric of this Allegro non troppo. As Franck said, "The finale takes up all 
the themes again, as in [Beethoven's] Ninth. They do not return as quotations, 
however; I have elaborated them and given them the role of new elements". He's 
right, too; and those transformations mean that the journey to the final 
coronation of the finale's main melody isn't simply about creating a piece that 
will work as a barnstorming symphonic finale, it's also about both clinching 
and transcending the melodies and drama of the preceding two movements, making 
the final coda a blaze of D major an authentic prize of a magnificently 
compelling symphonic struggle. And one that I want to hear in the concert hall 
more often!

Five key recordings

Chicago Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Franck-Symphony-Minor-Stravinsky-Petrouchka/dp/B00000I9M3/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1398675868&sr=8-3&keywords=pierre+monteux+franck+symphony>
/Pierre Monteux 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Franck-Symphony-Minor-Stravinsky-Petrouchka/dp/B00000I9M3/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1398675868&sr=8-3&keywords=pierre+monteux+franck+symphony>
: with only the most subtle moments of interpretative intervention, Monteux 
lets Franck's symphony speak as its composer wanted it to; as he told one of 
his students, as "nothing but pure music".

Montréal Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Franck-Symphony-Symphonie-montagnard-francais/dp/B0000041XM/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1398675938&sr=8-1&keywords=charles+dutoit+franck+symphony>
/Charles Dutoit 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Franck-Symphony-Symphonie-montagnard-francais/dp/B0000041XM/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1398675938&sr=8-1&keywords=charles+dutoit+franck+symphony>
: Dutoit's performance, recorded in immaculate sound, makes Franck's music 
dazzle and shimmer.

Boston Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Saint-Saens-Symphnoy-Franck-Honnegger-Symphony/dp/B000099636/ref=sr_1_8?ie=UTF8&qid=1398676004&sr=8-8&keywords=charles+munch+boston+symphony+franck+symphony>
/Charles Munch 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Saint-Saens-Symphnoy-Franck-Honnegger-Symphony/dp/B000099636/ref=sr_1_8?ie=UTF8&qid=1398676004&sr=8-8&keywords=charles+munch+boston+symphony+franck+symphony>
: Munch's driving tempos and innate feeling for Franck's symphonic drama make 
this one of the most satisfying performances available.

Hilversum Radio Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/French-Concert-Stokowski/dp/B000026C6Q/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1398676293&sr=8-2&keywords=stokowski+franck+symphony>
/Leopold Stokowski 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/French-Concert-Stokowski/dp/B000026C6Q/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1398676293&sr=8-2&keywords=stokowski+franck+symphony>
: ... and Stokowski's is one of the weirdest. His comparatively slow tempos and 
the way he pulls the pulse around give another view of the piece that you'll 
either feel reveals new sides to this score - or distorts its fundamental drama.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-UUzOLynw44&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-UUzOLynw44>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-UUzOLynw44&media=>
Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/C%C3%A9sar-Franck-Symphony-D-Minor/dp/B002B4ADNM/ref=sr_1_12?ie=UTF8&qid=1398676523&sr=8-12&keywords=furtwangler+franck+symphony>
/Wilhlem Furtwängler 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/C%C3%A9sar-Franck-Symphony-D-Minor/dp/B002B4ADNM/ref=sr_1_12?ie=UTF8&qid=1398676523&sr=8-12&keywords=furtwangler+franck+symphony>
: Furtwängler's live January 1945 recording is the last he made before exiling 
himself in Switzerland, and it sears with imagination - and terror. This is the 
performance that sums up another of Franck's accounts of the symphony.“I risked 
a great deal [in it], but the next time I shall risk even more". The next time 
never came since he died the year after the symphony's premiere, but you hear 
the knife-edge of danger in Furtwängler's performance.
 