
The very first people to hear or see any part of Brahms’s Fourth Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wxB5vkZy7nM> in 1885 had some surprisingly 
heretical things to say about the piece. Brahms and a friend played through the 
symphony on the piano to a group of his closest confidants, critics and 
collaborators, but the reaction was one of those devastatingly uncomfortable 
silences. Eduard Hanslick, Brahms’s critical champion, broke the uneasy 
atmosphere after the first movement with the unforgettable comment, “I feel 
I’ve just been beaten up by two terribly intelligent people”. As Brahms’s 
biographerJan Swafford 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Johannes-Brahms-Biography-Jan-Swafford/dp/0333725891/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1399838589&sr=8-1&keywords=jan+swafford+brahms>
 reveals, another friend, the writer Max Kalbeck, turned up at Brahms’s 
apartment the next day to recommend that the composer should not release the 
piece to the public in its current form. Instead, he suggested, he should keep 
thefinale  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WZGWB93-mmI>as a stand-alone piece, 
and replace both theslow movement  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RdazsCz7bZE>
and thescherzo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hlbRPGPUqis>. Riven by 
self-doubt, Brahms was unsure that he would allow the piece to have any life 
beyond its premiere in Meiningen that October. Only the work’s positive 
reception there, and the gradual, grudging change in his friends’ attitude to 
the piece at its Viennese premiere, convinced Brahms that the Fourth Symphony 
could survive.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxB5vkZy7nM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxB5vkZy7nM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwxB5vkZy7nM&media=>
That less-than-straightforward gestation seems hard to believe nowadays, when 
Brahms's Fourth Symphony is trotted out on concert programmes as a sure-fire 
way to put bums on seats, with its comfortingly familiar melodies and 
melancholy, its promise of satisfying symphonic coherence, and its apparently 
easy appeal to musicians, conductors and audiences. But I think those early 
commentators were on to something – not in terms of the work’s failure to live 
up to the promise of its three symphonic predecessors, but in the sense of the 
uncompromising intellectual complexity and refinement of this music, and its 
expressive implacability and even tragedy. You hear that above all in thefinal 
movement <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hg9iXypvP_k>, the passacaglia, which 
ends with one of the bleakest minor-key cadences in symphonic music.

This is a symphony that ought to leave you intellectually battered and 
emotionally bruised rather than superficially consoled. So what’s bizarre is 
the idea that Brahms’s Fourth Symphony represents a nice night out at your 
local concert hall. This music is some of the darkest and deepest in the 19th 
century. What you’re hearing in it is an E minor nail in the coffin of the 
possibility of a symphonic happy ending. Jan Swafford goes even further, 
calling the piece “a funeral song for [Brahms’s] heritage, for a world at 
peace, for an Austro-German middle class that honored and understood music like 
no other culture, for the sweet Vienna he knew, for his own lost loves”; it’s a 
work that “narrates a progression from a troubling twilight to a dark night: 
fin de siècle”, instead of the “darkness to light” trajectories of so many 
minor-key 19th century symphonies, which end in a major key – think of 
Beethoven’sFifth  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/sep/16/symphony-guide-beethoven-fifth-tom-service>
and Ninth, or all of Bruckner’s completed minor-key symphonies. And for the 
musicologistReinhold Brinkmann 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Late-Idyll-Second-Symphony-Johannes/dp/0674511751/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1399838616&sr=8-1&keywords=reinhold+brinkmann+brahms>
, “The chorales in [Brahms’s]First 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/mar/25/symphony-guide-brahms-first-tom-service>
 and Third Symphonies resound with ‘hope,’ directly and positively ... With its 
negative ending, the Fourth Symphony denies this hope; it is the composed 
revocation of it.”

What’s astonishing about Brahms’s achievement in the Fourth Symphony is that 
this ferocity and concentration of expression is achieved not through a 
heightened emotional rhetoric, but through a relentless focus on supposedly 
“abstract” musical details. I’ll explain those quotation marks later, but to 
get a sense of the all-pervasive nature of Brahms’s musical thinking in this 
piece, you only have to hear - or re-hear -the very opening of the piece 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yyYovRy4jVA>. That melody – criminally 
over-familiar to many of our ears today! – is built from a series ofdescending 
and ascending thirds <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pT6SN4tPbv8>, a favourite 
Brahmsian device, and a decidedly systematic approach to building a musical 
melody that he nonetheless turns into one of the most immediately attractive 
moments in his symphonic output. But it’s the construction that counts here, 
because that chain of thirds allows Brahms to outline the principal tonal areas 
of the symphony: there is an unusual emphasis in the melody on the 
flat-submediant of the E minor scale (C major), which is the home key of the 
third movement, it’s one of the tonal pivots of the slow movement, and it’s 
important in the finale too. But this melody also functions as a kind of 
generative DNA for the first movement’s - and the whole symphony’s - motivic 
drama. What I mean by that is the continuous meshing, churning and changing of 
musical ideas that Brahms creates, so that each line of music in the orchestral 
score functions as a cog in a symphonic machine. Arnold Schoenberg thought of 
this sort of compositional process – in which everything you hear can be 
understood as a transformation of a series of musical motives - as evidence of
“Brahms the Progressive” 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Style-Idea-Joseph-Henry-Auner/dp/0520266072/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1399838809&sr=8-2&keywords=schoenberg+style+and+idea>
 (as he dubbed him in a famous essay): Brahms’s motivic manipulation is a kind 
of precursor of Schoenberg’s “composition with 12 tones”, his serialism. But 
for others, this technique is an all-too obvious sign of Brahms’s conscious 
cleverness. That’s what Hanslick meant about being beaten up by two intelligent 
people, and it’s precisely the idea that Thomas Adès sends up in his piece,
Brahms 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Brahms-full-score-Thomas-Ad%C3%A8s/dp/0571522009/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1399838875&sr=8-1&keywords=thomas+ades+brahms>
, for baritone and orchestra, setting a poem byAlfred Brendel 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/One-Finger-Many-Alfred-Brendel/dp/0375502939/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1399838895&sr=8-1&keywords=alfred+brendel+finger>
.

In Adès’s piece, those chains of thirds from the start of the Fourth Symphony 
descend into a kind of musical oblivion, obliterated by their own logic. But in 
a way, that’s exactly that Brahms himself does in the Fourth Symphony. Brahms 
takes his techniques to compositional extremes. So much so that, as the 
composer and conductor Gunther Schuller points out in his bookThe Compleat 
Conductor 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Compleat-Conductor-Gunther-Schuller/dp/0195126610/ref=sr_1_sc_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1399839660&sr=8-1-spell&keywords=schuller+copleat+conductor>
, there are passages in the first movement that create “a multi-layered 
structure of such complexity that I dare say there is nothing like it even in 
theRite of Spring; one has to turn to Ives’s Fourth Symphony to find a 
parallel” – he meansthis place <http://youtu.be/1xZcBqzdhQ8?t=3m30s> of teeming 
rhythmic and polyphonic intensity – and later, Schuller identifies “one of the 
more complex and motivically convoluted passages in all music”, in the first 
movement’scentral section <http://youtu.be/1xZcBqzdhQ8?t=4m42s>. Brahms’s music 
demands this kind of forensic attention to detail to reveal its full riches, 
but in the symphony as a whole, the brilliance of the piece is to carry you 
through its structure, whatever of its motivic felicities you consciously 
appreciate when you’re listening. What you can’t escape is that the expressive 
intensity that you hear in the Fourth Symphony is a direct result of the 
density of its compositional thinking. Listen to the waythe second movement 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4t98EKVhtAU> sounds its lonely modal 
introduction before relaxing into a chromatically inflected E major; or hear 
how the scherzo’s galumphing energy also continues the symphony’s motivic 
journey:at the climax <http://youtu.be/wxB5vkZy7nM?t=29m38s> of this most 
extrovert movement in Brahms’s symphonic canon, the widely and wildly-spaced 
notes prefigure themain melody <http://youtu.be/wxB5vkZy7nM?t=30m27s> of the 
finale.

The finale. Brahms’s symphonic passacaglia is when I can explain the meaning 
of those “abstract” quotation marks. This is one of the most tightly 
constructed movements ever composed, with 30 variations (and a concluding coda) 
on the melody you hear blazed out at the beginning in the brass and woodwind; 
that melody is part of the texture of every single succeeding variation, as the 
passacaglia form demands. But although it’s made from the highest watermark of 
musical arcana and compositional virtuosity, all that supposed “abstractness” 
means that the piece is actually an explosion of expressive meanings. The main 
melody is an expansion of a chaconne tune from Bach’s cantata 150 (a 
“chaconne”, like the one inBach’s D Minor Partita 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tPWQjjOxjMs> for solo violin, is a similar 
form to a passacaglia), and Brahms’s use of a baroque method of construction is 
his homage to an era of musical history that this piece simultaneously honours 
and draws to a tragic conclusion. For me, the finale has the ineluctable power 
of a Greek drama: it’s a dark prophecy that’s fulfilled in that shattering 
final cadence. The journey from Brahms’s First Symphony to his Fourth is from 
optimism to pessimism, from the possibility of reshaping the world to a 
resignation at its essential melancholy. By 1885, in his early 50s but already 
somehow an old man, that was a historical trajectory that Brahms felt to be his 
own as well. Yet like all tragedies, the Fourth Symphony has a cathartic power 
– which is one explanation, at least, for the popularity of this despairing, 
troubling and astonishing symphony.

Five key recordings


Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra/Kleiber 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wxB5vkZy7nM>: one of the most remarkable 
recordings, of all time, ever – listen and be gripped from first note to last.

Orchestre Révolutionnaire et Romantique/ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UBCFcQpj1hQ> Gardiner 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UBCFcQpj1hQ>: mind you, John Eliot Gardiner’s 
approach is just as powerful, from another world of insight and imagination on 
period instruments.

Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra/ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b6G0OzJ8eYI>
von Karajan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b6G0OzJ8eYI>: Brahms was – and is! 
– the Berliner’s composer; Karajan’s recording shows you why.

Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Brahms-The-Symphonies-Gewandhausorchester-Leipzig/dp/B00E6G23TA/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1399839598&sr=8-1&keywords=chailly+brahms>
/Chailly 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Brahms-The-Symphonies-Gewandhausorchester-Leipzig/dp/B00E6G23TA/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1399839598&sr=8-1&keywords=chailly+brahms>
: Chailly’s approach fuses the Leipzigers' unique playing traditions with the 
lessons of recent scholarship; the result is white-hot imagination.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzlaTYaQP8IM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzlaTYaQP8IM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzlaTYaQP8IM&media=>
Berlin Philharmonic/ <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1xZcBqzdhQ8>Furtwängler 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1xZcBqzdhQ8>: Furtwängler’s is one of the 
great revelations of interpretation as an act of re-creation – Brahms’s 
symphony is re-made in front of your ears.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DleYbb5KZYDg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DleYbb5KZYDg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DleYbb5KZYDg&media=> 