
"I gave everything to it I was able to give. What I have here accomplished, I 
will never achieve again." Thus spake Camille Saint-Saëns about hisC minor 
Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vFXzPLx0S6o>, "avec orgue" (with 
organ), the third and last of his symphonies, and one of the crowning glories 
of his prodigious life in music. This week, I make a plea that we take the 
Organ Symphony seriously as one of the late 19th century's most significant and 
technically sophisticated orchestral works. And also of course that we enjoy 
its remarkable concatenation of tunes, colours, and kaleidoscopic thematic 
invention that have made the symphony so popular ever since its premiere in 
London's St James's Hall in 1886, when Saint-Saëns himself conducted the 
orchestra of the Royal Philharmonic Society, who had commissioned the piece.

It's all too easy to think of the Organ Symphony as a perennial symphonic 
pot-boiler, one of those knackered ex-thoroughbred warhorses of the repertoire 
whose every appearance on concert programmes is another stage in its 
consignment to the orchestral glue-factory. It doesn't help that the Big Tune 
of the last movement is one of the most used and abused motifs of classical 
music history, in everything from Disney's Babe movies to it being adopted as 
the national anthem of the micro-nation ofAtlantium 
<http://www.atlantium.org/faq.html>, a postage-stamp-sized potential 
principality in Eastern Australia. Its over-familiarity means it's hard to 
recognise the real achievement of this symphony which fused what were genuinely 
cutting-edge innovations with Saint-Saëns's inherently classical, conventional 
(with a small "c") instincts. So forget what you might think you know about 
this symphony, and prepare to re-hear the rafinesse, joie de vivre, and 
technical coup-d'orchestre of arguably Saint-Saëns's greatest single 
composition.

First off, what we're dealing with here is something almost without precedent 
in 19th century symphonic practice: a piece cast in two movements. OK, the work 
also encloses the archetypes of a classic four-movement pattern within its two 
halves, but in the first half Saint-Saëns elides the end of the C minorAllegro 
moderato <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=vFXzPLx0S6o> with the slow movement that 
follows, aPoco Adagio <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=VohAWjjJM7Y> in a 
thrillingly unconventional D flat major, a startling semitonal shift away from 
the home key. And, in the second half, he changes gear from thescherzo-like 
music <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pVDKxAjdeLk> that opens this section to 
the massive, shocking intervention of the introduction to the chorale-like Big 
Tune itself at the start of thefinal movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V_2FKcorqqE>.

Saint-Saëns further reconfigured the basic outlines of the 19th century's 
symphonic masterplan with his use of keyboards as part of the orchestral 
panoply. And he didn't just use an organ - which makes its quietly dramatic 
entrance at the start of the slow movement - but a piano as well, which needs 
two players to get to grips with the virtuosic figuration Saint-Saëns composed 
for it: listen to the glittering carillon of sound these four pianistic hands 
conjure around themain theme of the finale 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=V_2FKcorqqE>, one of the most satisfying moments 
in the whole symphony. But as well as the by turns gigantic and intimate 
soundworlds Saint-Saëns makes his orchestra produce (compare the organ's first 
entry to the thrilling, bombastic sonic coronation it gives to the symphony's 
final bars), you need to listen out for the way the whole piece prepares and 
prefigures that (in)famous melody, and what Saint-Saëns then does with it.

That's how the piece achieves its real ambition, which is to employ the 
progressive ideas of thematic transformation that Liszt had pioneered earlier 
in the century (the piece was subsequently dedicated to Liszt, who died a 
couple of months after the premiere), and makes them work not as part of a 
programmatic narrative, but as the engine of an abstract, symphonic discourse. 
The strings' tremulous and ominous figuration at the start of the allegro, 
after the symphony's short, mysterious introduction (itself full of symphonic 
premonitions, only realised much later in the piece), becomes a teasing 
ear-worm the first time you hear it. Expressively speaking, in terms of how 
Saint-Saëns dramatises and orchestrates them, they're at the opposite end of 
the expressive spectrum, and in different modalities too, but if you compare 
the outline of this tune to the Grande Mélodie, you can't fail to spot the 
connection.

There's more symbiosis between the scherzo's main melody and the crowning 
chorale. The scherzo section is a kind of gigantic upbeat to the finale - 
fragments of its melody are disguised, transformed, and finally revealed. The 
slow movement's Poco adagio does, crucially, introduce the gentle, lowering 
presence of the organ as a key character in the work's drama, and it also acts 
as a moment of visionary repose in the middle of the sounds and furies around 
it.

There's something else, too. In the finale's 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=V_2FKcorqqE> coda, after a showily effective 
fugue - Saint-Saëns manages to do something in the symphony that it would take 
Sibelius to top. He warps time and space - the Theme of Themes is sped up so 
much that time seems to slow down. Capped by the organ's thunderous bass-line - 
playing notes that the human ear can only just "hear", but which you should 
feel in the hall as more like primordial vibrations - the effect is both a 
masterstroke of time-melting symphonism, and an irresistibly joyous coda to the 
technical glories of this piece.

I have the image, at the end of the symphony, of the concert hall being 
miraculously lifted off the ground and held aloft by the combined efforts of 
all those pipes and all that air; all that counterpoint and all that 
time-stretching speeding up and slowing down; all that scraping and blowing, 
and all those keyboards. The whole work is a magnificent and fantastical 
symphonic machine that's an apotheosis of the orchestral technology of the late 
19th century. In other words: the Organ Symphony is the definitive steampunk 
symphony.

Five key recordings 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvFXzPLx0S6o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvFXzPLx0S6o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FvFXzPLx0S6o%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
All stentorian yet sensual performances of Saint-Saëns's masterpiece; I've 
always had a soft spot for Myung-Whun Chung's elegantly earth-shaking 
performance, but find out which you prefer!

Orchestre de l'Opéra Bastille/Myung-Whun Chung 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Messiaen-LAscension-Saint-Saëns-Symphony-3/dp/B000001GGU/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&qid=1393242800&sr=8-4&keywords=chung+organ+symphony>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FgBC2gYf5jN8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FgBC2gYf5jN8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FgBC2gYf5jN8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Chicago Symphony Orchestra/Daniel Barenboim 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Saint-Saëns-Symphony-Bacchanale-Prélude-macabre/dp/B0000B09YY/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1393242879&sr=8-2&keywords=barenboim+organ+symphony>

Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra/James Levine 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Saint-Saëns-Organ-Symphony-LApprenti-Sorcier/dp/B000001G85/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1393242923&sr=8-1&keywords=levine+organ+symphony>

Philadelphia Orchestra/Eugene Ormandy 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Saint-Saëns-Organ-Symphony-Saint-Saëns/dp/B0002IQHE8/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1393242971&sr=8-2&keywords=ormandy+organ+symphony>

Boston Symphony Orchestra/Charles Munch 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Munch-conducts-French-Orchestral-Works/dp/B000003FEG/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1393243014&sr=8-1&keywords=munch+organ+symphony+boston>
 