
Russia in the 1860s - the land without the symphony. Well, actually that's not 
quite true:Anton Rubinstein <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4YBu5QzHPoo> had 
written three, but, based in the language of Mendelssohn and Schumann, they 
propounded a backward-looking solution to the problem of finding what a Russian 
symphony might be. Thanks tothe "Five" 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Musorgsky-His-Circle-Russian-Adventure/dp/0571245625/ref=sr_1_sc_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1390814517&sr=8-1-spell&keywords=mussortsky+stephen+walsh>
, the loose group of composers (Mussorgsky, Borodin, Cui, Rimsky-Korsakov, and 
Balakirev), Russian musical culture was also trying to define itself as 
something distinctive rather than derivative, but by the mid-1860s, a truly 
Russian symphony was still proving elusive.

Bypassing what his elders were up to, the prodigiously gifted 20-something 
Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4S07V-wK3mw>, just 
appointed to a job at the Moscow Conservatory, saw a chance to compose his 
First Symphony and provide what Russian musical culture desperately needed. 
And, given the ambition of what he was attempting, it's no surprise that the 
piece caused him a lot of personal pain – it was the single work that gave him 
more anguish than any other, according to his brother Modest – and that it 
proved controversial to both factions of the Russian music scene. His 
conservative, formalist teachers, including Rubinstein, refused to endorse or 
perform what they saw of the symphony when it was a work-in-progress, and the 
progessives weren't well-disposed to Tchaikovsky's ambitions either: Cui had 
written a devastatingly negative review of Tchaikovky's graduation piece.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrPUgJ9GzUTc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrPUgJ9GzUTc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FrPUgJ9GzUTc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
That dichotomy between classical conformity – which Rubinstein demanded of 
symphonic music – and some other kind of still-to-be-discovered Russianness 
defines the scope of what Tchaikovsky is trying to make happen in his First 
Symphony. To say it's a musically tall order is putting it mildly. Tchaikovsky 
was throwing his hat into the most public, prestigious, but risky musical arena 
you could imagine, competing not just with his fractious, polemicised peers but 
with the greats of the German symphonic canon. His mental and physical health 
suffered so much during the composition of the piece that the 26-year-old 
thought he might not survive.

With these multiple pressures, and with the outside masters he felt he had to 
please and appease as well as his own pride and ambition, it's miraculous that 
thisG minor symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0dop_dPIgeI> was completed 
at all. And the fact that in parts of this piece, Tchaikovsky does more than 
simply pull off a symphonic-stylistic balancing act but manages to find a 
melodic and structural confidence that's completely his own, was proof that 
this 26-year-od symphonic tyro was already on a path to a music that was 
distinctively his own, yet definitively Russian.

Listen to the opening of the piece <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0dop_dPIgeI>
, and you're already in a symphonic world that a German composer simply 
couldn't have conceived. There's the sheer melancholic beauty of the melody in 
the flute and bassoon, but there's also what Tchaikovsky does with it, or 
rather doesn't do with it. As with both of the main tunes in this movement, 
Tchaikovsky wants to give his melodies - closed, circular objects rather than 
Beethovenian cells of symphonic possibility - their full expression, and at the 
same time create a sense of musical momentum. Tchaikovsky's subtitle for the 
whole symphony, "Winter Daydreams", and for this movement, "Daydreams on a 
winter journey", suggest that he wants to let himself off the symphonic hook, 
as if he's signalling to his listeners that this piece is as much a tone-poem 
as a symphony. But the first movement doesn't need that excuse: listen to the 
way he conjures the return to the first tune after the storm and drama of the 
central section: there's a breathtaking pause for the whole orchestra, and the 
cellos and basses are reduced to a shocked palpitation in a harmonic limbo, 
before the horns steal in with an extraordinarily chromatic meditation which 
gradually wrenches the music back to the home key, G minor. There's real 
structural invention in the coda, too, returning the piece to the 
piano-pianissimo "reverie" with which it opened.

Tchaikovsky calls his slow movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wPfTXtsi1BQ> "Land of gloom, land of mists", 
but this piece is in really a land of endless melody, of continual and 
seductive song, in which Tchaikovsky reveals that he can make a large-scale 
structure from a pure outpouring of the once-heard, never-forgotten tunes that 
he composed more brilliantly than any other symphonist of his time - or any 
other. The paradox is that this new kind of slow movement, something only 
Tchaikovsky could sustain, took more confidence and more compositional boldness 
to conceive than any of the other movements that are reliant on pre-existing 
models.The scherzo <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IA69IetixCA> is a masterful 
Russian reimagining of a Mendelssohnian flightiness, and then there'sthe finale 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DNe2SFJt_KE>. For Tchaikovsky scholar David 
Brown 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tchaikovsky-The-Man-His-Music/dp/160598017X/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1390814664&sr=8-1&keywords=tchaikovsky+david+brown>
, after its folksong-inspired slow introduction, this fourth movement descends 
into a "rhythmic stodginess" in its obsession with noisy fugal counterpoint – 
Tchaikovsky proving a point to Rubinstein that he knew all the tricks in the 
academic book – and ends with a "very noisy, and overblown" coda.

But I think Tchaikovsky deserves that irresistibly over-the-top conclusion: 
his First Symphony is one of the most important markers in the symphonic story 
in the 19th century, the piece in which a new type of symphony – absolutely 
Tchaikovsky's own, and Russia's too – is not just glimpsed, but claimed, 
staking out the territory his next five symphonies continued to explore. And as 
well as all that historical significance, it's also one of the most 
irresistibly attractive first symphonies ever written.

Five key recordings

New Philharmonia Orchestra/Riccardo Muti 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Symphonies-1-6-Muti-Philharmonia-Orchestra/dp/B00002501I/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1390814420&sr=8-1&keywords=muti+new+philharmonia+tchaikovsky>
: Muti's fleet-footed elegance doesn't dwell on the dreaminess of Tchaikovsky's 
reverie.

Chicago Symphony Orchestra/Claudio Abbado 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Claudio-Abbado-conducts-Tchaikovsky-Symphonies/dp/B004H6P2ME/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1390814454&sr=8-1&keywords=abbado+chicago+tchaikovsky>
: Abbado strikes a typical balance between lyrical sumptuousness and structural 
power.

Russia National Orchestra/Mikhail Pletnev 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tchaikovsky-Symphonies-Nos-Pyotr-Ilyich/dp/B000001GSB/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1390814377&sr=8-3&keywords=pletnev+russian+national+orchestra+tchaikovsky+1>
: Pletnev and his orchestra create the dreamiest, almost impressionistic 
hibernal gloom.

London Symphony Orchestra/Valery Gergiev 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tchaikovsky-Symphonies-Nos-Valery-Gergiev/dp/B0096CYER8/ref=sr_1_8?ie=UTF8&qid=1390850206&sr=8-8&keywords=gergiev+tchaikovsky+symphonies>
 Gergiev's is an opulent but occasionally, and appropriately, wild performance 
of Tchaikovsky's symphonic breakthrough.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0dop_dPIgeI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0dop_dPIgeI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0dop_dPIgeI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra/Bernard Haitink 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bernard-Haitink-The-Philips-Years/dp/B00DI5BS8M/ref=lh_ni_t?ie=UTF8&psc=1&smid=A3P5ROKL5A1OLE>
 Haitink's approach is the opposite of the interpretative interventionist: but 
letting the music speak on its own terms just proves just how thrillingly 
symphonically satisfying this piece can be.
 