
There were many candidates for the "Great American Symphony" by the 1940s 
(among themRoy Harris’s Third <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UQITv54rsVc>, 
Samuel Barber’s First <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6Dq68SSfy5Y>, and William 
Schuman’s Third <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DKxnQ0thmGI>) and yet by the 
end of the second world war there was still a need for a grand musical 
expression of a nation’s hopes, joys, and anxieties about the post-war world. 
And there remained a musical gap for a piece that would genuinely galvanise the 
widest possible musical public as well as satisfy the stringent demands of what 
a popular but serious mid-century American symphony might be; music that would 
take on the most symbolically European of forms and reform it in the image of a 
post-war, post-New Deal America.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSOMVZT_FyLo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSOMVZT_FyLo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSOMVZT_FyLo&media=>
In 1944, Aaron Copland started work on his Third Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SOMVZT_FyLo>, commissioned by conductor Serge 
Koussevitsky and the Boston Symphony Orchestra. What would end up becoming a 
piece that, in Copland’s words, would “reflect the euphoric spirit of the 
country at the time” when it was premiered in 1946, started out with the less 
nationalist but equally challenging goal of pleasing Koussevitsky and the 
conductor’s liking of “music in the grand manner” while remaining true to what 
had become Copland’s signature style, music of the populist but sophisticated 
daring ofAppalachian Spring <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t4E1JYP5Tgc>,  
Billy The Kid <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WXZVI2_8GJ4> and Rodeo 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SXikDnYZYpM>. 

Copland knew that composing such a large-scale, public piece (the symphony was 
to be his longest-ever orchestral work) would inevitably invite a larger sphere 
of interpretation. And he made the connection between the work’s high-profile 
commission and the post-war effort crystal clear in one of the work's biggest 
musical decisions. Copland based the last movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6SN-X0VV9Es> on his Fanfare for the Common Man 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZdqjcMmjeaA>, which had been premiered in 1943 
by Eugene Goossens and the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, part of a series of 
18 fanfares that Goossens commissioned, as “stirring and significant 
contributions to the war effort”. (Copland’s title came from a 1942 speech made 
by the US Vice President in which he hailed the coming of the “Century of the 
Common Man”.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6SN-X0VV9Es&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6SN-X0VV9Es>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6SN-X0VV9Es&media=>
But Copland wasn’t content simply to use the Fanfare as the stirringly 
uplifting climax of the symphony. The finale is a full-scale symphonic movement 
that uses the earlier work’s theme as the basis for a musical argument that’s 
both a hard-won symphonic prize from the three preceding movements, but which 
also crowns the piece with one of the rarest emotions in 20th century music: a 
genuinely-felt and achieved sense of heroism and optimism, with not a trace of 
cynicism in sight. AsLeonard Bernstein <http://www.leonardbernstein.com/>, 
arguably the work’s greatest interpreter, said: “The symphony has become an 
American monument, like the Washington Monument or the Lincoln Memorial”.

Which is precisely why you might criticise Copland’s symphony: what could have 
less to say to today’s world of doubt, ambiguity and creeping tragedies than a 
piece that sets out to appeal to the widest possible audience, to be 
appreciated on the most immediate level as a grandiloquently emotional public 
work, and which has all the marmoreal quality of the grandest architectural 
paeans to the American dream?

But what makes Copland’s symphony such a vital contribution to the genre in 
the 20th century, in the US or anywhere else, is that this really is a 
“Symphony for the Common Man”, in the best possible sense. The piece never once 
panders to populist taste for the sake of self-conscious “communication” but 
instead reconfigures symphonic discourse - the craft and graft of abstract 
musical argument - as a site of communal meditation, reflection and 
transcendence. On one hand, Copland’s Third works as an emotional journey from 
theuneasy tranquility <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SOMVZT_FyLo> of the 
opening movement to the heroic gestures of optimism of its finale; on the 
other, it functions as an abstract musical discourse in which its moments of 
expressive transcendence are prepared with the fastidious subtlety of a 
composer for whom the most important task was making sure “the right note [was] 
in the right place”.

And in fact, the Third Symphony is not only the conventional symphonic 
monument it might seem at first.The first movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SOMVZT_FyLo> is a spacious “Molto Moderato” 
that breathes the wide-open spaces, simultaneously new-minted and nostalgic, 
that Copland’s music conjurs so uniquely (he makes you re-hear the simplest 
building blocks of music - intervals of 4ths, 5ths, and 2nds - in new ways that 
nonetheless sound absolutely right); its tunes also prefigure some of the 
material of the Fanfare, just one of the ways that Copland ties the symphonic 
room together. More than that, this first movement owes precisely nothing to 
the first movements of most classical and romantic symphonies. It’s cast in an 
arch shape, so that it ends with a version of the music you hear at the start, 
an idea that’s more reminiscent of Bartók’s practice in his instrumental and 
orchestral works than anything else.The scherzo second movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n8Lfc3d-oJQ> has a more traditional shape, 
after its brassy call-to-attention introduction, and features some 
show-stopping, post-Rodeo high-jinks. But thethird, slow movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GgjjYf4rr7E> is the most unconventional of all, 
a series of lyrical episodes that contains the symphony’s most darkly emotional 
music, as well its most consoling lyricism.

That music leads straight into the finale, and the symphony ends with an 
apotheosis both of the Fanfare and the symphony’s very opening theme. No 
wonder, I think, that Koussevitsky thought the piece “the greatest American 
symphony ever written”. But its greatness isn’t just as a monument to post-war 
hope, it’s also a vindication of the still-popular power of symphonic thinking 
in expressing, as the playwright Clifford Odets puts it, “as lofty a nature as 
we in America have yet expressed”.

Three key recordings

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDkY-TYTHRGU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDkY-TYTHRGU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDkY-TYTHRGU&media=>
London Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Copland-Symphony-Complete-Everest-Recordings/dp/B004HZMLU6/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&qid=1398083817&sr=8-4&keywords=copland+symphony+london+symphony+third+symphony>
/Aaron Copland 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Copland-Symphony-Complete-Everest-Recordings/dp/B004HZMLU6/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&qid=1398083817&sr=8-4&keywords=copland+symphony+london+symphony+third+symphony>
 Copland’s conducting wasn’t always thought to be the finest, but there’s no 
doubting the commitment he draws from the LSO in this performance.

New York Philharmonic Orchestra/Leonard Bernstein 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Copland-Symphony-No-3-Aaron/dp/B000001G7A/ref=sr_1_fkmr0_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1398083847&sr=8-1-fkmr0&keywords=copland+bernstein+third+symphony>
: Bernstein’s last recording of the Third makes every bar speak with 
significance - symphonic, emotional and American.

Detroit Symphony Orchestra/Neeme Järvi 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/American-Series-Vol-10-Symphony/dp/B002XCAMSI/ref=sr_1_fkmr1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1398083876&sr=8-2-fkmr1&keywords=jarvi+copland+third+symphony>
: Järvi’s is a Technicolor performance in recorded sound and emotional impact.

 