Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSr3lsI4OVis%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSr3lsI4OVis%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSr3lsI4OVis%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
One of the most important things about Beethoven's Eighth Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gCkndZBnMLw> is that it puts a definitive 
kibosh on the idea of a symbiotic relationship between a composer's biography 
and their music. In the summer of 1812 when Beethoven was obsessively working 
on this piece, he wrote the most infamous letter of his life, to his mysterious
"Immortal Beloved" <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Immortal_Beloved>. The 
pain-wracked and heartbreaking sentimentality of that letter, with its doomed 
love and self-pitying prostrations, finds absolutely no corollary in the fabric 
of theEighth Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k4QU6KW4XjE>, which is 
the most ebulliently experimental symphony that Beethoven composed – and 
therefore, quite possibly the most ebulliently experimental symphony in the 
canon. (More proof needed? I give you theHeiligenstadt Testament 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Beethoven_Heiligenstaedter_Testament.jpg>, 
that despairing document in which Beethoven realises the full magnitude of his 
hearing loss, written around the time of his thrillingly self-confident Second 
Symphony.)

First performed in public at a concert in 1814 in Vienna that also included the
Seventh Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fOo1_eXVk-M> and Wellington's 
Victory <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZPX7RT9uFUU> (that work of tub-thumping 
jingoism that caused Beethoven to tell one of his detractors "what I shit is 
better than anything you could ever think up") the F major Eighth Symphony 
didn't generate the kind of applause that would signify "universal delight", 
and "did not create a furore", according to a contemporary account. Frankly, 
I'm surprised that the public's reaction wasn't total bewilderment - a more 
than comprehensible response to one of the shortest, weirdest, but most 
compelling symphonies of the 19th century.

What's brilliant about the Eighth's relatively small (time) scale is that it 
allows Beethoven to be more structurally radical than he could dare to be on 
the larger canvasses of his other symphonies. In the Eighth Symphony, there are 
holes that are left openafter the final chord 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=70EjszFOAkE>, questions that remain unanswered, 
loose ends that are deliberately not tied up. Most obviously, the Eighth 
Symphony has no slow movement (Beethoven did sketch one, but he abandoned it), 
but instead there's an impishAllegretto scherzando 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q_k8nIcJ-88> that comes second, a four-minute 
(or less) piece that was thought to be a homage toJohann Maelzel's 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johann_Nepomuk_Maelzel> metronome, but which is 
now recognised for what it is: an unprecedented intermezzo in place of an 
adagio. Except it isn't an "intermezzo" in the sense of being "incidental" to 
the music's argument, because this piece embodies the central and paradoxical 
substance of this symphony: this short movement, in its rhythmic obsessions, 
like the repeated staccato chords in the woodwind, or the demi-semiquaver 
chirrups of the first theme, and the bass-line that answers it; in its extremes 
of dynamic, often putting a fortissimo right next to a pianissimo, itshocketing 
textures <http://youtu.be/q_k8nIcJ-88?t=1m2s> of interlocking orchestral lines, 
and its warped musical mechanisms, sounds more like a proto-Stravinskian 
orchestral scherzo than an early romantic orchestral movement.

And that's the paradox of this symphony. It makes you think you're listening 
to a light-hearted witticism, but Beethoven is in reality reforming the 
symphony right in front of your ears. If you hear thesecond movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ummq7VsEgXU> as a musical joke, you're missing 
the point. Beethoven is trying to make a symphony in which textural, rhythmic, 
orchestral and harmonic invention take the place of the expressive intensity; 
so much so, that the piece can do without a conventional slow movement. That's 
a gigantic leap of musical imagination and compositional technique, and it 
means that the rest of the symphony is similarly reoriented towards this goal, 
so that Beethoven – in this piece perhaps more relentlessly than in any other 
of his symphonies – is focused on specifically musical questions that create 
and obey their own logic rather than any pre-existing models or forms. In that 
sense alone this symphony is "Haydnesque", an adjective often applied to it, 
but usually in a way that manages to patronise both Haydn and Beethoven, as if 
Haydn was only capable of comic symphonic entertainment, and as if the Eighth 
Symphony was somehow a lesser thing than the supposed titans that surround it – 
which it decidedly isn't.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fk2h8_yIIftg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fk2h8_yIIftg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fk2h8_yIIftg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The first movement <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k2h8_yIIftg> begins with a 
gesture of closure. The first two bars of the piece ought to be the end of a 
symphonic argument, not its beginning, and in fact the first movement ends with 
the very same music, now in its proper place. Continuing this inversion of 
common practice, the first movement soon findsweird keys 
<http://youtu.be/k2h8_yIIftg?t=25s>, strange silences, and odd sounds – this 
solo bassoon <http://youtu.be/k2h8_yIIftg?t=38s>, for example, or this 
ambiguous pianissimo <http://youtu.be/k2h8_yIIftg?t=55s>. But it's the central 
section and the reprise of the first theme that should knock your symphonic 
socks off: over a strangely forebodingticking mechanism in the violas 
<http://youtu.be/k2h8_yIIftg?t=3m50s> – an alternating octave you've just heard 
at the end of the first section – Beethoven inexorablyscrews up the harmonic 
tension <http://youtu.be/k2h8_yIIftg?t=4m6s> through a halting, uncertain 
sequence of variations on the first bar of the symphony, separated by gigantic 
walls of orchestral sound. That contrast catalyses a thrilling section of 
orchestral counterpoint, propelled by thetortuous transformation 
<http://youtu.be/k2h8_yIIftg?t=4m20s> the cellos and basses visit on the main 
theme; Beethoven generates massive harmonic and rhythmic friction here which is 
at last released in atriple fff (forte-fortissimo!) 
<http://youtu.be/k2h8_yIIftg?t=5m6s> restatement of the first theme in the 
bassoons, cellos, and basses. It's a moment when Beethoven gets rightly carried 
away with what he's done: that triple forte in the rest of the orchestra is so 
loud that it tends to obscure the tune in the bass line.
Charles Mackerras found an excellent solution 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k2h8_yIIftg> in his performance; Colin Davis 
and Hans Pfitzner (Pfitzner with a theatrical change of tempo) get the balance 
better than anyone else in my list of recordings.

The third movement <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SjjHQZGs5KI> is Beethoven's 
only symphonic minuet: a stately antipode to the Allegretto second movement, 
people often say, but that's again only if you choose not to hear what 
Beethoven's doing under the surface of the music. The piece is called only 
"Tempo di menuetto" - in the "time of a minuet" rather than a real courtly 
dance, suggesting that Beethoven is playing with instead of inhabiting the 
genre of the minuet. He luxuriates in a different soundworld from the rest of 
the symphony – sensuous and lyrical rather than crystalline – and plays with 
your sense of pulse and metre.

The finale <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q_sC3cvAXeo> starts with an 
existential itch: a pianissimo aggravation in the violins that sounds like a 
scurrying upbeat to a tune that never comes. Instead, after subsiding to 
piano-pianissimo, there's anorchestral onslaught 
<http://youtu.be/q_sC3cvAXeo?t=14s>, built over those alternating octaves 
again, which you'll hear throughout this movement, marking time but fragmenting 
orchestral space, especially when thetimpani have them 
<http://youtu.be/q_sC3cvAXeo?t=2m9s> with the bassoons. Beethoven starts his 
second theme in A flat major, he atomises his itching idea into its constituent 
elements and disperses it over the orchestra; he manages to wrench the music 
from F sharp minor and B minor back to F major in an astonishingsleight of ear 
<http://youtu.be/q_sC3cvAXeo?t=5m13s>. He creates a Klangfarbenmelodie, a 
melody ofchanging orchestral colour <http://youtu.be/q_sC3cvAXeo?t=6m20s>, a 
century before Schoenberg and Webern had the idea, he makes silence, dramatic 
pauses, integral to symphonic discourse in a way the symphony had never done 
before, and he createsa barnstorming coda <http://youtu.be/q_sC3cvAXeo?t=6m30s> 
that seems out of proportion to the rest of the movement, which makes you ask: 
what on earth just happened? Instead of resolution, the Eighth's fundamental 
musical questioning goes on long after the piece has finished. And it's quite 
possible it doesn't have an answer – and just as well, too: keep on listening, 
and keep on asking those questions!

Five key recordings

Orchestra Révolutionnaire et Romantique/John Eliot Gardiner 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Symphonies-Nos-7-8/dp/B000025M2K/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&qid=1392028679&sr=8-4&keywords=gardiner+beethoven+8>
: the shock of the new in Gardiner's thrilling performance.

Chamber Orchestra of Europe/Nikolaus Harnoncourt 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Complete-Symphonies-Robert-Holl/dp/B000095IUM/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1392028654&sr=8-1&keywords=harnoncourt+beethoven+symphonies>
: once radical, Harnoncourt's performance now seems to steer a middle ground 
between early music energy and modern instrument sumptuousness.

Staatskapelle Dresden/Colin Davis 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Symphonies-1-9-Staatskapelle-Dresden/dp/B005BMK9DK/ref=sr_1_sc_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1392028610&sr=8-2-spell&keywords=davis+beethoven+symphnoies>
: don't let the luxuriance of the Staatskapelle sound deceive you – this is as 
insightful and illuminating performance as they come.

Vienna Philharmonic/Christian Thielemann 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zegl7_zMj_Q>: Listen to Thielemann's 
"adventurous conservatism", as Joachim Kaiser puts it, in this imaginative and 
sometimes interventionist performance.

Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra/Hans Pfitzner 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Sym-Nos-3-8/dp/B00004TFS1/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1392028562&sr=8-2&keywords=pfitzner+beethoven+8>
: the performance - from the early 1930s - that made Colin Davis want to become 
a conductor, and more than a fascinating historical document, a revelation of 
an Eighth from another world.
 