
“He wrote the same symphony nine times.” "His one-dimensional orchestration is 
all thanks to his training as an organist.” They're "cathedrals of sound.” 
"They sound like Schenkerian middlegrounds” … and other such clichés. (Full 
marks if you got the last one, by the way, but I promise that’s what some 
musical analysts, especially those disciples ofHeinrich Schenker 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heinrich_Schenker>, think of the symphonies. What 
it means in essence is that Bruckner’s symphonies move like great undigested 
wodges of harmony rather than being fully finished in proper compositional 
finery: it’s saying they’re great symphonic lumps, basically, calling to mind 
Brahms’s hoary old gag that Bruckner’s symphonies sound like “symphonic 
boa-constrictors”.

So this week, a Bruckner symphony – the sixth 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mgggUyaeZVI> - that disproves these lazy 
received opinions about his music (he wrote 11 symphonies, in any case, not 
nine: check out numbers“0” <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3YzKeVYhMxI> and “00”
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNlbYSgzDkQ> – seriously, the “Doppelnullte” 
or Study Symphony in F Minor !), and which proves, I think, that his symphonic 
concerns weren’t always - and I don’t think they ever were – about constructing 
neo-medieval sonic edifices of mystical contemplation, but rather about 
connecting the earth with the cosmos, the human with the spiritual, the saucy 
with the sublime. Saucy? Well, yes, that’s one translation of how Bruckner 
himself described the Sixth: “Die Sechste ist die keckste”. And the “sauce” of 
the Sixth Symphony is its dynamism, its astonishing rhythmic invention and 
subtlety, and the unique orchestral colours in the Bruckner canon. So instead 
of focusing on its monumentalism or the largest scale of its macro-tonal 
adventure, I want instead, by focusing on a handful of moments, to try and show 
how strange and subtle this symphony is.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dra5AyJzTy5c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dra5AyJzTy5c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dra5AyJzTy5c&media=>
And let’s start, obviously, with third movement, the scherzo 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ra5AyJzTy5c>. The sound this music makes is 
unlike any of Bruckner’s other scherzo movements; not just because of its 
slower tempo than most of the other comparable movements, but because of its 
atmosphere of feverish harmonic ambiguity and almost grotesque contrasts of 
texture: the unsettling trudge in the cellos and the basses that you feel wants 
to resolve but which never properly does (at least, not until the end of the 
main scherzo section); those scratchy staccatos in the violas and second 
violins; the glinting filament of the high unison line in the woodwind; and 
those searching arpeggios in the first violins, which seem to dream of a 
harmonic stability that the rest of the orchestral texture stubbornly refuses 
to satisfy – and all that in the first 10 bars! But this passage – and the rest 
of the mysterious progress of the rest of the scherzo - symbolises the 
distinctive soundworld of this symphony, especially its employment of so many 
simultaneous musical strata. It’s the diametric opposite of a musical monolith, 
but rather a multifaceted, multi-layered - multi-“sauced” – symphonic 
experience, whose kaleidoscopic orchestration is a crucial part of how its 
essential drama is communicated: richer, by far, than anything a supposed 
“organist of the orchestra” could come up with.

And talking of musical strata, of co-existing lines of musical material, above 
all material with different rhythmic profiles, listen tothis passage 
<http://youtu.be/mgggUyaeZVI?t=3m54s> from the first movement, the climax of 
the music’s singing second theme. That theme starts out pitting rhythmic groups 
of two against three, and three against four, but it gets more complicated than 
that. AsJulian Horton 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bruckners-Symphonies-Analysis-Reception-Cultural/dp/0521081858/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1401654326&sr=8-1&keywords=julian+horton+bruckner>
 has revealed in abrilliant essay 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Cambridge-Companion-Bruckner-Companions-Music/dp/0521008786/ref=sr_1_13?ie=UTF8&qid=1401654404&sr=8-13&keywords=bruckner+cambridge+companion>
 on Bruckner’s orchestration, there are six layers of rhythmic stratification 
simultaneously happening at this moment, creating a teeming and even grating 
polyphony of different kinds of time against one another. In one half-bar unit 
(two crotchets), you’re hearing rhythmic divisions of nine against three 
against two against one. (Although in reality it’s even more complex that those 
ratios, since the second violins split their “three” into two[quavers] + 
three[quavers] +one [triplet crotchet]… Still with me? Never fear: read 
Horton’s whole article if you can!). That sort of thinking – and that sort of 
sound – blows out of the water the idea that Bruckner was writing pieces that 
were rough-hewn or unfinished. That passage rivalsBrahms’s Rite-of-Spring moment
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/may/13/symphony-guide-brahms-fourth-tom-service>
 in his Fourth Symphony for rhythmic sophistication; whereas that’s an uncommon 
moment in Brahms’s symphony, it’s part of the warp and weft of Bruckner’s 
entire symphony.

Another cliché-destroying moment is the very opening  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mgggUyaeZVI>of the symphony. No timeless mist 
of string tremolando here, no self-confident theme of simple-minded arpeggios 
rising out of the gloom, but instead, a rhythmic itch in the violins (itself a 
compound of divisions of the crotchet into four and then three…), and a 
profoundly harmonically unstable melody – or better, melodic fragment – in the 
cellos and basses, a dark cousin of the horn tune at the opening ofBruckner’s 4
th Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gcBg-tXn0fs>. This is music whose 
instabilities and collisions catalyse the rest of the movement, and the whole 
of the rest of the symphony. Again: instead of the monolithic or the 
monumental, this is a symphony made from its drama and its dynamism.

I said I wouldn’t harp on the sixth symphony’s macro-structure, but a couple 
of its most thrilling moments are made because of the bigger structural 
energies that are at stake. One is the way the main tune returns in the first 
movement, something Bruckner makes you think has already happenedby this point  
<http://youtu.be/mgggUyaeZVI?t=9m6s>– but in fact we’re in the wrong key, and 
not just a bit “wrong”, but we’re catastrophically far away from home, from 
where we should be, the key of A major/minor. In fact, Bruckner has 
spectacularly taken the rug from under your ears by reprising the melody first 
in E flat major/minor, the furthest end of the tonal spectrum from A. Yet 
that’s where, miraculously, he drives the music 14 bars later, when the timpani 
join in, the dynamic level goes up from fortissimo to forte-fortissimo, and A 
major/minor istriumphantly reclaimed <http://youtu.be/mgggUyaeZVI?t=9m40s>. 
It’s a spine-tingling moment of perfectly timed musical drama, I think, a 
passage whose effect is achieved only thanks to Bruckner’s astonishing sense of 
symphonic theatre. Yet more music that doesn’t belong in a cathedral.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZGTHB7hBLtk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZGTHB7hBLtk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZGTHB7hBLtk&media=>
The Adagio <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZGTHB7hBLtk> that comes second is 
one of Bruckner’s most heart-breaking slow movements. It includes a repeated 
melody I’ve always thought of asa funeral march 
<http://youtu.be/ZGTHB7hBLtk?t=5m8s>. And making a connection across the 
symphony,one of the finale’s tunes  <http://youtu.be/Htb5dHutpOo?t=4m52s>is a 
hyperactive transformation of the unforgettable, lamenting oboe line you hear 
at the start ofthe Adagio <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZGTHB7hBLtk>. But 
best and perhaps most cliché-beating of all is the sense at the end ofthe finale
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Htb5dHutpOo> that all of the threads – and all 
of those grinding symphonic strata – have not in fact been tied together. Yes, 
Bruckner brings back the melody from the first movement, and there’s abrief and 
noisy coda <http://youtu.be/0BYKlj7LSAE?t=11m8s>, but the emotional sense of 
this truncated apotheosis of the symphony is of questions that are left 
unanswered, of a symphonic drama that is left ambivalently open rather than 
cosmically closed.

That has troubled some Brucknerian commentators, who want to imagine that 
every Bruckner symphony ought to be a closed universe of musical and expressive 
experience. But why should that be the case? Instead of a sign of symphonic 
inadequacy, that emotional ambiguity is proof that the sixth achieves something 
completely different from the rest of Bruckner’s other symphonies, and it’s why 
I think its febrile drama resonates so profoundly after you’ve heard the whole 
piece. You’ll want to return again and again to this symphony and its 
stupendous - yet “saucy” - drama.

Five key recordings

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG3gFfDnYqII&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG3gFfDnYqII>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG3gFfDnYqII&media=>
Stuttgart Radio Symphony Orchestra/Roger Norrington 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Symphony-No-Norrington-Anton-Bruckner/dp/B001CH3BRO/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1401654846&sr=8-1&keywords=bruckner+6+norrington>
: Norrington’s no-vibrato crusade pay dividends, I think, in the slow movement, 
connecting the work with the earlier polyphony that Bruckner knew so well.

Staatskapelle Dresden/ 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bruckner-Complete-Symphonies-Eugen-Jochum/dp/B00004YA0T/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1401654894&sr=8-1&keywords=bruckner+6+jochum+dresden>
Eugen Jochum 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bruckner-Complete-Symphonies-Eugen-Jochum/dp/B00004YA0T/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1401654894&sr=8-1&keywords=bruckner+6+jochum+dresden>
: Jochum doesn’t take anything for granted in a performance of searing 
imagination.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmgggUyaeZVI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmgggUyaeZVI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmgggUyaeZVI&media=>
New Philharmonia Orchestra/ <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mgggUyaeZVI>Otto 
Klemperer <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mgggUyaeZVI>: Klemperer's structural 
authority places the sixth firmly in the tradition of Beethoven, Mendelssohn 
and Schubert.

London Symphony Orchestra/ 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bruckner-Symphony-No-LSO-Davis/dp/B000063DQG/ref=sr_1_sc_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1401655061&sr=8-1-spell&keywords=bruckner+6+kcolin+davis>
Colin Davis 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bruckner-Symphony-No-LSO-Davis/dp/B000063DQG/ref=sr_1_sc_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1401655061&sr=8-1-spell&keywords=bruckner+6+kcolin+davis>
: the closely-miked sound of this LSO Live recording amplifies the sense of 
feverish energy in Davis’s performance.

Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra/ <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mhSpBXV4ah0>
Wilhelm Furtwängler <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mhSpBXV4ah0> [movements 2-4 
only]: Sadly the first movement of this performance wasn’t preserved for 
posterity – but the rest of it takes the breath away with Brucknerian fire and 
brimstone.
 