
This ain’t no special pleading. Louise Farrenc's Third Symphony 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ZeYHeXnNdo> is the only one by a woman in this 
series, by a composer active in the mid-19th century, who contributed three 
remarkable symphonies to the canon of French instrumental music, who was 
admired in her lifetime by Schumann and Berlioz, who was at the centre of 
Parisian musical life as a teacher, composer and scholar, but whose posthumous 
reputation has hardly done her or her music the justice it deserves.

But there is something special about Farrenc  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louise_Farrenc>and her music, and especially this 
G minor symphony, written in 1847. Before I take the piece on its own terms, 
it’s important to understand something of the context of Farrenc's life, to 
appreciate why she faced particularly severe battles in getting her music to 
public performance in the first place; conflicts that are not exclusively to do 
with the inherent gender inequalities in musical life in patrician Paris. 
(Although those were a huge issue: it was only after she had been Professor of 
Piano at the Paris Conservatoire for seven years that she finally received the 
same pay as her male colleagues. She went on to hold the post for 30 years, 
becoming one of the most successful and sought-after piano pedagogues of her 
time, and the only female professor at the Conservatoire in the entire 
century.) There were systemic problems in French musical life that made it 
pretty well impossible for symphonic music to flourish. In the absence of 
orchestras for hire, composers had to either put together pick-up bands at 
their own expense, or otherwise hope that their work was picked for performance 
by the Société des Concerts du Conservatoire, where her G minor symphony was at 
last played in 1849.

So Farrenc was already bucking a major cultural trend by focusing in France on 
the genres of instrumental music that German composers had made their own in 
the early 19th century, instead of writing operas – the way that the vast 
majority of French composers made their name in their home country. And beyond 
that, there is the symbolic significance for any composer in the 1840s writing 
symphonies, in direct competition with – and threat of comparison to – Haydn, 
Mozart, Beethoven, Mendelssohn and Schumann. It’s a kind of equivalent in music 
of Lady Butler’s war paintings  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elizabeth_Thompson>in the later 19th century in 
Britain: Farrenc is asking to be taken seriously as a symphonist in a genre in 
which there were no significant precedents for a woman competing on her own 
terms with any of the Great Men of the past or the present.

Not that that’s how Farrenc thought of what she was doing, I’m sure. For her, 
the ideals were the sternest musical disciplines of clarity of thought and 
structure, compression and concision of expressive power, and the creation of a 
genuinely symphonic momentum. All of which she does, and more, in her third 
symphony, which is why this piece deserves a place alongsideMendelssohn’s 
symphonies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_HX_jF1_Tgc> in the repertoires of 
every orchestra, I think, as an essential embodiment of the reach and ambition 
of the post-Beethovenian symphony in the first half of the 19th century. What 
this piece is not is an heir to Berlioz’s 1829Symphonie Fantastique 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yK6iAxe0oEc> – music that was heard, for 
better and for worse, as a crazed aberration, the insane musings of a 
drug-addled weirdo (but more of that in a later instalment of this series!). 
Instead, Farrenc’s musical gods are those of symphonic seriousness and 
self-referential musical integrity. But that doesn’t mean that this 
half-hour-long piece is merely a worthy symphony-by-numbers. Far from it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4ZeYHeXnNdo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4ZeYHeXnNdo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4ZeYHeXnNdo&media=>
There is, in fact, just a trace of Berliozian sulphur in this music in the 
final movement <http://youtu.be/4ZeYHeXnNdo?t=29m58s>. But what I think is 
revealing about this place – as a yelping string line silences a soft, plangent 
melody in the woodwinds – is how it shows up those off-handedly sexist 
descriptions of “masculine” themes and “feminine” slower melodies in 18th- and 
19th-century symphonies for what they are: garbage. Ascribing those 
definitions, as some still do today, to music that’s “soft”, “yielding” and 
therefore “feminine” – and therefore, the kind of music that women ought to 
like or even write (as opposed to the “loud”, “violent” sounds that are 
properly “masculine” – and which often win out in symphonies written by men) is 
idiotically reductive, and doesn’t do any favours either to the men or women 
who write symphonies. Farrenc’s symphony is as impressively energetic and 
structurally satisfying as any of Mendelssohn’s or Schumann’s symphonies – so 
does that make it “male” or “female”? More like both; or better, neither! And 
that makes you realise that the performance of gender in the symphony in the 19
th century is much more complicated and contingent than those labels might make 
you think. The symphony as transgender interzone of gender representation. 
(There’s a PhD in that, but you heard it here first…)

But back to Farrenc’s Third. The first movement 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ZeYHeXnNdo> moves seamlessly and impressively 
from a short, slow introduction into a feverish Allegro that climaxes with a 
wild coda that unleashes the movement’s pent-up intensity;the slow movement 
<http://youtu.be/4ZeYHeXnNdo?t=11m19s> opens with a clarinet melody that is 
magnificently cosseted by a low brass and woodwind accompaniment, andthe 
scherzo out-Mendelssohns Mendelssohn himself 
<http://youtu.be/4ZeYHeXnNdo?t=19m32s> with its flighty, haunted gossamer of 
trills and pianissimo figuration. My own favourite movement isthe finale 
<http://youtu.be/4ZeYHeXnNdo?t=27m22s>, in which, after an implacable unison 
opening, there’s one of the most memorable tunes anyone ever wrote in a 
symphonic finale; later on, Farrenc makes a passage ofcontrapuntal rectitude 
<http://youtu.be/4ZeYHeXnNdo?t=29m18s> burn with a diabolical ferocity before a 
dark, uncompromisingly minor-key coda. There may be referents here, above all
Mozart’s G minor symphony, no. 40, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_vJPjUqWjjg>
 as well as Schumann and even Chopin, in the flexibility of Farrenc’s tunes, 
but the result is something distinctively her own: a uniquely expressive and 
significant voice that needs to be recognised and heard.

Two recordings

Scandalously, there are but two recorded performance to choose from, but 
thankfully they’re both high-quality interpretations, fromJohannes Goritzki and 
the North German Radio Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Louise-Farrenc-Symphonies-Nos/dp/B00000AEOG/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1403369308&sr=8-1&keywords=louise+farrenc+symphony+3>
, andStefan Sanderling and the Orchestre de Bretagne 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4ZeYHeXnNdo>. 
 