
Here’s the thing about Schubert. Far from the chubby little mushroom  
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/About/General/2012/3/29/1333039185204/Portrait-of-Schubert-in-V-008.jpg>
(“Schwammerl” was his mates’ nickname for him) that history has largely turned 
him into, Schubert was a person of huge creative ambition, who knew what was at 
stake for him in early 1820s Vienna. With a looming sense of his own mortality, 
especially after his devastating bout of syphilis in 1822 (an experience that 
may have been the catalyst for the other of his symphonies in this series,the 
Unfinished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/jan/14/symphony-guide-schubert-unfinished-tom-service>
), Schubert’s feeling of the necessity of doing the things he had to as a 
composer, and doing them right now, was one of the driving forces of his 
virtually ceaseless creativity all the way up to his death, at the age of 31 in 
1728.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOOdFlMdCN3A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOOdFlMdCN3A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOOdFlMdCN3A&media=>
And that meant, for Schubert, coming to terms with the achievement of the most 
famous composer in the world, a neighbour of his in his home city, Ludwig van 
Beethoven. In a few short years, Schubert (27 years younger than Beethoven) had 
to pay homage to Beethoven’s gigantic influence, but also – crucially – he had 
to have the courage to realise that what he could do as a composer was 
radically different from what Beethoven could, and then have the gumption to go 
ahead and do it.

Which is why, in the finale of Schubert’s Ninth Symphony 
<http://youtu.be/KoSt_iPzcA0?t=48m54s>, the “Great” C Major, there’s a 
quotation from the most infamous contemporary symphony, Beethoven’s Ninth. 
Schubert wrote his own ninth symphony in 1825, a year after Beethoven’s had its 
premiere, which the younger composer also attended. And on one hand, with this 
quotation from theOde to Joy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BVL7gLwzct0> 
theme from Beethoven’s epic finale he was explicitly acknowledging his debt to 
him, but he was also daring to compete with Beethoven’s signature reputation as 
a symphonist.

And yet it’s not that simple. Schubert’s quotation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KoSt_iPzcA0> comes at the middle point of his 
finale - one of thewildest rhythmical rides 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wf1Dxv377mE> in symphonic literature - and it 
appears out of the blue. Instead of telegraphing this moment, or preparing us 
for a big musical reveal, Schubert slips this tune, pianissimo, in the 
clarinets and woodwind; there’s anotherpianissimo tremor  
<http://youtu.be/zSKdoatAny4?t=51m2s>in the strings, also based on the Ode to 
Joy tune; and all of that, it turns out, is a dream-like upbeat before Schubert 
concentrates on themain drama of the movement 
<http://youtu.be/zSKdoatAny4?t=51m25s>. 

And that drama has nothing to do with Beethoven’s symphony, or even much to do 
with Beethoven’s symphonism – which makes the quote more ironic than 
forelock-tugging. What I think Schubert is doing in this piece is showing that 
his own brand of tonal dramaturgy, one that so often produced lyrical 
reflection and a-temporal meditation, and was equally capable of creating and 
sustaining large-scale symphonic momentum. In one sense, the Great C Major 
Symphony is less extreme than its aborted predecessor, the“Unfinished” B Minor 
Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0mnrHf7p0jM>, since the expressive 
world of the C major piece is less raw and uncompromising. But it’s also more 
ambitious because its completed symphonic journey is a self-conscious mark in 
the music-historical sand. (Even if it’s one that took decades to come to 
public life - it only got its posthumous premiere in 1839, thanks to the 
efforts of Felix Mendelssohn and Robert Schumann, whose review coined the 
notorious phrase, “heavenly length”, a tag that has stuck to this piece and to 
Schubert’s late music in general.)

I want to pick out some structural details for you, whether you might be 
coming to the symphony for the first time, think that the piece is dauntingly 
long, or are someone who has encountered the cliché that Schubert’s symphony is 
all about endless repetition and not much dynamic progression. Consider the 
following: the way thesecond theme in the first movement  
<http://youtu.be/zSKdoatAny4?t=4m7s>starts off in E minor rather the G major 
you should rightly expect; and the way Schubert ties the room together in the 
first movement’s coda, introducing the theme of the slow introduction toclinch 
the music’s architectural momentum <http://youtu.be/zSKdoatAny4?t=15m51s>. The 
A minorslow movement <http://youtu.be/zSKdoatAny4?t=16m25s> does just as 
strange things with key-centres as the first movement, makingsideways moves 
<http://youtu.be/zSKdoatAny4?t=19m41s> by thirds instead of conventional fifths 
– forget the jargon, the point is the emotional effect this produces when you 
hear the music: shifting by thirds creates a different kind of musical 
movement: it’s more like walking into a new room, to be surprised and even 
shocked at how different it is to where you were before, rather than 
progressing through a slowly- but logically-changing landscape. (There’s 
another great example of that in the transition in the scherzo movementto its 
trio section <http://youtu.be/zSKdoatAny4?t=38m>, where Schubert repeats a 
single note to the point where it’s removed from its harmonic context, allowing 
him to slip into a totally different key, from C major to A major as if by 
magic.)

The slow movement climaxes with a passage of terrifying contrapuntal severity 
and massive, inconsolable dissonance <http://youtu.be/zSKdoatAny4?t=25m30s>, an 
experience that taints the return of the innocent little tune you heard at the 
start. Then come the scherzo and the finale, two of the most rhythmically 
relentless pieces in the orchestral repertoire. In the finale, listen out for 
the22 repetitions  <http://youtu.be/zSKdoatAny4?t=52m43s>of the same obstinate 
harmony in the woodwinds and brass for a moment of genuine orchestral 
weirdness; and thrill, right at the end of the piece, when the violins at last
fulfil the destiny <http://youtu.be/zSKdoatAny4?t=57m54s> of one of the tunes 
they’ve been playing, over and over again, by celebrating its cadence into C 
major. Schubert never completed another symphony, but it would take musical 
culture until late into the 19th century to digest and understand what he had 
really achieved in this one-of-a-kind piece.

Five key recordings


Günter Wand/Berliner Philharmoniker 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eMx3ZnsG1Ew>: there’s a thrilling electricity 
in this live recording, both lyrical and inextinguishable.

Roger Norrington/Stuttgart Radio Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Schubert-Symphony-No-9-Franz/dp/B00008MJ9F/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&qid=1402852065&sr=8-4&keywords=norrington+schubert+9>
: breathless, for some, revelatory for others, Norrington makes the C major 
symphony a scruff-of-the-neck experience.

Jonathan Nott/Bamberg Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Schubert-Symphony-major-D-944-Great/dp/B000NQRV3U/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1402852114&sr=8-1&keywords=nott+schubert+9>
: among the best recent recordings, I think: Nott’s apparent interpretative 
restraint reveals the unadulterated power of the piece.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxNTva5JCHuM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxNTva5JCHuM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxNTva5JCHuM&media=>
Wilhelm Furtwängler/Berliner Philharmoniker 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Schubert-Symphony-No-9-Haydn-No-88/dp/B000001GQR/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1402852161&sr=8-3&keywords=furtwangler+schubert+9>
: A typically Furtwänglerian balance of unstoppable momentum and expressive 
intensity, from 1953.


Claudio Abbado/Chamber Orchestra of Europe 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AjCdFohPA0A>: …mind you, by completely 
different means, Abbado achieves the same thing!
 