
"I may be able to manage to knock Bax of [sic] the map." Thus wrote the young 
William Walton <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=79ahguBURn4>, only just 30, on 
accepting a symphonic commission. And while it’s possible to argue that Walton 
succeeded in blowing most other contemporary British symphonies – including the 
handful thatArnold Bax <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ues1W2t4UZE> had so far 
composed - out of the water when hisFirst Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XPrQYNa4YAc> had its premieres in 1934 and 
1935 (only three movements were ready by 1934; the premiere of the completed 
four-movement piece had to wait until November the next year), the effort of 
the First Symphony’s composition was one of the most musically and personally 
traumatic experiences of Walton's life.


This symphony is a volcanic eruption of dark, sensual passion which speaks 
with unmediated power from the very first bar.The first movement 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0kVgNCZEARU> is one of the most unrelentingly 
intense experiences and most remarkable structures in 20th century music; the 
scherzo is a bitingly bitterPresto "con malizia" 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1F2yfcHrKIQ> ("with malice"); the slow movement
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5TV1YKyCOi4> is a melancholic ache of 
chromatic pain; and thefourth movement 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PziLvqpvJe8> is the work’s major-key 
apotheosis, a controversially (even unsatisfyingly, for some) upbeat finale 
that sings, fugues, and shouts with joy.

As Walton later admitted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2002/jan/25/shopping.artsfeatures>, 
music of such searing intensity came from deep within. Unlike so many other 
works in this series, this B flat minor symphony really did have its 
inspiration in events of Walton’s personal life. It’s usually a dangerous thing 
for a composer to draw on the immediacy of their emotional lives, to make those 
dark and raw materials into the foundations of a huge symphonic structure. But 
in the first three movements – and the opening one most of all – Walton manages 
exactly that, and the music is a devastating emotional wound that’s both 
white-hot in its intensity and ferociously compelling as a symphonic structure. 
The piece transmutes Walton’s frustration and fears, his doubts and anger as 
his relationship with Imma von Doernberg came to an end: that malicious Presto 
is a tempestuous feud between the two lovers. But the finale was composed 
later, after he had met and fallen in love withAlice Wimborne 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Alice-wimborne-1914_edited-1.jpg>, a 
Viscountess and society hostess 22 years older than Walton. It’s not quite as 
simple as mapping emotional pain and subsequent pleasure onto the symphony’s 
structure, but that narrative is a crucial part of how the piece was conceived.

But it’s how all of that is translated into the music that matters. 
Harmonically speaking 
<http://www.academia.edu/1632407/To_Understand_the_Composers_Hesitation_The_Added_Sixth_and_Narrative_Fracture_in_Waltons_First_Symphony>
, the opening movement is built on an instability that’s sounded out rightat 
the start <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4dsiDa5RQOk> in the chords that are 
made from the ostinato in the low strings and horns before the oboe melody 
begins its keening progress. The movement presents two contradictory kinds of 
motion and emotion at the same time: this music is simultaneously one of the 
most restless, driving first movements in symphonic history, and yet all of its 
big melodies have, I think, the character of a lament. It’s music that’s firmly 
set on a sea of instability, if that’s not too paradoxical; and the implicit 
tension in the music’s emotional and harmonic worlds produces some 
ear-shattering and heart-breaking climaxes, aroundtwo-thirds of the way through 
<http://youtu.be/0kVgNCZEARU?t=10m7s>, and the monumental procession of pain  
<http://youtu.be/0kVgNCZEARU?t=12m59s>that marks the end of the movement. 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVwX9yJr2TWk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVwX9yJr2TWk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVwX9yJr2TWk&media=>
After the splintery and darkly thrilling energy of the scherzo, which explodes 
intoclimaxes  <http://youtu.be/sV-g5cH6qBw?t=4m28s>that are, in a way, even 
more shattering than those of the first movement since they seem so empty and 
random, the slow movement voices a genuine and intimate regret.The opening 
melody <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5TV1YKyCOi4> was originally planned for 
the first allegro; slowing the tune down released its true expressive power, 
and this movement encloses the symphony’s most affecting, lyrical and 
melancholic music.


All of which private intensity and anguish makes the finale 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PziLvqpvJe8> seem like a missive from another 
world. There’s a public, even heraldic pomp to Walton’s music in this movement, 
as if the grief and pain of the previous three movements had been exorcised by 
the symphonic struggles we’ve witnessed – or simply forgotten. He said on one 
hand that the finale was a "piece for the mob", and on the other, that "in some 
ways, I think the last movement to be the best of the lot, at anyrate[sic] it 
will be the most popular, I think." Whether you think of the finale, including 
itswildly celebratory fugue <http://youtu.be/PziLvqpvJe8?t=3m5s>, as a 
vindication of Walton’s symphonic journey, or as a pomp-and-circumstance 
sticking plaster over an emotional wound that still gapes by thetriumphant 
<http://youtu.be/PziLvqpvJe8?t=12m30s> (too triumphant?) closing bars, is a 
question of taste, and a question of which performance you’re listening to. 
That it caps the most searing and emotional British symphony so far composed 
is, I think, not in doubt.

Five key recordings


These are all vividly compelling traversals of Walton’s symphonic masterpiece 
– if you can bear so much savage emotional intensity, I recommend them all.

London Symphony Orchestra/Andre Previn
Royal London Philharmonic Orchestra/Charles Mackerras
London Symphony Orchestra/Colin Davis
Philharmonia Orchestra/William Walton
English Northern Philharmonia/Paul Daniel
 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Walton-Symphony-No1-Partita-William/dp/B0000014D5/ref=sr_1_2?s=music&ie=UTF8&qid=1396254022&sr=1-2&keywords=paul+daniel+walton+1>
 