
Nicholas Cook 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Symphony-Cambridge-Music-Handbooks/dp/0521399246/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1410159858&sr=8-1&keywords=nicholas+cook+beethoven+9>
 puts it well: “Of all the works in the mainstream repertory of Western music, 
theNinth Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sPt7eiVCTxk> seems the most 
like a construction of mirrors, reflecting and refracting the values, hopes, 
and fears of those who seek to understand and explain it … From its first 
performance [in Vienna in 1824] up to the present day, the Ninth Symphony has 
inspired diametrically opposed interpretations”. Those interpretations include 
those earlier listeners and commentators who heard and saw in it evidence that 
Beethoven had lost it compositionally speaking; that the piece, with its 
incomprehensible scale, nearly impossible technical demands, and above all its 
crazily utopian humanist idealism in thechoral setting 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ChygZLpJDNE> of Friedrich Schiller’s Ode to Joy
 <http://lucare.com/immortal/ode.html> in its last movement, amounted to 
madness. On the other side, Hector Berlioz thought it the “culmination of its 
author’s genius”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsPt7eiVCTxk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsPt7eiVCTxk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsPt7eiVCTxk&media=>
The Ninth Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dHDXdbSWu0E> is arguably 
the single piece that inspired the methodology ofmusical analysis 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Guide-Musical-Analysis-Nicholas-Cook/dp/0198165080>, a 
discipline of forensic musicological close-reading of the score that tried to 
prove just how unified and coherent a conception this symphony truly is 
underneath its chaotically diverse surface. It’s been held up as the central 
work of Western classical music both by those who imagine it as thene plus ultra
 of symphonic, technical, and compositional imagination and mastery, and by 
those who want to say that classical music can embrace the world outside the 
concert hall as well as within it, and that the piece is a sounding bell of 
social change, of emotional hope, and even of political reform.

But those reflections and refractions on and of the Ninth Symphony must also 
encompass the ways in which the piece has been used as a manipulative ear-worm 
byless-than-savoury regimes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2itdv1aEpG4>. The 
Ode to Joy tune - which Beethoven composed as a motto for the whole world to 
take to its heart, to become a national anthem of humanity itself, something 
much bigger in its impact even than the anthems of nation states that had 
emerged by the early 19th century - has been adopted as a the motto of 
dictatorships as well as democracies. As Beethoven’s most recent biographerJan 
Swafford 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Anguish-Triumph-Jan-Swafford/dp/0571312551/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1410161157&sr=8-1&keywords=jan+swafford+beethoven>
 says, “how one viewed the Ninth … depended on what kind of Elysium one had in 
mind, whether all people should be brothers or that all nonbrothers should be 
exterminated”. (Esteban Buch’s book,Beethoven’s Ninth – A Political History 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethovens-Ninth-Political-Esteban-Buch/dp/0226078124/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1410160127&sr=1-1&keywords=beethoven+9+a+political+history>
 has more on this particular side of the symphony’s history.) Today, theOde to 
Joy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EZ9lhoo8fZo> is the anthem of the European 
Union and the sound of Hogmanay and New Year celebrations everywhere from 
Germany toJapan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X6s6YKlTpfw>, and it’s an 
annual fixture at the Proms, traditionally on the penultimate night of the 
season,as it is this year 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/september-12/15144>. Some feel that 
Beethoven was simplytoo successful in writing a tune that really could be sung 
by all humanity, and that its vision of universal (or nearly – I’ll come on to 
that!) brotherhood is kitsch at best, or politically dangerous at worst. 
ConductorGustav Leonhardt <http://www.economist.com/node/21543464>, talking 
about the finale, said simply: “That ‘Ode to Joy’, talk about vulgarity! And 
the text! Completely puerile!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Fsymphony-guide-beethoven-ninth-choral-tom-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F8%2F1410210392980%2F92772ad0-8873-407e-9565-228ea8e2fa17-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Symphony%20guide%3A%20Beethoven's%20Ninth%20('Choral')&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Fsymphony-guide-beethoven-ninth-choral-tom-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Symphony%20guide%3A%20Beethoven%27s%20Ninth%20%28%27Choral%27%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Fsymphony-guide-beethoven-ninth-choral-tom-service%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F8%2F1410210392980%2F92772ad0-8873-407e-9565-228ea8e2fa17-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Detail of the viola part of the opening of Beethoven’s 9th (choral) symphony. 
Photograph: Eitan Simanor / Alamy/Alamy 
So the question is: given that the Ninth Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X6s6YKlTpfw> belongs to the whole world, and 
is now the sum total of all of these imaginings over the last 190 years, and 
its myriad performances and interpretations, what actually is it? There are 
many valiant attempts out there to show how the piece ties the room together, 
to tame its disturbing discontinuities and diversities by hearing it as a 
steady revelation of the Ode to Joy theme. That defining tune is indeed 
consistently prefigured in all three of the previous movements, and you can 
hear the finale as the logical end-point of this process. Beethoven even makes 
that journey absolutely explicit at the start of the finale, as the cellos and 
basses in their recitative-like outbursts reject music from the previous three 
movements as unfit for the grander purpose of the finale (a process clinched by 
the bass solo, who sings Beethoven’s own words: “O Friends, not these 
sounds!”); that destiny is revealed in the tune that steals in and takes over 
the orchestra, and it’s fulfilled oncethe soloists and the choir stand up 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QDViACDYxnQ> to sing Schiller’s words to the 
Ode to Joy theme.

That musical trajectory is paralleled by the symphony’s emotional narrative, 
starting with the burial of the old heroic ideal, asJan Swafford suggests 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Anguish-Triumph-Jan-Swafford/dp/0571312551/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1410161157&sr=8-1&keywords=jan+swafford+beethoven>
, in the first movement. Remember theEroica Symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/aug/05/symphony-guide-beethovens-third-eroica-tom-service>
: well,the first movement <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QfrAXZC7GKA> of the 
Ninth represents the interment of the great-man military heroism that the 
earlier symphony celebrates:the funeral march 
<http://youtu.be/QfrAXZC7GKA?t=14m18s> at the end of the Ninth’s first movement 
puts the nail in the coffin of the Napoleonic dream, which had curdled so 
devastatingly and produced the political repressions that Beethoven was living 
and working under when he was writing the Ninth Symphony in the early 1820s. 
Then comes theironic bucolic energy  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Aeieed-P0Qo>of the scherzo, and the Arcadian 
vision ofthe slow movement, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9X4bGbtqVgc> 
Beethoven’s most opulently lyrical music, an idyll that dreams of a new kind of 
heroism towards the end of its rapturous pastoral, asthose brass fanfares  
<http://youtu.be/QfrAXZC7GKA?t=38m>suddenly appear amid harmonic premonitions 
of the most visionary music of the finale.That final movement 
<http://youtu.be/DuDFyigVcXw?t=38m8s> itself is then an enactment of a victory 
for humanity, as individuals come together in joy and love: a community of 
choir, vocal soloists, and musicians that isn’t led by great men or even by 
God, but rather is built on the bonds between “brothers” of Schiller’s poem, as 
this new, true heroism of humanity creates its own destiny and fashions the 
world in which Beethoven wanted to live. That world symbolically includes 
geographical and ethnic diversities just as it encompasses the secular and 
sacred, in the Turkish music that interrupts the finale and with which the 
whole symphony noisily, joyously, overwhelmingly ends; as well as its virtuosic 
counterpoint, its sensuous polyphony and its cantata-like – but terrifyingly 
challenging - choral writing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Fsymphony-guide-beethoven-ninth-choral-tom-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F8%2F1410210222983%2Fc5c759fb-0d5e-424c-b953-fca68f91bd2a-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Symphony%20guide%3A%20Beethoven's%20Ninth%20('Choral')&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Fsymphony-guide-beethoven-ninth-choral-tom-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Symphony%20guide%3A%20Beethoven%27s%20Ninth%20%28%27Choral%27%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Ftomserviceblog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Fsymphony-guide-beethoven-ninth-choral-tom-service%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F8%2F1410210222983%2Fc5c759fb-0d5e-424c-b953-fca68f91bd2a-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The frontispiece of Beethoven’s choral symphony. Photograph: DEA / A. DAGLI 
ORTI/De Agostini/Getty Images 
Yet it’s precisely because of the power of Beethoven’s fulfilment of this 
symphonic, dramatic, and social vision (dimensions that Beethoven is working on 
simultaneously and symbiotically in this piece) that it asks so many questions 
that resound, unresolved, after any performance. One is aboutthe text 
<http://edboyden.org/beet9.html>; even if you don’t have to go as far as Gustav 
Leonhardt, you have to recognise that not everyone is actually included in this 
Utopian brotherhood. That’s implicit in Schiller’s lines: “Yea, if any hold in 
keeping / Only one heart all his own / Let him join us, or else weeping / Steal 
from out our midst, unknown 
<http://www.ukmagic.co.uk/song_anthems/european_union_national_anthem.html>”. As
Theodor Adorno 
<http://www.amazon.com/Beethoven-theodor-wiesengrund-author-adorno/dp/0745630456/ref=sr_1_cc_1?s=aps&ie=UTF8&qid=1410162172&sr=1-1-catcorr&keywords=beethoven+and+philosophy+adorno>
 puts it, “Inherent in the bad collective is the image of the solitary, and joy 
desires to see him weep … In such a company, what is to become of old maids, 
not to speak of the souls of the dead?” Beethoven sets Schiller’s 
loneliness-punishing lines, in the middle of the exposition of the Ode to Joy 
theme, with a strange diminuendo, sung by the soloists and then the choir, a 
moment of doubt amid a foment of affirmation. A detail perhaps, but a reminder 
that even this universal Utopian society has its darknesses, its excluded 
citizens. The irony is that Beethoven himself, while dreaming in his music of 
that joyful and loving connection with other human beings, searched for but 
only rarely found those connections in his own life: his music became what he 
could not.

There there’s the “fart” in the finale. Not my word, but conductor Roger 
Norrington’s <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TuPj66Y_xZw>description of the 
intervention of the contrabassoon, two bassoons, and bass drum, in the wrong 
key, in a new speed, and in what you soon realise is the wrong beat of the bar, 
a bathetic moment that comes just afterthe choir have invoked a vision of God 
<http://youtu.be/5wZcbHX40jw?t=49m5s> with some of the powerfully revelatory 
music of the symphony. Thismusical petard <http://youtu.be/5wZcbHX40jw?t=49m42s>
 hoists an accompaniment to a drunken soldier’s – sung by a helium-swallowing 
tenor, of course! – hymn to “conquering heroism”, as Beethoven savagely sends 
up the old ideals of great-man-militarism, with Janissary, Turkish-band music 
borrowed and wildly exaggerated from Mozart’s most popular opera during his 
lifetime,The Abduction from the Seraglio 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kvefmK6LNwc>. And from exactly the opposite 
extreme, there’s the music that comes shortly after thispissed private’s paean 
of praise <http://youtu.be/5wZcbHX40jw?t=50m15s> (alliteration – the lowest 
form of poetry, apologies!),the sublime setting 
<http://youtu.be/dHDXdbSWu0E?t=1h4m20s> of the last verse of Schiller’s poem, a 
vision of the embrace of “you millions”, the “kiss of the whole world”, and a 
creator “dwelling beyond the canopy of stars”. In music that sounds shockingly 
slow and spare afterthe hell-for-leather double fugue 
<http://youtu.be/5wZcbHX40jw?t=51m2s> and triumphalist version of the Ode to 
Joy tune we’ve just heard, Beethoven has trombones, low strings, and male 
voices intone the starkest of “embraces”. This isn’t about spiritual or sensual 
comfort, but something much stranger and deeper. The composerJörg Widmann 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FOg6XB5oh70> even describes this music as 
creating a “horrible” soundworld, in music that seems to directly contradict 
the salving sentiment of the words. Instead,this passage of the finale 
<http://youtu.be/dHDXdbSWu0E?t=1h5m38s> sounds out humanity’s awe at the 
coldness and vastness of the cosmos, putting us listeners in touch with our 
microscopic futility as individuals and even as collective humanityfaced with 
the depths of creation <http://youtu.be/dHDXdbSWu0E?t=1h6m24s>. What happens 
next – just after Beethoven creates acelestial soundscape 
<http://youtu.be/dHDXdbSWu0E?t=1h7m17s> on a vertiginously anticipatory 
dominant 9th chord <http://youtu.be/dHDXdbSWu0E?t=1h7m30s> that shimmers and 
pulses with strange tremolos and registers, the choir contemplating that 
“father beyond the stars” – is that the music isripped back to earth 
<http://youtu.be/dHDXdbSWu0E?t=1h8m7s> for the start of the symphony’s 
astonishingly jubilant coda, and the Ode to Joy theme leaps around in a 
triple-time explosion.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdHDXdbSWu0E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdHDXdbSWu0E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdHDXdbSWu0E&media=>
But that climactic juxtaposition between the cosmos and earthy celebration is 
only among the most extreme of the dozens of contrasts that define the finale 
in particular, and the symphony as a whole. Think of the opening image of
musical plasma <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dHDXdbSWu0E> out of which the 
melodies of the first movementcreep and crash 
<http://youtu.be/dHDXdbSWu0E?t=36s> into being, or later in the opening 
movement, the most dissonant-sounding first-inversion major-key chord in 
orchestral music –the D major return <http://youtu.be/DuDFyigVcXw?t=7m4s> of 
the first theme, which Jan Swafford aptly describes as the sound of the hero 
“sowing ruin” in the symphony’s structure. (For Susan McClary, in a 1987 
article, this moment symbolised instead the “throttling murderous rage of a 
rapist incapable of attaining release”, another of those diverse 
interpretations the Ninth has inspired.) There are the disruptive,out-of-phase 
timpani strokes <http://youtu.be/DuDFyigVcXw?t=15m44s> that puncture the 
scherzo, next to whichthe rustic drones <http://youtu.be/DuDFyigVcXw?t=19m52s> 
of the trio section are shockingly stable and good-humoured. On its own terms, 
the music of theAdagio molto e cantabile <http://youtu.be/DuDFyigVcXw?t=26m8s> 
slow movement is serenely lyrical, but in the context of the symphony as a 
whole, it’s music of extreme dramatic contrast, an oasis magicked out of the 
chaos around it.

All of these increasingly severe jump-cuts as the symphony goes on might well 
be in service of Beethoven’s compositional credo, that “even when I am 
composing instrumental music my custom is always to keep the whole in view” 
(which is decidedly not the same as a striving for a single-minded 
compositional unity). Yet that “whole” remains riddled with questions, about 
who we are as a society, about what the purpose of our lives should be – and 
what the limits of the symphony might be. Or rather, the Ninth Symphony is a 
realisation of the limitless possibilities of the symphony, to reflect who we 
are, a sounding board for vastly different ideas and ideologies about music, 
the world, and our place in it. That’s why Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony is 
arguably the central artwork of Western music: it is as much of a challenge now 
as it was in 1824 to its listeners, to performers, and to every composer who 
has written a symphony since. But it’s not because this piece is a monolithic 
monument of certainty; instead, it’s because its gigantic, irrefutable musical 
power is a wellspring of endless renewal and possibility. Rather like thewhole 
story of the symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog+series/50-greatest-symphonies>
, you might say...

Five key recordings
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIInG5nY_wrU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIInG5nY_wrU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIInG5nY_wrU&media=>
Wilhelm Furtwängler/Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ALTQ2Xb5Yaw>: maybe the most terrifying 
music-making that I know; a performance for Hitler’s birthday in 1942 that 
seethes with a daemonic intensity. The end sounds more like a scream of pain 
rather than a shout of joy.

Roger Norrington/London Classical Players 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hg5vABFHgpU&list=PL828D54B22FD2F086>: still 
incendiary and iconoclastic after more than two decades; thrills with the 
paradoxical shock of the new, as the Ninth was revealed to the world on period 
instruments for the first time.

John Eliot Gardiner/Orchestre Révolutionnaire et Romantique 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DuDFyigVcXw>: Proof of the range of 
possibilities of historically informed performance practice: Gardiner’s 
recording, made just a few years after Norrington’s, is if anything wilder and 
freer.

Leonard Bernstein/orchestra from all over the world! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IInG5nY_wrU>: the performance that Bernstein 
conducted with players from Germany, France, Britain, Russia, and America on 
Christmas Day 1989 at the Brandenburg Gate to mark the fall of the Berlin Wall 
– a searing “Ode to Freedom” (“Freiheit” replaced “Freude”, joy, for this 
performance).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5wZcbHX40jw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5wZcbHX40jw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5wZcbHX40jw&media=>
Riccardo Chailly/Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5wZcbHX40jw>: a recent, and brilliant, 
performance that pairs Chailly’s patina-stripping creativity with the 
Gewandhaus’s magnificent orchestral tradition. The result is catalytically 
imaginative – and you can hear this combination at the Proms this week.

Riccardo Chailly conducts Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/september-12/15144>with the Leipzig 
Gewandhaus Orchestra at the Proms on Friday 12th September.
 