
We think of the symphony in the 20th and 21st centuries as the apogee of 
radicalism and experimentation in the form, as composers strove to create new 
kinds of thinking and feeling after it was thought to have exhausted itself 
(not true! – as you’ll know if you’ve been followingthis series so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/apr/09/elliott-carter-symphonia-bubbles-colours-energy>
). But to experience a true sense of adventure, novelty and symphonic 
discovery, you have to cast yourself back to the mid-18th century, and an era 
in which this self-sustaining species of public instrumental music was still 
forming itself in the minds of composers and the ears of listeners.

And that’s where this week’s symphony, Johann Christian Bach’s G minor work, 
Op 6 No 6 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LqgUSBvTAg4>, comes in. Composed in 
the 1760s (definitely before 1769), it was almost certainly on the programmes 
of the concerts that Bach and fellow composer and impresario Carl Friedrich 
Abel put on in their series of prophetic and fashionable concerts at Carlisle 
House in London’s Soho, then St James, and finally at the bespoke concert room 
they had built at Hanover Square.JC Bach 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johann_Christian_Bach> – the “London” Bach: 
Johann Christian had moved to Britain in 1762, initially to write operas for 
the King’s theatre, and was music master to Queen Charlotte, but subsequently 
focused onconcertos <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9CfNb40dG1w> and 
symphonies – arguably did more to cultivate an appetite and an audience for 
instrumental music than anyone else of his time. Consisting mostly of Bach’s 
own music, the performances became essential events in Georgian London’s social 
and cultural calendar, even inspiring this paean from a contemporary:

Where Carlisle house attracts the light and gay

And countless tapers emulate the day, 

There youth and beauty chase the hours along, 

And aid time’s flight by revelry and song; 

……

Then worn with pleasure, forth the revellers stray, 

And hail with languid looks the new-born day: – 

They seek their homes; – there, weary with ennui, 

Joyless and dull, is all they hear and see; 

Spiritless and void, of every charm bereft, 

Unlike that scene of magic they have left, 

They childe the lingering hours that move so slow, 

Till the night comes, when they again can go

And mingle in the enchantments of Soho.

Plus ça change … but in the 18th century, alchemical delight was reached 
through symphonies rather than through anything more – well, chemical. And one 
of the pieces that would certainly have conjured a “scene of magic”, albeit a 
turbulent sorcery rather than anything more comforting, was theG minor 
symphony, Op 6 No 6 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LqgUSBvTAg4>. In three 
minor-key movements – including, in its centralAndante, piu tosto adagio 
<http://youtu.be/3XYWAoih8Io?t=3m6s>, one of the longest symphonic movements JC 
Bach ever wrote – this work reveals Bach’s major symphonic innovations as well 
as creating an explosive burst of thesturm und drang 
<http://youtu.be/LqgUSBvTAg4?t=10m6s> (“storm and stress”) passions that were 
the dark side of the 18th century’s sense and sensibility.

Bach’s music was designed to appeal to its audiences. His tunes, his simple 
harmonies and his innovative use of orchestral colour were all supposed to 
enliven, entertain and elevate his listeners when they first heard his new 
pieces. But that deliberate attempt to make instrumental music an embodiment of 
instantaneous feeling and passion instead of the intellectual rigour and 
contrapuntal complexity of an earlier era – above all, that of Bach’s father, 
Johann Sebastian, and in London the imposing legacy of Handel – was much more 
sophisticated than posterity would give him credit for. After his death, Bach’s 
music was scarcely heard in the 19th century, yet in his day JC was among the 
most famous composers in Europe. But somebody who did realise how Johann 
Christian was opening up new possibilities for the expressive potential of 
instrumental music was Mozart, who heard Bach’s music when he came to London in
1764 at the age of 8 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8rYBC82h8T4>. Mozart 
arranged Bach’s music, he played at the keyboard with him – and the young man's 
own music was transformed by the encounter. Mozart later memorialised JC Bach 
in the slow movement of hisA major piano concerto, K414 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OcJHGC8kq5I>, produced just after he had heard 
the news of Bach's death in 1782, basing the piece on one of the elder 
composer's overtures. “What a loss to the musical world!” he wrote. It was JC 
Bach, much more than Haydn, who was the most important influence on the young 
Mozart’s style and ideas about the form.

In JC Bach’s G minor symphony, there are moments when you feel you’re hearing 
premonitions of Mozart – most clearly in the atmosphere of headlong intensity 
in the first movement, which Mozart seems to recreate and remember in his own G 
minor symphony,K183, from 1773 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rNeirjA65Dk>; 
there’s a specific musical connection between the wayone of Bach’s melodic ideas
 <http://youtu.be/LqgUSBvTAg4?t=5s> emerges (a rocking semitone in the strings) 
and what he does with it in the central andmost stormy section  
<http://youtu.be/LqgUSBvTAg4?t=1m33s>of the movement, and what Mozart does with 
a similar idea <http://youtu.be/aBDykyJuKJg?t=3m39s> in his visionary C major 
symphony, K338. There’s even a connection between the slow movement’s openingC 
minor tune <http://youtu.be/3XYWAoih8Io?t=3m8s> and Wolfgang’s C minor piano 
concerto, K491, whose first three notes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PftH8FVzIRY> are exactly the same.

But better to forget what you know – or what you think you know – and instead 
try to experience JC Bach’s symphony as those listeners in Soho must have done. 
Brace yourselves for the compressed edge-of-the-seat drama of itsfirst movement 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LqgUSBvTAg4>, the unsettlingly emotional slow 
movement (witha final appoggiatura <http://youtu.be/LqgUSBvTAg4?t=9m50s>, a 
harmonic sigh that wounds its final cadence, mimicking the very end of theSt 
Matthew Passion <http://youtu.be/e4YIh7NOsa4?t=5m54s> by JC’s father), and the 
minor-key rocket <http://youtu.be/3XYWAoih8Io?t=11m41s> of the finale, 
propelled by horn-calls and explosions in the upper strings. The whole piece 
ends with a disturbing musical question-mark, a dramatic andsudden descrescendo 
<http://youtu.be/3XYWAoih8Io?t=13m45s> from forte to piano. Bach doesn’t 
resolve the tensions in this G minor symphony, as later composers might have 
felt they had to; instead, he leaves the tempest he has just unleashed fizzing 
electrically in the air and in your imagination.

Best of all, you can hear this symphony in two differently but equally 
exciting performances by theAkademie für Alte Musik Berlin 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3XYWAoih8Io> and Concerto Köln 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LqgUSBvTAg4> – interpretations that thrust JC 
Bach’s music thrillingly into the present tense.
 