
Mahler’s A-minor Sixth Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DrhsSYhuoUQ> 
is a mythical piece. Mahler may or may not have subtitled it “Tragic” at some 
stage of its composition, and it could, possibly, contain music that 
consecrates and depicts his wife Alma. It may be “the first nihilist work in 
the history of music”, as conductorWilhelm Furtwängler 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tKpjJCvWxRg> described it. Conductor and 
friend of Mahler’sBruno Walter <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3eUKpw21ASc> 
found the piece too expressively dark for him to conduct, since it “ends in 
hopelessness and the dark night of the soul”. Most significantly, it’s a work 
you are always told is dangerously, prophetically autobiographical, above all 
in itsfinal fourth movement <http://youtu.be/PDYizOtNIYI?t=52m10s>, that 
half-hour-long hallucinogenic, emotional nightmare-scape. When he revised the 
piece in 1906, Mahler deleted the third of the movement’shammer-blows 
<http://youtu.be/PDYizOtNIYI?t=1h4m44s> – a literal thumping of a gigantic box 
with a wooden sledge-hammer, as you can see in theVienna Philharmonic's 
performance <http://youtu.be/PDYizOtNIYI?t=1h4m47s>! – supposedly because he 
was trying to avoid a three-fold jinx of fate. His revisions were futile – the 
next year in 1907, Mahler had to cope with the death of his daughter, the end 
of his relationship with the Vienna State Opera, and the diagnosis of the fatal 
heart condition that would kill him four years later.

Most notoriously of all, this work – we are always told – is the symphony that 
its composer couldn’t make up his mind in which order to place the movements, 
whether thescherzo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ADN2QeeY7Bc> or slow 
movement <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jvUego50gVg> should come second. The 
piece was initially published in one order, but first performed, with Mahler 
himself conducting, in another. The result has been confusion and consternation 
for conductors and for listeners about the meaning, structure, and function of
the Sixth <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zvfh_mjPLlQ>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZvfh_mjPLlQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZvfh_mjPLlQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZvfh_mjPLlQ&media=>
So let’s deal with these crazy facts first. There ought to be no confusion 
about the order of the movements (readJeffrey Gantz’s 
<http://www.mahlerfest.org/mfXVI/notes_myth_reality.htm> excellent digest of 
these issues here), since Mahler never conducted the piece in any order apart 
from Andante-Scherzo; he felt so strongly about it that, despite having 
originally conceived the inner movements the other way round, he asked his 
publisher to insert an erratum into every copy of the first edition, making 
sure that the symphony would always be played with the slow movement second. 
Mahler must have felt incredibly strongly since in changing a published score, 
he was incurring extra costs and risking a critical backlash. The confusion 
comes only posthumously:Alma Mahler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/dec/02/alma-schindler-problem-gustav-mahler>
 sent conductor Wilhelm Mengelberg a telegram in 1919 suggesting the piece 
should be played Scherzo-Andante. And then there’s Erwin Ratz’s seemingly 
unfounded decision to reverse Mahler’s final order in hiscritical edition of 
1963 <http://www.gustav-mahler.org/english/>, ever since which conductors and 
record companies have taken this version as gospel, even though it directly 
goes against the only Sixth Symphony that Mahler ever knew, conducted, or heard 
in his lifetime. And the hammer-blows? Again, the idea that these hammer-blows 
actually represent real or imagined “blows of fate” – as well as being 
ludicrously superstitious – contradicts the coherent and convincing musical 
reasons Mahler had for deleting the third thump. (Again,Gantz is a good guide  
<http://www.mahlerfest.org/mfXVI/notes_myth_reality.htm>– and again conductors 
have gone against Mahler’s revisions, reinstating the third blow, thanks in 
part to another posthumous editorial cock-up).

But whatever the “facts”, these issues won’t go away, since they’re all part 
of how the piece has been played, interpreted, and heard over the decades – and 
I’m not going to suggest that any performance of the Sixth that changes 
Mahler’s order is inherently “wrong”, just that conductors and scholars need to 
have good reasons for their decisions (like the music-analytic ones put 
forward, for example, byDavid Matthews 
<http://ukcatalogue.oup.com/product/9780199249657.do> and Norman del Mar 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mahlers-Sixth-Symphony--Study-Norman/dp/030687329X/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1405326878&sr=8-3&keywords=del+mar+mahler+6>
).

Ironically, with all of this freight of interpretative controversy, there’s no 
other symphony in Mahler’s canon like the Sixth that is so much about a direct 
negotiation with, rather than an obliteration or sublimation of, the 
conventions of symphonic form. Yes, it’s conceived on a gigantic scale, but 
this piece is thefirst four-movement 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XWfXJ8lFDEQ>, purely instrumental symphony 
that Mahler had composed since his First (and even that piece started life as a 
five-movement quasi-tone-poem). Take the first movement, for example: anAllegro 
energico <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XWfXJ8lFDEQ> that opens with the grim 
tread of an A-minor march, which is contrasted with a magnificentlylyrical 
second main idea <http://youtu.be/XWfXJ8lFDEQ?t=7m> (the supposed 
“Alma-theme”); the first section is even marked to be repeated, just like in 
classical symphonies, and the trajectory of this movement ends in the 
symphony’s most joyous single moment ofmajor-key victory 
<http://youtu.be/DrhsSYhuoUQ?t=24m51s>. (That’s the problem with Walter’s and 
Furtwängler’s descriptions of the Sixth Symphony, and even the “Tragic” 
epithet: if you hear the piece thinking only of the implacable darkness with 
which it ends, you miss the true drama, which is that a completely different 
emotional outcome is possible until thefinal few minutes 
<http://youtu.be/PDYizOtNIYI?t=1h17m44s>. Everything is at stake right until 
the end of this music, and it’s the fact that this symphony consistently 
strives for a victory that it doesn’t ultimately win that makes it so 
emotionally devastating; in that sense, this symphony is the exact opposite of 
“nihilistic”.)

Yet this piece – like all of the symphonies in this series – is, at every 
point, challenging conventions even while it fulfils them. And in this piece, 
it’s how Mahler maintains an abstract musical momentum over the whole 
structure, even while, moment by moment, his music lurches from theemotional 
abyss to the mountaintop <http://youtu.be/XWfXJ8lFDEQ?t=57m37s>, and in some 
passages, can even contain music that sounds like it’s happening outside the 
frame of the rest of the piece. That’s literally true in the cowbells at the
still centre of the first movement <http://youtu.be/XWfXJ8lFDEQ?t=11m24s>; a 
vision of a world of unsullied nature brought into the concert hall, a 
prelapsarian pastoralism Mahler then wrenches back into the symphonic present 
tense of the desperate struggle of the rest of the movement. The cowbells return
in the slow movement <http://youtu.be/XWfXJ8lFDEQ?t=28m26s> as part of its 
relatively tranquil respite; andin the finale, too, 
<http://youtu.be/XWfXJ8lFDEQ?t=58m8s> where they represent an elusive hope of 
emotional stability the music will try and fail to achieve.In the scherzo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hQmXAnTQKwQ>, there’s a grotesque play of 
music that’s both child-like and “Altväterisch” (“old-fashioned”), but it’s in
the finale <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ycNgvfP8vLQ> in which the alchemy 
of the musical micro- and macro-structures is most vivid, and in which all of 
the major moments of this huge movement’s architecture are experienced as a 
twist of the symphonic knife in your very being. Or they should be, if 
conductor and orchestra are doing their job (as they are in the five 
performances below!). Those hammer-blows aren’t mere sound and fury; both 
strokes mark the music’s failed attempts to create a stable, victorious climax, 
instead of which the musiccurdles into angst 
<http://youtu.be/ycNgvfP8vLQ?t=12m17s> on both occasions 
<http://youtu.be/ycNgvfP8vLQ?t=16m55s> just after the percussionist has brought 
down their hammer. These are the sounds and the physical realisations – as you 
watch the player lift the hammer above their head and bring it down on the 
conductor’s cue - of the nail in the coffin of the fate of the symphony’s hero, 
whoever that is.

That’s another problem with conventional ways of thinking about this piece. If 
you conceive of it as autobiographical, then its journey to the final 
extinguishing of all hope in its final bars, and thelast, shocking appearance 
<http://youtu.be/DrhsSYhuoUQ?t=1h30m8s> of the fatalistic rhythm that has 
dominated both the first movement and the finale, is limited in its power: it 
depicts a figure who is someone apart from us – Mahler himself, or some other 
symphonic super-ego. Instead, I think the piece should feel as if it’s us in 
the audience who are the heroes and heroines who are not just depicted but 
implicated in the symphony’s drama. And paradoxically, this symphony has a
cathartic and even life-affirming power 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mahler-Symphony-Abbado-Lucerne-Region/dp/B000Q7ZKVG/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1405327795&sr=8-3&keywords=mahler+6+abbado>
, precisely because it confronts us with the limits of musical and symphonic 
existence, and creates sonic extremities that are still, more than a century 
on, unique to this score. They are evident above all in the dream-like 
soundscapes ofthe opening of the finale <http://youtu.be/DrhsSYhuoUQ?t=57m27s>, 
music that returns throughout the fourth movement; each time intensified, as 
each rotation of the symphonic wheel only brings the music closer to its 
ultimate oblivion. And that’s perhaps the greatest irony of all, that this most 
outwardly coherent of Mahler’s symphonies, with its four instrumental 
movements, should prove the most surreal, sonically imaginative and emotionally 
disturbing of them all.

Five key recordings
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXWfXJ8lFDEQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXWfXJ8lFDEQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXWfXJ8lFDEQ&media=>
Ivan Fischer/Budapest Festival Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XWfXJ8lFDEQ>: a performance of clarity, 
coherence, and musical focus, whose emotional impact comes from its objective 
revelation of Mahler’s symphonic structure.

Claudio Abbado/Lucerne Festival Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Mahler-Symphony-Abbado-Lucerne-Region/dp/B000Q7ZKVG/ref=sr_1_3?ie=UTF8&qid=1405326043&sr=8-3&keywords=abbado+mahler+6>
: one of the central achievements of the partnership between Abbado and his 
Lucerne players, making Mahler’s piece an unforgettable existential journey.

Klaus Tennstedt/London Philharmonic Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DrhsSYhuoUQ>: playing and conducting pitched 
at the very edge of Mahler’s symphonic abyss.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPDYizOtNIYI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPDYizOtNIYI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPDYizOtNIYI&media=>
Leonard Bernstein/Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PDYizOtNIYI>: an alchemy of orchestral 
virtuosity, expressive intensity, and interpretative imagination.

Jascha Horenstein/Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rRDZswVLeZA>: Horenstein’s live performance is 
one of the grittiest and grandest of this symphony ever recorded.

• Valery Gergiev conducts Mahler’s Sixth Symphony with the World Orchestra for 
Peace at the Proms <http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/july-20/14926>on 
Sunday 20 July. Details:bbc.co.uk/proms <http://bbc.co.uk/proms>
 