
"A symphony beyond symphonies" is how Paul Griffiths describes Elliott Carter's
Symphonia: sum fluxae pretium spei <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=Vkj24LtBiuA>
 ("I am the prize of flowing hope"). It must have seemed that coming up with an 
almost 50-minute symphonic work would be "beyond" the powers of the 85-year-old 
composer when he started working on the composition of the first of its three, 
large-scale movements. Or at least that its completion would be merely a 
"hopeful" prospect; the fact thatCarter finished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/apr/30/guide-contemporary-music-elliott-carter>
 the piece, and that it was premiered in full shortly before his 90th birthday, 
makes it the most significant symphony by any octogenarian in the late 20th 
century.

However, the mere fact that that the Symphonia is Carter's biggest-ever 
orchestral work, conceived and realised at a time when he can't have known or 
thought that he would keep living – and keep composing – for another 14 years 
(he died aged 103 in 2012), is hardly the main point of this piece. What makes 
Symphonia so special is that the piece is pitched in a place "beyond" the 
conventional confines of the symphony, because of the scale and scope of what 
it's attempting, poetically, musically and structurally. It's music that winds 
up reconfiguring what a symphony might be at the end of the 20th century, by 
which time the form had been battered, bruised and contorted out of all 
recognition to its heroic phase in the late 19th century; and which does so, 
paradoxically, because it defies, ignores, or flat-out contradicts the 
conventions of symphonic discourse. That's an astonishing achievement for any 
composer to attempt, let alone one in the middle of their ninth decade. (There 
I go again with the whole age thing ... still, Carter's prodigious late period 
of creativity is something unique in musical culture!)

The first clue to the work's iridescent and effervescent vitality is in that 
subtitle. It comes from a Latin poem,"Bulla" ("Bubble") 
<http://www.gutenberg.org/files/38550/38550-h/38550-h.htm> by the 17th-century 
English writer Richard Crashaw. It's a hymn to the transitory joys and 
tragedies of life, imagined form the perspective of – or rather, through the 
multi-coloured prism of – a bubble:

Here now, there now, coming, going
Wand'ring as if ebbing, flowing:
Sporting Passion's colours all
In ways that are bacchanal


The metaphor of the bubble works as a meditation on the fleeting nature of 
human existence, but it's also a profound and apposite analogy for the musical 
experience: any musical performance beings and ends, and lives and dies, with 
the vividness and fragility of "The brief substance of a dream", just like 
Crashaw's bubble. Carter's last movement, hisAllegro Scorrevole 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=f4fmz3h4I0g> ("Flowingly Fast") is the most 
obviously weightless and ethereal of the three parts of Symphonia, but Carter 
isn't content only to create music of dissolutely spume and foment (although 
there is plenty of that, like the music that starts the movement). In fact, the 
torrent of the Allegro Scorrevole coalesces into some of the most"intensely 
expressive lines" <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=f4fmz3h4I0g> (Carter's own 
words), especially in his writing for the strings, that he ever wrote for 
orchestra.

And just before the final disappearing act, as the music transfigures into the 
stratosphere, and silence, with a solo piccolo, there's a huge, and decidedly 
violent climax. That climactic chord contains all 12 pitches of the chromatic 
scale, the aural equivalent of being temporarily blinded by the sun – or, on an 
infinitely smaller scale, being lost in the rainbow iridescence of the gleaming 
surface of a bubble. Here's Crashaw again:

Since all colours you discern,
No one colour may you learn


That's precisely the effect of Carter's use of the total chromatic (total 
"coloured" – the root of the musical term lies in the visual world). And in 
fact, the carefully calibrated climactic moment in all three movements, among 
the only times Carter asks his orchestra to play "fff", forte-fortissimo (which 
occurs in a structurally similar place in the openingPartita 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=Vkj24LtBiuA> and the central Adagio Tenebroso 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=ctvbYJGcQus> to the Allegro Scorrevole 
<http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=f4fmz3h4I0g>, shortly before the end) is in every 
case a 12-note,chromatically complete <http://m.youtube.com/watch?v=PCAFZWotBKQ>
 chord. It's as if Carter allows his musical bubbles to collide, collapse, and 
conjoin with one another to produce an image of the teeming, kaleidoscopic 
chaos of Crashaw's Bulla.

But there's more. Carter's three movements present three different states of 
being. In the Partita, Carter says that his "musical intention was to present 
the many changes and oppositions of mood that make up our experience of life". 
That's what you hear throughout this movement, an ever-changing, continuously 
unpredictable play of different speeds of musical material, different modes of 
expression, from fragmentary explosions to intensely felt melodic lines. And 
the idea of a game is important in this piece, because, as Carter goes on, 
"like all games this piece adheres rather strictly to certain laid-down rules 
within which it presents a large expanse of action and expression". The slow 
movement, the longest of the three, comes the closest that Carter ever did to a 
lament, a prolonged outpouring of musical lines that search vainly, 
tenebrously, for respite; and they do so, extremely unusually for Carter, in 
the same time-signature and tempo throughout this 17-and-a-half minute 
structure. In fact, the third movement is also cast in a single speed and 
metre, and its essential expressivity and strangeness is to make a large, 
12-minute form out of the act of disappearing.

"Form"? Not really. That's what makes Symphonia so paradoxical. Carter's 
symphonic idea owes absolutely nothing to the ideas of development or 
recapitulation that are so central to so many of the symphonies in this series. 
In fact, Carter's music is better thought of as being in a ceaseless state of 
forming; that's to say, the music's form is made experientially rather than 
than architecturally, in the moment the music is happening in time instead of 
put together in a pre-made plan. (To use a phraseHarrison Birtwistle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/may/14/contemporary-composers-guide-harrison-birtwistle>
 often employs about his own music, the music is in a "continual state of 
exposition".) And yet, although Carter says that all three movements can be 
performed separately, just as they were commissioned and premiered individually 
by orchestras in Chicago, London and Cleveland, the total experience of 
Symphonia is profoundly, unmistakably symphonic. Or maybe symphoniac ... The 
end of Crashaw's poem says:

My Bubble lives but if thou choose to read.
Cease thou to read, and I resign my breath;
Cease thou to read, and that will be my death


Similarly, Carter's Symphonia dissolves into thin air in its final moments, 
but its experience will live on with you if you go on the epic, always-changing 
journey of the spirit and imagination that defines the piece.

And you must do so with this performance, the only recording 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=nb_sb_noss/278-9131477-3991260?url=search-alias%3Daps&field-keywords=carter+symphonia>
 that exists of the whole piece – and a magnificent one it is too, thanks to 
Oliver Knussen's uniquely authoritative advocacy as a conductor, the BBC 
Symphony Orchestra's dazzling playing, and some stellar sound, to boot. Enjoy 
venturing into the world of Carter and Crashaw's bubble...

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVkj24LtBiuA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVkj24LtBiuA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVkj24LtBiuA&media=>
Reading on mobile? Listen to an excerpt from Symphonia here 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vkj24LtBiuA>
 