
This week, a first. Johannes Brahms’s First 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hYDkQ4s80SQ> Symphony, in C minor. But if 
there’s one thing I want you to try and to do with this piece, it’s to hear it 
without the clichés of its supposed associated historical accretions: the fact 
that it took Brahms 14 years to complete the piece because he felt the weight 
of Beethoven so much on his shoulders; or the fact thatthe big tune  
<http://youtu.be/wbFETUlSm34?t=4m18s>in the finale sounds a wee bit like the 
one in Beethoven’s 9th ("any ass can see that", Brahms said); or even that its 
instantly acknowledged symphonic success after its premiere in 1876 meant that 
it was dubbed "Beethoven’s 10th". I think we should reclaim Brahms’s First on 
its own terms, not because it continues what Beethoven might have done with the 
symphony had he somehow lived another few decades, but because the piece 
presents a completely different idea of what the symphony could be. Whatever 
the modesty of Brahms’s own assessment of his music, his First Symphony is a 
magnificently immodest achievement, a piece that takes history on, in both 
sense of the phrase – and wins.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhYDkQ4s80SQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhYDkQ4s80SQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhYDkQ4s80SQ&media=>
So, a few moments that will try to make the case: firstly, the very opening 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hYDkQ4s80SQ>, the slow introduction before the 
tortuous Allegro gets going. To find music that sounds anything like this, the 
models are not Beethoven or even Schumann, but Bach, and possibly even earlier 
repertoires of German music. Brahms composes a richly chromatic counterpoint at 
the start of his symphony, music that’s rhythmically and expressively connected 
to the opening of Bach’sMatthew Passion 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XC1ECy1HvFQ>. If Brahms was worried about 
Beethoven, he shows it by bypassing entirely the latter’s ideas of clearly 
identifiable thematic cells and continual, dynamic, dialectical development. 
Instead, this introduction is defined by music that’s a polyphony of different 
musical ideas all happening simultaneously. Listen tothe opening again 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hYDkQ4s80SQ>, and hear how Brahms 
counterpoints that rising line in the violins and cellos with the descending, 
lamenting musical line in the woodwinds and violas. The texture isn’t reducible 
to a single musical thought, a "theme" or a "melody", but is defined rather by 
a network of interrelated musical lines churning away at the same time.

If that sounds a wee bit complex, that’s because it is! Brahms was attempting 
to make a symphony that works in musical space as well as time, one that has 
all the internal consistency and multi-dimensional splendour of a Bach fugue 
but also has the dynamism and energy of a large-scale orchestral work. No 
wonder it took him a few years: Brahms was reforging the symphonic project for 
the late 19th century. And he does it: listen to the way the main tune of the 
Allegro, the main part of the first movement, isreclaimed  
<http://youtu.be/hYDkQ4s80SQ?t=8m21s>about two-thirds of the way through: it’s 
another pitting of simultaneously rising and descending lines against each 
other, along with a thrillingly emphatic bass line, a moment that clinches both 
the music’s contrapuntal consistency and its symphonic power.

Brahms’s compositional high-wire act of that polyphonic work-out in the first 
movement is sidestepped by theslow movement  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LWqSLgCnOR8>and the Allegretto e grazioso 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rPIxCzOysR0> that come second and third in the 
symphony. But there’s a covert radicalism going on here too: again, directly 
contradicting Beethoven’s example in all of his symphonies (apart from the 
8th), Brahms does not even try to compose a wildly energetic scherzo, but 
rather the genteel and subtle character piece of his Allegretto; the slow 
movement in turn is the opposite of Beethoven’s visionary symphonic songs, but 
an intimately lyrical study crowned by the florid outpouring of a solo violin.

Brahms has turned the symphony inward, in both musical and emotional senses. 
He is resolutely focused on the inner workings of his musical material rather 
an overt expressive programme – let alone an attempt to change the world, as 
Beethoven’s Ninth wants to do – and for all its public grandeur as a 
large-scale symphony, this music sounds as if it’s addressed to us as 
individuals rather than speaking to our collective humanity.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwbFETUlSm34&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwbFETUlSm34>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwbFETUlSm34&media=>
Yet Brahms’s finale <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wbFETUlSm34> changes all 
of that. This movement is his solution to what he saw as the 19th century's 
symphonic problem - the tendency for the pieces to be weighted towards their 
opening allegros, to have worked out all their major structural tensions by the 
end of the first movement. Brahms’s fourth movement is different: everything is 
at stake here. It’s the longest part of the symphony, and from the outset, its 
drama is set out on a bigger stage than the previous three movements. Brahms 
puts us in the middle of sublime, terrifying, and minor-key nature at the start 
of the finale in a swirling, impressionistic Adagio. But the mists clear and 
from the heights,a horn-call <http://youtu.be/wbFETUlSm34?t=2m20s> (transcribed 
by Brahms from the alphorns of Switzerland) sounds in resplendent C major – a 
premonition of the trajectory of the whole movement. But to get there, we need 
a big tune, and the most assertively dynamic drama of the whole symphony - 
which is exactly what Brahms provides withthat melody 
<http://youtu.be/wbFETUlSm34?t=4m18s> - the one his first listeners kept 
comparing to Beethoven. There’s a moment of exquisite tension and release when
the horn call returns <http://youtu.be/wbFETUlSm34?t=11m3s>, now harmonised by 
an achingly dissonant chord, then salved when the music melts into a major key. 
And at the very end of the symphony, there’s the most overtly,heroically 
triumphant music <http://youtu.be/hYDkQ4s80SQ?t=44m36s> that Brahms ever 
composed for an orchestra. But what makes it moving rather than bombastic is 
the sense that this is a hard-won musical and personal victory for its 
composer. On one hand, this music crowns the work’s dramatic trajectory, but it 
also celebrates Brahms’s own vanquishing of his symphonic demons. And if we’ve 
only the ears to hear it, we’ll hear how completely he created something 
subtly, multi-dimensionally new.

Five key recordings

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwVKyW3RSrSQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwVKyW3RSrSQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwVKyW3RSrSQ&media=>
Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Various-Europakonzert-Concerto-Symphony-Meistersinger/dp/B0040Y7EV0/ref=sr_1_fkmr0_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1395661221&sr=8-2-fkmr0&keywords=barenboim+brahms+1+oxford+berlin>
/Daniel Barenboim a live concert from Oxford’s Sheldonian Theatre that made me 
feel the music could go no other way when I heard it.

Orchestre Révolutionnaire et Romantique/John Eliot Gardiner 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Brahms-Symphony-Gardiner-Monteverdi-Choir/dp/B001DCQJ4A/ref=sr_1_sc_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1395661246&sr=8-1-spell&keywords=john+eltio+gardiner+brahms+1>
: mind you, Gardiner’s performance, from the other end of the musical universe, 
makes me feel the same…

Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra/Riccardo Chailly 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Brahms-The-Symphonies-Gewandhausorchester-Leipzig/dp/B00E6G23TA/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1395661267&sr=8-1&keywords=chailly+brahms>
: Chailly’s is a patina-stripping performance of simultaneous tradition and 
radicalism.


Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYW2IVar8kcA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYW2IVar8kcA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYW2IVar8kcA&media=>
NBC Symphony Orchestra/Arturo Toscanini 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Toscanini-Collection-Vol-6-Brahms/dp/B000026PK6/ref=sr_1_8?ie=UTF8&qid=1395661303&sr=8-8&keywords=toscanini+NBC+brahms+1>
: Toscanini finds an intense, compelling, if sometimes claustrophobic power in 
this late recording.

The Gunther Schuller Orchestra/Gunther Schuller 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Gunther-Schuller-Conducts-Beethoven/dp/B000005VYJ/ref=sr_1_fkmr2_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1395661332&sr=8-1-fkmr2&keywords=schuller+brahms+1>
: a leftfield choice, you might think? Schuller’s performance attempts to prove 
the points about interpretation he makes in his bookThe Compleat Conductor 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Compleat-Conductor-Gunther-Schuller/dp/0195126610/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1395661384&sr=8-1&keywords=schuller+compleat>
. Listen out for revelations such as the return to the main theme in the first 
movement: no messing about with tempo or exaggerations of articulation, just 
plain, simple, and devastating. symphonic power.
 