
Here’s Simon Rattle  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JCIKfMm5RaA>on the final 
moments of this week’s symphony:

“It’s almost like a scream. It’s the most depressed C major 
<http://youtu.be/fYsBvlhsEtA?t=21m33s> in all of musical literature. There’s no 
other piece that ends in C major where you feel it’s the end of the world. Look 
at how carefully he orchestrates is so that it doesn’t sound like a victory, 
but as something you reach on the edge of death. You finally reach C major – 
and it’s over. It should be a struggle for the strings to achieve this last 
note with their last bit of energy”.

Sibelius’s 7th Symphony <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XHHfvdAqvn8> is more 
conventionally thought of as a vindication of a new kind of symphonic form (it 
plays for 22 minutes or so in a continuous single movement) and a reclamation 
of the affirmatory power of tonal possibility. It was first performed in 1924, 
when it was called “Symphonic Fantasy”; only when the piece was published a 
year later did Sibelius call it a symphony, the last he would give to the 
world). For many other commentators and conductors, the end of this symphony is 
the “grandest celebration of C major there ever was”, or a “triumphantly 
abrupt’ ending. It’s tribute to the huge emotional power of Sibelius’s music 
that it produces such wildly divergent interpretations – but I want to focus a 
little more on the scream rather than the triumph of what Thomas Adès, like 
Rattle, has called the “painfully inconclusive” ending of this symphony.

But let’s first think about the unique ambition of what Sibelius is attempting 
here. The journey towards the Seventh’s Symphony’s compression, its atomic 
collisions of different kinds of symphonic movement in a single, 
hyper-concentrated span, has its first precedent in Sibelius’s Third Symphony. 
Thefinale of the Third <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=21tQMRbPk_w> is a 
“crystallisation of chaos”, as he called it, that fuses scherzo and finale into 
a new kind of symphonic motion, music that generates a momentum that is 
simultaneously monumental, massive and irresistibly rapid. In the Fifth 
Symphony, he applies a similar logic to itsfirst movement 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_-onpGxdZFs>, which is really a welding 
together of two movement types, an opening allegro and a scherzo. But those 
already astonishing achievements are mere upbeats for what Sibelius is doing in 
the Seventh. The new piece (which evolved from a original multi-movement plan) 
fuses elements of slow movement, scherzo, of sonata-form, of rondo, and of 
grand symphonic coda in the same span of music, and it does so while attempting 
to elide the transitions from one to the other so that the effect of the whole 
piece is miraculously seamless instead of episodic.

In fact, the Seventh Symphony crystallises a conspectus of a compositional 
technique that later composers like Elliott Carter, George Benjamin, and 
countless others, would employ: so–called ”metric modulation”, in which you use 
a common unit of musical time to elide from one speed to another. Imagine a 
quaver ticking along at a certain speed, which then becomes the crotchet or the 
minim of the new tempo. And even better than that, listen to how Sibelius 
manages it in the Seventh Symphony, speeding up from anadagio to an allegro 
<http://youtu.be/fYsBvlhsEtA?t=7m24s>, and slowing down from presto to adagio. 
But the effect is even more subtle than simply shifting through the gears: the 
final appearance of the trombone theme, whose three-fold appearances are the 
symphony’s most obvious landmark, is achieved by amusical time-warp 
<http://youtu.be/fYsBvlhsEtA?t=17m33s>. What I mean is that Sibelius has sped 
up the music so much that time slows down (a sort of musical version of a 
common optical illusion, when spinning objects seem to slow down the faster 
they revolve) so that the hectic crotchets of the symphony’s last scherzoid 
music become the undulating accompanying bed of sound for the trombone’s theme. 
That’s a moment of musical magic; a truly Sibelian sleight of symphonic 
structure.

All of which means the Seventh Symphony is one of the most ambitious and 
extraordinary symphonies in the repertoire. So why the scream? For me, it’s 
because the gigantic energies that Sibelius is unleashing in his symphony – 
whether they’re thecosmic dance  <http://youtu.be/fYsBvlhsEtA?t=8m45s>of the 
faster music, or the impersonal yet shatteringly moving slow music at thestart 
<http://youtu.be/fYsBvlhsEtA?t=2m36s> and end  
<http://youtu.be/dfwLm1rW14Q?t=21m32s>of the piece, or the stately power of the 
trombone theme – are too massive to be contained by any structure, even one as 
sophisticated as Sibelius’s. I’m somehow aware, listening to the piece, of the 
vast spaces that lie just at the edges of the symphony, the strange regions it 
glimpses along its time-bending journey that Sibelius at once reveals and 
shrinks back from exploring. That’s why the end of the piece can sound like a 
scream into the void: thataching appoggiatura  
<http://youtu.be/h3ZvVXMpH14?t=22m18s> as the strings fight their way from B to 
C is the sound of a striving toward a coherence that Sibelius could well have 
felt was impossible, given the enormity of the musical powers he knew he had 
released - even as he closes off his symphony, and with it, his symphonic 
project (despite what may have happened to the Eighth Symphony 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symphony_No._8_%28Sibelius%29>). But all that’s 
in the ear of the beholder. Choose one of the performances below, and take your 
own journey into the other-world of Sibelius’s most astonishing and fantastical 
symphony.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdfwLm1rW14Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdfwLm1rW14Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdfwLm1rW14Q&media=>
 Bernstein’s powerful and emotional interpretation 
Five key recordings


Lahti Symphony Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sibelius-Symphonies-Lahti-Symphony-Orchestra/dp/B00002681Z/ref=sr_1_sc_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1395054661&sr=8-1-spell&keywords=vansak+sibelius+7>
/Osmo Vänskä 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sibelius-Symphonies-Lahti-Symphony-Orchestra/dp/B00002681Z/ref=sr_1_sc_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1395054661&sr=8-1-spell&keywords=vansak+sibelius+7>
 Vänskä’s restraint heightens the architectural and expressive power.Watch it 
here <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h3ZvVXMpH14>. 


Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bernstein-Conducts-Sibelius-Symphonies-NTSC/dp/B003COG186/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1395054680&sr=8-1&keywords=bernstein+sibelius+7>
/Leonard Bernstein 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Bernstein-Conducts-Sibelius-Symphonies-NTSC/dp/B003COG186/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1395054680&sr=8-1&keywords=bernstein+sibelius+7>
 Bernstein does the opposite - there isn’t a more obviously emotional 7th out 
there - and this is immensely powerful playing.Watch it here 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dfwLm1rW14Q>.

London Symphony Orchestra/Colin Davis 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sibelius-Symphonies-Kullervo-Colin-Davis/dp/B002LTJ30G/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1395054702&sr=8-1&keywords=davis+sibelius+7>
: always masterly in Sibelius; this performance reflects a lifetime of 
experience with this music.


Royal Philharmonic Orchestra/Thomas Beecham 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sibelius-Symphony-Sir-Thomas-Beecham/dp/B001IT6D5I/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1395054724&sr=8-2&keywords=beecham+sibelius+7>
: Beecham had the imprimatur of Sibelius himself –listen why 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZKjRXoHHaHc>.

City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra/Simon Rattle 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Sibelius-Symphonies-Sir-Simon-Rattle/dp/B000UPQFEA/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1395054752&sr=8-1&keywords=rattle+sibelius+7>
: Rattle’s scream – find out whether it convinces – or terrifies.
 