
This week, Beethoven’s Pastoral Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iQGm0H9l9I4>, his Sixth. Well, it does what it 
says on the tin, doesn’t it? A sentimental romp through the Viennese 
countryside, a programmatic sideline to the central sweep of Beethoven’s 
development, a gentle counterpart to the fire and brimstone of theFifth Symphony
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jv2WJMVPQi8> and the bacchanal of the Seventh 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kiG31BRHWkA>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiQGm0H9l9I4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiQGm0H9l9I4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiQGm0H9l9I4&media=>
But that’s only because history, and music history in particular, likes its 
battles to be epic, its progress to be heroic, and its most important leaps of 
imagination to be noisy, radical, and aggressive. It’s as if theFifth Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GW0y6upEhGk> is the “real” Beethoven – 
Beethoven as all-conquering hero – whereas thePastoral 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l8U_-xGgreY> is a sort of musical and 
biographical cul-de-sac. And whatever its veracity, the image of Beethoven the 
nature-loving hippy has proved a much less enticing idea for historians to 
appropriate than Beethoven storming the gates of revolution in a blaze of C 
major glory, as he does atthe end of the Fifth 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kHYBoG7hiZk>.

Yet Beethoven wrote this F major Symphony in tandem with the Fifth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/sep/16/symphony-guide-beethoven-fifth-tom-service>
. It was premiered at the same, over-ambitious concert in December 1808, and as 
the symphonic yin to the Fifth’s yang, the Sixth Symphony  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aW-7CqxhnAQ>is just as “radical” as the Fifth 
– in some ways, more so. I think both pieces are experiments in symphonic 
extremity, because both are pushing completely different musical boundaries to 
their limits, and beyond. The realisation that Beethoven was composing both 
symphonies at the same time is simultaneously baffling and astounding – and 
it’s proof that there ain’t just one Beethoven. On one hand, there’s the 
scowling man-of-the-people fomenting musical revolution and purging his inner 
demons through proto-minimalist compression and white-hot energy (that’sthe 
Fifth <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoFi39eEwk4>, by the way!), and on the 
other, there’s the composer content to luxuriate in an early kind of musique 
concrète by transcribing birdsong into a symphony, who has time to allow his 
imagination to flow and fly, apparently unfettered by the constraints of formal 
convention or symphonic concision (that’sthe Pastoral 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SU8sINH3wko>). They’re both wildly different, 
but they’re still only two sides of the nine-sided coin that is Beethoven’s 
symphonies.

But in lieu of (m)any other metaphors to riff on, I want to show how Beethoven 
creates a new kind of symphonic rhetoric in the Pastoral, a universe in which
lulling repetition <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HRwU0JaykJQ> rather than 
teleological development is what defines the structure, on the small and 
large-scales, and in which the patterns, continuities, and disturbances of the 
natural world that Beethoven knew (above all in music’s most violent storm, up 
to this point of world history, in the Pastoral’s fourth movement!) are 
transmuted into the discourse of afive-movement symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RhCNf8_L7fI>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKKd3svv4-o4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKKd3svv4-o4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKKd3svv4-o4&media=>
Take the central section of the first movement 
<http://youtu.be/r9oP2xXwbsI?t=4m38s>, for example, a passage that’s dominated 
by a single rhythm – the one you’ve originally heard in the second bar of the 
piece. It’s like looking at a landscape that changes slowly with the 
lengthening of the shadows and the deepening of the light, in whichtime is 
virtually suspended <http://youtu.be/SU8sINH3wko?t=5m45s>. That’s a remarkable 
reversal of symphonic polarity: this place in the first movement of a big 
symphony is supposed to be full of driving drama and incident, not static 
contemplation. (Compare this central section with the hell-for-leather momentum 
of the similar place inthe Fifth Symphony <http://youtu.be/N6K_IuBsRM4?t=1m53s>
). That’s nothing, though, next to the slow movement, theScene by the Brook 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eT4lCwQf2zM> (the movements’ titles are all 
Beethoven’s own), in which Beethoven starts to spin what becomes a nearly 
continuous stream of semiquavers over a hypnotically repetitious harmonic 
background and collection of melodic motives in the woodwind and strings – 
until, that is, the stream reachesa still pool 
<http://youtu.be/-ydwCZBPJ48?t=9m53s>, and a chorus of birds attract our 
attention, as wanderers through Beethoven’s symphonic stream-scape.The Scherzo’s
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jqSvvV40J2Q> dances would and could jollily 
repeat into the infinite were it not forthe Storm 
<http://youtu.be/iQGm0H9l9I4?t=28m49s>, which interrupts these “Merry Dances of 
the Countryfolk”, and cuts across the rest of the symphony both dramatically 
and temporally. It’s a shocking slice of verticality across the horizontal 
languorousness of the rest of the symphony. Storms, by their very nature, are 
protean, non-repeating, violent explosions, and that’s what Beethoven’s music 
is like too, with some wild rhythmic and textural effects:the churning of four 
against five <http://youtu.be/iQGm0H9l9I4?t=29m18s> in the double-basses and 
cellos, and electric currents of piccolo, timpani, and trombone. Just as 
suddenly as it has arrived, this lacerating music subsides, and gives way, 
without a break, to the most deliriously repeat-laden music in the symphony in 
the final“Shepherd’s Song: Thankful Feelings after the Storm” 
<http://youtu.be/iQGm0H9l9I4?t=31m58s>. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSU8sINH3wko&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSU8sINH3wko>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSU8sINH3wko&media=>
And it’s in this movement <http://youtu.be/SU8sINH3wko?t=36m8s> where 
Beethoven achieves something more purely spine-tingling and life-enhancingly 
joyful than almost anywhere else in his output.It’s this place 
<http://youtu.be/zTknBpjp7Pw?t=6m39s>, the climax of the whole movement, and 
the symphony.This music <http://youtu.be/Aj6-4hkDeKc?t=36m41s> is also a 
consummation of the symphony’s spirals of time and pattern: this is the last in 
the sequence of ever-more intense unfurlings of the movement’s main melodic 
idea, and Beethoven takes both extremes of orchestral register – high and low – 
to their utmost extreme, and then resolves a magnificently aching dissonance 
through a long, slow, descent in pitch, dynamic, and emotional intensity. It’s 
a moment that works expressively because of its sheer intensity, but which also 
is the apex of the symphony’s ever-intensifying interplay of cycles and 
repetitions. There’s more: this passage in the fifth movement rhymes with a 
similar one inthe first movement <http://youtu.be/-bbinrDGNJw?t=7m3s>: the 
climax of the opening movement is alsothe resolution 
<http://youtu.be/Aj6-4hkDeKc?t=9m4s> of a similar (but not identical) 
dissonance through a stepwise melodic descent, and it occurs at a similar place 
in the structure, just before the coda. It’s as if all of these small-scale 
cycles of repetition are enclosed by an even bigger orbit of time. Orbits and 
time-flows … “Pastoral”? This music is “cosmic”, too! Nowthat’s radical.

Five key recordings
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkD0dXwpAHE0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkD0dXwpAHE0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkD0dXwpAHE0&media=>
Bayerisches Staatsorchester/Kleiber 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-bbinrDGNJw&list=PLFC205938E3737208>: turns 
the “Pastoral” into the “Visceral” – the final movement isn’t so much a hymn as 
an earthy, elemental dance.

Orchestre Révolutionnaire et Romantique/ 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Symphonies-Orchestre-R%C3%A9volutionnaire-Romantique/dp/B0033QC0WE/ref=sr_1_fkmr1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1405964097&sr=8-1-fkmr1&keywords=gardiner+beethoven+pastoral>
John Eliot Gardiner: a recording that thrills with the extremes of Beethoven’s 
vision of the natural world. Is there a more orchestra-shattering Storm on 
record?

Staatskapelle Dresden/Colin Davis 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-The-Symphonies-Staatskapelle-Dresden/dp/B000AC5B0W/ref=sr_1_4?ie=UTF8&qid=1405964176&sr=8-4&keywords=colin+davis+beethoven+symphony>
: Davis’s approach lets Beethoven’s music sing, sonorously, deeply – and slowly!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAj6-4hkDeKc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAj6-4hkDeKc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAj6-4hkDeKc&media=>
Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Aj6-4hkDeKc>
/Chailly’s modern-orchestra but historically-informed recording is one of the 
most vivid recent recordings.

Claudio Abbado/Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beethoven-Complete-Symphonies-Karita-Mattila/dp/B001795SH8/ref=sr_1_9?ie=UTF8&qid=1405964204&sr=8-9&keywords=abbado+beethoven+symphony>
: Abbado’s live recording from Rome is lyrically, almost improvisationally 
irresistible, but it’s also structurally brilliantly achieved.
 