
Fantastic, and fantastical abstraction. In a sense, that’s a pretty good 
definition of what this whole “symphony” idea is all about, but it’s especially 
apposite for this week’s work,Oliver Knussen’s Third Symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gnol0WRWt6A>. The piece was completed in 1979 
after six years of working, thinking, revising, and refining. Knussen hasn’t 
added to his symphonic canon these last 35 years, but the principles that this 
piece embodies - its way of thinking and feeling made into sound, its 
connections, compressions, and concentrations of musical discourse and 
music-historical references – are still signature phenomena ofKnussen’s music 
today <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MGyg6l7-FHM> just as they were then. 

To put the achievement of the Third Symphony in context: at the age of 27, 
when Knussen completed a version of the piece with which he was satisfied, he 
was already a vastly experienced composer. In fact, even among history's 
(in)famous musical prodigies, Knussen’s precocity is outstanding. His First 
Symphony, written when he was 15, was already a virtuosic essay in serialist 
aesthetics; his Concerto for Orchestra (now renamed the Symphony in One 
Movement) andSecond Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nIKhAdj3tb0>, a 
song-cycle for solo mezzo-soprano – all completed before he was 20 – 
demonstrate a preternatural musical digestion. Barely out of his teens, Knussen 
had already come to terms with the legacy of the musical avant-garde, he had 
confronted and confounded the behemoth of symphonic tradition, and found his 
own expressive and poetic language in an unerringly dazzling deployment of 
large orchestral forces, and fused it together in music of astonishing richness 
and communicative power.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsymphony-guide-oliver-knussen-third-symphony-tom-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F7%2F1404743857236%2Fd09999b7-aaf5-4950-97e7-88f8eada3726-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Symphony%20guide%3A%20Knussen's%20Third&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsymphony-guide-oliver-knussen-third-symphony-tom-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Symphony%20guide%3A%20Knussen%27s%20Third&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2014%2Fjul%2F08%2Fsymphony-guide-oliver-knussen-third-symphony-tom-service%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F7%2F1404743857236%2Fd09999b7-aaf5-4950-97e7-88f8eada3726-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Oliver Knussen working at the piano at the age of 15 in 1967. Photograph: 
Pryke/Getty Images 
Those pieces would already put him among the masters of late 20th and early 21
st century symphonism (as well as making him one of the most prodigious 
composers of all tim). His Third Symphony demonstrates how completely Knussen’s 
powers of compositional filtering had worked by his mid and late 20s. This 
music adds the colouristic virtuosity of early 20th-century music – Stravinsky, 
Scriabin, Ravel – to Knussen’s compositional panoply, as a well as a complete 
understanding of Elliott Carter’s simultaneous layers of musical time, in the 
way the music flows from one tempo to another, the way it stacks up different 
kinds of metrical pattern against themselves. But the result of all that fusion 
is neither a symphony that works because of other pieces it sounds like, nor is 
it a sprawling canvas of self-conscious epic-ness, as you would have thought it 
would have to be, to cram in all these ideas – and more – into an idiom that is 
completelyKnussen’s own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/jun/04/oliver-knussen-contemporary-music-guide>
. No:Knussen’s Third Symphony <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gnol0WRWt6A> 
lasts barely quarter of an hour, yet, as so often with this composer’s music, 
the journey it creates - in tandem with the concentration it compels in anyone 
who listens to it – is out of all proportion to its diminutive length. This 
music covers a massive musical and emotional spectrum, and it does it through 
the clarity of its ideas, the luminous sumptuousness of its orchestral 
colouring, and the sharpness of its violent, almost expressionist climaxes.

The piece begins  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gnol0WRWt6A>as it will end, 
with a gentle skirl of woodwind sonority. In between come two main sections, an 
Allegro con fuoco and a Molto tranquillo, the second, longer part like a 
becalmed dream of the first. The forthright expressive directness of this music 
– like the whirling clarinet line in the two-minute long opening section, the 
magnificently intense string line that starts the Allegro, or its hectic climax 
just a few minutes later, or most powerfully of all, the huge eruption that 
scars the uneasy tranquillity of the Molto tranquillo – defines the 
communicative brilliance of this music. To understand the inner workings of 
Knussen’s music is a lifetime’s labour (read Julian Anderson’s articles to find 
out more 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=6026504&fileId=S0040298200015618>
!), but that’s not the point of the elaborateness and fineness with which the 
piece is made. The music’s surfaces move with a captivating shimmer and dazzle, 
but each time you listen you will take a new pass through the work’s musical 
currents and undercurrents, finding new layers of poetry and 
technical-expressive alchemy in its crystalline construction. That’s the 
paradox about this supposedly “short” piece: it’s music that creates its own 
kind of time, which seems to suspend linear temporality - the music moves 
instead in spirals and circles rather than straight lines, symbolised by the 
return of that opening music right at the end of the piece.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeLqXHwc9ocY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeLqXHwc9ocY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DeLqXHwc9ocY&media=>
There may also be a clue to the expressive intensity of this music. When he 
was first thinking about the Third Symphony, Knussen designed a three-movement, 
half-hour piece on Shakespeare’s Ophelia: her trauma, madness and drowning. 
Perhaps there are echoes of that original inspiration in the controlled chaos 
of the Allegro con fuoco, and the dark, deceptive stillness of the symphony’s 
final few minutes. But the completed symphony I think both contains and 
releases that Ophelian experience, becoming simultaneously more concentrated in 
its language and scale, and even more open to a larger range of interpretation, 
imagination – and fantasy. You see? Fantastical abstraction...

A key recording
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgnol0WRWt6A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgnol0WRWt6A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dgnol0WRWt6A&media=>
The reference recording of Knussen’s Third Symphony is this one, by the 
Philharmonia and Michael Tilson Thomas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gnol0WRWt6A>. It’s a fine account of the 
piece, but we need Knussen’s own performances of this symphony – and his others 
– on record!
 