
Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, left for the United States on Saturday on 
her way to Central America, a trip that will bescrutinised by China, incensed 
by her congratulatory call to Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/china-plan-taiwan-force-trump-call-state-media>
.


While the focus of the nine-day trip is to bolster relations with Taiwan’s 
Central American allies,Tsai’s US stopovers will be closely watched amid 
speculation she may make contact with the president-elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/china-urges-us-block-taiwan-president-tsai-ing-wen-stopover>
 and his team.

She is to transit in Houston this weekend and return to Taipei via San 
Francisco next weekend.

China should plan to take Taiwan by force after Trump call, state media says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/china-plan-taiwan-force-trump-call-state-media>
The call with Trump in December after he won the presidency upended decades of 
diplomatic precedent in which Washington has effectively ignored Taipei in 
favour of Beijing, which considersTaiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> a breakaway province to be brought 
back within its fold.

Since then, China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has stepped up 
military drills near Taiwan, with speculation its sole aircraft carrier may 
pass through the Taiwan Strait during or shortly after Tsai’s trip. The drills 
are seen as a show of strength by Beijing as its ties with the self-ruled 
island and the US deteriorate.

“What China cares most about is whether Tsai and Trump will meet,” political 
analyst Liao Da-chi said. “These are all warning signals to see how Taiwan will 
respond, as well as testing waters with the US,” added Liao, a professor at the 
National Sun Yat-sen University.

Beijing has asked Washington to bar Tsai from flying through US airspace. “A 
transit is a transit,” the Taiwanese leader told reporters last week, when 
asked whether she would be meeting anyone from Trump’s administration.

China urges US to block Taiwan president Tsai Ing-wen from stopover
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/china-urges-us-block-taiwan-president-tsai-ing-wen-stopover>
Trump himself appeared to have ruled out meeting Tsai this trip, saying it is 
“a little bit inappropriate” to meet anybody until he takes office on 20 
January.

Taiwan’s presidential office and the foreign ministry declined to provide 
details of Tsai’s itinerary during her US stays. Deputy foreign minister Javier 
Hou told a legislative committee last month the ministry was seeking to arrange 
meetings with members of the US Congress from both parties as per past 
protocols, according to the Central News Agency.

Tsai will visit Honduras, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and El Salvador – among the 
dwindling number of states that officially recognise Taiwan. She will attend 
the presidential inauguration in Nicaragua on Tuesday and meet with the heads 
of states of the other three nations.

It is also an opportunity to interact with leaders of other countries “to show 
the international community that Taiwan is a competent and responsible 
partner,” Tsai told reporters on Saturday before her departure.

Taiwan is down to 21 allies after the small African nation of Sao Tome and 
Principe switched recognition to Beijing last month. The Vatican is Taiwan’s 
highest-profile supporter, but the Holy See’s recently improving relations with 
Beijing are casting doubt over ties with the island.

Analyst Liao said Beijing would continue to woo the island’s allies as a 
pressure tactic on Tsai, who refuses to acknowledge the concept that there is 
only “one China”.

Taiwan’s defence ministry has declined to comment on speculation that China’s 
Liaoning aircraft carrier may pass through the Taiwan Strait on its return 
journey after its first exercise in the Pacific. The ministry is “monitoring at 
all times” the position of the Liaoning, spokesman Chen Chung-chi said.

The vessel and five other warships passed south of the island outside Taiwan’s 
air defence identification zone last month, before heading to the South China 
Sea.
 