
Maria Balshaw, the hugely respected leader of Manchester’s galleries and a 
driving force in the city’s cultural renaissance, is expected to replaceSir 
Nicholas Serota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/how-nicholas-serota-art-modern-champion-tate-arts-council-england>
 as director of Tate.

The hunt for Serota’s successor, to one of the most powerful jobs in the arts, 
has been ongoing since it was announced in Septemberhe was standing down after 
almost 30 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/sir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate>
.

Balshaw has been talked about as a favourite ever since. It is understood she 
has now been chosen by Tate trustees. Her name has been put forward to the 
government and it still needs to be formally agreed by the prime minister. A 
decision is not expected until at least next week.

Balshaw has been director of the Whitworth Art Gallery since 2006. She became 
joint director of the Whitworth and theManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> Art Gallery in 2011. In 2014, she 
in effect became Manchester’s cultural attache when she took on the role of 
strategic lead for culture at the city council.

Nicholas Serota: art's modern champion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/how-nicholas-serota-art-modern-champion-tate-arts-council-england>
At the Whitworth, Balshaw has led the much-admired £15m redevelopment of the 
gallery, helping to breathe new life into the collections and dramatically 
increasing visitor numbers. It won the 2015 museum of the year prize.“The 
Whitworth feels vital and alive,” wrote the Guardian art critic Adrian Searle. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/feb/11/cornelia-parker-whitworth-art-gallery>

It is highly probable that Tate trustees would have been impressed by 
Balshaw’s record on big, strategic projects. As well as the art galleries, she 
has been a central figure in the creation of The Factory, the £110m arts venue 
planned on the former site of Granada’s TV studios. A planning decision on the 
project is to be announced by city councillors on Thursday.

She is also admired by and enjoys warm relationships with artists. She 
successfully persuaded Cornelia Parker that the Whitworth should be the venue 
for an important exhibition in 2015. “She made it impossible to turn down,” 
said Parker inan interview with Apollo magazine 
<http://www.apollo-magazine.com/apollo-awards-2015-personality-of-the-year-maria-balshaw/>
 to mark Balshaw being named its personality of the year in 2015.

Lucy Powell, MP for Manchester Central, said: “Manchester’s loss is the Tate’s 
gain.” Powell said she knew Balshaw had applied for the role. “I feared she 
would get it. It’s brilliant for Manchester to have a Mancunian sprinkling in 
the cultural scene in London but we will miss her,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftate-to-name-maria-balshaw-as-new-director-replacing-nicholas-serota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f63c4047a05d4f101f90601fc09cc512b9a6e2c%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tate%20to%20name%20Maria%20Balshaw%20as%20new%20director%20to%20succeed%20Serota&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftate-to-name-maria-balshaw-as-new-director-replacing-nicholas-serota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tate%20to%20name%20Maria%20Balshaw%20as%20new%20director%20to%20succeed%20Serota&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftate-to-name-maria-balshaw-as-new-director-replacing-nicholas-serota%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f63c4047a05d4f101f90601fc09cc512b9a6e2c%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The Whitworth Art Gallery won the 2015 museum of the year prize. Photograph: 
David Levene for the Guardian 
The Tate appointment would be recognition not only of Balshaw’s success with 
getting renowned artists to show their work at the Whitworth but in attracting 
new audiences to the museum, Powell added.

The museum is in the impoverished Moss Side district at the end of 
Manchester’s Curry Mile. When the Whitworth reopened after a £15m revamp in 
2015,she insisted that guests at the gala dinner were served curry from one of 
the road’s restaurants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2015/feb/16/18000-visit-revamped-manchesters-whitworth-opening-weekend-helen-pidd>
.

“She understands much more than most how cultural institutions need to change 
in order to stay relevant and not become elitist institutions separate from 
their communities,” said Powell. She added that one of the reasons the 
Whitworth won museum of the year was the effort Balshaw had made to welcome 
local residents, particularly the young.

The writer Jeanette Winterson, who is professor of creative writing at the 
University of Manchester (of which the Whitworth is part), said Balshaw’s 
vision and communication made her the perfect person to take over Tate.

“She is high art but she’s democratic. There’s no dumbing down, there’s no 
apologies but she is also saying this is for everybody. That’s why I love her … 
it’s that all-inclusive, forward thinking but no compromises,” she said.

Balshaw had been pivotal in rejuvenating culture in the city, the writer said, 
adding: “When she comes to the Tate she will bring in a different approach. 
She’ll bring in more women of course, which is what’s needed, it will be new. 
Nick Serota has done a great job but in terms of appointing somebody else there 
could not be a better person.”

Balshaw was a warm and charismatic person, said Winterson. “[But] there is no 
bullshit there, she will say it like it is, you will get the truth. She is 
kind, she’s compassionate and she respects people but she doesn’t play the 
game, she doesn’t arse lick, she doesn’t dick suck, she doesn’t brown nose.”

Balshaw will take charge of an organisation that consists of Tate Modern, Tate 
Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tatebritain>, Tate Liverpool 
and Tate St Ives.


In a Guardian interview in 2015, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/feb/09/maria-balshaw-whitworth-manchester-art-gallery>
 she admitted being flattered by the talk about her possibly succeeding Serota. 
She said: “Who wouldn’t, in the art sector, want that kind of job?”

Serota is to become chairman of Arts Council England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/sir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate>
 next month. His formal leaving date from Tate has yet to be agreed and there 
is likely to be a transitional period.
 