
Airbnb <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/airbnb> may be known for 
offering frugal travellers savings over traditional hotels, but a new 
investigation reveals that a lot of the savings the company can offer in the UK 
come not from fancy technology, but tax advantages.

According to the Financial Times 
<https://www.ft.com/content/73102c20-c60e-11e6-9043-7e34c07b46ef>, around one 
third of the savings the company offers customers on accommodation in London 
comes from having a lower tax bill.

Where a traditional hotel has to pay expensive business rates on its property, 
and charge VAT on the entire cost of its stay, individuals and small businesses 
who let out rooms on Airbnb have a much lighter taxation regime: the service 
only charges VAT on its service fees, not on the bulk of the cash transferred 
from guest to host, and homeownersare recipients of a number of tax breaks 
aimed at encouraging them to take on lodgers 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/sirajdatoo/rent-a-room-on-airbnb-for-longer-tax-free?utm_term=.mbEeKbMyn#.lfzOrdejJ>
. Larger UK businesses are also levied VAT, but only when their revenue tops 
£83,000, something only the largest Airbnb hosts achieve.

The average hotel room price included $41.30 (£33.60) a night in tax, 
according to the FT’s figures, whereas the average Airbnb stay was just $8.40. 
That difference would account for a third of the difference between the typical 
hotel cost and Airbnb room.

In a statement given to the FT, Airbnb said “The overwhelming amount of money 
generated by the Airbnb platform stays with hosts and their communities. The 
Airbnb model is unique and empowers regular people, boosts local communities 
and is subject to local tax. It also makes Airbnb fundamentally different to 
hotel groups and companies that take large sums of money out of the places they 
do business.”

Airbnb has faced criticism from competitors for the laissez-faire attitude 
with which it treats hosts. The Bed and Breakfast Association has attacked the 
company for not requiring hotel-standard fire protection (it does not require 
hosts to fit smoke alarms, for instance, nor oblige them to document emergency 
exits).

From spring 2017, Airbnb is to introduce at least one new regulation for its 
users,requiring them to comply with UK laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/01/airbnb-introduces-90-day-a-year-limit-for-london-hosts>
 that limit the period of time a home can be let out to 90 days in one year 
unless council permission is granted. Previously, Airbnb had required councils 
to independently enforce the laws, even though it held the data required to 
prove breaches.

“We want to help ensure that home-sharing grows responsibly and sustainably, 
and makes London’s communities stronger,” the company said when it introduced 
the change. “That is why we are introducing a change to our platform that will 
create new and automated limits to help ensure that entire home listings in
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> are not shared for more than 90 
days a year, unless hosts confirm that they have permission to share their 
space more frequently.”

The enforcement won’t come cheap. The Financial Times estimates 
<https://www.ft.com/content/3bedf28e-c63d-11e6-8f29-9445cac8966f> the company 
could lose out on $400m worth of bookings a year through implementing the 
limit. Airbnb in a statement said, “the analysis by the Financial Times is 
wrong and is based on false data and flawed methodology”.
 