
Body odor is among 52 criteria that officials at San Diego International 
Airport use to judge taxi drivers. Taxi drivers say that smacks of prejudice 
and discrimination.

For years, inspectors with the San Diego regional airport authority run down 
their checklist for each cabbie proof of insurance, functioning windshield 
wipers, adequate tire treads, good brakes. Drivers are graded pass, fail or 
needs fixing.

Anyone who flunks the smell test is told to change before picking up another 
customer.

Leaders of the United Taxi Workers of San Diego union say the litmus 
perpetuates a stereotype that predominantly foreign-born taxi drivers smell bad.

A 2013 survey of 331 drivers by San Diego State University and Center on 
Policy Initiatives found 94% were immigrants and 65% were from East Africa.

Drivers wonder how inspectors determine who reeks. Driver Abel Seifu, 36, from 
Ethiopia, suspects they sniff inconspicuously during friendly conversations in 
the staging area. Airport authority spokeswoman Rebecca Bloomfield said there 
is “no standard process” to testing.

Others drivers question how inspectors distinguish between them and their 
cars. The checklist has a separate item for a vehicle’s “foul interior odors”, 
which Bloomfield says may include gasoline, vomit or mildew.

“If they want to bring their smell detector, they can use it to test the 
customers and the drivers,” said driver Negus Gebrenarian, 39, from Ethiopia. 
He, like other drivers, said the stench is just as likely to come from the back 
seat as it is from the front.

The airport authority says it is enforcing a policy of the San Diego 
Metropolitan Transit System, which regulates taxis throughout the region, that 
prohibits foul-smelling drivers and promotes regular bathing. It also says the 
practice is about satisfying customers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fsep%2F12%2Ftaxi-driver-body-odor-san-diego-smell-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F12%2F1410538612377%2Fe3495a93-e1f6-4b42-b343-8993172fbb49-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taxi%20drivers%20object%20to%20body%20odour%20test%20by%20San%20Diego%20airport%20authority&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fsep%2F12%2Ftaxi-driver-body-odor-san-diego-smell-test%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taxi%20drivers%20object%20to%20body%20odour%20test%20by%20San%20Diego%20airport%20authority&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fsep%2F12%2Ftaxi-driver-body-odor-san-diego-smell-test%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F12%2F1410538612377%2Fe3495a93-e1f6-4b42-b343-8993172fbb49-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A cab driver waits near his car in line at a depot near the airport in San 
Diego. Photograph: Gregory Bull/AP 
“Taxi drivers are often the first impression that travelers receive when 
arriving into San Diego and we want to encourage a positive experience,” 
Bloomfield said.

Only about three drivers fail to get a passing grade each year, she said.
Inspectors have been smelling drivers for years. There was no controversy 
until a union employee waded through a 568-page airport board agenda and 
noticed the checklist, which had been approved in July for revisions unrelated 
to the body odor test. KPBS reported on the practice last week.

San Diego’s policy appears to be unusually explicit about sniffing out smelly 
cabbies. Chicago requires that drivers be “clean and neat in their appearance”. 
New York City’s wording is similarly broad.

Seattle long evaluated cabbies for body odor associated with infrequent 
bathing and not washing clothes but dropped that test last month for a more 
general requirement on cleanliness.

“The industry didn’t like it and they felt that we were kind of overstepping: 
Why are we dictating to them? We don’t tell city employees that you’ve got to 
shower more often,” said Denise Movius, Seattle’s deputy director of finance 
and administrative services.

Bhairavi Desai, executive director of the 18,000-member New York Taxi Workers 
Alliance, said her face reddened with anger and dismay when she learned about 
the San Diego practice. She suggested the airport leave it to customers to 
complain about body odor.

“What a dehumanizing way to treat your workers,” she said. Travelers arriving 
in San Diego on Wednesday were mixed. Sue Beneventi, 70, thinks cabbies are 
getting picked on.

“If you’re going to say cab drivers, shouldn’t you also say waitresses and 
anyone else who deals with the public?” she said after returning from San 
Antonio.

Daniel Johnson, an 18-year-old Marine who came from Flint, Michigan, said it’s 
fair to grade on body odor, especially considering the $70 fare to get to his 
base.

He has felt trapped in smelly cabs in other cities.

“The smell puts a sour expression on your face and you’re thinking I just 
don’t want to be in here,” he said.
 