
Every month there are new headlines about the Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/rbs-grg-compensation-small-businesses-andrew-tyrie>
’s wrongdoing. The chief executive, Ross McEwan,puts the best spin on things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/17/ross-mcewan-rbs-brexit-not-banking-crisis-plenty-money>
, but his bank is still failing; most recently it failed theBank of England’s 
stress test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/rbs-fails-bank-of-england-stress-test>
. Trying to privatise the bank hasn’t worked and state ownership hasn’t been a 
rip-roaring success either; but worse, its very size and dominance means 
together with the other big banks it is stifling competition. Now is the right 
moment for a different approach.

Turn RBS into a building society says Co-op party chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/11/turn-rbs-into-a-building-society-says-co-op-party-chief>
Together as taxpayers we saved the Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> – now we should 
each be allowed to own it. It should become a people’s bank, which every 
tax-paying British citizen would have the right to become a part-owner of.

The Royal Building Society of Scotland, with an iron lock on its assets, would 
be a final, decisive break with theFred Goodwin era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jan/19/sir-fred-goodwin-life-times-rbs>
. It would conserve the strength and credibility of one of our major financial 
global players while injecting a much needed dose of competition and diversity 
into British banking.

More than £45bn of taxpayer funds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/rbs-sale-fred-goodwin-bailout-years-of-losses>
 have been injected into the Royal Bank of Scotland. This was the right thing 
to do, but neither keeping it as a state bank nor a fully privatised bank offer 
the same advantages as turning it into a mutual. Its sheer size means it risks 
being captured again by narrow shareholder interests or those of its senior 
executives, or both.

Turning it into a mutual with its assets protected from the so-called 
carpet-baggers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/notesandqueries/query/0,,-5449,00.html> who 
championedbuilding society demutualisation in the 1990s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/29/bradfordbingley.creditcrunch> 
would substantively change the culture at RBS and, crucially, make banking more 
competitive. In strong mutuals it is member expectations rather than 
shareholder interests that help to ensure more competitive products and 
services are prioritised by managers.

Despite new entrants to the banking market and the many reforms to regulation, 
the structural problem in Britain’s banking market – a lack of competition – is 
as bad now as it was at the time of thefinancial crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/dec/28/markets-credit-crunch-banking-2008>
, and is arguably worse following the banking mergers that the crash 
precipitated.

In strong mutuals it is member expectations rather than shareholder interests 
that ensure more competitive products

Anyone tempted to think that banking is now a wholly reformed and properly 
functioning market would find the Competition and Markets Authority
investigation into retail banking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/09/watchdog-demands-banking-app-to-help-customers-shop-around>
, published in August, disturbing reading.

The CMA described the personal banking market as being concentrated, that 
concentration levels have increased since the crisis, and that competition is 
not working well.

It went on to note that for lending to small and medium-sized businesses, the 
four largest providers, RBS, Lloyds, Barclays and HSBC, together had a combined 
market share of over 80%. They underlined the adverse effects on competition in 
personal banking, basic current accounts andSME lending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/apr/05/how-would-brexit-affect-finance-for-smes>
 caused by the combination of persistent concentration in the market and 
barriers to entry and expansion.

Full private ownership of all the big banks, the stated aim of both the last 
two governments, is only likely to exacerbate the lack of competition.

In 2014, of the top 10 banking groups by market share for personal current 
accounts, only two could reasonably be described as mutual, and only one had a 
market share of 5% or higher.

State ownership of RBS has steadied a sinking ship, but it has not changed the 
critical weakness in British banking: the lack of competition between different 
types of banks or building societies.

After eight hard years and a £52bn loss, can RBS ever be privatised?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/22/can-rbs-ever-be-privatised-eight-years-52bn-loss>
Across Europe, the United States and Australia, mutual banks play a critical 
role in challenging traditional shareholder-owned banks in financial services 
markets. Rabobank is a Dutch co-op bank – one of the world’s top 30 banks. Navy 
Federal is a $50bn mutual bank serving the American military and Crédit Mutuel 
is one of the biggest French banks.

Indeed, part of the reason for the lack of competition in British banking is 
that many of the biggest building societies in the 1990s demutualised and were 
gradually bought up by the big banking groups.

The suspension of the sale and reprivatisation of shares in RBS offers a new 
opportunity to put in place an alternative to either state or private 
ownership. No one thinks the government will get its money back from the sale 
of RBS shares in full for the foreseeable future. Indeed, the small number of 
RBS shares that were sold resulted in anet loss of £1bn to the taxpayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/04/rbs-sell-off-george-osborne-defends-1bn-loss>
.

It’s time to return RBS to the people who saved it, and create a competitor to 
the traditional shareholder-led bank. Indeed, it is the only sustainable way to 
inject a serious dose of competition into arguably Britain’s most important 
industry.
 