
This year was a mixed bag for startups. Powa Technologies, an e-commerce 
company that was one of Britain’s so-called unicorns (a startup valued at over 
$1bn), crashed hard,declaring bankruptcy 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-35860814> early in 2016. US wearables 
company Pebble sold to Fitbit for less than a 10th of its peak valuation. But 
on the plus side, Europe minted – foaled? – 10 new unicorns, and Finnish gaming 
company Supercellbecame the continent’s first “decacorn” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/23/clash-of-clans-maker-supercell-becomes-europes-first-decacorn>
 (a startup valued at over $10bn).

But for some startups, the year ahead is nothing but hopeful. Here are some of 
the companies that look set to have a 2017 they will remember for some time.

Monzo

Banking startup Monzo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/19/monzo-banking-tech-startup-current-account>
 launched in 2015, but 2017 is set to be a turning point for the fintech 
darling. For the first 18 months of its public operation, Monzo has been 
limited in what it can offer customers by British banking regulations, forcing 
it to operate as little more than a pre-paid debit card with a (very slick) app.
 A Monzo beta card. Photograph: Alex Hern for the Guardian 
But early next year, Monzo should receive a full banking licence, allowing it 
to operate as the main bank account for users who want to switch their 
financial life over to a startup wholesale. Crucially, the license gives it 
access to the direct debit and faster payments system, allowing users to pay 
bills from their Monzo accounts – and be paid into their accounts.

The banking licence also means the company can start making money for the 
first time. Users will be able to request an overdraft facility on their Monzo 
current accounts, with the fees paid being the first revenue the startup will 
pull in. In the long term, though, don’t expect it to settle for overdraft 
fees: Monzo wants to be Facebook for money.

Thread
 Thread’s trick is a clever mixture of human stylists, AI assistants and 
tools. Photograph: Thread 
Fashion tech startup Thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/19/thread-fashion-stylist-startup-machine-learning-ai>
 is trying to solve the problem of styling at scale. It’s a tricky beast: your 
style is an inherently personal thing, yet for any startup to avoid burning 
money, it needs to come up with a way to efficiently pick clothes for thousands 
of customers at the same time.

Thread’s trick is a clever mixture of human stylists, AI assistants and tools 
that let both work together to deliver a semi-personalised collection of outfit 
ideas to every customer. It means that each human stylist is able to provide 
five outfits a week to somewhere in the realm of 80,000 people, with Thread’s 
sartorial suggestions improving the more data it has on each member. Despite 
its data-driven back end, though, the stylists’ fashion sense still shines 
through.
Still to come: womenswear, which has been on the backburner owing to the vast 
increase in complexity for women’s fashion.

Automata

Robotics startup Automata has its background in architecture: the company’s 
founders spent 10 years working in Zaha Hadid’s studios. There, they learned 
the value of robots for simple repetitive tasks, but also the prohibitive cost 
of most of the machines available on the market today.

The fruits of their labour will arrive in 2017: a low cost robotic arm, which 
the company hopes will give robotics its “iPhone moment”. It can be programmed 
by simply moving the arm, showing it the movements it needs to carry out. Those 
motion points are stored, and used to automate the task.

The company has is set on automating low-skilled, repetitive manual labour. 
Rather than going for scale, however, it’s focusing on smaller companies that 
would love to automate their business but can’t afford the capital costs.

Open Whisper Systems

Open Whisper Systems is never going to become a unicorn, or make its founders 
rich, but it could be the startup that has the most effect on the coming year. 
The non-profit group is in charge of the development of iPhone app Signal, an 
encrypted messaging service that hasEdward Snowden’s seal of approval 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/26/apple-developer-signal-messaging-app-edward-snowden>
.
 Where Signal differs from most secure chat apps is its ease-of-use. 
Photograph: Signal 
Where Signal differs from most secure chat apps is its ease-of-use: the app 
feels very similar to everyday services like WhatsApp or Facebook Messenger. In 
fact, WhatsApp also offers encryption, and borrowed the basic code wholesale 
from Signal. That’s fine, because Open Whisper Systems makes everything it does 
available under open-source licences, which allow others to reuse the code as 
they see fit. It also lets anyone with the technical knowhow examine the app to 
make sure it does what it says it does.

Downloads of Signal spiked in the days after Donald Trump’s election, as many 
realised that a far-right demagogue would soon be in charge of the world’s most 
advanced surveillance apparatus. Hopefully, that will prove to be an abundance 
of caution, but if not, the app could be a lifesaver.

OnePlus
 Carl Pei, co-founder of OnePlus, in 2015. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via 
Getty Images 
Hardware is hard. It’s not enough simply to code something and release it to 
the world. You need to actually build the stuff, too.

So it’s extra impressive that Chinese startup OnePlus has managed to rise to 
be one of the best smartphone manufacturers in the world in just three years 
and five phones. And it 2017,it hopes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/01/future-android-pixel-google>
 to take third place in the global smartphone market, by units shipped, placing 
it square behind Samsung and Apple.

It’s a big goal, but the smartphone maker could pull it off. It chases the 
premium end of the budget market – or the budget end of the premium market – by 
making phones that compete favourably with the flagships such as Samsung and 
Google, but with price tags hundreds of pounds lower.

CCP

Icelandic games company CCP hardly counts as a startup. Founded in 1997, the 
company is best known for its first and flagship game, Eve Online, a 
space-faring massively multiplayer game, which has been running continuously 
for 13 years. Eve remainsa huge business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/12/how-virtual-world-edge-of-apocalypse-and-back-again>
, and recentlywent free to play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/15/eve-online-goes-free-to-play>
 in an effort to entice more users to jump into the galaxy of New Eden, but 
CCP’s big bet is in a different realm.

Two Eve spinoffs, Valkyrie and Gunjack, have led the pack of virtual 
reality-based games. Gunjack, a turret shooter, is one of the more popular 
games on simple VR platforms like Google’sDaydream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/10/google-daydream-view-review-comfortable-mobile-vr-headset-with-limited-compatibility>
. Eve Valkyrie, meanwhile, is a full-blown multiplayer space combat sim, 
throwing the player into chaotic dogfights around the rusting hulks of dead 
spaceships.

Both games have been well-received, leading to interest from potential buyers 
mooting a €900m price-tag 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-12-09/eve-online-owners-said-to-weigh-game-maker-sale-after-approaches>
.
 