
The Texas senator Ted Cruz <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz> and 
governor, Greg Abbott, have met the Taiwanese president, Tsai Ing-wen, while 
she was passing through the state on her way to diplomatic stops in Central 
America.

Donald Trump 'not denying Russia was behind hacking campaign', says Priebus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/donald-trump-not-denying-russia-hacking-report-reince-priebus>
Cruz said China’s consulate had asked, in “a curious letter”, that the Houston 
congressional delegation “uphold the ‘OneChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> policy’” and not meet the Taiwanese 
leader.

In December, Donald Trump spoke with Tsai by phone, breaking decades of US 
precedent in relations with China. Cruz, a Republican who endorsed Trump after 
losing to him in the presidential primary, had previouslydefended 
<http://www.chron.com/news/houston-texas/article/Ted-Cruz-defends-Donald-Trump-s-call-with-Taiwan-10690709.php>
 Trump’s call.

“The People’s Republic of China needs to understand that in America we make 
decisions about meeting with visitors for ourselves,” Cruz said in astatement 
<https://www.cruz.senate.gov/?p=press_release&id=2951> on Sunday. 

“This is not about the PRC [People’s Republic of China]. This is about the US 
relationship withTaiwan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan>, an ally we 
are legally bound to defend. The Chinese do not give us veto power over those 
with whom they meet. We will continue to meet with anyone, including the 
Taiwanese, as we see fit.”

Cruz said he and Tsai discussed “arms sales, diplomatic exchanges and economic 
relations”, and that he hoped to increase trade betweenTexas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> and Taiwanese markets.

In a separate statement <http://gov.texas.gov/news/press-release/23027>, 
Abbott said he and Tsai discussed agriculture and gas trade, and exchanged 
gifts. Tsai received “a clock bearing the Texas state seal”, Abbott said, and 
the governor was given a vase.

Abbott said the issues discussed were energy, trade relations and commercial 
ties between Taiwan and Texas.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fchina-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20warns%20Trump%20of%20damage%20to%20bilateral%20relations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fchina-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20warns%20Trump%20of%20damage%20to%20bilateral%20relations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fchina-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video&media=>
China warns Trump of damage to bilateral relations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/12/china-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video>
China said on Monday it opposed the Cruz-Tsai meeting, and a state-run 
newspaper warned of “revenge” againstDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> should he abandon the One 
China policy.

“We are firmly opposed to the Taiwan leader’s engagement with US officials 
under the pretext of transit, and her attempt to undermine China-US relations,” 
the foreign ministry spokesman Lu Kang told a regular briefing.

He urged the US to abide by the One China policy and “prudently handle” 
Taiwan-related issues.

The Global Times newspaper said Beijing was “fully prepared” to break ties 
with the US should Trump abandon the policy.

“If Trump reneges on the One China policy after taking office, the Chinese 
people will demand the government to take revenge. There is no room for 
bargaining,” said the paper, which often takes a nationalistic tone.

US politicians often meet Taiwanese presidents when they pass through the US, 
despite tensions between federal officials. Tsai incurred Beijing’s anger over 
her refusal to endorse its policy that mainland China and Taiwan constitute a 
single nation.


Barack Obama says Donald Trump may have 'enough craziness' to be president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/barack-obama-enough-craziness-donald-trump-interview-abc>
Beijing lodged a complaint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/03/china-donald-trumps-taiwan-phone-call-complaint-us>
 with the US over Trump’s call with Tsai, the first between American and 
Taiwanese leaders since ties were cut in 1979 at China’s request. Barack 
Obama’s White Housereassured 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-china-idUSKBN13T0SQ> China, but 
Trump continued to threaten exacerbating tensions with Beijing.

Not long after his 10-minute conversation with Tsai, the president-elect 
railed against China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/trump-foreign-policy-faces-scrutiny-as-team-defends-taiwan-phone-call>
 on Twitter.

He wrote <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/805538149157969924>: “Did 
China ask us if it was OK to devalue their currency (making it hard for our 
companies to compete), heavily tax our products going into their country (the 
US doesn’t tax them) or to build a massive military complex in the middle of 
the South China Sea? I don’t think so!”

He then accused China of stealing an underwater drone that it seized in 
contested waters, calling itan “unpresidented [sic] act” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/17/donald-trump-china-unpresidented-act-us-navy-drone>
.

“We should tell China that we don’t want the drone they stole back,” he wrote. 
“Let them keep it!”
 