
Teenage prodigy Destanee Aiava was knocked out of the Australian Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> before most local fans 
found a seat on Monday, but a spirited first appearance in her home grand slam 
delivered a $50,000 windfall for 92 minutes’ labour – not bad work if you can 
get it for a school holiday job.

The 16-year-old Melburnian was beaten but far from outclassed, losing 6-4, 7-6 
(7-3) to Mona Barthel, now the world No181, but previously as high as 23 in the 
world rankings and certainly no slouch. Ten years Aiava’s senior, the German 
entered this clash with five Australian Open campaigns behind her, a couple of 
tour titles to her name and scalps such as last year’s champion Angelique 
Kerber.


The contrast could not have been more pronounced: veteran nous v the sprit of 
youth; height v grunt; cautious defence v unselfconscious attack. Both of 
Barthel’s parents are doctors and her father once won a European shotputting 
title, so poor Mona, you suspect, has a decent amount of high-achieving to live 
up to.

Related: Alex De Minaur wins through to second round on Australian Open debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/alex-de-minaur-wins-through-to-second-round-on-australian-open-debut>

Aiava’s pedigree is arguably more suited to the brutally physical world of 
modern professional sport 
<http://www.theage.com.au/sport/tennis/australian-open-2017-destanee-aiavas-grand-slam-date-20170110-gtoxqg.html>
 – her father is Australia’s mixed martial arts coach and her mother a former 
representative rugby union player and footballer. At times in this match, as 
she swivelled into another sizzling forehand winner, you could just as easily 
imagine Aiava side-stepping hapless tacklers, breaking the line and sailing 
past the net for a try.

All of this is moot. Barthel proved adept at reaching and returning most of 
what the teenager belted at her, which was plenty, and that, coupled with a 
sturdy if unimposing service game, was enough for her to prevail. Hints at 
frailty on the latter front surfaced only as bookends to the match. Barthel 
offered the Australian two break points early in the first set – an opening 
Aiava missed by attacking quite admirably – and then finally lost her serve 
while looking to close out the match at 5-4 in the second.
 Destanee Aiava, right, gave Mona Barthel a solid workout in their first-round 
match. Photograph: Michael Dodge/Getty Images 
Experience told in the tiebreaker, in which Barthel raced to a 3-0 lead before 
easing her way to victory.

A telling statistic here was that Aiava’s first serve came down at only 55% 
(Barthel managed 66%), but she won 74% of her points on it; had she upped the 
first number significantly she might have caused her opponent all sorts of 
trouble. Ditto the Australian’s inability to nail more than one of four break 
points offered up. The teenager produced six more winners than her opponent, 
but 14 more unforced errors, and that balance of trade was telling.

Yet in all senses bar the scoreline it was an assured debut from Aiava, who 
achieved the distinction of becoming the first player born in the 21st century 
to feature in a grand slam singles match. Early on it had seemed likely she 
would make mincemeat of Barthel’s gentle second serve, and a pair of blistering 
passing shots in the German’s second service game lifted a polite capacity 
crowd.

A deft drop shot or two also showed the finesse and skill that will develop 
with more grand slam experience, but the raw ingredients here are compelling. 
At the peak of her physical development she will be a ball-striker to fear.

Other than that obvious power and strength, Aiava’s most impressive trait so 
far is her composure when things aren’t going to plan, which is relatively 
often when you’re no longer hammering the ball past kids but dealing with 
hardened tour professionals such as Barthel. Nothing troubled her notably until 
her post-game press conference, in which she mumbled just as any put-upon 
teenager should.

If the past fortnight is anything to go by, the Australian is also pleasingly 
unencumbered by your typical “tennis parents”. Her mother Rosie was a picture 
of equanimity sitting courtside with Daria Gavrilova on Monday and said earlier 
in the week that this catchy new name in Australian tennis was the result of an 
inescapable feeling her daughter was simply meant to be. On current evidence 
her instincts appear prescient.
 Ashleigh Barty of Australia in action against Annika Beck of Germany. 
Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP 
While chalking up this loss as a kind of moral victory and something fresh for 
the women’s game in Australia, it’s also worth noting how poignantly the teen 
sensation’s story dovetails with the grand slam return of Ashleigh Barty, not 
so long ago the occupant of Aiava’s current position in the scheme of things 
but now, at the positively ancient age of 20, already an honours graduate from 
the school of hard knocks.

 On Monday afternoon Barty was facing an Australian Open crowd for the first 
time since she upped and left tennis altogether in September 2014, favouring 
the country’s other summer sporting obsession in the shape of a speculative 
season with Women’s Big Bash League cricket side Brisbane Heat.

 Upon her return one can’t help but ponder the financial disparity in the 
upper echelons of the two sports; a one-hour Australian Open loss here would 
have netted Barty more than twice as much as a full season in the WBBL. And so 
it was that the right-hander appeared on Margaret Court Arena to face 50th 
ranked baseliner Annika Beck, another German with egghead parents: chemistry 
professors both.

Barty’s 6-4, 7-5 triumph to register her maiden Australian Open singles win 
was not as straightforward as the scoreline suggests. She trailed 3-0 early in 
the first set before determinedly breaking back in the fourth game and going 
from strength to strength thereafter, swapping jittery indecision for a 
muscular command of the match and betraying few signs of the shoulder injury 
that shortened her pre-tournament campaign in Hobart.

To clinch the first set Barty opened up break and set point at 5-4, and on the 
second attempt nailed the door shut with a cracking double-handed backhand 
winner down the line. Though she boasted a dozen more unforced errors than the 
German at that point, Barty also possessed the lion’s share of their combined 
gumption.

The second set was utterly strange. Just as quickly as she’d assumed control 
in the first Barty surrendered it, losing her serve twice to trail 4-2, but the 
mood soon swung back in her favour. She levelled it at 4-4 and then, at 6-5, 
opened up two match points on Beck’s serve, sealing a successful comeback from 
the second. Her win came in an hour and 40 minutes, and Barty will now face 
giant-slaying American Shelby Rogers, who recorded the upset of the first day in
defeating fourth seed Simona Halep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/16/fourth-seed-simona-halep-first-big-name-to-falter-at-australian-open>
 in straight sets.

Another Australian winner on day one was 17-year-old Jaimee Fourlis, who 
dispatched American Anna Tatishvili 6-4, 6-3 in an hour and 42 minutes, taking 
her chances to progress to the second round and an $80,000 pay day. Like Barty 
and their countryman Alex De Minaur, she showed that Destanee Aiava is not the 
only name to pencil in for higher honours in coming campaigns.
 