
I was first flown out to Seattle at the start of 1989. I'd been asked by 
Melody Maker <http://archivedmusicpress.wordpress.com/category/melody-maker/> 
to write a cover story onSub Pop <http://www.subpop.com/> Records and its 
flagship bandMudhoney <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mudhoney>. It was my 
first time in the US. It seemed like the Emerald City to me, but instead of 
Munchkins there were scores of long-haired, hard-rocking, heavy-drinking folk 
influenced by earlyBlack Sabbath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/blacksabbath> and 60s garage rock. I drank 
cheap Mexican beer with affable flannel-shirted musicians inPike Place Market 
<http://www.pikeplacemarket.org/>, and fell in love with the place.

A few days after I arrived, there was a label showcase at Seattle University – 
Girl Trouble <http://www.wig-out.com/>, Skin Yard 
<http://www.endino.com/skinyard/>, Nirvana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/nirvana> and the Fluid 
<http://www.subpop.com/artists/fluid>. Nirvana had just released their debut 
single Love Buzz. I was a performer –hadn't I released the first (much-derided) 
single on Alan McGee's Creation label? 
<http://www.creation-records.com/tag/the-legend/> – and so I demanded to play 
as well. So it was that I found myself on stage, alone, as 800 hardcore kids 
bellowed back the words toArthur Conley's Sweet Soul Music 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sp3JOzcpBds> at me.

Upon returning home, my story on Sub Pop helped launch the label and its 
roster on the road to (temporary) world domination; and every time I bumped 
into one of their bands after that, they'd be like: "Hey, why not jump on stage 
with us tonight and do that crazy thing you did in Seattle?"

So it was that, years later, I found myself performing Nirvana's encores for 
them on their final tour of the US, andpushing Kurt Cobain on stage in a 
wheelchair 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/music/sevenages/events/alternative-rock/nirvana-headline-reading-festival/>
 at Reading festival 1992 for their last UK show, 19 years ago; the gig will be 
screened at the festival this weekend. It's also rumoured I introduced Cobain 
to his wifeCourtney Love <https://www.theguardian.com/music/courtney>, but 
that's a whole other story.

There's been a lot of talk about grunge since Cobain's death in 1994. How it 
put Seattle on the map. How it revitalised rock music. How it was just a 
media-created fad. As Nirvana's breakthrough album Nevermind approaches its 
20th anniversary next month, it's time to explode some myths.

1. Grunge began in Seattle

It didn't. Sub Pop used the word in 1988 to promote a Green River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/78f56916-fe11-4110-8f10-d553ddf8de7b> 
album – "gritty vocals, roaring Marshall amps, ultra-loose GRUNGE that 
destroyed the morals of a generation" – but the word had been around as a 
description for decades. It shows up in 1957, on the back sleeve to aJohnny 
Burnette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/e92e6d99-d4b3-4942-a6e6-b59427dae61e> 
rockabilly album.Lester Bangs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/apr/12/artsfeatures.music> was using it 
in April 1972.

When Mudhoney <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mudhoney> singer Mark Arm 
referred to "the streets of Seattle being paved with grunge" in my cover story, 
he was using the term disparagingly. Grunge: the opposite of gold. Worthless.

There's more of an argument to be had for grunge beginning in Australia 
with the Scientists and their scrawny punk ilk. Grunge wasn't suburban metal, 
despite whatAlice in Chains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/aug/05/alice-in-chains-review> and 
Pearl Jam <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pearljam> would have us believe. 
It was stripped-back primeval rock music, no artifice, just SWEAT and BEER and 
heads banging in bass speakers.

2. Grunge was overwhelmingly male

Women were totally represented. L7 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/57111f1f-9829-45ea-bb4e-a5aba37cd1d1>,
Lunachicks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/0639533a-0402-40ba-b6e0-18b067198b73>,
Dickless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/4ece8309-01ed-4ef4-9485-3ea0e165d403>,
STP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/5051acff-6bb7-460a-8f9f-a5d6ffc73f07>,
7 Year Bitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/91d06612-5c1e-4278-b40b-b6ce22dc9bb4>
. Courtney Love.Babes in Toyland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/41593aa1-dda6-4a5a-af87-0eebf93e3775> 
– the all-female Minneapolis band whose first two albums are among the greatest 
of the era. Grunge was also inextricably linked withRiot Grrrl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/mar/04/grrrl-power-music>.

3. Nirvana <https://www.theguardian.com/music/nirvana> came from Seattle

Kurt Cobain and Krist Novoselic, the two founder members of Nirvana, grew up 
in the depressed logging town of Aberdeen, WA. Dave Grohl is from Washington 
DC. As soon as they could, Krist and Kurt moved: not to Seattle but to the 
nearby towns of Olympia and Tacoma, because the rent was cheaper. Right up to 
the point whenNevermind 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classic_Albums:_Nirvana_%E2%80%93_Nevermind> hit 
No 1 on the Billboard chart in December 1991, Kurt was living in Olympia. He 
then moved to LA before ending up in Seattle.

4. Kurt Cobain was murdered 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/regulars/ontherecord/story/0,12255,1187024,00.html>

Suicide's very nature leaves it wide open to conspiracy theories. No one else 
is present – not usually. Kurt killed himself. He was screwed up, and full of 
rage and despair: at his record company, who he thought were placing undue 
pressure on him; with his bandmates, who he didn't want to play with; with 
himself, for being such a moody bastard. He was screwed up and full of rage and 
despair, when all he wanted to be was fucked up.

5. Cobain didn't want to be famous

He just had no idea what fame would entail. He was proud of his music. He 
wanted it to be heard by as many people as possible, but he was also 
conflicted. Kurt had received his schooling from people likeK Records 
<http://www.kpunk.com/>' founder Calvin Johnson, and his former girlfriend Tobi 
Vail, who fervently believed in doing it for yourself, away from the corporate 
machine. He wanted to sell. He just didn't want to sell out.

6. Cobain wrote most of Hole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/1dcc8968-f2cd-441c-beda-6270f70f2863>
's second album, Live Through This

Kurt sang backing vocals on two songs. He wrote one B-side for Hole (Old Age 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PQSlcvCyyPc>), uncredited. And that was it. It 
would be just as accurate – and misleading – to say that Courtney Love wrote 
most of Nirvana's third album,In Utero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/album/2a0981fb-9593-3019-864b-ce934d97a16e>: 
you can certainly see her influence in Kurt's lyrics. Before the pair met, it 
was often guesswork as to his intentions. Afterwards, his lyrics were far more 
direct.

7. Nevermind was actually crap

Some folk reckon Butch Vig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/feb/04/smart-studios-closure-nirvana>'s 
gleaming production was a betrayal of Nirvana's roots. Listen up: Cobain loved 
theBay City Rollers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/may/10/bay-city-rollers-leo-sayer-david-essex-osmonds>
 as much as he loved the punk rock ofHalf Japanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/18dc6bd7-9caa-4c2d-a2fc-e9546ebda6a4> 
andBeat Happening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/album/24f4578d-856d-3d84-804e-abff91ce3ac8>. 
He loved the chest-beating swagger ofBlack Flag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/9941a936-196a-4a62-ae53-a69cbc33f20e>
, the cute girl pop ofShonen Knife <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shonen_Knife>, 
the hair-flailing noise of his Sub Pop contemporaries, and Abba.

I suspect most people who claim Nevermind to be not a million miles adrift from
Mötley Crüe <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/jun/17/popandrock1> have 
never heard Mötley Crüe. Likewise those who have noted the similarity ofSmells 
Like Teen Spirit <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hTWKbfoikeg&ob=av3e> to 
Boston'sMore Than a Feeling <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SSR6ZzjDZ94>.

You're missing the point. Great bands transcend their influences.

8. Grunge was all dark, gloomy, woe-is-me music

Sure, Soundgarden were moody. Sure, Kurt Cobain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kurt-cobain> could be a pissy bastard. Sure, 
it rained in Seattle a lot. The man-behemoth Tad Doyle (of Nirvana's touring 
buddies Tad), however, was as genial as he was scary-looking. Mark Arm, 
meanwhile, is perhaps the funniest man in the Pacific northwest. During the 
1992 Reading festival, it poured down. Mud formed. During the Sunday, bands got 
pelted with reams of the stuff. Artists reacted in different ways. Donita from 
L7 hurled a used tampon into the crowd. Mudhoney downed their instruments and 
started pelting the audience back.

"You guys can't throw," taunted Mark Arm. "You're used to playing soccer and 
kicking balls with your feet." Just then a sizeable lump of Berkshire hit him 
smack in the face. "That'll learn me," he remarked afterwards. "Never taunt an 
armed audience."

9. Cobain was grunge's only casualty

Andrew Wood from Mother Love Bone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/a5585acd-9b65-49a7-a63b-3cc4ee18846e>
. Mia Zapata fromthe Gits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/91d06612-5c1e-4278-b40b-b6ce22dc9bb4>
. Kristen Pfaff from Hole. Layne Staley from Alice in Chains. PoetSteven 
"Jesse" Bernstein <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steven_%22Jesse%22_Bernstein>
. RIP.

10. Grunge had a great legacy

Smashing Pumpkins <https://www.theguardian.com/music/smashingpumpkins>. Puddle 
of Mudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/ff460a70-fdf4-4aa2-b021-8a04da76d88e>.
Silverchair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/b0799818-22cb-4564-8e68-3c410d0722ee>
. Bush.Muse <https://www.theguardian.com/music/muse>. Ash. Courtney Love. 
Better Than Ezra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/7986c185-d91d-4204-8ee2-eac5d503fe39>
. Pearl Jam. Stone Temple Pilots. Live.Staind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/jan/29/artsfeatures2>. Creed. 
Candlebox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/8e9516ba-f417-47dd-a8a5-8998b94553f8>
. Some legacy!
 