
Tennis Australia is concerned Bernard Tomic’s bad attitude is dragging Nick 
Kyrgios <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nick-kyrgios> down amid growing 
calls to ban the pair from the Rio Olympics.

While TA chiefs are pleased with Kyrgios’s improved on-court conduct after the 
21-year-old safely saw out a six-month probation period on the ATP Tour, the 
governing body would like to see Tomic follow suit.

Nick Kyrgios calls Australian Olympic chief's bluff over Rio snub threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/10/nick-kyrgios-calls-australian-olympic-chiefs-bluff-over-rio-snub-threat>
The 23-year-old has made headlines for all the wrong reasons for returning 
serve with the wrong end of the racquet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/04/bernard-tomic-under-fire-again-after-latest-tank-at-madrid-open>
 on match point in his first-round loss in Madrid, prompting asecond warning 
from Australian Olympic team boss Kitty Chiller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/07/bernard-tomic-and-nick-kyrgios-put-on-notice-by-australian-olympic-boss>
.

TA, though, is unhappy that Kyrgios has seemingly been tarred with the same 
brush by Chiller and others condemning the behaviour of Australia’s top two 
players.

“Nick’s done a really good job at containing himself and learning and getting 
better,” TA spokesman and former head of professional tennis Todd Woodbridge 
said on Wednesday.

“He was in the press last week for having a discussion for a line call but if 
we’d have watched every other player last week, it would have been the same.

“So I think Nick’s going about everything the right way – he’s planning his 
schedule [and it’s] very important for him to stay fresh and that’s what’s he’s 
been able to do.

“He’s taking breaks and, when he’s fresh, his mind’s fresh and he plays well. 
For him to be lumped into the media last week was a pretty unfair assessment.”

TA president Steve Healey told Fairfax Media Tomic’s actions in the Spanish 
capital were disrespecting tennis and Woodbridge agreed he needed to lift his 
game.

Woodbridge attributed Tomic’s troubles to being dispirited after another 
dreadful claycourt campaign.

“This has happened every year on the clay courts,” he said. “Bernard is at his 
worst on clay. He really struggles on the surface and then he really goes deep 
into lacking confidence and, once that happens, we see him really wander off 
mentally.

Bernard Tomic retires eight minutes into match in Rome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/09/bernard-tomic-retires-eight-minutes-into-match-in-rome>
“So it’s been a little disappointing to see what he’s done the last couple of 
weeks. He’s just got to get through this bit of the season. It’s another few 
weeks until the end of the French [Open] and then we see him start to play 
tennis again and mentally switch back on.”

Healey said Olympic selections would be discussed at board level next week, 
but Woodbridge called for calm as critics urge the AOC not to rubber-stamp 
tickets for Kyrgios and Tomic should TA pick them for Rio.

“We’ve got another eight weeks or so before selection is done, so there’s a 
lot of tennis to be played, a lot of water to go under the bridge,” Woodbridge 
said.

“But right now, like when you play Davis Cup for Australia, you want your best 
players out there. Let’s see what they do in this next six weeks.”
 