
Eighteen months ago, I discovered someone who changed my life forever.

His name is Teodor Currentzis <http://www.teodor-currentzis.com/>. He’s a 
conductor who has recorded three operas for Sony music that are the single 
greatest albums that I have ever heard. And I don’t say that lightly.

The problem is, they’re opera. I know. The art form that’s apparently been 
dying for decades and that has a reputation for snobbishness, inaccessibility 
and general wankiness. Truth be told, I have always loathed it – but stay with 
me. These three are by Mozart, which helps. Opera’s biggest deterrent for me is 
Wagner. Chubby women shrieking at you in German for six hours simply cannot be 
described as entertainment – unless you like being bound, gagged and whipped in 
basement flats in Mayfair.

But Mozart is a different kettle of musical fish altogether. The guy, dead at 
35, composed music that came straightfrom God’s mouth. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/oct/27/amadeus-review-national-michael-longhurst-lucian-msamati-salieri>
 And his three greatest operas are The Marriage of Figaro (Le Nozze di Figaro), 
Così fan Tutte and Don Giovanni. Operas with ridiculous plots and even more 
intricate and ludicrous subplots. But underneath the farcical stories are 
important, powerful messages about the nature of love, humanity and our 
capacity for forgiveness. And Mozart sets these stories to the most profound 
music imaginable.

The problem with classical music is that it is only ever as good as the 
performance you are hearing or witnessing, which is why interpreters such as 
Gould, Karajan, Horowitz and Callas are so immortal. They were capable of 
reimagining what was set down on paper hundreds of years earlier and offering 
it to audiences in the present day in a way that shook, and still shakes, the 
foundations of our reality.

So along comes a young Greek conductor called Teodor Currentzis. He is the 
conducting equivalent of Glenn Gould morphed with Kurt Cobain. Gould said there 
is no point performing something that’s been performed a thousand times before 
unless you do it differently. And Currentzis, who has a work ethic and 
attention to detail that would have made Steve Jobs look like an unemployed 
bum, goes way, way beyond that.

It’s as if Currentzis has found a wormhole and tunnelled back in time into 
Mozart’s mind

He formed his own orchestra, Musica Aeterna, hand-picking the very best 
musicians he could find – largely from Russia, where they have quite the 
selection. He somehow convinced Sony to inject an obscene amount of money, and 
he set to work producing and recreatingdefinitive performances of Mozart’s 
three greatest operas <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wrMNE_ZATPo>. He records 
in Perm, a city in the middle of Russia whose temperature redefines cold. He, 
his orchestra and singers, along with producers, sound engineers and 
technicians, spend weeks in what can only be described as a classical music 
lock-in – they live, eat and breathe there, and the majority of their waking 
moments are spent creating music. Hundreds of hours of takes are recorded, with 
Currentzis pushing everyone involved beyond the limits of what most would 
consider possible. He chooses speeds that are, to many, unplayable. Vocal 
techniques that are not taught in any schools. Interpretations that make most 
music critics and regular opera audiences question everything they thought they 
knew. His conception of these works is so grand, so life-affirming and 
life-changing, so far beyond anything that has come before it that it has, for 
me, redefined music itself. This is classical music breaking the four-minute 
mile.
 ‘It’s about love, it’s about being human.’ The Marriage of Figaro with Iain 
Paterson as Figaro and Sarah Tynan as Susanna in a 2007 English National Opera 
production. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
I found his albums by dumb luck and have spent hundreds of hours listening to 
them. They accompany me everywhere. There are no other recordings where I know, 
just absolutely know, that this is how the composer himself would have heard it 
while he was writing it down. It’s as if Currentzis has found a wormhole and 
tunnelled back in time into Mozart’s mind. Everything about his approach is 
groundbreaking. The attack of the strings, the unbelievable presence of the 
sound – you feel as if you’re sitting right in the middle of the orchestra as 
melody after melody sweeps through your ears, the quality of the singing, the 
sheer, visceral, driving energy, the humour, pathos, romance, verve, 
face-punching force of it all is overwhelming.

I don’t think opera really deserves its rep. One of my favourite stories about 
Così is that the librettist, Lorenzo da Ponte, had a mistress for whom he wrote 
one of the main roles. Mozart loathed her. And he noticed that when she sang 
high notes she would lift her face to the sky and when she sang low notes she 
would drop her chin to her chest. And so while he was writing her famous, 
showcase aria, Come Scoglio (Like a Rock – she’s declaring that she’s going to 
be completely faithful to her fiance; a blatant lie as it turns out), he fills 
the whole thing with jumps from high to low and low to high, in order, to quote 
Mozart, “to make her head bob up and down like a chicken”.

I think of Mozart conducting this, watching the soprano nodding her head up 
and down and giggling to himself. Most amazing is the fact that Mozart wrote 
one of the greatest and most beautiful operatic arias ever, while 
simultaneously taking the piss out of a woman he detested.

These albums offer me a deeper understanding of myself, an unimaginable beauty 
and a window into another, better, world

The Marriage of Figaro story, with its infidelity, mistaken identity, 
cross-dressing – the whole shebang– is as idiotic as Così’s. But in both there 
is a deeper reality about love, and being human. Figaro’s ending (in 
Currentzis’s hands) makes me sob every time. In fact many times I just can’t 
listen to the last few tracks because I genuinely think I’ll throw myself under 
a train.

The cheating Count, who really doesn’t deserve the “o” in his title, has 
really, really screwed up with his wife. And he’s been caught red-handed. He 
drops to his knees and sings the most beautiful, pleading, desperate aria,
Contessa perdono! <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ah6bD5iqco&app=desktop>  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qZ_aFikkJUo>– “Countess, forgive me!”. And the 
Countess, more kind than he (Più docile io sono– “I am more mild”), forgives 
her husband. Just like that. In one musical phrase comes a hammer-blow 
definition of true love that just about cleaves your heart in two. Love does 
indeed conquer all.

I don’t trust anyone or anything. I’m the anti-trust guy. But Currentzis, I 
trust. His albums have become one of my best friends. They offer me everything 
I’ve ever wanted – a deeper understanding of myself, an unimaginable beauty and 
a window into another world that is better, safer, more profound and filled 
with more meaning than the one I currently inhabit. He keeps me company while 
on planes, on trains, in hotels, backstage, while I make dinner and during the 
lonely post-divorce nights.

I managed to wrangle a pre-release copy of Don Giovanni. It was meant to come 
out a year ago, but having recorded the whole thing and with it ready to go, 
Currentzis felt he could do better. And somehow he managed to convinced Sony to 
finance rerecording the entire opera.

In Currentzis’s hands, the orchestra makes sounds that I’ve never heard before 
and his singers are transported into world-class stars to rival Callas and 
Carreras. There’s a moment early on in the opera – Giovanni’s Viva la libertà – 
that is in many ways the most important moment in all of art. It’s the fault 
line between classicism and romanticism, and Currentzis is one of the only 
musicians capable of fully understanding and transmitting the meaning of 
“libertà”.
 ‘By the end, we are almost in Hitchcock territory.’ Duncan Rock as Don 
Giovanni and Andrii Goniukov as the Commendatore in Glyndebourne’s 2016 
production of Don Giovanni. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Mozart’s opera is about a young, arrogant, nobleman who shags his way around 
town, abuses and pisses off everyone else until he encounters something he 
cannot kill, beat up, dodge, or outwit – a giant statue called the 
Commendatore, the murdered father of a woman Don Giovanni tried to rape. 
Giovanni killed him in a duel following the attack. He then makes a move on 
another woman he passes in the street after the attack, and goes on to try to 
seduce a young bride on her wedding day. His servant sings with glee that he’s 
notched up 1,003 lovers which, pre-Tinder, is quite something.

By the end, we are almost in Hitchcock territory. Mozart uses trombones to 
depict the statue, which would’ve made his audience shit themselves because in 
his day no one used trombones other than in church. It’s terrifying. It’s full 
of dissonant sevenths and insane tension as the Don refuses to repent for his 
appalling life, despite the Commendatore’s ghost urging him to and giving him 
one last chance. But it’s too late. The Don is dragged down to hell. Da Ponte, 
who wrote the lyrics, gives the simple stage direction: “Fire on all sides; 
earthquake.” Which is kind of the master of understatement, and also perhaps a 
pretty decent description of how I feel about my life the majority of the time.

Unwilling to end it there, where perhaps it would be most natural, Mozart, 
with his giant heart, allows us to end the opera with a sense of joy, wonder 
and transformation as the remaining cast rejoice at Don Giovanni’s 
disappearance and the music moves into the major key with melody after melody 
pouring into us.

Perhaps this reads like a sycophantic love letter to Currentzis. And although 
in many ways it is that, it’s more an open thank you letter. Because within his 
recordings (and if opera really is not doable for you, listen to his version of 
Mozart’s Requiem or Tchaikovsky’s Violin Concerto or this Rameau track 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PGkC94O3r3g>), there is an absolute meaning to 
life that has long eluded me.

The other night I met a brilliant young theatre director and asked him if he’d 
been approached about doing opera. He told me he had just recently been asked 
but that he wouldn’t do it “because I really think opera is a dying art form”. 
I’m going to send him these box sets because I know he’ll change his mind.

•Così fan Tutte 
<http://www.teodor-currentzis.com/index.php/discography/mozart-cosi-fan-tutte/> 
andLe Nozze di Figaro 
<http://www.teodor-currentzis.com/index.php/discography/mozart-le-nozze-di-figaro/>
 are available on Sony Classical.Don Giovanni is released on 4 November 
<http://dongiovanni.teodor-currentzis.com/>.

 