
The texts began arriving on customers’ phones over the weekend: Tesco Bank had 
spotted unusual activity on a significant number of current accounts, and was 
getting in touch with customers to alert them. But thatwasn’t enough to prevent 
£2.5m being siphoned out of about 9,000 accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/tesco-bank-cyber-thieves-25m>
, and transferred to criminals whose identities and locations remain a mystery.

The damage to the bank’s reputation may be significant – but more significant 
still is that the attack is only the latest, and presently most visible, 
example of a rising tide of onslaughts against online banking, which seek to 
exploit any weak spot in web-facing computer systems and their users.

The hackers’ motives are straightforward. As the wild west bank robber Willie 
Sutton explained when asked to explain his motivation: “That’s where the money 
is.”

And experts warn that 2016, which has already seen an audacious attempt to 
steal £763m ($951m) electronically from Bangladesh’s central bank in the 
spring, is the precursor for much worse to come.

“Because a lot of economies aren’t in good shape, you’ll see more and more 
skilled computing people being out of work, and turning to the dark side where 
they work for criminals,” says Ilia Kolochenko, chief executive of High-Tech 
Bridge, a web security company. “And at the same time you’ve got a lot of 
companies trying to optimise their costs, and preferring to save money on the 
cyber side. It’s hard to predict how successful and how large the scale will 
be, but I’m pretty sure it will get worse.”

The Bangladesh attack occurred in February, when hackers broke into the Swift 
network, the international financial transfer information system, and told the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York to make 32 transactions totalling $951m to 
accounts around the world. Although only $101m, in two transactions, was paid 
out, a total of $63m has not been recovered. Swift has since warned banks to 
update their software.

It is highly unlikely that the same group was behind the Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> Bank attack; the amounts involved 
– and number of accounts – are so different as to imply separate operations. 
However, this suggests that various gangs are trying to break into banks and 
accounts online. There have certainly been a number of online raids – some 
involving big money. In 2013, online security company Kaspersky said that as 
much as $900m had been stolen from 100 banks after their internal systems were 
infected with malware.

And in late 2015, the UK’s National Crime Agency investigated the theft of 
£20m from several accounts, enabled by malware which had infiltrated customers’ 
PCs.

There are suspicions that Tesco Bank’s security model was more vulnerable to 
compromise than it should have been: once logged in to a current account, a 
user could set up a transfer to a current account in another bank without 
having to get an SMS confirmation. The question, still unanswered, is how the 
accounts were targeted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a3444292752405ad86bd6f0a05a1a693094082c%2F0_42_1380_1724%2F1380.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tesco%20cyber-raid%20raises%20serious%20questions%20over%20UK%20banks%E2%80%99%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tesco%20cyber-raid%20raises%20serious%20questions%20over%20UK%20banks%E2%80%99%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a3444292752405ad86bd6f0a05a1a693094082c%2F0_42_1380_1724%2F1380.jpg>
 Feezan Hameed, jailed for 11 years over thefts of £113m from British banks. 
Photograph: Metropolitan Police/PA 
It is possible that the hackers found a weakness in the back-office systems – 
possibly from a current or former employee, suggests Kolochenko.

Tesco Bank declined to discuss whether there are any patterns in the accounts 
that were targeted: “This is a criminal matter, and so we are constrained in 
what we can say,” a spokesman said. He declined to say whether any criminals 
had been identified or what lines of investigation were being pursued.

Andrew Bailey, chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), told 
MPs last week that “there are elements of this [attack] that look 
unprecedented”, but did not elucidate.

What parts are unprecedented? The fraud was far from the largest conducted on 
a UK bank; in September, the23-year-old head of a fraud ring, Feezan Hameed, 
was jailed for 11 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/21/feezan-hameed-fraud-gang-jailed-11-years-southwark-crown-court>
, after his gang stole £113m from British banks. They fooled people into 
thinking they were talking to their bank, and got them to hand over their 
internet details – which he would then use to get access to their accounts. 
Only £47m has been recovered.

So if the FCA’s Bailey is worried, it must be about the online nature and the 
scale of the attack – not its value. And this is the concern: if criminals can 
compromise 9,000 accounts in a matter of hours during a weekend and siphon off 
an average of £280 from each one before being spotted, what’s to prevent it 
being done to an even greater number of accounts for greater amounts of money, 
and leaving banks to pick up the pieces? What’s to stop it being done to any 
bank every night?

The idea of banks building up a false sense of security before a disaster 
might sound familiar. Simon Moores, an independent consultant on security, 
likens the situation now to the US financial market in 2006/7, when complacency 
over the inherent risks of mortgage-based products was compounded by ratings 
agencies which had an interest in certifying sketchy financial instruments as 
safe. “It’s just likeThe Big Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/jan/30/michael-lewis-the-big-short-interview>
,” Moores says, referring to the film and book about the lead-up to the 
financial collapse, which was forecast by only a few. “The computer security 
industry is worth £30bn, but it doesn’t work any more. Having a box to protect 
your bank website or business doesn’t work. But nobody is prepared to accept 
the fact.”

Banks don’t like discussing hacks; more than 100 banks are reckoned to have 
had up to $900m stolen in late 2013, according to security company Kaspersky. 
The hackers compromised internal computers and used video feeds for months to 
learn daily routines.

Moores points out that 2015 was a record year for cyber-attacks globally – but 
that’s only because 2016 hasn’t finished yet. Malware – which tries to attack 
PCs or corporate systems – is on the rise: “There are now thought to be more 
than 500 million worms, Trojans and other viruses in circulation, and 
reportedly every day there’s another 1.25 million ‘polymorphic’ threats [which 
change as they are copied between machines, making identification harder].”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3460967f6331b319589b08b33e1512d40ef6528%2F0_139_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tesco%20cyber-raid%20raises%20serious%20questions%20over%20UK%20banks%E2%80%99%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tesco%20cyber-raid%20raises%20serious%20questions%20over%20UK%20banks%E2%80%99%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3460967f6331b319589b08b33e1512d40ef6528%2F0_139_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The Federal Reserve Bank in New York, which was told to make 32 transactions 
totalling $951m for accounts around the world after hackers got into the 
transfer system. Photograph: Andrew Gombert/EPA 
For banks, the attraction of online banking is clear: it doesn’t require 
expensive offices in high streets, or the employment of thousands of tellers 
who might be vulnerable to criminals through blackmail or greed. Instead, it 
relies on computers, and a relatively small and highly trained (and well-paid) 
staff, while the customer-support function normally done by tellers can be 
outsourced to call centres that have little more access than ordinary customers 
to the banks’ databases.

For the customer, online banking should mean greater convenience – it can be 
done anywhere and any time you can get an internet connection – and 
reliability, since the challenges (such as passwords and memorable words or 
phrases) you face to log on successfully are more complex than a simple 
four-digit number at a cash machine.

But for both, inserting a computer between the customer and the bank has 
opened up new risks from malware targeting web browsers, computers and mobile 
phones. Browsers, software and computers – both the customers’ and the banks’ – 
can have mysterious bugs which allow access to hackers and leave almost no 
trace; there is a constant need for bug-finding and updates to defeat them.

Even while banks strengthen their software, though, the weak link can lie 
outside. One of the biggest problems for online banking was the malware Zeus, 
which defeated many antivirus packages. First seen in 2007, it lurked in the 
background of Windows computers infected via email attachments or web pages and 
captured logon passwords and account numbers. By 2010, it had infected nearly 
4m PCs.

In April two men – a 27-year-old Russian called Aleksandr Andreevich Panin and 
an Algerian accomplice, Hamza Bendelladj 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/21/hackers-jailed-over-spyeye-virus-that-robbed-bank-accounts-worldwide>
, were given prison sentences totalling more than 24 years 
<https://www.justice.gov/usao-ndga/pr/two-major-international-hackers-who-developed-spyeye-malware-get-over-24-years-combined>
 for their role in creating and running a “botnet” of infected computers called 
SpyEye, which relied on Zeus and had stolen more than $100m from US banks and, 
by extension, their customers. By 2011, there were versions of Zeus that
infected smartphones running on Google’s Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2011/jul/22/smartphones-hacked-zeus-malware>
, putting banking apps at risk.

So far though, banks appear to have managed to stay ahead in the arms race; 
the growth in the use of smartphones may actually have helped, because their 
security model is generally better than PCs, holding apps in deeper “silos”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe99d17419211233039a9e7fb2dd2006f8dd29e8%2F0_194_4341_2605%2F4341.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tesco%20cyber-raid%20raises%20serious%20questions%20over%20UK%20banks%E2%80%99%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tesco%20cyber-raid%20raises%20serious%20questions%20over%20UK%20banks%E2%80%99%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe99d17419211233039a9e7fb2dd2006f8dd29e8%2F0_194_4341_2605%2F4341.jpg>
 Banking app security appears to be better than it is on PCs. Photograph: Alamy 
Customers have often borne the cost of the skirmishes, though. Ross Anderson, 
professor of security engineering at Cambridge University’s computer security 
group, has clashed with the UK’s financial instutions for more than a decade, 
first over weaknesses in cash-machine security and more recently over banks’ 
reluctance to accept the cost of online fraud, while they reap the profits of 
lower online overheads.

Customers who have been defrauded often have to fight for their refunds, 
Anderson says. Many of those whose money was stolen by Hameed are still trying 
to get their money back, he points out.

“As long as UK banks don’t have to bear the cost of fraud, they won’t have an 
incentive to improve their security,” he says.

He notes that the Tesco case – in which refunds were immediate – was a rare 
and welcome exception. He notes too, that being able to transfer money more 
quickly has brought significant problems.

“In the old days, if you wanted to send £1,000 to your aunt in Australia, it 
would cost you £30 and take four days and you might have to visit the branch. 
Now it can be set up and sent in seconds. If you’re a fraud victim, you can’t 
stop it.”

It might sound strange for a computer security expert to bemoan faster 
payments. But the problem is more one of imperfect authentication: clearly, 
something failed at Tesco. Because thousands of customers were affected by the 
attack, Tesco paid up; but when a single person or business is hit by Zeus or 
another variant, banks often dispute it.

Anderson says: “They shouldn’t design systems for perfect humans who can 
recall dozens of passwords. They should design for people as they are, faults 
and all.”

Moores says the threat to the users, and the banks, will only increase. “The 
attacks are going to get automated, and they’re going to recruit machine 
learning – that stuff’s not just for Google.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86859a1fcda45d06427c8099c47d0655da1d0998%2F0_0_3467_2081%2F3467.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tesco%20cyber-raid%20raises%20serious%20questions%20over%20UK%20banks%E2%80%99%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tesco%20cyber-raid%20raises%20serious%20questions%20over%20UK%20banks%E2%80%99%20security&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Ftesco-cyber-theft-serious-questions-bank-security%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86859a1fcda45d06427c8099c47d0655da1d0998%2F0_0_3467_2081%2F3467.jpg>
 A customer uses a machine at a Tesco Bank cash point. Customers who lost money 
in the recent cyber attack have been refunded. Photograph: Paul Ellis/AFP/Getty 
Images 
RISING TIDE OF HACKING

Banks don’t like to talk about online hacking, especially when it involves 
customer accounts. But here are some that we know of.

2013 As many as 100 banks worldwide are discovered to have been infiltrated by 
malware – sent as email attachments to bank employees – which sent back video 
and other data from internal networks. Thathelped hackers to steal a total of 
$900m 
<http://www.pymnts.com/news/2015/how-100-banks-got-hacked-and-lost-900-million/>
, according to the Kaspersky Lab, which claims it had gone on for almost two 
years. Neither the amounts stolen nor the details have been confirmed.

December 2014 About 730,000 login details for wealthy clients of Morgan 
Stanley are offered for sale online,after being stolen by an employee 
<http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2015/01/05/morgan-stanley-fires-employee-saying-data-on-350000-clients-was-stolen/?ref=technology&_r=1>
, 30-year-old Galen Marsh, between 2011 and 2014. Morgan Stanley says it found 
no evidence that customers lost any money. Marshpleaded guilty 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-09-21/ex-morgan-stanley-employee-pleads-guilty-to-taking-client-data>
 in September 2015, receiving 36 months’ probation. Morgan Stanley wasfined $1m 
<https://blogs.absolute.com/blog/sec-issues-1-million-data-breach-penalty/>.

Meanwhile, hackers in Russia and Ukraine break into the internal networks at 
financial institutions in their countries and infect ATMs withmalware that 
would give them 50 times the amount they seemed to be taking out 
<https://krebsonsecurity.com/2014/12/gang-hacked-atms-from-inside-banks/>. The 
group is reckoned to have gained access by buying access to PCs already 
infected by opportunistic hackers using weaknesses in Microsoft Office and 
Windows.

January 2015 Hackers acquire codes from Swift, the international financial 
network which enables transfers between banks, to get access to a bank in 
Ecuador, Banco del Austro, and transfer $12m out of it via Wells Fargo to banks 
in Hong Kong, Los Angeles and Dubai. The bank sues Wells Fargo but does not 
tell Swift, whichonly learns of the incident via a lawsuit in May 2016 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/lawsuit-claims-another-global-banking-hack-1463695820>
.

April 2015 Ryanair confirms that £3.3m has been stolen from it 
<http://www.cbronline.com/news/cybersecurity/business/10-lessons-learnt-from-ryanairs-chinese-bank-hack-4566379>
 by a fraudulent transfer via a Chinese bank. Neither the bank nor Ryanair 
offers any information about how the fraud happened.

Late 2015 The UK’s National Crime Agency investigates a series of bank frauds 
enabled by malware called Dridex, which infects PCs and harvests online banking 
details from users. British accounts are reckoned to have had £20m taken from 
them and paid to accounts in eastern Europe.

February 2016 $81m is stolen from Bangladesh’s central bank; investigators 
link the malware used to break into the systems to that used to penetrate Sony 
Pictures in 2014 by a hacking group called Lazarus. The hackers had sought to 
transfer $1bn, but a fault in their code halted the transaction early.

May 2016 Swift says a Vietnamese bank has been hacked, but doesn’t disclose 
whether any money was lost, or which bank is involved. It urges its members, 
numbering more than 9,000, to keep their software up to date.

June 2016 $10m is stolen from a bank in Ukraine after the Swift system is 
exploited using a method similar to that used against the Bangladesh central 
bank in February.

November 2016 Tesco Bank says £2.5m has been stolen over the weekend of 5-6 
November from the accounts of about 9,000 customers, out of a total of 136,000. 
All have been refunded; questions remain about how the transfers were made. 
Tesco could face a substantial fine from regulators.
 