
Electric carmaker Tesla Motors <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tesla> 
is blaming “currency fluctuations” for the decision to push up the price of 
models sold in the UK by 5% in the new year.

The US firm’s UK showrooms were informed of the decision earlier this week and 
staff have been contacting prospective customers to warn them about the 
imminent price hikes.

One email seen by the Guardian states: “We have just received some information 
that we need to share with you – due to currency fluctuations we will be 
increasing our UK prices for custom orders by 5% on 1 January 2017.”

UK car exports soar to record high
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/22/uk-car-exports-soar-to-record-high>
It also states: “Prices on showroom and pre-owned cars will remain fixed at 
current prices.”

In the six months since the vote for Brexit retailers and manufacturers have 
signalled the weakness of sterling willpush up prices in 2017 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/2016/oct/15/after-marmite-bitter-taste-price-rises-new-year-2017-retail>
 as the cost of importing goods increases. The pound has lost more than 15% of 
its value against the dollar since the Brexit vote.

Fashion retailer Next has said its clothing prices will rise 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/2016/aug/03/next-expects-higher-profits-despite-tougher-trading-conditions>
 by up to 5% while electrical goods retailers Dixons Carphone and AO have also 
said their suppliers want tocharge more 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/2016/nov/22/white-goods-set-to-soar-on-black-friday-shoppers-rush-beat-price-rises-brexit>
. Apple haspushed up the price  
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/technology/2016/oct/28/brexit-apple-mac-customers-prices-rise-us-dollar-pound-sterling>
of every computer in its range, while Microsoft and Dell have also signalled 
that price hikes are on the way.

Tesla’s main base of operations and factory is in California but it has a 
European base in Amsterdam and a distribution centre in Tilburg in the 
Netherlands.

A Tesla <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tesla> spokesperson said: 
“‘Due to currency fluctuations, we will be increasing our UK prices by 5% on 1 
January 2017.”

It is understood that this means prices for both Model S and Model X will 
increase on 1 January.


Last month its chief executive Elon Musk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/11/elon-musk-tesla-cars-no-driver-model-s>
 announced plans to expand its European operations by building a second 
“gigafactory” battery production plant and an automated manufacturing research 
centre. Theexpansion follows the purchase of German firm Grohmann Engineering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/08/tesla-adds-german-firm-grohmann-to-european-operations>
 which specialises in automated assembly systems serving the automotive, 
telecommunications, consumer electronics and biotechnology industries.

Tesla did not confirm the timescale for building Gigafactory 2 in Europe with 
Musk stating it would do so after production of its Model 3 was under way.

At that time Tesla said it had taken 370,000 pre-orders of its more affordable 
Model 3, which will sell for about $35,000 (£28,263) and is expected to start 
being delivered in 2017 with full production in 2018.

Until now, mid- and high-capacity models of the company’s Model S and Model X 
cars have come with free access to Tesla’s network of superchargers, which are 
capable of putting a half-charge into a car’s batteries within 30 minutes. But 
it has alreadyannounced plans to start charging for this service 
<https://www.tesla.com/blog/update-our-supercharging-program> in January.
 