
Take a break from the American mammon groove during your walkabout in the 
United States and wend your way to the south-western borderlands. Slowly 
traverse a swath of terrain between Austin and the environs of Albuquerque, 
Santa Fe, out to the ancient ruins ofChaco Canyon 
<http://www.nps.gov/chcu/index.htm>.

These are lands of America's other origin story, taking you into the deep time 
of the new world. This route moves through the deserts, austere and verdant 
landscapes, mostly wild and unpopulated, an itinerary with ample promise of 
getting lost, travelling in time and undergoing inadvertent epiphanies.

Texas and New Mexico have deep-rooted, large and rapidly growing Hispanic 
populations (Texas 38.1%, New Mexico 46.7%, in the 2010 census), and both are 
"majority minority" (an oxymoron much in use), indicating that a majority of 
people are from non-white ethnic groups. You're a majority, but you're still 
minority.

This reconquista has brought a tide of new, transforming ways of understanding 
our history and this very geography, that lately is attracting artists and 
visionaries from all parts.

This is my widescreen homeland, encompassing my birthplace (San Antonio, 
Texas) and my longtime spiritual refuge (the Jemez wilderness of north-west New 
Mexico), a land I've long harboured an inexplicable sense of belonging to. I 
first sensed this attraction travelling there with my family as a 14-year-old. 
Coming from parched south Texas, north-western New Mexico seemed impossibly 
alpine, its primordial forests fragrant, mysterious and sheltering.
 El Santuario de Chimay, New Mexico Photograph: Arnold Drapkin/ZUMA 
Press/Corbis 
Jose Limón, the director of the Institute for Latino Studies at the University 
of Notre Dame, in Indiana, calls the region "Greater Mexico", preponderantly 
Hispanic and uniquely forged in all the epics of North America – indigenous 
genesis, the conquest and colonisation of Mexico, myriad migrations and the 
revolutionary birth of the United States.

The Texas state capital of Austin (only founded in the 1830s) sits on the 
fault line separating Anglo and Hispano worlds, ever touting its difference, if 
still harbouring a wariness of fully embracing all thingsMexicano.

Growing up in San Antonio (founded in 1718), the comparatively rural redoubt 
of shipwrecked TexanMexicanidad, Austin was our Athens up the road, an eclectic 
gathering place where auspicious hippy world wisdom was dependably in foment. 
Then, it was the prophetic psychedelia of Roky Erickson and the 13th Floor 
Elevators rock band; the searing postmodern blues ofTownes Van Zandt 
<https://townesvanzandt.com/>. The sounds and words of ZZ Top  
<http://www.zztop.com/>and Willie Nelson, <http://willienelson.com/> blues-y, 
rebellious and rough-hewn, were ubiquitous, familiar and fitting for the time.

In the summer of 1979, making a pilgrimage to the now long-gone venue of the 
new Austin sound, the Armadillo World Headquarters, it was Talking Heads (Fear 
of Music tour), with the B-52s opening. The world was changing. These days, at
Waterloo Records <http://www.waterloorecords.com/Home> you might hear the 
psychotropic songcraft ofDavíd Garza <http://www.davidgarza.com/> on the sound 
system, mantric drone rock fromThe Black Angels <http://theblackangels.com/>, 
or the post-punk siren songs ofAlejandro Escovedo 
<http://alejandroescovedo.com/> or Spoon <http://www.spoontheband.com/>.

Austin's hardscrabble Texas Hill Country <http://www.texashillcountry.com/> 
setting belies its blessed geographic location, a city conjured over the 
Edwards limestone aquifer, filtering precious rainwater into a vast underground 
reservoir. In such an arid, unforgiving land, cooling springs abound, from
Barton Springs <http://austintexas.gov/department/barton-springs-pool> in the 
city toKrause Springs <http://www.krausesprings.net/> in nearby Spicewood 
(don't missOpie's Barbecue <http://www.opiesbarbecue.com/> there).

An hour west is the 6m-year-old Enchanted Rock 
<http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/state-parks/enchanted-rock>, a massive, pale-pink 
granite pluton dome with peaks jutting out from a sandy valley of mesquite 
trees. It beggars belief the first time you see it; many say it's a sacred 
place.

We climbed and circled the hoary igneous batholith like it was David's 
Jerusalem or the very Ka'bah. The vista spans miles in every direction, 
surveying tiny mesquite stands, specks of cattle, a few dusty ranch houses in 
the distance. If you're not a poet when you climb it, you might be one when you 
descend.

For my family, San Antonio was the cradle of antiquity, a secret Mexican city, 
on American soil. It was founded in the last push of the Spanish colonisation 
of Mexico, early in the 18th century. A constellation of beautifully restored 
missions on the modern city's Southside echoes these distant origins. The 
legendaryAlamo <http://www.thealamo.org/main/index.php>, living testimony to 
how badly an immigration policy can go awry, was itself a Spanish mission.

During the Chicano movement, activists and intellectuals reclaimed Texas and 
New Mexico as Aztlán, the mythical land from which the Aztecs came, an old 
homeland rediscovered. San Antonio imparted a different way of being American, 
open to identities emerging from the deep time of these lands – indigenous, 
Hispanic, Anglo and beyond.
 UFO festival in Roswell, New Mexico Photograph: Ted Soqui/Sygma/Corbis 
My preferred road to New Mexico is Highway 90, through Castroville, Hondo 
(full of Santos family members), and Uvalde, careening then into the astounding 
desolation of West Texas. Past Del Rio, there'sSeminole Canyon State Park 
<http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/state-parks/seminole-canyon>, where you must hike 
down into the deep canyon to view ancient, indigenous stone wall paintings 
depicting a people in pilgrimage. It's testimony to how long people have 
journeyed across these lands, long before there was a border to be policed.

Marfa has become a cultural destination of late: hipsters heading out there as 
if the tap water gives you visions. I don't get it. There's a great radio 
station (KRTS <http://marfapublicradio.org/>), bookstore and a cafe next door 
with a fantastic green chilli, but I prefer to head south to visit Presidio and 
Ojinaga, which is on both the US and Mexican sides of the border.

From there, I climb into the nearby mountains to Chinati Hot Springs 
<http://www.chinatihotsprings.net/>, an exalted desert oasis. On an open plain, 
you can soak in a stone tub fed by a steaming geothermal spring under the vast, 
glimmering heavens, meteors streaking by.

Spaniards ventured into the lands that became New Mexico in the late 16th 
century, searching for mythical cities of gold. Santa Fe was founded in 1609, 
Albuquerque 1691. A sense of the mythical is there today. Nearing Albuquerque, 
there's Alamogordo, where the first nuclear bomb was tested in 1945, or 
Roswell, where in 1947 extraterrestrial visitors famously scuppered a flying 
saucer in the desert.

After graduating high school, some chums and I backpacked into the craggy, 
mountainous pine forests of the Jemez wilderness, west of Santa Fe. The 
landscape is pocked with hot mineral springs to soothe intrepid trekkers 
(nature bathing is a big draw on all my road trips). We ended up atFenton Lake 
<http://www.emnrd.state.nm.us/spd/fentonlakestatepark.html>, a limpid blue 
mountain pond, finding a bustling movie set for Nicolas Roeg's The Man Who Fell 
to Earth. It's the lake where David Bowie's quixotic alien character, Thomas 
Jerome Newton, splashes down and later builds a wickedly cool Atomic 
Ranch-style manse.

My New Mexico has always been a place of such surprises. Living rough for a 
week on the streets of Albuquerque on that trip, my comrades and I were 
welcomed by a myriad of strangers who shared their chilli-pork stews, beers and 
tequila – and that was just for breakfast.
 A view of the Enchanted Rock, Texas. Photograph: Peter Tsai/Getty 
Images/Flickr RF 
Dubbed the "Land of Enchantment", there's a presence of the mystic in New 
Mexico as common as the spicy scent of piñon. There's a mingling of the very 
old and the new. With its adobe facades, Santa Fe feels like a metropolitan 
pueblo, even as it's home to theSanta Fe Institute <http://www.santafe.edu/>, 
where post-quantum physics and chaos theory have been nurtured.

In 1987, I journeyed to Chaco Canyon <http://www.nps.gov/chcu/index.htm> where 
you see the ruins of a city that sprawled along the canyon walls, abandoned by 
the Anasazi people in the 6th century BC. I was making a documentary about the 
"harmonic convergence", a global new-age Woodstock, marking the beginning of 
the last segment of the much-vaunted Mayan calendar. Three thousand devotees 
showed up, chanting, drumming, dancing and visiting the sunken circular kivas 
where native people still worship and leave offerings. It was yet 
another meeting of worlds.

My last trip to New Mexico was in 2001, over days that included the events of 
9/11 in my then hometown of New York. My companion and I had set out fromJemez 
Springs <http://www.jemezsprings.org/> to visit the museum of the Manhattan 
Project in Los Alamos <http://www.lanl.gov/museum/index.shtml>. Along the road 
that morning, we silently followed the radio news as the two towers of the 
World Trade Center fell. At theLos Alamos Historical Society 
<http://www.losalamoshistory.org/>, exhibits about the region's indigenous 
origins sat alongside the history of the bomb and the blasts at Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki.

In these lands, on these roads, you can't escape a view of the world through 
the long span of time, the lessons ever the same, ever new.

John Phillip Santos is a film-maker, producer, journalist and author

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 