
Almost eight years ago, the Lehman Brothers collapse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/sep/13/lehman-brothers-was-capitalism-to-blame>
 plunged the global economy into recession. The interbank market collapsed, and 
the entire industrialised world was thrown into the worst crisis since the end 
of the second world war. Though central banks have maintained ultra-low 
interest rates, the crisis hasn’t yet been fully overcome. On the contrary, 
numerous economies, such as the southern European countries andFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/14/france-and-finland-weigh-on-eurozone-economic-growth>
, simply aren’t making any headway. And Japan has been on the ropes for a 
quarter of a century.

Some economists believe that this is evidence of “secular stagnation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/07/imf-gloom-global-economy-growth-secular-stagnation>
”, a phenomenon described in 1938 by the American economist Alvin Hansen, who 
drew on Karl Marx’sLaw of the Tendency of the Rate of Profit to Fall 
<https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1894-c3/ch13.htm>. Owing to the 
gradual exhaustion of profitable investment projects, according to this view, 
the natural real interest rate has continued to fall. Stabilising the economy 
thus is possible only by an equivalent decline in policy interest rates.

In view of the huge credit bubble that preceded the crisis in Japan, the 
United States, and southern Europe, and the aggressive policies pursued by 
central banks over the past few years, I doubt that this theory is correct. In 
fact, I find it plausible that a very different mechanism lies behind the 
post-2008 stagnation, which I refer to as “self-inflicted malaise”.

This hypothesis is best understood in the context of the economist Joseph 
Schumpeter’s theory of the business cycle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jan/21/alan-greenspan-business-cycle>
. Faulty expectations on the part of market participants regularly cause credit 
and asset-price bubbles. Investors, expecting prices and incomes to rise, 
purchase residential and commercial properties, and they take chances on new 
business ventures. Real estate prices start to rise, a construction boom 
occurs, and a new phase of rapid expansion begins, partly sustained by the 
revitalisation of the domestic economy, including services. The growth in 
incomes increasingly emboldens borrowers, which further heats things up.


Then the bubble bursts. Investment collapses and real estate prices fall; 
businesses and banks go bankrupt; factories and residential buildings are 
vacated; and employees are laid off. Once prices and wages have fallen, new 
investors step in with new business ideas and establish new firms. After this 
“creative destruction”, a new phase of rapid expansion sets in.

In the current crisis, however, monetary policy pre-empted the creative 
destruction that could have formed the basis for a new upswing in growth. Asset 
holders talked central bankers into believing that Schumpeter’s economic cycle 
could be overcome by large-scale bond purchases financed via the printing 
press, and by corresponding interest-rate reductions.

These measures stopped the fall in asset prices halfway and thus saved much 
wealth. But they also prevented young entrepreneurs and investors from risking 
a new start. Instead, established firms remained in place, keeping themselves 
afloat but lacking the wherewithal for new investments. In Japan and Europe, in 
particular, large numbers of such zombie firms and banks survived, and they are 
now blocking would-be competitors able to drive the next upswing in growth. The 
resulting economic ossification looks like the secular stagnation that Hansen 
described; in fact, the malaise is self-inflicted.

And, because low interest rates have reduced asset managers’ returns, some 
central banks – and the European Central Bank, in particular – have relied on 
successiveinterest-rate cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/ecb-cuts-eurozone-interest-rate-to-zero>
 in an effort to engineer ersatz value gains for assets. The economy is thus 
caught in a trap, forcing the ECB to engage in ever more radical monetary 
policy measures. Its current programme of quantitative easing is meant to 
double the money supply in a very short period. Further guns are being moved 
into position, such as successively more negative nominal interest rates or
so-called helicopter money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/22/helicopter-money-back-in-the-air>
.

The only way out of the trap is a hefty dose of creative destruction, which in 
Europe would have to be accompanied by debt relief and exits from the eurozone, 
with subsequent currency devaluations. The shock would be painful for the 
incumbent wealth owners, but, after a rapid decline in the dollar values of 
asset prices, including land and real estate, new businesses and investment 
projects would soon have room to grow, and new jobs would be created. The 
natural return on investment would again be high, meaning that the economy 
could expand once again at normal interest rates. The sooner this purge is 
allowed to take place, the milder it will be, and the sooner Europeans and 
others will be able to breathe easy again.

Hans-Werner Sinn is professor of economics and public finance at the 
University of Munich, was president of the Ifo Institute for Economic Research 
and serves on the German economy ministry’s advisory council. He is the author, 
most recently, ofThe Euro Trap: On Bursting Bubbles, Budgets, and Beliefs 
<http://ukcatalogue.oup.com/product/9780198702139.do>

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>
 