
We don’t normally look for a deep and personal connection with total 
strangers, but for the attendees atThe Human Connection 
<https://www.facebook.com/thehcmovement/>’s monthly eye-gazing events, that’s 
exactly what we’re here for. Usually steel-reinforced personal space bubbles 
have been punctured, and in a corner of the Fitzroy Gardens in Melbourne, 
people have gathered hoping to take a look through the windows of another’s 
soul.

A group of assorted people – many in hippie and festival gear, but plenty in 
unremarkable Saturday wear – are sitting cross-legged on the grass. The drill 
is simple: find someone sitting alone, sit opposite them, gaze silently into 
each other’s eyes for as long as you feel like it, then chat.

Eye contact is good for you. But can you put your phone down for long enough? 
| Jonathan Shehee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/eye-contact-smartphone-human-behavior>
Over the course of three hours, I gaze into the eyes of 11 strangers. Some are 
meditative and peaceful. Some are nervous. Some can’t stop giggling or pulling 
faces. Some engage in the activity as if it is a staring contest. Some list 
gently to one side.

For me, it’s mostly quite calming; less challenging and less intense than 
expected. Several of my gazes are ended by a blowfly flying up my nose, and one 
by a ringtail possum crashing down out of a palm tree.Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> organiser Cindy Melksham 
tells me that in an indoor environment, the experience is more intense – less 
chatting, fewer distractions. In the park, though, the conversation flows 
freely, and the post-gaze chats are probably the best bit. It’s easy to talk to 
someone you’ve just stared at for three minutes straight. The awkwardness has 
burned off already.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthe-eyes-have-it-how-staring-at-strangers-became-a-global-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8dcc782a9b96c73993c14c5930a632fa123b6e7%2F0_0_2000_1335%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eyes%20have%20it%3A%20how%20staring%20at%20strangers%20became%20a%20global%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthe-eyes-have-it-how-staring-at-strangers-became-a-global-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eyes%20have%20it%3A%20how%20staring%20at%20strangers%20became%20a%20global%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthe-eyes-have-it-how-staring-at-strangers-became-a-global-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8dcc782a9b96c73993c14c5930a632fa123b6e7%2F0_0_2000_1335%2F2000.jpg>
 Everyone here is looking for different versions of the same thing: human 
connection. Photograph: Simeon/The Human Connection 
Most of the participants are new to eye gazing, but everyone here is looking 
for different versions of the same thing: human connection. A few are taking 
part in an effort to come out of a shell. Some are looking for meaningful 
interaction. One participant tells me, mournfully, “I didn’t really feel much.” 
He’s here to get in touch with his feelings, and the fact that he isn’t having 
any is a disappointment. Some are keen to do a little post-gaze personality 
cold reading, though few get it right.

There’s a lot of mention of the superficial nature of modern digital life and 
social media, though ironically, everyone present heard about the event through 
Facebook. One participant, Dave Kirk, admits he’s more of an introvert.

“I love connecting with people, but I recharge in isolation – I’m much more 
comfortable in isolation. I like venturing out to connect, then returning to 
being a hermit,” he tells me. “The experience of connection with someone with 
eye contact for just a minute – conversation just flows so easily following 
that, it’s quite amazing.”

The Human Connection’s founder, Igor Kreyman, tells me the movement has 
snowballed since it began last year. “We started off with Sydney, and we had 
150 people come to the first event in April, and then in May we had 300 people, 
so we decided to try Melbourne, then Adelaide, Brisbane, Canberra, Wollongong 
and Sunshine Coast are in the process – and we have events in LA and Mumbai 
then New Zealand. We’re growing quite rapidly.

“One of the most memorable experiences was when an Asian lady in her 40s or 
50s came through. She didn’t know about the event, had her grocery shopping 
bags with her. She asked what was happening, and we said, ‘It’s a form of 
meditation, would you like to try it?’ She sat down and kept asking, ‘What do 
we do now?’

“She had very specific ideas and settled values, but watching her let go and 
go deeper into the experience was amazing. Afterwards, she told me, ‘You’re 
like an airport – you hold a lot of space for all the planes.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthe-eyes-have-it-how-staring-at-strangers-became-a-global-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44cbbb0c12d3bf4e0f083ad5991b4be4e68d0fa0%2F0_0_2000_1335%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eyes%20have%20it%3A%20how%20staring%20at%20strangers%20became%20a%20global%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthe-eyes-have-it-how-staring-at-strangers-became-a-global-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eyes%20have%20it%3A%20how%20staring%20at%20strangers%20became%20a%20global%20movement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthe-eyes-have-it-how-staring-at-strangers-became-a-global-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44cbbb0c12d3bf4e0f083ad5991b4be4e68d0fa0%2F0_0_2000_1335%2F2000.jpg>
 Eye gazing is ‘less challenging and less intense than expected’, with most 
pairs of strangers springboarding straight into conversation. Photograph: 
Simeon/The Human Connection 
In Hindu practice, Darshan – literally, “seeing” – includes gazing into the 
eyes of a holy person, and being seen in return. Eye gazing is a meditative 
practice in Buddhism, Sufism and Tantra. The original “look into my eyes” 
hypnotist, Franz Mesmer, treated patients with intense eye contact. 
Psychoanalytic philosophers such as Lacan and Žižek explored the idea of “gaze” 
– the paradox being that the only thing you can never see properly is yourself.

Ulay v Marina: how art's power couple went to war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/11/marina-abramovic-ulay-performance-art-sued-lawsuit>
Many animals, including bears, chimps, dogs and cats, regard eye contact as an 
act of dominance. Many cultures regard it the same way, and avoid it when 
interacting with a superior. While westerners generally regard it as a sign of 
respect, trust, truthfulness and strength, it’s still confronting, and holding 
a gaze is usually the province of romantic relationships. In fact, in 1989, 
researcher Joan Kellerman and her teamlinked eye gazing to increased romantic 
and interpersonal attraction 
<https://www.researchgate.net/profile/James_Laird2/publication/223385329_Looking_and_loving_The_effects_of_mutual_gaze_on_feelings_of_romantic_love/links/54da1ae40cf2970e4e7db846.pdf>
. Kreyman tells me that at least one couple has now met and married through 
their eye-gazing events.

Performance artist Marina Abramović turned the eye gaze into art with her work 
The Artist Is Present <https://vimeo.com/72711715>, looking into the eyes of 
thousands of MoMA punters over three months – a work which went viral to the 
tune of 40 million views, after her former lover Ulay dropped in, apparently 
unannounced. The footage of the two weeping (along with, inone version 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CAID_2iKO5Y>, a false backstory that they 
hadn’t seen each other for 30 years) was pure emotional cocaine, somewhat 
undercut by the fact that the two have sincesued each other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/21/ulay-claims-legal-victory-in-case-against-ex-partner-marina-abramovic>
. But it was no matter:Amnesty International 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f7XhrXUoD6U> put the concept to work, pairing 
Europeans and refugees in their own affecting video.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df7XhrXUoD6U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df7XhrXUoD6U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Df7XhrXUoD6U&media=>
It’s Abramović we mostly have to thank for this pleasant day of meeting 
strangers under the linden trees in Fitzroy Gardens. Kreyman first experienced 
eye gazing as a meditation and theatresports activity, but honed his technique 
as a facilitator at Kaldor Project 30’s Marina Abramović: in Residence in 
Sydney in 2015.

Whatever the origins of the movement, and whatever your personal experience of 
the process, it’s clear that eye gazing is an undeniable shortcut to human 
connection – something most of us could always use a little more of.

• The Human Connection <https://www.facebook.com/pg/thehcmovement/events/>’s 
next eye-gazing events will be held on 14 January in Sydney, Canberra and 
Brisbane, and on 15 January in Los Angeles
 