
Everyone remembers their first Stephen King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking> experience. Mine was hunkering 
down in a corner of the basement of an empty house, feverishly turning the 
pages of The Shining. Even crossing the hall on a toilet break required a major 
act of nerve when all you could think of was that infernal booming of the roque 
mallet striking the walls as the misshapen creature approached… “Come out here 
and take your medicine!”

Back then, everyone agreed it was the scariest book they had ever read. And 
Stanley Kubrick was making the movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-shining>. The teaser trailer depicted a 
tsunami of red liquid gushing out of an elevator; it looked nothing like blood, 
but was suitably ominous. It promised to be the scariest film ever made.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3b726feAhdU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3b726feAhdU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D3b726feAhdU&media=>
Except it wasn’t. The first time we saw The Shining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-shining>, it was a shattering 
disappointment. I’d never expected – nor wanted – a film adaptation that 
slavishly stuck to its source, but Kubrick had left out all the best bits. 
Where were the hedge animals? The roque mallet? The boiler? “The novel is by no 
means a serious literary work,” Kubrick told French film critic Michel Ciment, 
“but the plot is for the most part extremely worked out, and for a film that is 
often all that really matters.” Yet he and his co-writer, Diane Johnson, 
cavalierly junked the central dynamic of a parent struggling against his own 
dark urges and fear of harming those closest to him, and fans of the book were 
not pleased.

Jack Nicholson, who played Jack Torrance, was a gurning madman who resented 
his wife and son from the very first frame. Shelley Duvall, as Wendy Torrance, 
was little more than a hysterical woman in peril. Their son’s imaginary friend 
Tony was reduced to the talking finger of child actor Danny Lloyd, and the 
pivotal “REDRUM” moment was accompanied by the sort of musical 
crash-and-shock-zoom that critics normally despise in films by less adulated 
directors. Worst of all, following Dick Halloran (Scatman Crothers) all the way 
from Florida to Colorado, only to summarily kill him off in the hotel lobby, 
seemed little more than the film-maker’s “Fuck you!” to fans of the novel, in 
which the character survived.

In years to come I would begin to appreciate Kubrick’s film for what it was, 
rather than what it wasn’t. The Steadicam shots of Danny riding his tricycle 
around the hotel corridors are a masterclass in building tension. After a 
decade of subtly calibrated performances, Nicholson crossed the line into the 
hammy-eyebrow-acting that would henceforth be his default approach, but as a 
portrait of resentful, abusive, entitled masculinity, his Jack Torrance is a 
terrifying creation, far scarier than the hotel’s supernatural manifestations, 
and his interactions with the barman and former caretaker are little 
masterpieces of unease. Duvall discovering the contents of her husband’s 
manuscript is chilling. And replacing the hedge animals with a maze was 
probably a smart move, given the technical constraints of the era.

Before the end of the 1980s, I wasn’t the only one to do a 180-degree turn and 
decide The Shining was a great horror movie after all. Critical antipathy 
turned to adulation. King scripted a TV mini-series that stuck religiously to 
the plot of the book – and it fell flat. Kubrick’s version became one of the 
most-quoted films of all time. Wacko Jacko axing his way through the bathroom 
door, “Heeere’s Johnny!”, the spooky twins, REDRUM were all referenced 
endlessly, in everything from Twister to The Simpsons to Spaced and beyond.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWDpipB4yehk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWDpipB4yehk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWDpipB4yehk&media=>
To paraphrase David Thomson, great films only partly belong to the director – 
“they also belong to the minds that interpret them”. And as Rodney Ascher’s 
2012 documentaryRoom 237 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/25/room-237-review> showed, The 
Shining became a focus for conspiracy theorists who claimed it was really about 
the genocide of Native Americans, or the Holocaust, or faked moon landings. It 
wasn’t the film’s fault it was embraced by weirdos, but it felt like the tip of 
an iceberg. Otherwise normal people seemed as obsessed as Jack Torrance had 
been with the Overlook. Of course it’s a seething mass of metaphor, but so are 
other horror movies – that’s part of their appeal. But you could barely post a 
photo of a corridor on social media without some wag responding with “REDRUM”, 
or a tricycle-related quip, or “Watch out for the twins!” – as though there 
were no other corridors in the movies, or indeed in life.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsZe_MyQqiws&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsZe_MyQqiws>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsZe_MyQqiws&media=>
I became fed up with the ubiquity of the film’s tropes, the endless quotation 
and recycling, and started seeing its flaws again, particularly Kubrick’s 
contempt for his characters and his cruelty to women (you can see him bullying 
Duvall in the making-of documentary) and the underlying sense of an A-list 
director slumming it in a genre he essentially despises. Among King 
adaptations, Carrie, The Dead Zone and Pet Sematary not only retain their power 
to scare but also to grip at an emotional level. But the only emotion in The 
Shining is the “Gotcha!” of a fairground haunted mansion, and those thrills 
have long since been parsed into extinction. Move along now.
 