
Fat chips with feta at Gazi, Melbourne <http://gazirestaurant.com.au>:
chosen by Nigella Lawson, food writer and broadcaster

If I tell you that the best thing I ate this year was in January, please don’t 
think that the rest of my eating year has been a disappointment: know that I 
would never allow that to be the case. I have a big thing about chips. Whenever 
I go out, I ask if the chips I see on the menu are hand-cut. I’m nearly always 
told they are; they invariably aren’t. That’s no good – I’m not interested if 
they’re triple-fried in goose fat if they’re not hand-cut. It’s all about the 
rough edges, you see.

Now, I have to say I didn’t oversee how they cut the chips at a restaurant 
called Gazi in Melbourne when I was there in January, but they taste like the 
real thing – but different. They’re fat chips that are halfway to potato 
wedges, fried in intensely garlicky oil and, once crisp and golden, tossed in a 
bowl with proper Greek dried oregano and crumbles of sharp feta. It’s 
impossible not to eat well in Melbourne (well, in Australia generally), but 
these chips were absolutely worth flying the 10,496.05 miles for.

Scallops with truffle puree at the Clove Club, London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/jul/06/clove-club-london-restaurant-review>
Gregory Marchand, chef-patron, Frenchie, London

This was really fresh, really beautiful and really, really tasty. The scallops 
came with a dashi jelly, mandarin juice, chopped hazelnuts and a brown-butter 
dressing, with some raw chestnut mushrooms shaved on top. Everything in the 
meal was stunning – the duck with fermented red cabbage puree was another 
standout – but this was the dish with the biggest wow factor. I still remember 
the experience of eating it.


Cured pastırma fish at Ismet Baba, Istanbul
Marianna Leivaditaki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/18/watermelon-charred-feta-bread-salad-mint-recipe-marianna-leivaditaki-cook-residency>
, head chef, Morito Hackney Road, London

Earlier this year, a few of us from Morito went to Istanbul. We had some 
amazing food but the most interesting thing was a dish we ate at a fish 
restaurant in Uskudar, right next to the Bosphorus, called Ismet Baba. The dish 
is balık pastırması: swordfish cured with pastırma spices, so lots of 
fenugreek, chilli flakes, cumin and caraway. Even though I cure fish myself, I 
had never eaten it in this way before. Then, a few months later, I went to 
Crete and had a very similar dish. I couldn’t believe the coincidence. So I got 
to work and tried to replicate it – and I did it quite successfully. Now it’s 
on our seafood menu. I’ve turned it into a salad with capers, cherry tomatoes 
and some boiled baby potatoes, but in Turkey and Crete they just served it on 
its own with a little olive oil.


Squid bolognese at Koffmann’s, London
Tom Kitchin, chef-patron, The Kitchin, Edinburgh

I don’t know if it’s a nostalgic thing, because his restaurant is about to 
close, but the best thing this year was Pierre Koffmann’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/16/ofm-awards-2016-lifetime-achievement-pierre-koffmann>
s squid bolognese. It’s a mindblowing dish. He’s taken the idea of spaghetti 
bolognese, but there’s no pasta involved. What you do is freeze the squid in a 
vacuum pack bag in one big block, then slice it very thinly on a meat slicer, 
which creates a kind of tagliatelle effect. The bolognese is the tentacles 
cooked in a rich tomato sauce. Some of the most ingenious things in life are 
the simplest. You can’t take it out of the man, he just keeps creating.


Jackfruit curry at Samakanda, Sri Lanka
Meera Sodha, food writer, author of Fresh India

In January, I went to Sri Lanka and stayed at a tropical plantation in the 
south called Samakanda. One evening some local chefs climbed the trees in the 
garden, harvested some coconuts and tender baby jackfruit and made a curry. I’d 
never eaten jackfruit before and I’d been staring at these spiky green fruit in 
the sky wondering what they’d taste like. They cooked the jackfruit in a clay 
pot over an open fire with onions, ginger, spices, coconut milk and a very sour 
ingredient called goraka. As you never just get one dish in Sri Lanka, we also 
had an aubergine and mustard pickle called brinjal moju, a cashew-nut curry, 
sambal and spiced rice, all washed down with an arak sour. But the jackfruit 
curry stood out: the sticky sweetness of the fruit was balanced by the sourness 
of the goraka, and together they cut through the creaminess of the coconut. It 
was a sensational dish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ad226a932fe54327e61403eac97607a2ca1763d%2F13_71_1691_1691%2F1691.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20thing%20I%20ate%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20thing%20I%20ate%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ad226a932fe54327e61403eac97607a2ca1763d%2F13_71_1691_1691%2F1691.jpg>
 Jackfruit curry chosen by Meera Sodha. Illustration: Sarah Tanat-Jones 
Cured and smoked jowl at Pitt Cue, London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/15/pitt-cue-london-ec2-restaurant-review-marina-oloughlin>
Sarit Packer, chef-patron, Honey & Co and Honey & Smoke, London

Itamar and I used to get takeaways from Pitt Cue’s little place off Carnaby 
Street but we wondered how it would translate to a big restaurant in the City. 
We thought they might go for something over-sleek but they haven’t – it’s not 
frou-frou and the food was really simple. They did this smoked jowl which was 
literally the piece of meat on a plate, with a lick of puree. It was proper 
proud cooking, as if to say, we know we can do this amazingly well so you don’t 
need anything else. And it was fun to see people being really creative with 
smoke.

Petit-beurre cake
Tomer Amedi, head chef at the Palomar, London

My wife made me a cake for my birthday in April. It’s called a petit-beurre 
cake, after the French biscuits (which are very popular in Israel), and it’s 
the most delicious thing in the universe. I used to have it when I was little. 
My wife knows it’s one of my kryptonites: she made me a whole tray and I ate 
half of it by myself. It’s basically a layer cake with vanilla cream and these 
biscuits, then you add shaved chocolate on top and then the biscuit becomes all 
mushy and nice. It’s simple, it’s trashy, but it’s so good.

Cochinita pibil in Yucatán, Mexico
René Redzepi, chef-patron, Noma, Copenhagen

This summer, I went to a tiny little Mayan village called Yaxuna in the 
Yucatán peninsula and had cochinita pibil. It’s a very traditional dish made 
with a little pig, usually wild, that they hunt and then marinate in the seed 
of the achiote tree mixed with sour orange juice. It’s then folded in banana 
leaves and cooked in a pit. We ate it in 35-degree heat with fresh tortillas, 
which Mayan women made on hot stones, accompanied by pickled onions, fresh 
coriander and habanero chillies (as a pale gringo, I could only have a few 
drops of the chilli marinade). The meat was moist and juicy and the acidity was 
just incredible. It was such a perfect mouthful – the best Mexican food I’ve 
ever had.

Bone-marrow arancini by Jacob Kenedy at the Oxford Symposium on Food and 
Cookery
Bee Wilson, food writer and historian

At the Oxford Food Symposium, <http://www.oxfordsymposium.org.uk/> which I’m 
the chair of, we always have themed meals, and this year the theme was offal. A 
lot of people thought it was going to be dreadful, but Jacob Kenedy, 
chef-patron at Bocca di Lupo, put together a total feast – one of those meals 
I’ll remember all my life. The level of thought he put into it was just 
extraordinary. There was a lot of wordplay on the menu: it included ox-heart 
tomatoes, marrow-fat peas and kidney beans. He served red mullet livers, which 
he’d been stockpiling for months at the restaurant, with bruschetta and peas. 
He made coda alla vaccinara, or Roman oxtail stew, and an extremely spicy stew 
of innards called u morzeddhu. But the thing that really stood out for me was 
an arancino (stuffed rice ball). I’m not often a fan – I think they can be 
quite dry and disappointing compared to risotto – but this was a beautiful 
golden sphere, so saffrony, and when you opened it up it had bone marrow in the 
middle. It was so unctuous – sort of like having risotto Milanese with osso 
bucco all in one tiny, perfect element.

Black rice with squid ink at El Pirata of Mayfair, London
Fred Sirieix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/17/the-art-of-service-maitre-ds-secrets-fred-sirieix>
, general manager, Galvin at Windows, London

El Pirata of Mayfair is a lovely Spanish restaurant next to where I work. It’s 
a traditional, no-frills tapas place that’s been open for 22 years – if it were 
French it would be a bistro. The dish I love there is black rice with squid. 
They cook the rice in squid ink and a little bit of fish stock and it has a 
very delicate round flavour. I love the langoustine with tomato sauce, too, and 
breaded monkfish – oh, it’s delicious. And such good value. I said to the 
manager, “Are you mad?” He said, “Fred, people like these prices and we’re 
happy, too, we don’t need to put the prices up.” OK, fine by me. Oh, and the 
ham, I think it’s the best that you can find in London. Don’t take my word for 
it, go and try it out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5def2c092f9a08b94c38dae59f91b72bb3a8ec3a%2F0_26_722_903%2F722.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20thing%20I%20ate%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20thing%20I%20ate%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5def2c092f9a08b94c38dae59f91b72bb3a8ec3a%2F0_26_722_903%2F722.jpg>
 Squid chosen by Fred Sirieix. Illustration: Sarah Tanat-Jones 
Pan-fried cep with celeriac puree and shaved truffle at Timberyard, Edinburgh

 Gill Meller, Head chef at River Cottage and author of Gather

Timberyard is a family-owned restaurant – the father, mother, daughter and two 
sons are all involved and they were incredibly welcoming. One particular dish 
in the six-course lunch bowled me over. The chef had received a delivery of 
fresh ceps that morning. He’d taken a thick slice from the middle of the 
mushroom and pan-fried it on both sides with salt and pepper, then served it 
warm with a tiny bit of celeriac puree and shaved truffle. Every mouthful was 
exceptional, partly because the mushroom was so fresh and pristine. It was the 
simplest dish you could imagine, but the way it was executed was just perfect.

Watermelon in Beijing
Michael Zee, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/21/symmetry-breakfasts-michael-zee-dumplings-turkish-pizza-recipes>
 author ofSymmetry Breakfast

In September, I went to stay with my sister who lives in Beijing. She was 
obsessed with watermelons, which are absolutely gargantuan in China – bigger 
than a beach ball. They’re so big, you need help in the supermarket to put it 
into the trolley, and we had to carry our one home in a pram. The heart of the 
watermelon is the best bit. It was such a different texture to anything I’ve 
ever experienced in the UK or America: the flesh was like sugar crystals. I 
just chopped it up and ate it by itself. It was so sugary and sweet, I couldn’t 
stop eating it.

Duck breast with blackcurrant at Birch, Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/30/birch-bristol-restaurant-review>
Stephen Terry, chef-patron of the Hardwick, Abergavenny

The couple who run Birch, Sam Leach and Beccy Massey, are young and very 
passionate. They grow a lot of the produce themselves, make their own bread, do 
their own butchery. The food is very simple and the place is unpretentious, 
which appeals to me – they’re clearly putting their money into quality 
ingredients rather than fine china. We went in the springtime and every dish 
was a celebration of the season: we had some early rhubarb, we had snails. But 
the best thing was duck with blackcurrants and roasted carrots. It was the most 
amazingly cooked duck breast I’ve had in my life. I asked if he’d cooked it in 
a water bath and he said, no, just in the pan. It was beautiful.

Spätzle at Rotstockhütte, Gimmelwald, Switzerland
Trine Hahnemann, food writer and cook

This summer I went hiking in the Swiss Alps. One day we walked for 12km, a lot 
of it uphill, and then came down into a valley where we found a little cafe 
that looked a bit like a shed. They made just a few dishes and one of them was 
homemade spätzle with cream, bacon and local cheese. I had it with a big glass 
of beer. Maybe it was the circumstances – I was really hungry from the long 
walk – but this dish was so good. It wasn’t a foodie thing at all: it felt like 
the world hadn’t touched this place for a long, long time. But it made me 
really happy.

Veal brain at Le Baratin, Paris
Dominique Ansel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/20/five-christmas-bakes-dominique-ansel-cronut>
, owner, Dominique Ansel Bakery, London

It was in Paris this spring, at a small bistro called Le Baratin, that I had 
the best dish ever: veal brain, poached and seared, with lemon sauce and some 
small boiled potatoes. I love simple, home-cooked food and this was just spot 
on – unbelievably delicious and cooked to perfection. Le Baratin is a tiny 
place in Belleville, not fancy at all. There’s an open kitchen and you can see 
the chef [Raquel Carena] working away, with just one other cook, while her 
husband manages the bar and front of house. She makes the kind of food I want 
to eat every day. I’d like to go back very soon.

Pumpkin tortelli at Dal Pescatore, Canneto Sull’oglio, Italy
Massimo Bottura 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/17/massimo-bottura-chef-best-restaurant-osteria-francescana>
, chef-patron, Osteria Francescana, Modena, Italy

None of the best things I ate this year involved luxury ingredients but they 
all had an emotional quality, which is very important to me. A few months ago I 
had a pumpkin tortelli at Dal Pescatore, not far from Modena, which reminded me 
of my youth and the flavours of my grandmother’s cooking. It is savoury, spicy 
and sweet, so you have this feeling that you’re almost eating a dessert at the 
pasta course. Maybe the pasta was more refined and the plate more elegant, but 
otherwise it was exactly like my grandmother made it. As soon as I tasted it, I 
was so emotionally touched, because it took me back to the memory of my youth. 
It was unbelievable: I almost cried.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff520af5e2969ccd3c9792fb8cb8d5493893296bf%2F24_38_972_1306%2F972.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20thing%20I%20ate%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20thing%20I%20ate%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff520af5e2969ccd3c9792fb8cb8d5493893296bf%2F24_38_972_1306%2F972.jpg>
 Pumpkin tortelli chosen by Massimo Bottura. Illustration: Sarah Tanat-Jones 
Grilled starfruit in Sylhet, Bangladesh
Nadiya Hussain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/19/nadiya-hussein-bake-off-senseless-love-affair-with-cheese>
, food writer and broadcaster

My dad has a starfruit tree in his backyard in Bangladesh and when we were 
over there last month it was in season, which I was very excited about. My 
relatives were all laughing at me because they think starfruit is a nuisance – 
they don’t really eat them because they’re so tart, and when they become sweet 
they disintegrate very quickly. But it was such a treat to see them growing in 
abundance, and for the kids to pick them. They couldn’t see where the star was, 
but then we sliced one up and they saw it and were like, “Ah, that’s really 
cool.” I’d never cooked with starfruit before, but me and the kids dug a hole 
in my dad’s front garden (which he doesn’t know about because we filled it up 
afterwards) and took an old piece of metal mesh from my uncle’s building site 
and built a fire. Then we grilled the starfruit with cinnamon and sugar, and 
ate it with all the kids in the village. We were just making it up as we went 
along, using whatever we had in the cupboard, but it was so good. Grilled 
starfruit, I can tell you, is really delicious.

Roast Dexter ribeye
April Bloomfield <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/april-bloomfield>, 
chef-patron, the Spotted Pig and the Breslin Bar & Dining Room, both New York

Few things blew my mind this year, but one that did was this lovely beef I had 
at my friend Charlie Hart’s farmhouse in Cornwall. He cooked us a Dexter ribeye 
roast with all the trimmings – lots of roast potatoes and vegetables – and it 
was all delicious, but the joint was the standout. Boy, was that thing beefy: 
the fat was the colour of good butter and the meat so tender and tasty. It was 
one of those moments where you have a connection with what you’re eating – it 
kind of grabs you, stops you in your tracks, and makes you go, “Whoa, that’s 
perfection!”

Fried reindeer moss sprayed with chocolate at Noma, Copenhagen
Sat Bains, chef-patron, Restaurant Sat Bains, Nottingham

Take a snapshot of “Nordic” cuisine right now, and people are still doing the 
kind of stuff René Redzepi was making five or six years ago. But what the guy 
himself is cooking these days, you can’t call it Nordic. It’s unique. This 
dessert blew my mind. I had it in August, when I was in town for theMad festival
 <http://www.madfeed.co/>, and, like all René’s food, it looks stunning. It 
comes on a bed of moss with slices of chocolate-covered dehydrated cep, which 
were amazing in their own right, but this lichen was something else: it’s 
deep-fried, sprayed with chocolate and flavoured with, at a guess, pine oil. 
The first thing that hits you is the texture – it’s like the most delicate 
Shredded Wheat imaginable – then all these flavours hit you all at once. It’s 
incredible. I went back six weeks later, just to have it again.

Scallops at Fäviken, Sweden
Clare Smyth, chef

I went to Fäviken at the end of the summer and the whole dining experience was 
incredible. First, we sat at a log fire for aperitifs and snacks. Then we went 
upstairs and had a procession of courses – we probably ate 30 different things, 
though it didn’t feel like a heavy meal. Everything was good but there were a 
few standouts. One was the most amazing plump scallop that was cooked on a big 
wood fire in the middle of the kitchen. They remove the skirt, then pour the 
juice back into the shell and serve it on some juniper wood. It’s just a 
scallop – so simple – but it was the most succulent sweet thing. Towards the 
end, we went back down to the fire and they handed out a wonderful selection of 
sweets, petit fours, coffees and homemade drinks. Afterwards, we went out to a 
tipi to smoke cigars and drink cognac.

Whole peking duck at Park Chinois, London
Jay Rayner, Observer restaurant critic

The best all-round eating experience remains Riley’s Fish Shack in Tynemouth 
and, having come so late in the year, it’s unlikely to be beaten. But the best 
single food item has to be the whole peking duck at Alan Yau’s homage to the 
famed dinner-dance clubs of Shanghai, Park Chinois, just off London’s Berkeley 
Square. Is it cheap? God no. It’s £85, though that’s for two at least. But 
blimey, it’s good: crisp lacquered skin, the perfect thin layer of fat, sweet 
yielding meat. It’s been said that the Chinese are the best at roasting duck. 
And this is quite simply the very best of the best. It could be more expensive. 
For £280 they’ll bung on 50g of beluga caviar, but I really wouldn’t bother.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9adc5e1038c5188cbf281dbff28b0beecb0741a9%2F0_0_975_1313%2F975.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20thing%20I%20ate%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20thing%20I%20ate%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9adc5e1038c5188cbf281dbff28b0beecb0741a9%2F0_0_975_1313%2F975.jpg>
 Peking duck chosen by Jay Rayner. Illustration: Sarah Tanat-Jones 
Gaeng ki lek (beef and cassia leaf curry) at Bo.lan, Bangkok
Andy Oliver, chef/co-owner, Som Saa, London

Before we opened the new Som Saa, the team went on a research trip to 
Thailand. For me, the meal at Bo.lan was the highlight of the entire visit, and 
this curry stood out even among all the other sublime dishes. It had sweetness 
from fresh coconut cream and this amazing artisan palm sugar that tastes a bit 
like a combination of butterscotch and honey, and that’s balanced by the slight 
bitterness of fresh cassia and the fragrance of fresh makrut lime leaf. The 
beef was pretty special stuff, too – aged rump grilled until it was all smoky. 
When you’re just off a flight from the UK and eat here, it smacks you square in 
the face – all those familiar Thai tastes and ingredients are turned up to 11, 
because they’re fresh from the market that morning.

Cuttlefish with summer truffle at Bakè <http://www.bakeristorante.it/>, Torre 
dell’Orso, Italy
Jane Baxter, chef/co-owner, Wild Artichokes <http://www.wildartichokes.co.uk/>
, Kingsbridge, Devon

Bakè is the kind of place that proves you shouldn’t judge on appearances. It’s 
behind a semi-deserted shopping centre on the outskirts of a quiet seaside town 
in Puglia – the only thing missing is tumbleweed – but you walk in and the 
place is packed: they had to bring in an extra table and move everyone around 
to make room for us. The owner’s a bit of a local celeb – he invented the 
pentolo pan, for cooking large amounts pasta – but he’s best known round these 
parts as a truffle hunter. It’s a short menu: three or four pastas, a few 
mostly fishy mains, and a selection of antipasti, of which this dish was one. 
It’s so simple: incredibly fresh cuttlefish sliced very thinly, then 
flash-fried and dressed with brilliant olive oil and summer truffles. The 
combination was staggering.

Reuben sandwich at Black Axe Mangal, London
Tim Siadatan, chef/co-owner, Padella and Trullo, both London

I’ve eaten at Black Axe Mangal a lot in the past year – well, it is just 20 
metres down the road from Trullo. Everything Lee Tiernan and the BAM team cook 
is excellent, but their take on the Reuben is the best I’ve ever had. 
Everything in it – and I mean absolutely everything – is made in-house: the 
smoked pastrami, the brisket, the welsh rarebit mix for the cheese, the 
sauerkraut, the pickles and even the mustard. And it’s all served in a homemade 
flatbread with a side of homemade crisps. It’s totally awesome.

Nathan Outlaw’s lobster roasting juices
Tom Adams, chef-patron, Pitt Cue, London, and Coombeshead Farm, Lewannick, 
Cornwall

What with opening the new Pitt Cue and Coombeshead in 2016, I haven’t had many 
meals out this year. Even so, there have been many memorable morsels along the 
way, and perhaps the most satisfying came during a dinner we held at the farm 
with Nathan Outlaw. I hadn’t eaten much all day, and was running mostly on 
fumes and the occasional Malteser. After we sent out the main courses, there 
was a short respite before dessert, so I nipped out to the prep area, where 
we’d moved the spent roasting trays. Some of Nathan’s sweet, buttery, smoky 
lobster roasting juices were still in the trays, so I liberated a few slices of 
bread and took care of things. Roasting and resting juices are my holy grail, 
and these were some of the finest.

Curried calves’ brains, Farokh Talati <https://twitter.com/farokh36> pop-up, 
London
Gary Usher, chef-owner, Sticky Walnut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/feb/14/sticky-walnut-chester-restaurant-review>
, Chester; Burnt Truffle, Heswall, Wirral, Hispi, Manchester

Farokh’s day job is at St John Bread & Wine in London, but on the side he runs 
these brilliant Persian and curry pop-ups – he’s done a couple for us up at 
Sticky, but I’m on-duty there, so only get a small taste. I had these brains in 
October, when he did a guest night at Black Axe Mangal in Highbury. He serves 
everything family-style, and you just dive into this amazing feast. These 
massala-spiced brains came with a wonderful tarragon mayo, and I must have 
eaten at least five of them all by myself – and I mean whole ones. We sometimes 
have brains on the menu at our places, but Farokh’s spicing takes them to 
another level.

Coffee ice-cream at Grom, Milan
Ruby Tandoh <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ruby-tandoh>, food writer

In May, I went to Italy with my girlfriend for five weeks and we must have had 
two ice-creams a day while we were there. We went to a couple of 
off-the-beaten-track places that were highly recommended, with an old man 
crushing pistachios with his bare hands or whatever, and to be honest they were 
underwhelming. The best was at a chain called Grom. I know being into a chain 
is very anti-foodie, but it was really amazing ice-cream. The one I remember 
most clearly was the first one I had: coffee and pistachio in a branch in 
Milan. I couldn’t believe that a coffee ice-cream could taste like that – so 
dark and bitter but sweet as well. It was wonderful. In every town we went to 
after that, we’d go to Grom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16226c657b087cad86d5d97fbdf188579ff37d06%2F23_44_944_1181%2F944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20thing%20I%20ate%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20thing%20I%20ate%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbest-thing-i-ate-2016-nigella-lawson-nadiya-hussain-rene-redzepi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16226c657b087cad86d5d97fbdf188579ff37d06%2F23_44_944_1181%2F944.jpg>
 Coffee ice-cream chosen by Ruby Tandoh. Illustration: Sarah Tanat-Jones 
Lamb barbacoa at Rancho Seco, Malinalco, Mexico
Nieves Barragán Mohacho, head chef, Barrafina, London

In September, I went to Mexico for a week, and spent three days in Malinalco 
learning about barbacoa – and no, it’s not the same as barbecue. The guy 
smeared a glorious paste of herbs, spices and about 10 types of chilli all over 
half a lamb, then laid it on a rack over a big pot filled with chickpeas, 
carrots, tomatoes, onions, herbs, spices, chillies and water, so the fat would 
drip through. He covered the meat with agave leaves, put the pot in a hole 
filled with smouldering charcoal, covered everything with hay and left it. The 
next day, about 16 hours later, we had the soup from the pot, then the lamb 
with tacos and … Oh my god! Even though I was full, I just couldn’t stop 
eating. It was my idea of heaven. And the guy still refused to tell me what was 
in his paste.

Anchovy cicchetti at All’Arco, Venice
Angela Hartnett, chef-patron, Murano, Cafe Murano and Merchants Tavern, London

A few months ago, Russell Norman (Polpo) took a bunch of us over to Venice for 
a few days. We went to All’Arco the morning after a lovely, but very long, 
night on the town. It’s a bacaro near the Rialto, and while the others were 
chatting away over yet more drinks, I sat quietly at the bar and got stuck into 
the cicchetti. My memory’s a little hazy, for obvious reasons, but three stood 
out: one topped with sea bass ceviche with oil and chilli, another with 
fontina, prosciutto and swiss chard, and these little squares of bread spread 
with glorious butter and topped with a single salted anchovy. That’s all there 
was to it, but it was just the best.

Soba noodles dipped in duck broth at Kanei, Kyoto
Erchen Chang, chef/co-owner, Bao, London

Kanei is in an unassuming house in a quiet residential neighbourhood. We were 
lucky, because we got to the front of the long queue just before they shut the 
doors – there are only 16 or so seats on the tatami, so it’s pretty cosy. The 
four schoolboys next to us all seemed to know what they wanted and ordered 
straightaway, while this old guy sat behind us told me he’d been eating here 
for 10 years. We had cold soba noodles with a rich, hot duck broth with three 
slices of pink duck breast floating in it. You dip the super-bouncy soba in the 
broth, and slurp. This dish was so simple, yet every part of it hit the spot 
and was so elegant. OFM

Steamed flower crab, Tasting Court, Hong Kongcorrect
Fuchsia Dunlop, cook and writer of Land Of Fish And Rice 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/land-of-fish-and-rice.html>

My dish of the year was steamed flower crab with golden chicken oil and 
Shaoxing wine, served on a rippled bed of smooth rice pasta. It was part of an 
exquisite Cantonese feast arranged by friends. Every dish was prepared with 
consummate artistry, among them lion’s head meatballs and a perfect rendition 
of an old classic, braised pomelo skin with dried shrimp eggs. I think it’s the 
best Cantonese meal I’ve ever had, and the steamed crab was the highlight. 
Unforgettable.

Chicken rice, Wee Nam Kee, Singapore
Claus Meyer, Food writer and co-founder, Noma

Last winter, during a trip to Singapore, I had the best chicken in my life. 
The chicken itself was a 2kg free-range chicken of the very best quality. It 
was poached for 30 minutes in a gigantic pot full of chicken stock that I 
suspect had been cooking for decades and had been passed on from chef to chef, 
just like a sourdough is passed on from one generation to another. After 30 
minutes, the chicken was taken out of the stock and put straight into water 
with ice to seal the melted fats and juices under the skin. The chicken was 
then kept at room temperature. The rice itself was cooked in chicken fat and 
then in chicken stock, and served with a black thick soy-like sauce and a 
chilli sauce made from freshly pounded chillis, ginger juice, garlic, lime 
juice, sesame oil and sugar. When the chicken melted in my mouth, tears came to 
my eyes.
 