
If the US presidential campaign conveys a flavour of unreality, that may be 
because it is rooted in fiction. In 1935, Sinclair Lewis sat down to write a 
novel about political radicalisation and social upheaval in the 
depression-ravaged US. What emerged after four months of feverish work wasIt 
Can’t Happen Here <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/It_Can%27t_Happen_Here>, a 
runaway bestseller that quickly sold more than 300,000 copies.

Lewis was alarmed by what was taking shape in the country. The New Deal had 
delivered a false sense of optimism to the Federal Reserve, if not to the 
millions queueing at the soup kitchens. The money supply was tightened in 
anticipation of a sustained rally, government spending was cut and taxes were 
raised. As a result, the US was pushed to the cusp of a double-dip depression, 
with manufacturing back to its 1934 level and unemployment up by 5%.

This created fertile ground for Father Charles Coughlin 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Coughlin>, Huey Long 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huey_Long>, William Randolph Hearst 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Randolph_Hearst> and other fanatics to 
spread the gospel of bigotry. It was no fleeting backlash: on the eve of the 
second world war, the German American Bundpacked more than 20,000 militants 
into Madison Square Garden in New York for a pro-Hitler rally 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0gU9op16rjQ>. To wild applause, their leader, 
Fritz Kuhn, derided the US President as Franklin D “Rosenfeld”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fit-cant-happen-here-1935-novel-sinclair-lewis-predicted-rise-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F266d3cee065b072c66a344d392e408ca1d1a7634%2F110_0_2402_3000%2F2402.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%201935%20novel%20that%20predicted%20the%20rise%20of%20Donald%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fit-cant-happen-here-1935-novel-sinclair-lewis-predicted-rise-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%201935%20novel%20that%20predicted%20the%20rise%20of%20Donald%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Foct%2F09%2Fit-cant-happen-here-1935-novel-sinclair-lewis-predicted-rise-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F266d3cee065b072c66a344d392e408ca1d1a7634%2F110_0_2402_3000%2F2402.jpg>
 Controversial Louisiana senator Huey Long, who was accused of being a 
demagogue, was assassinated in 1935. Photograph: Alamy 
Lewis’s antihero is the ignorant demagogue Berzelius “Buzz” Windrip, who wins 
the 1936 election with the support of millions of impoverished and angry 
voters. They marched carrying placards that read: “We are on relief. We want to 
become human beings again. We want Buzz!”

Windrip could count on a number of real-life champions who appear in the 
novel, such as the newspaper tycoon William Randolph Hearst. In 1935, the man 
widely regarded as responsible for goading the US into the Spanish-American war 
proclaimed: “Whenever you hear a prominent American called a fascist, you can 
usually make up your mind that the man is simply a loyal citizen who stands up 
for Americanism.”

Lewis’s hero, the New England journalist Doremus Jessup, attends a Windrip 
rally in Madison Square Garden. Jessup reports that Windrip’s rhetoric was 
irresistible to his thousands of downtrodden admirers. He later can’t remember 
a word Windrip said. But it doesn’t matter: if Windrip contradicts himself, 
backtracks on policy or simply spews out a torrent of lies, he tells them what 
they want to hear. Every American will be guaranteed a minimum income of $5,000 
($88,000 in today’s money), US-hating Mexico will be severely dealt with and 
Jewish bankers will be punished for landing the country in this mess.

Windrip unveils his 15-point manifesto, which includes “prison or the death 
penalty” for anyone advocating communism and the recognition of Jews as “fully 
Americanised”, so long as they continue to support “our ideals”. Substitute 
“Muslim” for “communist” and “Hispanic” for “Jew” and there emerges an 
uncomfortable picture of what is taking place in the US today.

Windrip wins the election. He orders the invasion of Mexico, after which his 
victorious militia returns singing When Johnny Comes Marching Home. Political 
opponents are herded into concentration camps, while a flood of refugees flee 
across the border to Canada.

In the end, though, it is only a work of fiction – and millions of Americans 
cling to the belief that it will remain so. Fingers crossed on 8 November.

Jules Stewart is the author of Gotham Rising: New York in the 1930s, published 
in November by IB Tauris. To order a copy for £20, go tobookshop.theguardian.com
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/gotham-rising.html> or call 0330 333 6846. 
Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
 