
Goalkeeper: Keylor Navas

Keylor Navas was nearly sold to Manchester United in 2015 but he has developed 
into a real unsung hero at Real Madrid this year, producing 10 clean sheets in 
12 matches in the Champions League as the club achievedLa Undécima. He had to 
fill massive boots when he replaced Iker Casillas for the bargain price of €8m, 
but Navas has stepped up.

Right-back: Héctor Bellerín

Lightening quick and with great ability, Héctor Bellerín has grown and grown 
at Arsenal to become one of their most effective and reliable players. No 
wonder the club has signed him up till 2020. If Arsenal are to mount a proper 
title challenge this year, they will need him to be fit and firing.

Centre-back: Toby Alderweireld

Not many centre-backs play for 10 hours without committing a foul. Toby 
Alderweireld athletic, quick and smart – all the ingredients for a world class 
centre-back. It’s a shame he’s been injured a lot of this season; Spurs are a 
different team when he plays.

Centre-back: Leonardo Bonucci

Leonardo Bonucci can pretty much do it all. He has won Serie A six times at 
two clubs, he is great on the ball, good in the air and can pick a pass from 
anywhere. That ball for Emanuele Giaccherini against Belgium in the Euros was 
something else. No wonder he has earned the nickname “Beckham Bonucci”.

Left-back: Patrice Evra

Patrice Evra is still playing for Juventus and France at the age of 35, two 
years after Manchester United moved him on for just £1.2m, which shows the 
quality he possess. Also,his Instagram posts 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BOMz2gADZqn/?taken-by=patrice.evra&hl=en> are all 
you need to pick you up on a Monday morning. Age is just a number for the 
footballer and the man. He’s an ever-reliable old head who can still mix it 
with the best in Europe.

Centre-midfield: N’Golo Kanté

You can see why Chelsea paid £32m for N’Golo Kanté. He is a box-to-box player 
who never seems to stop running, just the type of player every team needs. He 
has played 54 games in the Premier League for Leicester City and Chelsea, 
winning 37 of them (69%) and only losing just five. If Sir Alex Ferguson 
reckons he’s the best player in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>, then you know Kante is 
something special.

Centre-midfield: Renato Sanches

Still only 19, Renato Sanches has bags of talent. Give him a few years and the 
Bayern Munich midfielder will be among the best in the world. Sanches has all 
the qualities needed to dominate a midfield and that’s why he wonthe 2016 
Golden Boy award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/renato-sanches-marcus-rashford-golden-boy-award>
. He’s been compared to Clarence Seedorf and his performances at the Euros show 
you why.

Left wing: Marcus Rashford

Perhaps the best thing Louis van Gaal did at Manchester United was giving 
Rashford his debut. He scored on his Europa League, Premier League, League Cup, 
England U21 and England debuts. Rashford really captures the essence of what 
the unexpected 11 is about, a player who came on and changed the game out of 
nowhere. He doesn’t seem fazed by anything.


Right-wing: Riyad Mahrez

What a find this guy was. Riyad Mahrez signed from Le Havre in 2014 and 
inspired Leicester City to the title this year. scoring 17 goals and laying on 
11 assists for the champions. He became the first Algerian to win a Premier 
League medal and the first African to win the PFA player of the year award.

No10: Dimitri Payet

Dimitri Payet put together a string of stunning performances for West Ham and 
France in 2016. He dazzled defenders with his dribbling ability and whipped in 
free-kicks from all over the pitch. His goals against Manchester United, 
Crystal Palace, Middlesbrough and Romania need to be watched again and again.

Striker: Jamie Vardy

Who else could it be? He scored in a record 11 consecutive Premier League 
matches as Leicester City came from nowhere to win the title and scored his 
first international goal with a tasty backheel against Germany. What a year 
2016 has been for Vardy, who finished eighth in the voting for the Ballon d’Or.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM0sa9OFKc6w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM0sa9OFKc6w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DM0sa9OFKc6w&media=>
Follow Copa90 on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/user/Copa90football>, 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/copa90> and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Copa90>
 