
Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election surprised most of the 
world. But the president-elect is not finished defying expectations. Contrary 
to the predictions of many experts, stock markets have rallied strongly since 
his victory, with the three major US indices reaching record highs while the 
dollar has soared. Explaining these unexpected responses could provide a 
glimpse of what the next few months have in store for markets.

Before the election, most analysts predicted that a Trump win would trigger a 
large stock-market selloff and a rush into low-risk government bonds. And, 
indeed, when the results began rolling in, that is what happened, beginning 
with Trump’s dramatic victory in Florida and gaining traction as his lead in 
the electoral college grew. By the time that lead appeared insurmountable, the 
Dow Jones index of US stocks had fallen by 800 points, and the broader S&P 500 
was “limit down”. Moreover, the dollar began to slide, and a flight to quality 
in US Treasury markets caused bond yields to plummet.

But market pessimism did not last long. Soon after the president-elect 
delivered his acceptance speech in New York, at nearly 3 am EST, stocks began 
to rally – and have ever since, helping to boost risk assets around the world. 
With capital pouring into the US, the dollar strengthened to levels not seen 
for some 13 years.

10 economic consequences of Donald Trump's election win
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-economic-consequences-us-election-growth>
In addition, many investors have abandoned the safety of government bonds, 
triggering a spike in interest rates even more pronounced than during the 2013 
“taper tantrum” that followed former US Federal Reserve chair Ben Bernanke’s 
statement that the Fed intended to wind down its liquidity support. Markets are 
now all but certain that the Fed will pursue an interest-rate hike next month.

The most likely explanation for the turnaround lies in Trump’s post-election 
remarks, which have focused largely on his economic agenda’s pro-growth 
features, such as deregulation, corporate tax reform and infrastructure 
spending. Since the election, Trump has mostly avoided talking about his 
trade-protectionist campaign pledges, such as imposing punishing tariffs on 
China and Mexico, dismantling the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta), 
and rescinding America’s bilateral trade agreement with South Korea. Though he 
hasreiterated his pledge to withdraw from the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-100-days-plans-video-trans-pacific-partnership-withdraw>
, that deal had not yet been ratified, anyway. And he has also chosen not to 
repeat his criticisms of the Fed and its leadership.

This shift in focus has convinced markets that Trump may well decide not to 
follow through on the more growth-damaging measures he suggested during his 
campaign. Trump has become far more conciliatory as well, telling theNew York 
Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/22/us/politics/donald-trump-times-tweets.html> 
thathe did not want to “hurt the Clintons” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-investigation-jail-dropped>
 by appointing a special prosecutor to investigate his former opponent. 
Similarly, after years of criticising Barack Obama,Trump has spoken positively 
– even glowingly – about him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/barack-obama-donald-trump-white-house-meeting-transition>
.

Similar tendencies can be seen in Trump’s approaches to his Republican 
campaign opponents, including the House Speaker, Paul Ryan, and one of Trump’s 
most outspoken Republican detractors,former Massachusetts governor Mitt Romney. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/24/mitt-romney-opposition-trump-aide>
 Given that Republicans won a majority in both houses of Congress and gained 
further ground at the state level, Trump’s détente with the party establishment 
bodes well for the enactment of his pro-growth policies.

Of course, to make faster and more inclusive growth a reality, thereby 
validating exuberant markets, more will be needed – namely, careful design, 
broad political buy-in, and sustained implementation. Moreover, the team that 
will oversee that process has yet to be selected; like other appointees, its 
members could well face long vetting processes and, in some cases, confirmation 
challenges in the Senate.

Once the team is in place, its members will need to figure out how to make 
Trump’s plans work for an economy that has – by necessity, not choice – been 
excessively reliant on unconventional monetary policies. The plan must 
recognise that, during this protracted period of monetary expansion, both 
financial markets and resource allocation have been distorted, worsening wealth 
inequality.

The good news is that the incoming administration can draw on measures that 
were formulated during Obama’s tenure, but which gained little traction because 
of the highly polarised and dysfunctional congressional politics that 
characterised most of Obama’s eight years in office. Such measures address 
imperatives such as infrastructure investment, tax reform, and job creation.

But, the US does not exist in a vacuum. External challenges must also be 
overcome – or, at least, contained – if the president-elect is to fulfil 
markets’ expectations. Developments in Europe, which faces a series of 
potentially destabilising political events in the next few months, will be 
particularly consequential.

Italy is about to hold a constitutional referendum that could result in the 
fall of Matteo Renzi’s government. The UK has to produce a plan to guide a 
credible and orderly Brexit process. In France, the far-right Front National’s 
Marine Le Pen will attempt to turn the upcoming presidential election into 
another anti-establishment upset. And, in Germany, Angela Merkel will try to 
position herself to win another term next fall, in an environment that has been 
tripping up traditional politicians.


Notwithstanding the risk of instability in Europe, Trump is in a position not 
just to help boost growth in the US, but also to make it more inclusive. By 
pursuing a Congress-supported pivot towards a more comprehensive economic 
stance, his administration’s policy surge could also spur the private sector to 
begin using its large amounts of cash not for short-term financial engineering, 
but for growth-enhancing investments in plant, equipment, and people. If the 
economic frustration that drove so many Americans to vote for Trump is to be 
dissipated during his presidency, and if the market gains are to be validated 
and augmented, this prospect must become a reality.

• Mohamed El-Erian is chief economic adviser at Allianz, and chairman of 
Barack Obama’s Global Development Council.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>

 