
Alien: Covenant

Despite Ridley Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/22/ridley-scott-alien-covenant-reboot-script-filming-troubles>
 being back at the reins,Prometheus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/03/prometheus-ridley-scott-review-alien>
 (2012) turned out to be abit of a damp squib 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/08/prometheus-ten-key-questions>. 
Its sequel (and the prequel to the original Alien) looks miles better already.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fthe-most-exciting-science-fiction-films-of-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faaf3df876b79d6cb9c8ad80c5c8d8b9fc06eb269%2F190_0_1790_1075%2F1790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20most%20exciting%20science-fiction%20films%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fthe-most-exciting-science-fiction-films-of-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20most%20exciting%20science-fiction%20films%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fthe-most-exciting-science-fiction-films-of-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faaf3df876b79d6cb9c8ad80c5c8d8b9fc06eb269%2F190_0_1790_1075%2F1790.jpg>
 Alien: Covenant (2017), starring Katherine Waterson 
Ripley-esque Katherine Waterston and Danny McBride are among crewmates on the 
good spaceship Covenant who find what looks like paradise but turns out to be a 
much less friendly place. Its sole inhabitant: David, the synthetic person 
played byMichael Fassbender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-fassbender> (and the highlight of 
Prometheus).

Annihilation 

Two years on from their storming Ex Machina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ex-machina>, Alex Garland and Oscar Isaac are 
back with the story of a biologist (Natalie Portman) who signs up for “a 
dangerous, secret expedition where the laws of nature don’t apply”. Jennifer 
Jason Leigh is a – we’re assuming – slightly unhelpful psychologist.

Blade Runner 2049 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/19/blade-runner-2049-trailer-harrison-ford-ryan-gosling>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGDscTTE-P-k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGDscTTE-P-k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGDscTTE-P-k&media=>
If the return of Harrison Ford in The Force Awakens made for the most 
eagerly-anticipated sci-fi of 2015, the return ofHarrison Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrisonford> in a very belated Blade Runner 
sequel must make Denis Villeneuve’s flick –also starring Ryan Gosling, for 
God’s sake – the early pick of next year’s. One of the most expensive R-rated 
movies ever made, it’s still pretty secret, but we do know Robin Wright, Jared 
Leto and Dave Bautista co-star.

The Dark Tower

Idris Elba and Matthew McConaughey topline this Stephen King adaptation – the 
former as a lone knight patrolling the alternate dimension of Mid-World; the 
latter as a vicious sorcerer hellbent on preventing our 11-year-old hero 
reaching the Dark Tower and thus saving everyone from extinction. Danish 
director Nikolaj Arcel (whose last movie was period romanceA Royal Affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/jun/14/a-royal-affair-review>) looks a 
bracingly unconventional choice to tackle King’s bracingly weird series.

Geostorm

Call it the hangover Gravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/07/gravity-review> effect, but space 
is big in 2017 – very, very big. Despite some slightly ropey lineage – the 
director is an Independence Day veteran; Gerard Butler features prominently in 
the cast – there’s some positive buzz building around this tale of a man who 
tries to stop climate-controlling satellites from creating a huge storm. And 
then his brother discovers a plan to assassinate the president (Andy García). 
Never rains but it pours, eh?

Ghost in the Shell 

The casting of Scarlett Johansson in this second big-screen transfer for the 
Japanese anime has raised a few eyebrows and blood pressures, but we’re still 
eagerly anticipating Rupert Sanders’sleek-looking take 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/14/ghost-in-the-shell-trailer-scarlett-johansson-video>
.Juliette Binoche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/10/juliette-binoche-sils-marie--interview-ruthless-depardieu-wanted-to-kill-me>
 pops up as a doctor, in case you were still unconvinced.

God Particle

Last year’s shock Cloverfield film turned out to be a gem, so we’re hoping for 
something special from this less well-veiled but curiously starry latest 
prequel to the found-footage aliens classic. Gugu Mbatha-Raw, Elizabeth 
Debicki, Daniel Brühl, Ziyi Zhang, David Oyelowo and – but of course – Chris 
O’Dowd are astronauts in peril after a shocking space station discovery.

Kong: Skull Island 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fkong-skull-island-first-trailer-for-tom-hiddlestons-epic-monkey-adventure-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kong%3A%20Skull%20Island%3A%20trailer%20for%20Tom%20Hiddleston's%20epic%20ape%20adventure%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fkong-skull-island-first-trailer-for-tom-hiddlestons-epic-monkey-adventure-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kong%3A%20Skull%20Island%3A%20trailer%20for%20Tom%20Hiddleston%27s%20epic%20ape%20adventure%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fkong-skull-island-first-trailer-for-tom-hiddlestons-epic-monkey-adventure-video&media=>
Kong: Skull Island: trailer for Tom Hiddleston’s epic ape adventure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/nov/17/kong-skull-island-first-trailer-for-tom-hiddlestons-epic-monkey-adventure-video>
Not a follow-up to Peter Jackson’s mo-cap King Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/dec/09/1>, but rather a sister film to
Gareth Edwards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/18/godzilla-review-gareth-edwards-reboot-mark-kermode>
’ Godzilla. Tom Hiddleston,Brie Larson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/08/brie-larson-at-telluride-its-so-easy-to-fall-into-a-world-of-pleasing-everyone>
, John Goodman and Samuel L Jackson star in the larky-looking story of 
explorers in Hawaii who happen on a massive angry ape (plus a very hairy John C 
Reilly).

Life
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHguxTfWISKY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHguxTfWISKY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHguxTfWISKY&media=>
More space-filling: this time Ryan Reynolds and Jake Gyllenhaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jake-gyllenhaal> are among tense astronauts 
cultivating some seeds of life discovered on Mars. At first they’re excited, 
then ecstatic, and then very, very worried as it turns out it might not only 
destroy them but, if they return to Earth, everything there, too.

Star Wars: Episode VIII

With Rogue One winning the Christmas race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/19/rogue-one-star-wars-story-2016-record-opening-felicity-jones>
 even more comprehensively than predicted, signs are strongRian Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/18/star-wars-episode-viii-rian-johnson>
’s latest instalment in the central Skywalker saga will wipe every other movie 
off the box office next year. Mark Hamill is said to have a slightly larger 
part this time round (not hard, we know), while Harrison Ford (sorry, spoiler … 
) a slightly smaller one.
 