
In an era in which yesterday’s inconceivable is making a habit of becoming 
today’s reality, it is perilous to offer firm predictions about the future, but 
folk carry on doing it all the same. I was recently at a conference about the 
causes and consequences of Brexit and the Trumpquake where I heard the French 
participants try to keep everyone calm by expressing confidence that those 
shattering setbacks to conventional wisdom would not be followed by the 
election ofPresident Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/the-guardian-view-on-the-french-presidency-the-far-right-is-too-close-to-power>
. France was not America. Two rounds of voting would see the leader of the 
Front National beaten when it came to the final choice because moderate voters 
would coalesce behind whoever emerges as her prime competitor. We could rely on 
France to be a firewall against the spread ofauthoritarian nationalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/02/far-right-europe-austria-democratic-right-elect-cleaned-up-fascist-president-suspend-country-from-eu>
 across the west. It all sounded plausible, and their confidence was buttressed 
by the opinion polling, but given the recent track records of both expert 
opinion and polling, this forecast was more alarming than it was comforting.

Post-truth? My word of the year is normalisation – as applied to Trump | Peter 
Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/post-truth-normalisation-us-politics-trump>
Rather than peer into a foggy crystal ball, liberal democrats might better 
devote their time to starting to learn some lessons from the seismic shocks of 
2016. The first of these is not to surrender to despair, a challenge made 
easier by reminding ourselves of the narrowness of these defeats. It suits 
Brexiters here and Trumpeters on the other of the Atlantic to roar that they 
represent “the people”, for this helps them in their ambition to claim a larger 
mandate than they have been awarded, just as it also serves their endeavour to 
silence any dissent. Brexiters represent just over half of a very divided 
British people.Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
cannot even claim that much. It bears repeated repeating that he lost the 
popular vote, only gaining the presidency thanks to the quirks of the electoral 
college. Had 72,000 people across three swing states – Michigan, Pennsylvania 
and Wisconsin – voted the other way, we would now be watching the team-making 
of President-elect Clinton.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Flessons-liberals-brexit-trumpquake-demagogues-rules-electoral-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78956618fc9ab0ae2331ed410ba32baa497a24de%2F0_219_3200_2181%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20shock%20lessons%20for%20liberals%20from%20Brexit%20and%20the%20Trumpquake%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rawnsley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Flessons-liberals-brexit-trumpquake-demagogues-rules-electoral-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20shock%20lessons%20for%20liberals%20from%20Brexit%20and%20the%20Trumpquake%20%7C%20Andrew%20Rawnsley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Flessons-liberals-brexit-trumpquake-demagogues-rules-electoral-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78956618fc9ab0ae2331ed410ba32baa497a24de%2F0_219_3200_2181%2F3200.jpg>
 The US president-elect Donald Trump and beaten Democrat candidate Hillary 
Clinton: ‘She did not do Michigan the courtesy of one visit while campaigning.’ 
Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images 
Her bewildering decision not to put more effort into those states – she did 
not do Michigan the courtesy of one visit – is another lesson to apply in 
campaigning and policymaking. Don’t take the support of anyone for granted. 
Particularly, don’t assume that your traditional base is safe when both the 
Brexit vote and the US presidential contest exposed societies fracturing along 
economic and cultural lines that don’t match traditional big-party divides.

There was a broad narrative in the US mainstream media, which seemed to be 
supported by polls, that a Clinton victory was “inevitable”. Just so with the 
Brexit referendum. The polls, bookmakers and most protagonists on both sides 
regarded it as “inevitable” that Britons would choose to stay within the EU. 
The treatment of both contests as foregone conclusions proved calamitous for 
Remainers and Democrats by inducing complacency among supporters and 
galvanising their opponents. Treat every fight as tight and never presume that 
a result is in the bag.

Another takeaway from the US election is that it has become foolish to assume 
that “experience” is an unalloyed asset in electoral politics. You’re probably 
better off presuming the opposite. In this age of rage against anything or 
anyone that can be depicted as “the establishment” or “the elite” choice, it 
has become a handicap to be an “insider” and a great advantage to be an 
“outsider”. This was one of Mrs Clinton’s tragedies. She was one of the best 
qualified people ever to run for president. As a woman bidding for a job that 
had always been held by men, she felt her credentials had to be superior to 
those of any male competitors. She would never have secured the Democratic 
nomination had her career been made in reality TV.

Yet when her turn to have a shot at the White House finally came round, her 
longevity on the scene was not an asset, but a liability. One of the more 
obvious lessons is that you take a big risk running a widely distrusted 
candidate from a political dynasty in a “change election” when many of the 
voters are expressing anger with the status quo. A similar conclusion can be 
drawn from the Brexit referendum. The barrage of “expert” opinion deployed on 
behalf of the Remain campaign proved far less effective at persuading swing 
voters than In strategists had expected.

It is also no longer safe to assume that portraying your opponent as dangerous 
– even if they are – will be as effective as it used to be. Trump was 
repeatedly described as unfit to be president, not least by Republicans. Barack 
Obama made his excellent joke that a man who could not be trusted with his 
Twitter account could not be trusted with the nuclear codes. In the Brexit 
referendum, Outers were often branded as reckless advocates of a blind leap 
into the unknown. This was true – and counterproductive as a strategy for 
countering them. First, because calling them dangerous did not amount to an 
answer to the grievances driving substantial numbers of voters in the direction 
of the demagogues. Second, telling a voter that something is a risk only works 
if that voter thinks they have a meaningful stake in society as it is and many 
clearly don’t. Third, branding the insurgents as rogues burnished their appeal 
for many aggrieved with the status quo.

A big chunk of the electorate in western democracies are, for various reasons, 
so discontented that they are willing to blow up conventional politics – if 
only to see what happens next. A lot of Trump voters told pollsters they didn’t 
think he was fit to be president, but put him there anyway. Italy’sFive Star 
Movement <https://www.theguardian.com/world/five-star-movement>, pioneered by 
the comedian-bloggerBeppe Grillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/beppe-grillo>, has taken this to its logical 
conclusion with the slogan “vaffanculo”. That translates as “fuck off”.

You can say the new “populists” are phoneys and presume their mendacities and 
contradictions will be exposed once people have experience of how they wield 
power.Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/19/corbyn-criticises-fake-anti-elitism-trump-farage-video>
 was doing that yesterday when he had a pop at the “fake anti-elitism of rich 
white men like Nigel Farage and Donald Trump”. The Labour leader makes a good 
point. But there was a better one he could have made. Why have a former 
commodity broker and a billionaire property developer proved more effective at 
mobilising voters discontented with their economic lot than did the Labour 
party at our most recent general election?

The most disturbing and urgent question for liberal democrats is why their 
arguments haven’t had traction and why demagogic arguments are proving so 
resonant to so many; in the US, that included flipping substantial numbers of 
voters who had been for Obama into the Trump camp. A bit of the explanation is 
that the new demagogues have been better campaigners. All the sophisticated 
strategists employed by the In campaign never came up with a message to rival 
the crude, cut-through clarity of “Take Back Control!” All the expensive 
consultants on team Clinton never found a match for “Make America Great Again!” 
Incendiary and divisive language has always been a tool of demagogues. The new 
breed has taken this to another level and technology equips them with 
unprecedented ways of amplifying their messages. Donald Trump was recently 
asked whether he regretted the misogyny and racism of his campaign. He replied: 
“No, I won.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fcorbyn-criticises-fake-anti-elitism-trump-farage-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corbyn%20criticises%20%E2%80%98fake%20anti-elitism%E2%80%99%20of%20Trump%20and%20Farage%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fcorbyn-criticises-fake-anti-elitism-trump-farage-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corbyn%20criticises%20%E2%80%98fake%20anti-elitism%E2%80%99%20of%20Trump%20and%20Farage%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fcorbyn-criticises-fake-anti-elitism-trump-farage-video&media=>
Corbyn criticises ‘fake anti-elitism’ of Trump and Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/19/corbyn-criticises-fake-anti-elitism-trump-farage-video>
His many noxious outpourings on the campaign trail were not said in spite of 
the fact that they would cause widespread revulsion. They were calculated to 
elicit a hot response from both his zealots and opponents and by doing so 
generate massive amounts of media coverage. A similar shock-and-horrify 
strategy was employed by elements of the Leave campaign during the Brexit 
referendum. Arron Banks, friend and financier ofNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> and one of the party who 
were recently received at Trump Tower, has published his account of their 
battle plan for the referendum campaign. “The more outrageous we are, the more 
attention we’ll get. The more attention we get, the more outrageous we’ll be.”

This weaponising of outrage consciously creates a dilemma for mainstream 
politicians and media still operating within the conventional parameters of 
debate. If offensive and mendacious statements are ignored, bigotry and lies 
will not be called out. But if they are challenged, the propagators gain the 
oxygen they are seeking.

A critical reason that liberals have been losing is that they foolishly 
presumed that the big arguments were so well won that they didn’t need to fight 
for them. Because it was so obvious to them that liberalism and globalisation 
have delivered prosperity, security and opportunity, they didn’t think they 
needed to bother to continue making the case. When politicians of the 
mainstream did talk about globalisation, for too long they represented it as an 
irresistible force. Anyone on the receiving end of its negative impacts or 
unhappy with the distribution of its rewards was essentially told they no 
choice but to suck it up.

The overarching error was to assume that the arc of history was bent 
irreversibly in the direction of enlightenment, internationalism, tolerance and 
liberty. Now they should know better. A very old lesson must be learnt afresh. 
In politics, there are no final victories.
 