
The inauguration of a US president is normally a moment of great hope. It is a 
celebration of representative democracy and the peaceful transfer of power. It 
is an affirmation that the ideals and laws set out in the 1787 US constitution, 
still a global paradigm for modern-day governance, continue to be honoured and 
observed. Inauguration confers legitimacy on a head of state in the name of 
“we, the people”. The incumbent has a duty to respect and uphold the 
constitution’s central aims, namely “to form a more perfect union, establish 
justice, ensure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defence, promote 
the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty”.

The inauguration this Friday of Donald Trump as 45th US president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is not a normal moment. Nor 
for the majority of Americans who did not vote for him, and countless onlookers 
around the globe, is it a moment of hope. Rather, Trump’s ascent to what is 
commonly termed the world’s most powerful job is a moment of dread, anxiety and 
great foreboding. We said, after he won the Republican nomination last summer, 
that Trump has shown himself unfit to be president. His often-demonstrated 
ignorance, racial bigotry, misogyny, untruthfulness, hostility to free speech, 
crude bullying and dangerous, rabble-rousing nationalism utterly disqualify him.

Nothing has occurred since Trump narrowly won last November’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-elections-2016>, despite polling nearly 
three million fewer votes than the Democrats’ Hillary Clinton, to alter this 
unhappy conclusion. The president-elect’spress conference last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-media-cnn-buzzfeed-intelligence-agencies>
 failed to justify hopes that the imminent, awesome responsibilities of office 
would moderate his reckless behaviour. In a matter of minutes, he slandered 
America’s intelligence agencies, threatened Mexico, vowed again to build a 
border wall, pistol-whipped US businesses that invest abroad, took a wrecking 
ball to Obamacare, pilloried unfavoured news organisations, and boasted about a 
shady $2bn business deal. This is not the behaviour of a president.

Although only days away from the Oval Office, Trump continues to blurt out 
half-baked opinions on sensitive issues, like a bar-room boor. He appears not 
to think before he opens his mouth or his Twitter account. And what pops out is 
usually offensive, inflammatory or inaccurate, exemplified by last week’s
insulting of Meryl Streep 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/818419002548568064>. Hopefully, 
speechwriters more sensible than he will craft his inaugural address. Friday’s 
ceremony is a momentous occasion. It will be watched around the world. It is a 
showcase for America. Yet Trump is an embarrassment. His elevation is a 
national humiliation.

Few will enjoy this gross spectacle more than Vladimir Putin, Russia’s 
messianic president, and his plausibly deniable teams of cyberhackers, 
conspirators, fake newsmen and skilled muddiers of pools. Russia’s election 
interference on Trump’s behalf, publicly certified by the Obama administration 
and all the US intelligence agencies, has cast a dark shadow. The release last 
week of anunverified dossier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-russia-dossier-what-happens-next>
 alleging Russian contacts with Trump’s campaign staff and the gathering of 
blackmail material against him has intensified fears that Moscow is still 
trying, directly or indirectly, to manipulate the president-elect, by 
exploiting his inexperience, vanity and naive view of Putin.

Trump has flatly denied the dossier’s allegations in his customary, choleric 
way. But his narcissism, when combined with his visceral hatred of Barack 
Obama’s foreign policy and his susceptibility to flattery, makes him a 
vulnerable target. Putin calmly repudiated the dossier, refusing to be drawn 
into the dispute, just as herefused to react to Obama’s expulsion of Russian 
diplomats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
 over the election scandal. Russia’s leader is plainly expecting political 
payback in the form of an early summit with Trump. Only then may his real 
objectives become clear, including perhaps the lifting of US sanctions over 
Ukraine, acquiescence in Russia’s annexation of Crimea, a free hand in Syria 
and a Nato pullback in eastern Europe. Meanwhile, Putin can sit back and enjoy 
the unprecedented confusion and disarray in Washington that his covert 
activities helped engender.

Yet for much of the confusion attending the transition, Trump alone is to 
blame. He often stresses his experience as a business leader and 
decision-maker. But decisive leadership has been alarmingly lacking amid the 
conflicting policy approaches promoted by his most senior nominees. Rex 
Tillerson, the ExxonMobil oilman improbably tapped for secretary of state, said 
last week the US would, in effect,besiege fortified islands Beijing has 
illegally created 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/trump-risks-war-with-beijing-us-blocks-access-south-china-sea-state-media>
 in the South China Sea. There is no doubt that the islands are a problem. But 
threatening to expel the Chinese by military force is not a sensible way to 
address it. This latest provocation follows Trump’s incendiary, off-the-cuff 
comments about Taiwan. Little wonder Chinese state media are warning of a 
coming war with the US.

The impression that Trump and his top advisers have little idea what they are 
doing and scant grasp of key issues has strengthened, rather than receded, as 
the transition has chaotically unravelled. Trump says the CIA arebehaving like 
Nazis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/mike-pompeo-cia-nominee-senate-hearing-trump-russia>
.Mike Pompeo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/mike-pompeo-cia-director-confirmation-hearing-live-key-points>
, his nominee for CIA director, lavishes praise on the agency and pledges to 
investigate the same dossier that Trump dismissed out of hand. While Trump’s 
sons, acolytes and lawyers insist their billionaire daddy-boss will avoid 
conflicts of interest, Ben Carson, his choice as housing tsar,refuses to rule 
out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/ben-carson-housing-secretary-confirmation-hearing>
 the possibility of millions of dollars in federal grants benefitting Trump’s 
real estate empire.

A former general, James Mattis, slated to become defence secretary, revealed 
even bigger contradictions. Far from endorsing Trump’s ideas about enhanced 
future collaboration with Russia, Mattisidentified Putin as a powerful foe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/james-mattis-mike-pompeo-confirmation-hearings-russia>
 intent on destroying Nato. It was vital, he said, that “we recognise the 
reality of what we [are dealing] with with Mr Putin”. Russia had chosen the 
role of strategic adversary and the US must be prepared to confront it. Mattis 
also declared Russian forces had committed war crimes in Syria, a view shared 
by the Obama administration, Britain and the UN, but one that has not been 
endorsed by Trump. Add to that Tillerson’s separate comments that Russia should 
be punished for “invading” Crimea and policy towards Moscow looks more than 
merely confused. As with China, it looks like Trump is spoiling for a fight.

Well, is he? The fact is, nobody knows – and that includes a lazy, muddled and 
largely clueless Trump himself. Spouting prejudices, selling slogans and making 
it up as you go along may work on the campaign trail. But it will not do in the 
White House.

Even if all Trump’s numerous inadequacies and sordid personal baggage were set 
to one side, his egregious lack of coherent, fact-based, rational and 
cooperative policy platforms, especially internationally, is potentially 
disastrous. Look again at what the US constitution demands: justice, 
tranquillity, liberty, common defence and the common good. All these principles 
are in peril. As the Trump era begins, a more imperfect disunion is the dismal 
prospect.
 