
Down a narrow alley between two brick buildings in a Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles> warehouse district – now an 
expensive loft neighbourhood – in the small corner of a ground floor window 
filled in with concrete, a small plastic growth spreads out from the sill.

Like sculpted globs of clear ice, the crystalline shapes spill out from the 
window’s crevice, mixing with translucent blue mineral forms, forming a blossom 
of geometry.

Less noticeable but bigger, another cluster of golden crystals juts out a few 
feet overhead from another crook in the window. The crystals – fully and 
perceptibly artificial – burst from the window frame. But despite their sci-fi 
glam, they’re so subtly inserted into this unremarkable slit of the built world 
that they’re much more likely to be overlooked than noticed.

These crystalline growths are the sculptural street art of Los Angeles-based 
artist Paige Smith. They’re what she calls “urban geodes”, the cityscape 
version of the mineral growths that can form inside sedimentary and volcanic 
rocks. She places these clusters in the crevices of the city – in the void of a 
wall’s missing brick, in the spout of a tiny pipe, or in the crack in a façade.

“I think there’s kind of a beauty in paying attention to those things that 
most people overlook,” Smith says.


Small, unobtrusive and sometimes hard to spot, these small-scale works are 
both a celebration of the ignorable parts of the city and an invitation to seek 
them out. Smith hand-folds the shapes out of paper, glues them together, and 
fills them into pre-measured forms that she can later quickly implant in the 
cracks and crannies of the city. Recently she’s also been measuring her sites 
and creating perfectly tailored moulds into which she pours resin, casting 
plastic-like crystal clusters to install.


There’s kind of a beauty in paying attention to those things that most people 
overlook
Paige Smith  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Furban-geode-street-art-paige-smith-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430174042549%2Fa6a513ae-8c43-44ca-902f-980319cc4825-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20LA%20street%20artist%20who%20sees%20beauty%20in%20the%20cracks%20of%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Furban-geode-street-art-paige-smith-los-angeles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20LA%20street%20artist%20who%20sees%20beauty%20in%20the%20cracks%20of%20our%20cities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Furban-geode-street-art-paige-smith-los-angeles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430174042549%2Fa6a513ae-8c43-44ca-902f-980319cc4825-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Smith maps all her urban artworks, which have spread as far as Amman and 
Melbourne 
Smith is a graphic designer and when she moved to Los Angeles from San 
Francisco about five years ago, she ended up in LA’s burgeoning arts district. 
With massive murals on warehouse walls and an abundance of sanctioned and 
unsanctioned street art, the neighbourhood can seem like a big outdoor gallery. 
“I was looking at a wall with these big murals, and there was a missing brick 
on the wall next to it,” she says. “Then I started to see them everywhere.”

To counter the large-scale artwork, she began hand-folding tiny paper shapes – 
pyramids and polyhedrons and rhombic prisms – and planting them in those 
crevices about two and a half years ago. Inconspicuous cracks in a wall would 
soon be filled with the glint of a gold-painted paper crystal growth, implanted 
surreptitiously by Smith for passersby to see – or not. Some are covered in 
glitter, others are painted in blues or purples or blacks, but most are gold.

The paper sculptures, when exposed to the elements, eventually break down. The 
newer crystals, made of hardened resin, are more durable. But Smith says the 
public nature of the works means they’re also exposed to the human element. 
Many have been taken or smashed. One was even set on fire. She’s curious about 
these interactions; how people notice, respond to and even vandalise them. 
She’s considered monitoring them but, she says, “the mystery is interesting”.


Smith has mapped the locations <http://acommonname.com/street-art-project/> of 
her geodes, which are scattered around Los Angeles and other cities, but only 
provides their general locations. “What I prefer is that people stumble upon 
them. You still have to go out and find them; you have to look around,” she 
says, hoping these small installations can get more people to notice and think 
about the smaller spaces and interstices of the built environment.

Urban Geode location map <http://acommonname.com/street-art-project/> 
In addition to the geodes she’s placed around LA, Smith has also installed 
some on her travels around the world, including in Madrid and Bali. And, 
through a network of fans worldwide, she’s shipped geodes to be installed in 
the crevices of cities such as Istanbul, Amman and Melbourne.


Smith says the project is like a street-art version of the concept of magical 
realism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/17/gabriel-garcia-marquez-appreciation-edmund-white>
, and she hopes these little pockets of unexpected crystals will inspire a 
sense of wonder in the people who happen to come across them: “I like to 
believe in those bits of magic that can exist in our world.”


Find out more about the Urban Geodes project here 
<http://acommonname.com/street-art-project/>, or email 
streetart@acommonname.com if you are interested in participating
 