
We are very used to celebrating the amateur, the enthusiast, the hidden talent 
in this country. From baking, dancing, singing and gardening to playing in 
brass bands, high diving, acting – you name it. We have two great beliefs which 
we in the UK celebrate with pride: one, that if you put your mind to it, you 
can achieve your goal; and two, that everyone has a talent, and that it must 
never be wasted.

At face value, “amateur” means what it says – people who love what they do. 
But there’s the negative meaning too: a beginner, someone inexperienced, who 
would best leave it to the professionals.


Amateur orchestras in the UK would give very short shrift to that idea, and 
rightly so. In difficult economic times, they continue to shine as one of our 
great cultural jewels. Making the new BBC seriesThe Great Orchestra Challenge 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07sxkg9>, my fellow judges and I have spent 
six months exploring this wonderfully rich part of our cultural life.

Thankfully, despite the very patchy record of funded music education in 
schools in recent generations, there is still a strong and proud bedrock of 
enthusiastic amateur orchestral musicians in the UK. We discovered them 
carrying the flame for amateur music-making, on a mission to play the music 
they love and cherish, welcoming and encouraging newcomers to their orchestras 
round the country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fthe-great-orchestra-challenge-tv-show-paul-daniel-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d5469a8d5fcb0d6f67d5ccf15a4e660d2d8092c%2F0_0_3248_2600%2F3248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Great%20Orchestra%20Challenge%3A%20the%20TV%20show%20uncovering%20the%20UK's%20part-time%20musicians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fthe-great-orchestra-challenge-tv-show-paul-daniel-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Great%20Orchestra%20Challenge%3A%20the%20TV%20show%20uncovering%20the%20UK%27s%20part-time%20musicians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fthe-great-orchestra-challenge-tv-show-paul-daniel-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d5469a8d5fcb0d6f67d5ccf15a4e660d2d8092c%2F0_0_3248_2600%2F3248.jpg>
 Slaithwaite Philharmonic Orchestra, finalist in BBCs Great Orchestra 
Challenge. Photograph: BBC 
Germany might have the most professional orchestras in the world (a grand 
total of 130 full-time ones) but here in the UK we’re devoted to the world of 
amateur orchestras. There are so many, in fact, that we decided to make our 
series about symphony orchestras only, and excluded smaller groups with fewer 
than 40 players from our search. Even so, there were hundreds on our list that 
we eventually narrowed down to the five that made it on to the final shortlist.


Playing a full role in a serious amateur orchestra is not just about loving 
your music. These musicians must devote enormous time and energy to practising 
and preparing their music; travelling to rehearsals at evenings and weekends 
when their friends have their feet up; promoting their orchestra and raising 
money to make it all possible. We met farmers in Devon who make a 140-mile 
round trip to every rehearsal. Their orchestra,North Devon Sinfonia 
<http://www.northdevonsinfonia.org.uk/>, serves some 3,000 sq miles of the most 
sparsely populated countryside in the UK. At theLondon Gay Symphony Orchestra 
<http://lgso.org.uk/>, meanwhile, the conflict between your job as a busy City 
lawyer or banker and an intense rehearsal schedule for the next foreign trip 
adds a different kind of stress.

The benefits of playing in an amateur orchestra are rich, and richly deserved, 
for musicians and their audiences alike. Apart from the sheer life-enhancing 
thrill of practising a skill outside your nine-to-five life, making music of 
the visceral strength and quality that we came across can combat stress. Taking 
on the emotional responsibility towards your fellow musicians in a kick-ass 
performance of a big romantic symphony, or a brand new commissioned Dance 
Suite, generates pride in yourself and your community. And communicating all 
that energy and talent to your audience contributes immeasurably to their lives 
too. While the local authorities are struggling with the tangible, financial 
assets of their community services, amateur music-making is pouring social 
benefits and social profits into the community.


There are of course tough challenges along the way. All our orchestras have 
different battles to fight. The mounting cost of concerts, of hiring sheet 
music (especially contemporary works which cost far more) is theirs to bear, 
all at a time when external support is harder to come by. In the relative 
serenity of central Scotland, difficulties with performing venues throw up 
last-minute performance crises (triumphantly resolved!) for Stirling Orchestra 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-tayside-central-37196358>. For the 
People’s Orchestra 
<http://www.birminghammail.co.uk/news/showbiz-tv/peoples-orchestra-bidding-win-bbc4s-11800536>
 in inner-city Birmingham, the open-door policy of welcoming everyone who wants 
to play (at a very high standard) means making expert high-speed musical 
arrangements to accommodate eight flutes and five saxophones. The orchestra 
commissions new works regularly, gives eight big concerts a year, numerous 
community events for mental health charities and care homes, works tirelessly 
to secure Arts Council, EU, and trust fund money, and has employed 200 
back-to-work volunteers in its short history. After that, arranging and playing 
Berlioz’s March to the Scaffold (with added saxophones) for our contest was the 
icing on the cake.

Our most senior orchestra, the 125-year old Slaithwaite Philharmonic 
<https://www.facebook.com/SlaithwaitePhil/> in West Yorkshire, has to be as 
energetic as the newest whippersnapper on the block. Surrounded by some of the 
busiest and strongest amateur orchestral playing anywhere in the UK, with 
fierce competition from orchestras in six neighbouring cities, Slaithwaite 
can’t rest on its laurels. They nearly folded 40 years ago – dark days 
remembered as if yesterday. They came back fighting. This year’s birthday 
celebrations reach a grand climax with Mahler’s Resurrection Symphony.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fthe-great-orchestra-challenge-tv-show-paul-daniel-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff94c3150571d4a558c59afb1c520d700efb4d32c%2F232_0_1136_1136%2F1136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Great%20Orchestra%20Challenge%3A%20the%20TV%20show%20uncovering%20the%20UK's%20part-time%20musicians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fthe-great-orchestra-challenge-tv-show-paul-daniel-bbc%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Great%20Orchestra%20Challenge%3A%20the%20TV%20show%20uncovering%20the%20UK%27s%20part-time%20musicians&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fthe-great-orchestra-challenge-tv-show-paul-daniel-bbc%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff94c3150571d4a558c59afb1c520d700efb4d32c%2F232_0_1136_1136%2F1136.jpg>
 Katie Derham, Chi-chi Nwanoku, Paul Daniel - the judges for BBC’s Great 
Orchestra Challenge Photograph: BBC 
I saw our job very clearly: to use this golden opportunity to celebrate the 
thousands of devoted amateur musicians across the country, to challenge our 
orchestras to achieve more and better and to help them to discover untapped 
potential. We chose musical challenges that would play to the orchestras’ 
strengths, while also challenging them to go one step further. Comparing 
orchestras with such contrasting characters and personalities was the hardest 
part: deciding which group best met the challenge of playing great symphonies, 
or opera arias, or concertos, or which orchestra found the most dynamic and 
inspiring way to attract and hold its audiences, was very difficult. My guiding 
principle was simple: I was not looking only for technical prowess and 
excellence, but rather for the spirit and enthusiasm that makes an amateur 
performance uniquely special. If it was going to be a contest, I wanted to see 
our orchestras raising their own bars as much as trying to go better than the 
others.

My colleague and friend Chi-chi Nwanoku 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jun/02/chi-chi-nwanoku-classical-music-living-colour-black-orchestra-chineke-foundation>
 – who is currently breaking down barriers withChineke! Orchestra 
<http://www.chi-chinwanoku.com/chineke-foundation/> for black and ethnic 
minority musicians – has been a constant inspiration as mentor and guide to the 
orchestras. Katie Derham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/02/katie-derham-strictly-prom>, 
occasionally called on in the series to demonstrate her dancing prowess 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KPlp0mNbmMc>, has her own treasured experience 
as an amateur violinist to add to her support for the musicians.

These days, we are becoming better and better at consuming culture, and music 
in particular. We hear and know more music than ever, delivered in incredible 
quality on “platforms”, on which we sit listening, often in passive isolation. 
Music, a visceral force for drawing people together, for communicating drama or 
just pure emotion, needs more performers and fewer headphones. I don’t think 
I’ve ever met someone who doesn’t love music. And we’re all very capable of 
making it.

• All Together Now: The Great Orchestra Challenge 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p046b196> is on BBC4 Tuesdays at 9pm, with the 
Final on BBC Two on Saturday 17 September, andon iPlayer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b07rfnc2/all-together-now-the-great-orchestra-challenge-episode-1>
.
 