
When New Orleanian actor Wendell Pierce (star of Treme and The Wire) was asked 
how food had helped Louisiana recover from Hurricane Katrina, he replied: “It’s 
all about creativity. Taking what little you have, and creating something 
wonderful. That’s what gumbo is: the scraps of the table, with a little oil and 
burnt flour – one of the finest culinary treats ever ...”

Gumbo, essentially a stew, is the history of Louisiana in a bowl. As with many 
dishes, its origins are disputed. Some say it’s a derivative of bouillabaisse, 
the Provençal fish stew. It’s more likely, however, to have arrived with the 
first wave of African slaves in Mobile, Alabama, in around 1720, as an 
evolution ofsoupou kandia, a Senegalese fish-and-okra stew (the word for okra 
in several west African languages isn’gombo). The dish’s evolution reflected 
the changing face of Louisiana, with the French-speaking Acadians, Spanish and 
even German settlers adding to the pot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Fnew-orleans-best-gumbo-louisiana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf03663fc9b99a3605d424a23396ab86988aab27%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20foodie%20traveller%20...%20on%20the%20best%20gumbo%20in%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Fnew-orleans-best-gumbo-louisiana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20foodie%20traveller%20...%20on%20the%20best%20gumbo%20in%20New%20Orleans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Fnew-orleans-best-gumbo-louisiana%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf03663fc9b99a3605d424a23396ab86988aab27%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Parkway Bakery & Tavern serves a Cajun alligator and andouille gumbo. 
Photograph: Brian Jarreau 
Thickened with roux, filé (sassafrass) or fevi (okra), it’s then laden with 
local crab, shrimp or oysters, seasonal greens and ham hock, or chicken and
andouille, a coarse-ground smoked and spiced sausage, ubiquitous in southern 
Louisiana’s Cajun cookery. All are fantastic, their deep, rich flavours and 
variations as multifaceted and soulful as the city itself.

My favourite gumbos are made in Mid-City: first, Liuzza’s by the Track 
<http://liuzzasnola.com/> for a loose, wonderfully spiced chicken and shrimp 
soup; and, second, the thick, robust and classically Cajun alligator and 
andouille version atParkway Bakery & Tavern <http://www.parkwaypoorboys.com/>, 
served with hunks of Leidenheimer’s French bread.

Tom Browne, head chef at newly opened Decatur 
<https://twitter.com/decaturlondon>, east London, which specialises in 
Louisiana cuisine
 