
Breathing is given remarkably little air time. But a comprehensive report on 
outdoor air quality <http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs313/en/> 
worldwide emerged from the World Health Organisation recently, linking 3 
million deaths a year to air pollution.

It’s enough to keep you indoors. Unfortunately there’s declining air quality 
inside, too, particularly from concentrations of volatile organic compounds 
(VOCs). This chemical class includes formaldehyde and toluene and leads to so 
called “sick building syndrome”. Symptoms include dizziness, asthma and 
allergies.

Dr Vadoud Niri, a US chemist and campaigner for eliminating VOCs, has one 
prescription: potted plants. He particularly wants them installed in nail 
salons, where you can smell the VOCs in the air.

His research showed the everyday house plant to be pretty effective at 
eliminating VOCs from the air, particularly the 1970s macramé basket stalwart – 
the spider plant.

This is not the first research into the purifying powers of the humble house 
plant. In the 1980s, as mycolleague James Wong wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/13/purify-your-home-with-plants-james-wong>
, Nasa researched 19 plants and discovered that you need a variety, as 
different species are good with different pollutants – Costa Farms’ guide,
o2foryou.org <http://www.o2foryou.org/Public/HowPlantsCleanTheAir.aspx>, has a 
handy list – and one healthy plant for every 100 square feet of living space is 
a good idea, too.

It’s not all good news: no plant removes tobacco smoke, and research results 
are from laboratories rather than typical homes. To get strong results 
according to the Nasa research, you need to focus on the soil, and possibly use 
a charcoal filter, too.

But plants do help, especially if we keep them for a long time. Research tells 
us that older plants in the same soil become more efficient at processing 
specific pollutants – so hang on to them.

The big picture: day of the dead
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-house-plants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35dd390bc4cc8be9478017efea57876eab601514%2F347_32_1112_667%2F1112.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20house%20plants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-house-plants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20house%20plants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-house-plants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F35dd390bc4cc8be9478017efea57876eab601514%2F347_32_1112_667%2F1112.jpg>
 Shadow lands: remembering extinct passenger pigeons. Photograph: Keely Clarke 
Remembrance Day for Lost Species on 30 November is a chance to mourn extinct 
and disappearing species, and to avow your commitment to preserving those that 
remain. Originated by a Sussex theatre group, the day is now driven by artists, 
scientists and curators and often takes the form of elegiac memorials (such as 
this one to passenger pigeons on a Welsh beach by Emily Laurens). For details, 
visit lostspeciesday.org

Well dressed: picture this, a world of denim
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-house-plants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7b83749f10cd246e22b6cc8fbb538598e11ab2f%2F391_771_3561_3587%2F3561.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20house%20plants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-house-plants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20house%20plants&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-house-plants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7b83749f10cd246e22b6cc8fbb538598e11ab2f%2F391_771_3561_3587%2F3561.jpg>
 Jeans genius: artwork made of used denim fabric. Photograph: Toby Smedley 
Artist Ian Berry has long inhabited a world of indigo. It began with him 
noting all the shades of different jeans he had piled up at his parents’ home, 
and coming up with a strategy to avoid throwing them away. His answer? To cut 
them up and make a portrait of Blondie. Now he has become so well known for his 
photo-realistic pictures in denim that people leave bags of their old jeans 
outside his house. He is both thankful and astounded by our consumption levels. 
‘It may be a universal, democratic fabric, but our throw-away culture is 
harming the world and many of the production methods concern me,’ says Berry. 
To him denim is precious, despite the glut of cast-offs he now has access to. 
You can see his new work at Gallery Different in London from 16 November (
cattogallery.co.uk <http://cattogallery.co.uk/>).

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 