
Humanity has been trying to cut down on the estimated 40bn metric tons 
<https://www.climate.gov/news-features/climate-qa/which-emits-more-carbon-dioxide-volcanoes-or-human-activities>
 of carbon dioxide produced each year for decades. Some countries have imposed 
carbon taxes. Many businesses are looking at using alternatives to fossil fuels 
to make their products. For example, Coca-Cola investedmillions of dollars in 
creating its PlantBottle 
<http://www.plasticsnews.com/article/20130607/NEWS/130609933/cokes-plantbottle-use-swells-globally>
, which gets its plastic from plants instead of petroleum, and saved315,000 
metric tons of CO2 between 2009 and 2015 
<http://www.coca-colacompany.com/stories/plantbottle-20-coca-cola-unveils-worlds-first-pet-plastic-bottle-made-entirely-from-plants>
.

Donald Trump supports 'clean coal' – but does it really have a future?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/04/trump-supports-clean-coal-but-does-it-really-have-a-future>
But both public and private efforts haven’t stopped global temperatures from 
rising. Now, a growing number of scientists and innovators are arguing that we 
need to look at new ways to prevent more manmade CO2 from escaping into the 
atmosphere.

Brent Constantz, CEO of building materials company Blue Planet, says he has a 
good solution: sequestering waste carbon dioxide into manmade limestone.

BluePlanet, which was founded in 2006, collects carbon dioxide from 
California’s largest power plant, at Moss Landing, by bubbling the plant’s 
waste gases through seawater 
<http://www.santacruzsentinel.com/article/ZZ/20090214/NEWS/902149878>. The 
process removes about 90% of the carbon dioxide and combines it with minerals 
in the water, resulting in the creation of limestone that is composed of about 
50% waste carbon dioxide.

Given that the Moss Landing plant produces more than 2m tons of carbon dioxide 
<http://www2.cec.org/site/PPE/co2emissions?page=4&order=field_plant_state_value&sort=asc>
 per year, this one plant could mitigate more than six times the carbon saved 
by Coca-Cola’s PlantBottle.

Cutting carbon out of cement production makes sense: cement manufacturing is 
responsible for an estimated 5% of global CO2 
<http://blog.rmi.org/blog_2016_07_12_looking_for_breakthrough_in_cement_concrete>
. Adding to the problem, countries around the world mine and ship billions of 
tons of rock every year; in the US alone, 1.32bn metric tons of crushed rock 
were mined 
<http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/stone_crushed/mcs-2016-stonc.pdf>
 in 2015. If the carbon produced by those processes could be cut, it could 
result in a significant improvement.

A hotter world

This year, Earth hit a major milestone: for the first time in recorded 
history, September readings of atmospheric carbon dioxide, which are always the 
lowest of the year, didn’t drop below 400 parts per million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/the-world-passes-400ppm-carbon-dioxide-threshold-permanently>
.

James Hansen <https://350.org/about/science/>, the former head of the Goddard 
Institute for Space Studies and one of the world’s foremost climatologists, has 
argued that the reading needs to get below 350 parts per million, if, as he put 
it, we wish to “preserve a planet similar to that on which civilization 
developed and to which life on Earth is adapted”.

“It was a real crossing the Rubicon moment,” says Jamie Henn, co-founder of 
global warming activism group350.org <https://350.org/>. “Nobody knows where 
the real tipping points are – the specific points at which global warming will 
become irreversible or will fundamentally change the Earth’s ability to support 
human life. But this September’s 400 parts per million moment is a real warning 
call that we’re crossing it.”

There’s no lack of interventions to lower carbon: last year’s Paris climate 
agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
, ratified by 112 countries, committed the world to keeping global warming to 
under2C <http://www.washingtonpost.com/sf/national/2015/11/29/carbon/>. Another 
solution popular among activists and politicians is a tax on carbon production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/aug/29/california-has-urged-president-obama-and-congress-to-tax-carbon-pollution>
.

But some critics argue that this solution is untenable. Even beyond the common 
argument that it willweaken economic growth 
<http://grist.org/climate-energy/what-were-getting-wrong-in-the-carbon-tax-debate/>
, there’s the fact that carbon taxes like the one levied inBritish Columbia, 
Canada 
<http://www.vox.com/energy-and-environment/2016/11/2/13491818/carbon-taxes-british-columbia-experiment>
 have had a negligible effect in lowering CO2 emissions. Evencarbon tax 
advocates <http://www.vox.com/2016/4/22/11446232/price-on-carbon-fine> are 
beginning to admit that it is only one of many carbon reduction policies that 
need to be implemented immediately.

Blue Planet has already begun branching out. It is currently working with 
cement manufacturers in Mexico and Canada, steel mills in Mexico, aluminum 
plants in Canada and coal-fired power plants in Wyoming to collect flue gases 
and use them to produce limestone. Constantz estimates that initially, each 
plant will produce between 50,000 and 100,000 tons of aggregate per year.

It’s not the only company working on finding ways to use waste CO2. Companies 
such as AirCarbon and Novomer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/aircarbon-sustainable-materials-greenhouse-gases-carbon-dioxide>
 use waste carbon to make plastic and textiles.Mineral Carbonation 
<http://mineralcarbonation.com/>, an Australian company, is working on 
producing limestone from waste carbon, and Solidia <http://solidiatech.com/>, a 
US company, is also sequestering carbon in building materials.

Google, Apple, Facebook race towards 100% renewable energy target
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/06/google-renewable-energy-target-solar-wind-power>
The policy side

Changes in government policy could make a huge difference when it comes to 
increasing the effectiveness of the carbon sequestration technologies being 
developed by Blue Planet, Mineral Carbonation and others.

Constantz cites California’s waste tire rubber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/10/toxic-chemicals-flint-triclosan-green-chemistry>
 initiative as an example of how policy can supercharge change. California 
requires that contractors add ground up waste tires to the asphalt mix on every 
road project. “It’s been 100% effective: there are no tires in California. 
We’re importing tires,” Constantz says.

In that vein Blue Planet is working with the state – as well as Ottawa, in 
Canada – to pass legislation that would require highway contractors to use 
carbon recycled rock in their projects. It helps that highway construction is 
already one of the biggest markets for cement and rock. Construction of a 
two-lane highway uses about25,000 tons of crushed stone per mile 
<http://geology.com/articles/crushed-stone/>, and almost 66% of that stone is 
limestone. “California uses 400m tons of rock every year,” says Constantz, 
noting that much of this material is paid for by the federal gasoline tax, 
which helps cover road upkeep. “We get $11bn dollars per year to buy rock and 
we import it from Canada and Mexico.”

If Blue Planet and its competitors can make artificial limestone at a 
competitive price, then they have the potential to become a major force for CO2 
sequestration and reduction.

And this is a place where carbon taxes can help. Blue Planet receives a 
“royalty” of $10 for every ton of waste CO2 it collects in California, and 
Constantz estimates that, when Canada enacts its expected $30 carbon royalty fee
 <http://www.cleanprosperity.ca/national_carbon_home> and California raises its 
fee to $50 per ton, the economics of his limestone production will become even 
more attractive.

With a combination of price supports and market supports, countries have the 
potential to significantly advance carbon reduction.

Discussing the use of manmade limestone, Constantz is even more effusive: 
“That one move could solve climate change in the world,” he says.























 