
As soon as we cross the border into northern Albania, near Shkodër, we are 
faced with a decision: coast or mountain? I’ve wanted to visit Albania since 
the 1990s, when I glimpsed its then unreachable coast from Corfu and heard it 
was the loveliest in the Med. But we’ve arrived in a heatwave – 40C-plus – so 
turn towards the cool mountains of the south-east. After well-groomed Croatia 
and Montenegro, Albania appears as shaggy and ill-kempt as a lovable hound, all 
dirty paws and enthusiastic tail.

After a night at a wayside hotel, we continue south, turning off the main road 
at Urakë to explore. Our guidebook says there are Illyrian tombs near a village 
called Selca. The road becomes a track and divides. We stop to ask directions 
and at this moment we finally arrive in Albania.
Albania map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/08/albania_map-zip/giv-30080U5To3xfbUpHR>
The man speaks a lot and waves his arms. I’d guess we are getting 90% Albanian 
and a smattering of other European tongues, none of them English. Albanian is 
seriously different from any other living language, but speaking it quickly to 
foreigners will, it is widely believed, make it perfectly comprehensible. This 
man, we gather, advises taking the left fork. We do so, and within a mile he is 
proved correct.

Away to our right is a magnificent ancient bridge, spanning the river in two 
impressive and wildly uneven arcs of stone. A youth appears on a horse with a 
wooden saddle. “Via Egnatia,” he says, pointing at the bridge excitedly. “Old!” 
This is an understatement. TheVia Egnatia 
<http://www.viaegnatiafoundation.eu/index.php/hiking-wandern/via-egnatia-hiking-trail>
 was constructed in the third century BC, probably on top of an earlier road, 
the only land link between the eastern and western regions of the Roman empire.

Notable feet have trodden its route, including Julius Caesar, the apostle 
Paul, and many crusaders. There are hopes that its remnants might become a 
long-distance hiking trail, but for now this bridge is unmarked. We only have 
the youth and his horse, which we lead over the cobbled arches that have 
supported so many travellers.

Resuming our search for the tombs, we meet an old man on a donkey who feeds us 
wild plums and points out the bee-eaters nesting in a mud bank. Only it’s not 
the birds he’s pointing to, but the dark blobs of cave entrances on the next 
hill. A third-century BC Illyrian king, Monum, is supposed to be buried here. 
We tramp around, finding three tombs in the rock, long since emptied of all 
treasure, much to the disappointment of Maddy, 12.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Feast-european-road-trip-albania-tombs-via-egnatia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439390276582%2Fc10c8ee4-af40-4d2d-9f75-1b6f59d26983-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20two%3A%20road%20trip%20across%20Albania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Feast-european-road-trip-albania-tombs-via-egnatia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20two%3A%20road%20trip%20across%20Albania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Feast-european-road-trip-albania-tombs-via-egnatia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439390276582%2Fc10c8ee4-af40-4d2d-9f75-1b6f59d26983-2060x1373.jpeg>
 An ancient bridge on the even more ancient Via Egnatia. 
Later that day we drive over a pass and catch sight of Lake Ohrid, 300 metres 
deep and entirely fed by aquifers. Macedonia is on the far side, 10km away. 
Closer, on a small promontory, is a lovely village, Lin, where cottages are 
decked with flowers, old ladies in black sit in the shade, and all the children 
are out playing in boats. Just as we say to each other, “It’d be nice to stay 
in one of these houses,” a young woman accosts us in English: “Would you like 
to stay in my house?”

A Balkan road trip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jun/29/balkan-road-trip-tips-montenegro-croatia-bosnia>
Rosa shows us through a gateway to her shady terrace by the lake, where her 
rowing boat is hauled up. She pours us a tot of raki and fetches a bowl of 
fresh figs. There is never any doubt we will stay: the only question is for how 
many years. We eat a lunch ofkoran, a sort of trout and one of seven fish 
species that haunt the deeper zones of the lake. Later we swim and explore the 
rest of the promontory, where there is a ruined fifth-century church with 
mosaics of peacocks eating luscious bunches of grapes.

“The village is half Orthodox and half Muslim,” Rosa tells us later, “But we 
are all happy together.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Feast-european-road-trip-albania-tombs-via-egnatia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439550306580%2F984c08a2-2a1a-4be6-8baa-419c92102447-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20two%3A%20road%20trip%20across%20Albania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Feast-european-road-trip-albania-tombs-via-egnatia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20two%3A%20road%20trip%20across%20Albania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F15%2Feast-european-road-trip-albania-tombs-via-egnatia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F14%2F1439550306580%2F984c08a2-2a1a-4be6-8baa-419c92102447-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Floria in the garden at her homestay in the village of Dardhe. 
We leave, reluctantly, next day and drive into the mountains on the Greek 
border, reaching Dardhe, once an important trading post but now largely 
abandoned. Some of the fine stone houses are being restored, as is the road – 
clearly there are big plans for Dardhe – but we amble out on a footpath and 
eventually come to a house with a sign. Is it a B&B? We can’t decide.

We enter the idyllic garden. An old lady in black greets us by kissing Sophie 
and Maddy, then serving more raki. She can’t understand why Maddy doesn’t swill 
the stuff down. She talks continuously. “I think she’s explaining about wolves 
in the forest,” I say. “No,” disagrees Sophie, “she’s talking about the London 
Olympics.”

A man appears from inside and tells us in halting English that Floria, his 
mother, is offering a room, but wants us to understand she will not be making
lakror today – though the nearby tavern will have it.

Again, there is no doubt we will stay. At the tavern, home to a stuffed lynx 
but no wolves, the waiter fills our water carafes from a gushing spring and we 
order lakror, not knowing what to expect. After an hour he returns with a 
wooden block, clears a vast space, then brings out an iron pan the size of a 
cartwheel and lays it proudly on the table. “Lakror,” he announces.

Lakror, it turns out, is a local speciality, a bit like a Turkish börek – a 
flat pie stuffed with cheese and vegetables and utterly delicious. Which is 
fortunate, as we are eating it for the next two days. When we leave, Floria is 
heartbroken that we have not tried her lakror, but we promise to return. After 
all, we have fallen deeply for this shabby, hugely eccentric gem called 
Shqipëri by its inhabitants, and Albania by everyone else.

 * We had no problems driving in Albania. A policeman stopped us for failing 
to use headlights during the day, but simply leaned in and switched them on. The
Bradt Guide by Gillian Gloyer <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/albania-4.html> 
is useful. A room for three in Rosa’s B&B (+355 69 45 04577, English spoken) is 
€25 a night with breakfast and use of the boat, dinner €4. Floria’s (+355 69 21 
39787, no English) was €20 a night
 