
When winter after winter is marked by headlines dominated by NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> crises, it is easy to become immune 
to the warnings. There are those who will argue, the government among them, 
that what we are seeing unfold this year is no different in scale to what we 
have seen in the recent past.

But it is not just the judgment of the British Red Cross, an organisation 
hardly known for hyperbole, that the NHS is facing a “humanitarian crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
” that should set alarm bells ringing in Downing Street. The evidence is 
mounting that the NHS is facing unprecedented strain, unnecessarily putting 
lives at risk. In the past month, a third of hospital trusts have issued alerts 
warning of the need for urgent action to cope with demand; seven said they were
unable to provide minimum standards <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38526285> of 
comprehensive care for patients.

Related: Theresa May’s claim on NHS funding not true, say MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/30/theresa-mays-claim-on-health-funding-not-true-say-mps>

Senior doctors have warned the crisis is on a scale not seen since the early 
1990s, while the president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine has 
described the system as “on its knees 
<http://www.rcem.ac.uk/RCEM/News/News_2017/Emergency_Care_is_in_crisis.aspx>”.

To say that the response from the government is woeful would be an 
understatement. In the face of a growing chorus of warnings from all quarters, 
ministers have done no more than reiterate theirwidely discredited claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/nhs-head-disputes-theresa-may-claims-over-health-funding>
 that the NHS is getting an extra £10bn in funding a year by 2020. AsMPs on the 
health select committee have pointed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/30/theresa-mays-claim-on-health-funding-not-true-say-mps>
, in real terms it is just a £6.5bn funding increase, with £3.5bn of that 
coming from cuts to public health and medical training.

This latest crisis must be seen in the context of the NHS’s remarkably 
successful history. Almost 70 years after it was founded, its key principle 
remains enshrined at the heart of the service: free care at the point of 
delivery based on clinical need, not ability to pay. It is far from perfect: 
cases such asMid Staffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/feb/06/mid-staffs-hospital-scandal-guide>
 illustrate the quality of care on offer can be highly variable. But it has 
been named thetop-performing international healthcare system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/17/nhs-health> by a panel of 
independent experts, beating countries that spend much more on their systems 
than we do. In the hearts of the public, it is much more than a provider of 
healthcare – it is a cherished national institution.

Related: Theresa May cannot ignore NHS crisis or brush off critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/07/theresa-may-cannot-ignore-nhs-crisis>

Yet the NHS needs to evolve significantly if it is to keep pace with 
demographic and technological shifts. As the population ages, increasing 
numbers of people will find themselves living with the kind of medical 
conditions that require care over a period of years, not weeks. This means more 
care will need to shift from treatment in acute hospitals to helping people 
manage their own conditions in the community. Developments in medical 
technology will require advanced care to be delivered by specialised doctors 
working in larger centres that treat more patients, allowing them to hone their 
expert skills. Yet in recent years, political energy has instead been expended 
on reorganisations that concentrate on backroom structures rather than focusing 
on patients.

Even if the NHS were in rude financial health, achieving this scale of change 
in a complex network of organisations – that together represent the world’s 
fifth-largest employer – would represent an unprecedented challenge. But its 
finances have been ailing since 2010. It is undergoing the biggest financial 
squeeze <https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/blog/2015/10/nhs-spending-squeezed-never> 
in its 70-year history. Last year, NHS organisations in England ended the year 
with a deficit  
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/sites/files/kf/field/field_publication_file/Deficits_in_the_NHS_Kings_Fund_July_2016_1.pdf>
three times the size of the previous year.

To plug the gap between the limited extra cash on offer from the government 
and rising costs and demand, the chief executive of NHS England agreed to find 
£22bn of efficiency savings a year by 2020. This was always considered highly 
ambitious by health experts, given that easier savings have already been made 
in numerous efficiency drives in the past. But in the context of cuts to social 
care services and the government’s unfunded commitment to providing a seven-day 
NHS, realising these savings has shifted from the realms of the unlikely to the 
all but impossible.

Related: NHS faces 'humanitarian crisis' as demand rises, British Red Cross 
warns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>

As pressures grow for NHS trusts to do what they can to minimise their 
deficits in the coming financial year, they have bunkered down into emergency 
mode. The result is staffing shortages, cuts to the numbers of beds, 
unacceptable waits at A&Es across the country and hospitals at capacity 
diverting ambulances elsewhere. Ultimately, care gets poorer and more thinly 
rationed. The cost can be measured in human lives.

These immediate financial pressures make it far more difficult for the NHS to 
foster the sort of innovation that will be critical to maintaining its status 
as a world-class health service. They sink staff morale, compounding long-term 
recruitment shortages in nursing and clinical specialities, such as emergency 
medicine, and make it harder for the NHS to recruit the calibre of leaders it 
needs to effect change. Now is the time to be investing in long-term reform, 
not forcing hospital trusts to undergo painful cost-cutting exercises to try to 
make resources stretch ever further.

There is now an extraordinary level of consensus that the NHS urgently needs a 
cash injection to see it through this crisis. Even Andrew Lansley, Jeremy 
Hunt’s predecessor as health secretary, considered no champion of the NHS, has 
called for it to receive an extra £5bn on top of what the government has 
already promised.
 Even former health secretary Andrew Lansley, not considered a champion of the 
NHS, has called on the government to increase its funding. Photograph: David 
Jones/PA 
These calls have so far fallen on deaf ears within government. Theresa May’s 
domestic policy agenda has been characterised by warm words about making life 
easier for those just managing to get by. But she has spent valuable political 
capital, already in short supply as a result of Brexit, on headline-grabbing 
policy announcements such as grammar schools that are a distraction from the 
real social issues facing the country. Her government’s first big set of tax 
and spending decisions delivered tax cuts for businesses and more affluent 
families at the expense of tax credits for low-income working families.

Meanwhile, the reality of her government’s domestic policy is hospitals more 
stretched, older people left without basic personal care, schools struggling to 
cope with funding cuts, homelessness on the rise and an understaffed prison 
service barely keeping a lid on unrest across the prison estate. If she chooses 
to say nothing about the looming NHS funding crisis in her heavily trailed 
speech tomorrow, it will speak volumes about where her true priorities lie.
 