Who turned the Berlin Philharmonic down in 1989, when they were looking for a 
successor to Herbert von Karajan?  Daniel Barenboim  Carlos Kleiber  Lorin 
Maazel When was the Berlin Philharmonic first conducted by a woman?  1887  1930 
 1985 Simon Rattle conducted Sibelius's Third Symphony in 2010. How many times 
prior to this had the orchestra played it?  3  23  0 Sergiu Celibidache was 
Principal Conductor from 1945-52. But his relationship with the orchestra 
during Karajan’s tenure (1955-1989) was non-existent, and he only returned in 
1992. To which brand did he compare Karajan and his musicianship?  Chrysler  
Coca-Cola  Walt Disney When films were made of his orchestra, how did Herbert 
von Karajan alter his players' appearance?  He insisted that the women all wear 
long skirts  He insisted that all men were clean-shaven  He insisted that 
players who were bald wear wigs Tchaikovsky, Strauss, Mahler and Dvorak are 
among the composers who conducted the orchestra in its first two decades. Who 
didn't?  Brahms  Grieg  Saint-Saens Which of the following pieces did the 
Berlin Philharmonic and Wilhelm Furtwängler not premiere?  Schoenberg: 
Variations Op 31  Richard Strauss: Four Last Songs  Prokofiev: Piano Concerto 
no 5, with Prokofiev as the soloist Herbert von Karajan was not known for his 
advocacy of new music. Which of the following composers' music did he conduct 
during his 34 years in charge?  Karlheinz Stockhausen  Pierre Boulez  Hans 
Werner Henze In his first concert as chief conductor in 2002, which British 
composer's music did Simon Rattle perform?  Thomas Adès  Edward Elgar  Benjamin 
Britten In 2005, the orchestra made their debut in which city?  Glasgow  Los 
Angeles  Shanghai  You got…  Challenge your friends Submit answers  