
If there’s one thing 2016 taught us it’s that political predictions are a 
mug’s game. Predictions about technology and society, however, are at least a 
little easier. One thing that’s going to rub up against our noses during 2017 
is the imminence of thedriverless car revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/13/self-driving-cars-bmw-google-2020-driving>
, which is going to be a big one.

Around our house there is a new noise. It’s my voice, in a tone of 
authoritarian command, saying: “Alexa, stop!” Or perhaps, “Alexa, play the 
Beach Boys”; or “Alexa, what’s the weather like tomorrow?” Yes, like thousands 
of others, I got thenew Amazon toy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/21/amazon-echo-review-the-best-combined-speaker-and-voice-assistant-in-the-uk>
 for Christmas – a small cylinder that can answer many questions with enormous 
speed and proficiency, play music, order taxis, dictate recipes and much else 
besides.

In an age of employment insecurity, driving has become the default way that 
many people, particularly men, keep their heads above water

Yet Alexa, already transforming life in my household, is nothing compared to 
the changes that driverless cars are going to visit on us very soon. Not long 
ago this was science fiction, but in 2016 we saw them tested on the streets of 
Milton Keynes. Meanwhile, in San Francisco,a row between Uber and the state of 
California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/uber-self-driving-cars-california-illegal-unethical-tactics>
 over licences saw driverless cars removed from the streets and thefirst fatal 
car crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/30/tesla-autopilot-death-self-driving-car-elon-musk>
 in the US involving a car on autopilot.

Next year the UK government hopes we will see trials of driverless cars on 
British motorways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/12/george-osborne-driverless-car-trials-budget>
. So it’s time for some serious thinking about what’s coming down the fast lane 
in 2017.

Let’s start with the positives. First, quite a lot of people who would be 
killed or maimed on the roadsif we carry on as we are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/04/driverless-cars-boris-johnson-stallion-road-safety>
 will be saved. It may seem counter-intuitive, but almost all studies on 
properly equipped driverless cars suggest they aresafer than those driven by 
humans 
<http://www.theinquirer.net/inquirer/feature/2426988/humans-vs-robots-driverless-cars-are-safer-than-human-driven-vehicles>
. There is an additional safety advantage for women, who worry about late-night 
taxi rides. A driverless car might seem a sinister invention to some people – 
but it isn’t going to rape you.

Driverless cars should also greatly improve the urban landscape 
<https://www.wired.com/2016/10/heres-self-driving-cars-will-transform-city/>. 
We have become used to the ugliness ofalmost every street being choked by 
parked vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/uber-self-driving-cars-pittsburgh-how-driverless-cars-could-change-our-future-lyft-john-zimmer>
, but there would be almostno point in most of us owning a car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/01/driverless-cars-test-google>
. The cost of a cab ride is mostly made up by paying the driver, and therefore 
local rides would be dramatically cheaper.

It will seem outlandishly extravagant to blow tens of thousands of pounds on 
buying a piece of equipment you can hire whenever you need it for far less. 
Petrolheads on aJeremy Clarkson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson> kick will still want to own 
their cars, but for most people this will be a big saving.

So our streets will be clearer. And, because these will be electric cars, 
cleaner too. There will have to be vast new infrastructure systems – huge 
garages to store the cars so they can arrive quickly when ordered. I wonder 
whether local train services will survive. We may see a return to the 
Thatcherite proposal for railway lines to be turned into roads, this time for 
driverless cars.

As for buses, at the moment we have a largely undiscussed transport apartheid 
between car owners and bus users. But if driverless cars work then surely there 
will bedriverless buses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/19/driverless-buses-arrive-in-australia-smart-and-green-but-what-now-for-drivers>
, which can be a lot smaller and more numerous than today’s diesel-spewing 
vehicles. At the other end of the scale, car sharing and car pooling, already 
popular, will expand: the distinction between somebody using a driverless 
minibus and driverless, large shared car could become meaningless.

Put all this together and I can imagine car ownership, and car driving, being 
frowned on as much as opening a packet of fags at a family gathering is now.

But let’s turn to the dark side of this. First, the effect on jobs. There are 
just under 300,000 HGV drivers licensed in the UK and about the same number of 
licensed taxi and cab drivers in England and Wales. But these figures are 
probably an underestimate of the actual numbers of professional drivers, given 
the black/grey economy and the local delivery drivers. Putting all this 
together, I wouldn’t be surprised if there were around a million people across 
the UK dependent upon driving others, or goods, or takeaways for their living.

But the numbers are only the half of it. In an age of job insecurity, driving 
has become the default way that many people, particularly men, keep their heads 
above water. If you can’t find anything else, sign up with a local cab firm and 
spend long hours on the streets.

The battle over Uber and driverless cars is really a debate about the future 
of humanity | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/paul-mason-driverless-cars-uber-artificial-intelligence-unemployment>
So the effect of this version of job destruction will be harsh, and require 
redistribution. Who will be the huge gainers from the driverless car 
revolution? Presumably the biggest car companies, and those at the forefront of 
the technology – Tesla, Mercedes, Honda – and the taxi companies, like Uber. 
Both can expect to make gargantuan profits. How do you channel some of that 
money back into the economy to provide jobs for the former drivers?

That’s the old question about the taxation of multinationals. I don’t see any 
chance of our society running out of things for human beings to do – not with
the care crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/02/how-care-crisis-making-old-age-nightmare>
, or the needs of the NHS, or the almost endless amounts of environmental work 
to be done. It’s about funding, by effectively taxing the new profits.

There are also safety issues. This entire system depends upon the internet. A 
terrorist attack, or even a large solar flare, could knock everything out. The 
more interconnected we are, the more vulnerable we are.

This is such a huge issue I would expect it to be a major political 
question for the year ahead. As with most technological advances, driverless 
cars will be a wonderful future or a looming disaster, dependent on the 
political choices we make. That, at least, hasn’t changed. Has it, Alexa?
 