
On 8th street in the heart of downtown Los Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles>, a single stair leads to a 
raised, red and white tile platform. This trash-strewn urban ruin is tucked 
into the corner of a large parking lot within sight of the neon marquees of the 
Broadway theatre district. It is what remains of Taco House, one of LA’s iconic 
hamburger stands, which are quickly being erased from this rapidly transforming 
city.


Los Angeles is, of course, inextricably associated with the automobile, and it 
was here that many suburban building types – from modernist homes to fast-food 
restaurants – were pioneered. But it is changing:five transit lines 
<http://thesource.metro.net/2013/06/13/new-under-construction-map-for-metro-rail-debuts/>
 are being built, and cranes loom over the city’s boulevards. The epicentre of 
this transition is the once moribund downtown, where a denser and wealthier 
city is displacing, among other things, one of its old, car-oriented icons.


The hamburger stand is part of southern California’s rich tradition of 
roadside architecture. These buildings are typically 100 square-foot boxes, 
with an outdoor window to order and pick up food. Next to the structures are 
rudimentary dining areas, often consisting of no more than a plastic tarp and a 
few fold-up chairs and tables. To compensate for their diminutive size, the 
stands sometimes have large signs and, in more elaborate cases, are decorated 
to resemble everything from a log cabin to a traditional Korean house.

Perhaps the sprawling, car-obsessed Los Angeles of the post-war era was simply 
an aberration

LA’s hamburger stands have held the fascination of visiting critics since the 
1970s. Architects Denise Scott Brown and Robert Venturi famously coined the 
terms “ducks” and “decorated sheds” to describe buildings such as these, that 
use signage or elaborate decoration to signify their purpose. Reyner Banham, in 
his seminal book Los Angeles: TheArchitecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> of Four Ecologies, 
wrote rapturously about hamburgers as being “a work of visual art” and a 
“fantasia on functional themes”, comparable to the buildings in which they are 
sold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdisappearing-hamburger-stands-downtown-los-angeles-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f50a0e876675a4376ecfa45fd8be8c028d3aa09%2F0_324_2992_2052%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20disappearing%20roadside%20hamburger%20stands%20of%20downtown%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdisappearing-hamburger-stands-downtown-los-angeles-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20disappearing%20roadside%20hamburger%20stands%20of%20downtown%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdisappearing-hamburger-stands-downtown-los-angeles-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f50a0e876675a4376ecfa45fd8be8c028d3aa09%2F0_324_2992_2052%2F2992.jpg>
 Built in 1931, this faux-log cabin is the oldest hamburger stand in downtown 
LA. Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
The rise of the hamburger stand coincided with the decline of downtown Los 
Angeles. In the early part of the 20th century, it was the dominant centre of 
southern California, accounting for 90% of all retail sales. The hulking beaux 
arts buildings that line streets such as Spring and Broadway are a testament to 
downtown’s former commercial might.

However, as early as the 1920s, the car began to decentralise the city, and 
the need for parking subsumed downtown. Hundreds of buildings were levelled to 
accommodate parking lots, such as the Armory Building, which once occupied the 
site of Taco House. This imposing,Romanesque revival edifice 
<https://urbandiachrony.wordpress.com/2011/05/31/northwest-corner-of-eighth-and-spring-streets-c-1908-2011/>
, which for a time housed the city’s main post office, was levelled in 1938 and 
replaced by 800 sq ft of asphalt and a tiny stand.

There are approximately 20 hamburger stands left in downtown Los Angeles. They 
began to appear in the early 1930s, rapidly proliferated throughout the 40s and 
50s, and the last was built in 1964. Only a fraction still serve food; others 
have been converted or stand vacant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdisappearing-hamburger-stands-downtown-los-angeles-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a6d19cb98d072808ca9626546498d14d34b35d9%2F0_0_2525_2373%2F2525.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20disappearing%20roadside%20hamburger%20stands%20of%20downtown%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdisappearing-hamburger-stands-downtown-los-angeles-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20disappearing%20roadside%20hamburger%20stands%20of%20downtown%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdisappearing-hamburger-stands-downtown-los-angeles-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a6d19cb98d072808ca9626546498d14d34b35d9%2F0_0_2525_2373%2F2525.jpg>
 Illustration: Max Podemski 
As white collar industries moved out of downtown in the mid-century, they were 
replaced by blue collar wholesalers. Responding to the new demographic brought 
in by these industries, kebabs,bibimbab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/nov/18/bibimbap-korean-dish-comfort-food>
 and tortas joined hamburgers on the menus of many stands.

Ye Old Taco House has occupied the corner of a large parking lot at 4th and 
Hill Street since 1962. Like many of the stands, it is an immigrant-owned 
enterprise run by Maria Morales and her son Josh. On a slow Tuesday night, 
Maria helps in the kitchen as an older relative sits in the corner, watching 
TV. The Morales have operated the restaurant for 11 years, while the 
neighbourhood has transformed around them.

“Before it was only Hispanic people, now it’s everything: American people, 
Chinese people,” Maria explains. As we speak, two security guards walk in, 
ordering in Spanish, followed by a tattooed rocker, most likely in the area for 
one of the new trendy bars that have opened up nearby.

Downtown is the centre of one of the most diverse cities on the planet, and 
the eclectic menus of many of the stands cater to an array of palates. The menu 
at Kiku Teriyaki includes all the standard teriyaki dishes as well as a large 
assortment of Korean ones, ranging from spicy squid and kimchi stew to mackerel 
pike with kimchi. “All the restaurants on this street are owned by Koreans but 
I am the only one serving Korean food. They all eat here,” says its owner, Mr 
Lee. “Non-Koreans usually order teriyaki, but Mexicans and Armenians order 
Korean dishes because they like spicy food.”

Further south, Maya Heidary is preparing her stand for its grand opening. 
Built in 1931, Maya’s (as it is now known) is the oldest hamburger stand in 
downtown LA, and its log cabin facade and frying pan clock have changed little 
over the decades. Heidary is the fourth owner in the last year, and is having 
difficulty figuring out how to position her new restaurant in the changing 
neighbourhood.

“There are all kinds of customers here: high class, middle class,” she says. 
“It makes it very hard to plan my menu, because if the price is too low you 
won’t get the high class people, and if it’s too high you won’t get the middle 
class people. That is why many of the stands around here serve all kinds of 
food.” Her stand has traditionally served Mexican food, and she plans to keep 
burritos and tacos on the menu while gradually expanding into hamburgers, 
pizzas and wraps.

With downtown LA now boasting a residential population that has grown to over 
50,000, many stands have benefited. “It’s busy all the time now: lunchtime, in 
the evenings,” says Maria Morales.

But these affluent new residents are not the traditional patrons of hamburger 
stands, and many have had to adapt. The Husky Boy stand on Broadway and 8th 
served office workers for decades with an “only in LA” menu of burritos, tacos 
and pastrami (a legacy of theJewish and Mexican residents of Boyle Heights 
<http://www.tabletmag.com/jewish-life-and-religion/123270/viva-pastrami>, east 
of downtown). In 2012, its mishmash façade was cleaned up and painted over with 
a colourful mural when it was taken over by Two Boots Pizza, a New York 
franchise with unorthodox pizzas with ingredients like creole chicken and 
jalapeño pesto.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdisappearing-hamburger-stands-downtown-los-angeles-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F362e88252fca106e68a0fd289720e4ddf233685a%2F0_31_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20disappearing%20roadside%20hamburger%20stands%20of%20downtown%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdisappearing-hamburger-stands-downtown-los-angeles-california%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20disappearing%20roadside%20hamburger%20stands%20of%20downtown%20Los%20Angeles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Fdisappearing-hamburger-stands-downtown-los-angeles-california%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F362e88252fca106e68a0fd289720e4ddf233685a%2F0_31_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 A 33-storey high-rise is planned for the site of the current Ye Olde Taco 
House. Photograph: Max Podemski 
Phil Hartman, the owner of Two Boots, was urged to come downtown by some 
adjacent businesses and was astonished by the buildings in the area. The 
diminutive stand is sandwiched between the Platt Building, a gothic revival 
office tower, and the elaborately ornamented Wurlitzer Building.

“I didn’t even know Los Angeles had a centre, I think a lot of people think 
that,” admits Hartman, a New Yorker.

With its googie architectural detailing <http://www.spaceagecity.com/googie/>, 
vivid signage and outdoor seating area, Two Boots is one of the better 
preserved stands in downtown. A self-described preservationist at heart, 
Hartman says the structure was in such poor condition that it had to be 
“rebuilt from scratch”. An “early adopter” of downtown, Two Boots has since 
been joined on the surrounding blocks by the uber-trendy Ace Hotel as well as 
high fashion outlets from Sweden and France.

But this rising affluence threatens the stands’ much-loved status as bastions 
of unpretentious, affordable food. Kim can point to each business on his block 
and list their rents: $7,000, $6,500, $3,000 a month. At these levels, it is 
nearly impossible for many of the stands to stay in business in their current 
form. While an entire burrito goes for $5 at many stands, at Two Boots a single 
slice of pizza costs $4.09.

The gentrification of Skid Row - a story that will decide the future of Los 
Angeles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/mar/05/gentrification-skid-row-los-angeles-homeless>
The hipsterfication of LA’s hamburger stands may, however, prove the final 
chapter in the saga of these half-century-old structures. A construction boom 
is transforming the landscape, with parking lots becoming new buildings on what 
seems like monthly basis. The Anzutei ramen stand on Spring Street will soon be 
replaced by a28-storey luxury hotel 
<http://urbanize.la/post/rendering-revealed-slim-dtla-hotel-tower>. A 33-storey 
high-rise 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/realestate/la-fi-property-report-historic-core-20150402-story.html>
 is planned for the site of Ye Olde Taco House, and those red and white tile 
remnants on 8th will soon be cleared to make way for a24-storey residential 
tower 
<http://brighamyen.com/2015/05/28/new-luxury-rental-tower-coming-to-8thspring-in-downtown-la/>
.

Los Angeles’s transition to being denser and less car dependent is 
unquestionably a good thing, resulting in a more liveable and sustainable city. 
However, the loss of these tiny stands stokes a broader anxiety about the 
changes brought about by this process. These idiosyncratic, populist buildings 
represent the entrepreneurial, immigrant city that Los Angeles has become since 
the rise of the automobile. Their destruction in favour of luxury behemoths is 
a symbol of the city gaining wealth while losing some of its character.

Despite this tension, the re-urbanisation of Los Angeles’ core is, in a sense, 
the city going back to the future. If we look atphotographs of downtown in the 
1920s 
<http://www.kcet.org/updaily/socal_focus/history/la-as-subject/7th-and-broadway.html>
, it looks like New York or London: dense and bustling with streets packed with 
pedestrians, cars and trams.

So perhaps the sprawling, car-obsessed Los Angeles of the post-war era was 
simply an aberration. In the future, this period of car worship, which so 
defines the city in the popular imagination, might be seen as a stepping stone 
to a more urban and urbane place – albeit one with less pastrami cheeseburgers.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 