
Zombie fans will soon be able to experience for themselves the fear and horror 
ofThe Walking Dead <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>, 
as Universal Studios Hollywood has developed a new attraction based on the hit 
TV series.

Due to open on 4 July, the walk-through attraction has been created with the 
help of Los Angeles-based special effects studio KNB EFX, which is responsible 
for creating the gory, decaying zombies featured in the show.

The Walking Dead tells the story of survivors in a post-apocalyptic world 
dominated by flesh-eating “walkers”, which is how zombies are referred to in 
the show. Due to start its seventh season this year,the AMC show 
<http://www.amc.com/shows/the-walking-dead> is the most watched in cable 
television history.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsFhBEqqL6Mw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsFhBEqqL6Mw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DsFhBEqqL6Mw&media=>
 Making the Walking Dead attraction – video 
Universal Studios worked with KNB EFX and the Walking Dead’s creative team to 
develop animatronics, as well as prosthetics, moulds and fine details of the 
walkers. The attraction’s set design and props will be recognisable to fans of 
the series, who will also encounter actors in makeup throughout their journey. 
The experience, which is being described as “intense” and is not recommended 
for under 13s, will be in a custom-built structure within the park.

“After six years of working on The Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>, we have a great 
opportunity to take it out of the studio, off the soundstage and into an 
attraction where guests can come face-to-face with walkers,” said the show’s 
executive producer and director Greg Nicotero.

“It’s very exciting to be able to make the attraction as authentic as 
possible. We’re getting the chance to utilise moulds that were created 
specifically for the show and translate them into parts of the attraction. 
We’re creating animatronic walkers that guests will be able to see … it’s never 
been done before.”

 * universalstudioshollywood.com 
<http://www.universalstudioshollywood.com/the-walking-dead-attraction/>  