
We were high in the Rhodope mountains of southern Bulgaria, one of Europe’s 
largest wildernesses, a place where wolves and bears can still be found, that 
is home to a scattering of hardy villages, mostly Turkish-influenced from the 
long presence of the Ottoman empire. The narrow valleys have tumbling rivers 
that carve deep gorges, inspiration for many stories, notably that of Orpheus, 
the divinely inspired musician. We had trekked up from the village of Yagodina, 
spotted a snake among the flowers, and now we were tired. We needed 
distractions. It was then that disaster struck, the sort of thing that can 
occur in myth-soaked mountains.
Bulgaria Rhodope mountains 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/08/travel_bulgaria-zip/giv-30080o3KA1NUw1QKx>
It was my daughter Maddy (12) who roused the slumbering gods. She took out her 
phone and started playing music: Shakira to be precise, the one about hips. I 
leaped up on a rock and, egged on by the adoring jeers of my family, performed 
an inadvisable parody of the Colombian diva. The gods passed their judgement. 
Something in my lower back snapped.

By the time we had descended to our destination, the village of Trigrad, I 
knew I was going to suffer. Fortunately the Rhodope region is renowned for the 
longevity and good health of its inhabitants and, at theTriibria hotel 
<http://www.rooms.bg/en/hotel-trigrad-hotel-triibriq.html>, the owner, Nevse, 
brought out all the secrets of Rhodopean vitality: ironwort tea; mursalski, 
renowned for anti-inflammatory properties; then patatik, a potato-based 
Rhodopean favourite, filled with cheese and herbs collected on the mountain. 
Later came other balms, notably mavrud wine (Bulgaria’s best red, grown on the 
lower slopes of the Rhodopes). Still I sat there, twisted and contrite, 
clutching my coccyx. Finally yoghurt was brought.

The Rhodopes’ reputation for health is not new: back in 1905 a Russian 
researcher noted the unusually high incidence of centenarians and decided the 
secret was in the yoghurt. A bacteria, lactobacillus bulgaricus was isolated. 
Scientists went on to find that Bulgarian yoghurt helped increase bone density 
and reduce chloresterol. It was a wonder cure. The Rhodopeans, of course, knew 
their yoghurt was good, but the secret of long life? They kept quiet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440073089309%2F47a0864f-93e7-4d4d-a689-f92be9644b78-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20east%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20three%3A%20hiking%20in%20Bulgaria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20east%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20three%3A%20hiking%20in%20Bulgaria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440073089309%2F47a0864f-93e7-4d4d-a689-f92be9644b78-2060x1373.jpeg>
 An old man chopping firewood for in Trigrad 
I ate my yoghurt; I drank more ironwort tea. I staggered over to the bar and 
was shown dozens of proprietary spirits, none of which had any claim to 
healing. Finally, an unlabelled bottle of tawny liquid was produced and a tot 
poured. Ice was added. Two hours later I knew I had found Bulgaria’s secret 
weapon in the war on decrepitude: rakia.

Next day, I was much better, and we strolled through the village towards 
Trigrad’s famous gorge <http://bulgariatravel.org/en/object/369>. Despite it 
only being early August the villagers were clearly preparing for winter: 
everyone appeared to be chopping or stacking firewood. The streets were lined 
with long walls of logs and the houses fortified by ramparts of kindling. 
Beyond the houses was thegorge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/13/top-10-canyons-gorges-europe-walking-hiking-trips>
, deep enough to swallow London’s Shard. At its narrowest point there is a 
dark, savage hole into which the river plunges, the Devil’s Throat. It was here 
that Orpheus supposedly descended to Hades in pursuit of his deceased beloved, 
Eurydice. We decided to follow. Fortunately someone has built a footpath into 
the cave which enters lower down so you pass into the bowels of Hades first, 
admiring some of the 35,000 bats who live there, then climbing through vast 
vaulted chambers towards daylight. At this point Orpheus made the fatal mistake 
of looking back, despite having been warned against it, thus losing Eurydice 
forever. The moral is clear: once the right answer to a problem is found, do 
not look back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440151775694%2F81c73e2e-86b6-42c4-ab74-4cf00130e6df-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20east%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20three%3A%20hiking%20in%20Bulgaria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20east%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20three%3A%20hiking%20in%20Bulgaria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F21%2F1440151775694%2F81c73e2e-86b6-42c4-ab74-4cf00130e6df-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The natural arches of Chudni Mostove in the Rhodope mountains 
We spent the rest of the day climbing up on the crags, admiring some of 
Rhodope’s 80 unique plant species. Clouds of butterflies went with us, hitching 
lifts on our shoulders. There were glorious panoramas of endless forests and 
mountains: one of the pleasures of the Rhodopes is the sense of vast wild 
spaces. At sunset part two of my cure commenced: ironwort, bean soup, yoghurt, 
and several medicinal shots of rakija.

Next day we walked a gorge near Devin village, soaked my back in renowned spa 
waters and ended the day higher up the valley in the village of Lyaskovo at the 
homestay of Rumen and Zacharina Rosenovi. After a superb dinner, our hosts’ 
son, Boris, played the bagpipes and Zacharina got Sophie and Maddy dancing. 
Personally, I still felt some Shakira-inspired caution, something Rumen clearly 
understood, leaving me in the company of a rakia bottle that, bizarrely, 
contained three woodcarved musicians – a gift from another villager. Could it 
have been Orpheus? I lifted the bottle and I did not look back.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440073173102%2F7194cff3-caf9-4146-85be-8f79d89590db-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20east%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20three%3A%20hiking%20in%20Bulgaria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20east%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20three%3A%20hiking%20in%20Bulgaria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440073173102%2F7194cff3-caf9-4146-85be-8f79d89590db-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The Rosenovi family in Lyaskovo, bagpipes to the fore 
Later, a group gathered and an impassioned discussion on the fragile legality 
of making rakia in modern Bulgaria ensued. “Anyone who has tried our mountain 
rakia,” declared one man, “never wants anything else. Big business doesn’t like 
that.” Deeper into the evening, if I recall correctly, we debated the correct 
way to express Yes and No with your head. Ruman said the British shake for Yes 
and nod for No which, at that moment, seemed entirely accurate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440073227847%2F525af8fe-7963-442a-b918-59551b7a5c3d-2060x2060.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20east%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20three%3A%20hiking%20in%20Bulgaria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20east%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20three%3A%20hiking%20in%20Bulgaria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F22%2Feast-european-roadtrip-bulgaria-trigrad-gorge-rhodope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440073227847%2F525af8fe-7963-442a-b918-59551b7a5c3d-2060x2060.jpeg>
 Rumen Rosenovi with his special bottle of rakia 
Next day, we set off through Lyaskovo, calling greetings to all the people out 
chopping logs and admiring some venerable communist-era vehicles – Bulgaria 
could snatch the mantle of “ex-communist country with great vintage vehicles” 
from Cuba. Then we trekked upwards into the forests and collected handfuls of 
wild strawberries and raspberries, crossing the highest ridge at 1,900 metres, 
before dropping down to Chudni Mostove, a stirring sight where water has carved 
several massive arches in stone, the largest over 45 metres high and wide. I 
scrambled down steep gulches and leaped from rocks like a mountain goat.

Our last night we spent in Kosovo, a restored village, then next day stopped 
by Bachkovo, an 11th century monastery busy with little ceremonies and rituals, 
before returning to Plovdiv, an ancient city and a great base for any 
exploration of Bulgaria’s southern mountains. The Rhodope had cured me, but I 
don’t believe it was the yoghurt.

• Bulgarian roads are the most pot-holed we have yet encountered, but fuel is 
the cheapest. We are using the Bradt Guide to Bulgaria. I’m reading The 
Traveller’s Literary Companion to Eastern and Central Europe, edited by James 
Naughton, which covers a lot of the countries we are visiting, including the 
next: Romania.Traventuria <http://www.bulgariawalking.com/>, provided Kevin and 
family’s self-guided walking tour (In the Footsteps of Orpheus 
<http://bulgariawalking.com/p118-In-the-footsteps-of-Orpheus-Rhodope-Rodopi-Mountains-self-guided-walking-tour-in-Bulgaria>
 starts from £307 per person in a double room, including ground transfers, en 
suite halfboard accommodation, detailed route notes and maps).HomeAway 
<http://www.homeaway.com/> provided self-catering accommodation in Plovdiv 
<http://www.homeaway.co.uk/p3860088>, from £75 per night. Kevin also stayed at 
Hotel Hebros <http://www.hebros-hotel.com/index.php?lang=en>, double rooms with 
breakfast from £56, +359 32 260180


Follow Kevin’s journey on instagram.com/kevinrushby 
<https://instagram.com/kevinrushby/>; contribute your tips on things for him to 
see and do on the way ontwitter.com/kevin_rushby 
<https://twitter.com/kevin_rushby>
 