
It’s difficult to know where to start with Adam Curtis’s latest film. At 
nearly three hours in length, HyperNormalisation contains a hyperabundance of 
images and ideas. There are montages of monster movies mixed with home video 
grabs and bits from BBC Breakfast. There are observations about the nature of 
reality, the limits of data and the dextrous nature of Jane Fonda’s career. 
It’s less a documentary than an experience.

Curtis knows where to start, of course. He always does. There’s always one 
moment, one telling event that will go on to assume central significance in an 
argument that encompasses the globe and decades of history. In 
HyperNormalisation, that inciting incident is a local government meeting in New 
York City in 1975. The meeting was called with the purpose of restructuring an 
enormous public debt. Except the creditors never turned up. Instead, they 
demanded the city authorities restructure themselves. And put the creditors in 
charge. From that, Curtis argues, came a new fiscal policy – “austerity” – and 
a sense that politics was no longer the art of the possible but the art of the 
deal. SoonDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> was 
buying up substantial slices of Manhattan on terms that were laughably 
favourable to the real estate developer, sorry, president-elect.

From Manhattan, Curtis moves to Damascus, to Russia, to the Lebanon, to Libya, 
to cyberspace and back again. Along the way he constructs an argument that 
says, and I simplify wildly: a desire on the part of politicians to control 
events and their electorates led to a manipulation of reality which in turn 
fostered atomisation, cynicism and, ultimately, a loathing of the political 
class. Perhaps there have been some events this year that bore this theory out, 
I don’t know.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAUiqaFIONPQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAUiqaFIONPQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAUiqaFIONPQ&media=>
Watch a trailer for HyperNormalisation 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AUiqaFIONPQ> 
Just my little joke there. Curtis’s film features a recurring Trump alongside 
the director’s normal motley crew of jihadis and Washington insiders. Also 
within his sights are the “technological utopians” of Silicon Valley, the 
creators of our filter bubbles and pedlars of fake news. When watching 
HyperNormalisation you can feel, as with much of Curtis’s work, that someone is 
explaining the true nature of the world to you for the first time. Shortly 
after that feeling passes, you start furrowing your brow and wondering if it 
wasn’t all a bit too simple or too broad to be convincing. This process doesn’t 
invalidate the experience and Curtis knows this is the way people view his 
films. It is an argument he is making, after all.

Where else on television, or to be more accurate, in digital media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/digital-media> do you get such provocation? 
I took 22 pages of notes watching the film again before I wrote this. Some of 
it was to place events in a linear order (he does jump about a bit – and 
perhaps a digression about LSD that suddenly leaps back 20 years isn’t entirely 
necessary) but mainly it was to record things I found interesting, shocking, 
touching or just odd. Like the Iranian fountains whose water ran blood red to 
commemorate a massacre. The “artificially intelligent” psychoanalyst that 
achieved wonderful results by repeating its patients’ remarks back to them. The 
way a hopeful Occupy Wall Street protester (himself a veteran of the Iraq war) 
resembled a naive young PLO soldier from the early 80s. A speech by Ronald 
Reagan that claimed “God has placed the destiny of an afflicted mankind” into 
America’s hands. David Frost rehabilitating Libya’s Colonel Gaddafi.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-10-hypernormalisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad82ea54794f7e85c9d981b9aee2dc73b37e2d96%2F17_24_672_543%2F672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20No%2010%20Hypernormalisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-10-hypernormalisation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20No%2010%20Hypernormalisation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-10-hypernormalisation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad82ea54794f7e85c9d981b9aee2dc73b37e2d96%2F17_24_672_543%2F672.jpg>
 Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi … as shown on HyperNormalisation. Photograph: 
Adam Curtis 
Gaddafi will stay with me the most. Playing a major part in 
HyperNormalisation, Curtis argues he is a patsy Reagan’s America transforms 
into a global supervillain for their political messaging. Gaddafi is accused of 
atrocities he didn’t commit, bombed by way of punishment, subjected to 
sanctions and then, when the west needs someone to confess to holding weapons 
of mass destruction in the Middle East, is quickly rehabilitated. And 10 years 
later an American drone launches the missile that leads to his death. But 
Gaddafi is more than just a pawn. He comes over in this film in his full 
complexity; a dupe and a tyrant, yes, but also a conflicted individual 
concerned about what he felt to be injustice in the world.

HyperNormalisation is not just provocation. It is a collection of insights 
into history and the human condition. Equally though, it is a piece of video 
art, each moment crafted to fit in a particular place among the run of images 
that precede and follow it. It has bravura moments, such as the captioning that 
suddenly dominates the screen during a tale of Trump to read: “But things 
didn’t go according to plan” (a knowing wink to Curtis’s penchant for grandiose 
declarations). It prompts you to think, not just about the argument being 
articulated, but of any number of apparently unrelated ideas and emotions 
brought into play through comparison and contrast. At the end of 
HyperNormalisation’s two hours and 45 minutes, the thing I felt most strongly 
was that I wanted to give Muammar Gaddafi a hug. I had not expected that.

 * More best TV of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/06/best-tv-shows-of-2016>
 