
If the Liberty Bell isn’t a symbol for the greatness of Philadelphia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/philadelphia>, I don’t know what is.

Originally used to summon lawmakers to what’s now Independence Hall, while the 
constitution and the declaration of independence were debated, the bell was 
later used as a symbol of both American freedom and the abolitionist movement. 
It is a symbol of both our city and of the American spirit. It is probably the 
most popular Philadelphia tattoo. But my favorite story of the Liberty Bell 
happened in 2001, when a man from Nebraskastruck it four times with a hammer 
<http://articles.philly.com/2001-04-07/news/25331182_1_park-ranger-liberty-bell-pavilion-mitchell-guilliatt>
 before park rangers tackled him.

I thought of this Liberty Bell story when hearing the news that Lonely Planet 
named 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/09/best-destination-in-us-2016-philadelphia-lonely-planet>
 Philadelphia the top destination in all of the United States for 2016.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fphiladelphia-best-us-city-lonely-planet-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a8ff016d17d0213f9373ff3fcd69e2b28f59e80%2F0_144_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20grit%20and%20glory%20of%20Philadelphia%3A%20it's%20time%20to%20recognize%20the%20city's%20greatness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fphiladelphia-best-us-city-lonely-planet-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20grit%20and%20glory%20of%20Philadelphia%3A%20it%27s%20time%20to%20recognize%20the%20city%27s%20greatness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Fphiladelphia-best-us-city-lonely-planet-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a8ff016d17d0213f9373ff3fcd69e2b28f59e80%2F0_144_5200_3120%2F5200.jpg>
 The Liberty Bell: symbol of American freedom and the abolitionist movement. 
Photograph: Richard T. Nowitz/Corbis 
Philadelphia seems to be having a moment. There was a time when the city’s 
inclusion at the top of a list like this would seem ridiculous, even to 
partisan Philadelphians. Now they happen all the time. This is the second 
straight year Philadelphia has shown up on a major travel list: it was third on 
the New York Times’52 Places to Travel in 2015 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/01/11/travel/52-places-to-go-in-2015.html>
. We’re winning the bids for major world events: Pope Francis visited in 
September. The Democrats will nominate their choice for president here this 
summer.

Lonely Planet cited Philadelphia’s recent nod as the first Unesco World 
Heritage City in the US 
<http://www.uwishunu.com/2015/11/yes-philadelphia-named-americas-first-world-heritage-city/>
 and the 40th anniversary of the first Rocky movie as reasons for the honor, 
saying Philadelphia was “experiencing a transformation to its urban core, yet 
retaining its deep American history and uniquely gritty flavour”.

It’s true: the city has seen an influx of energy in the last decade. Young 
people are a barometer of what’s hip, right? Well, Philly has everyone else 
beat on that point: according to a2014 Pew report 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/wwwpewtrustsorg/reports/philadelphia_research_initiative/phillymillennialsreport012214pdf.pdf>
, Philadelphia’s millennial population (people between the ages of 20 to 34) 
increased by about 100,000 from 2006 to 2012. The change was the largest, as a 
percentage of population, of any major US city. The town is becoming moreAdonis 
Creed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/17/creed-review-life-in-the-old-punchbag-yet-sylvester-stallone-rocky-balboa-michael-b-jordan-adonis>
 than Rocky Balboa. The influx of young people has given Philadelphia a vibrant 
nightlife.

Young people are cool. Philadelphia is cool, maybe?

Maybe not. Maybe it doesn’t matter. I’m 33 years old and I’ve lived here my 
whole life. My parents have lived here their whole lives. My grandparents … you 
get the idea. I loved this city in the 1980s. But, yes, Philadelphia does seem 
like a better place to both live and visit than it’s ever been in my lifetime. 
Yet it’s kept its wonderful mix of highbrow and lowbrow culture and held on to 
its charm and character.

Philadelphia is where the US founding fathers debated the constitution and 
where people perfected “extreme” professional wrestling. It’s the city that 
gave us both Rocky and Rocky V. Philadelphia is the home of theMagic Gardens 
<https://www.phillymagicgardens.org/>, a folk art environment that is basically 
mosaics and trash. It is sometimes the most beautiful place in the city.

Philadelphians want people to recognize the city for its own greatness, not 
for its greatness compared to New York or DC

Philadelphia has an innovative, exciting food scene and is also the home of 
the cheesesteak and the soft pretzel. One of our three Fortune 500 companies 
makes bottle caps. The baseball stadium is gorgeous and it’s next to an 
off-track betting parlor. There is something for everyone. Even if you don’t 
have a great time visiting Philadelphia, you’ll have an interesting one.

People in Philadelphia are defensive about the city in ways that are quite 
often silly. On Monday night,The X Files aired an episode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/08/the-x-files-episode-four-recap-home-again>
 set in Philadelphia. People here seemed to care most that it incorrectly 
identified a major east-west road as “South Walnut Street” – and just when they 
were getting over the 1997 episode that said we had a “Little Russia” section. 
When Superman came to Philly in a comic, people were angry it called West 
Philly the “South Side”. But so what? We just want people to get things right. 
Philadelphians want people to recognize the city for its own greatness, not for 
its greatness compared with New York or Washington DC.

Best destination in the US? Fall in love with Philadelphia, says Lonely Planet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/09/best-destination-in-us-2016-philadelphia-lonely-planet>
And it is a great city. A weird one, too. 

The city has changed. But Lonely Planet gets it right: what’s developed in the 
last 20 years or so still usually carries that innate Philadelphia spirit. This 
city has a weird mix of cynicism, pessimism and gritted civic pride. This is a 
city that shows you who it is and doesn’t give you any BS about it.

That makes any major placement on a list like this quite hilarious. I mean, 
the No 3 place to visit in 2016 is Yellowstone national park. But you know who 
does the food service at Yellowstone? That’s right:Aramark 
<http://www.nps.gov/yose/learn/news/national-park-service-selects-yosemite-hospitality-llc-a-subsidiary-of-aramark-for-primary-concession-contract.htm>
, a Philadelphia company. Why visit there when you can go to Philly and get 
better food, right?

So, yes, Philadelphia is now a hip place to visit. Somehow, I don’t think 
we’ll let it go to our heads.
 