
As a boy growing up in the tame, tramped-over precincts of the Hudson Valley, 
30 miles up the river from what was then the world’s biggest city, I couldn’t 
help wanting more from nature. I avidly read Outdoor Life magazine, watched 
documentaries about the Rockies and Alaska, traced my finger along the serrated 
spine of California’s Sierra Nevada on the relief map our teacher thumbtacked 
to the wall in elementary school.

There were bears out west, mountain lions, coyotes and wolves, badgers, 
marmots, golden eagles – and what did we have? Deer, squirrels, maybe a fox or 
two (not that I ever saw any). Westchester County was the only place I knew 
then, a place of housing developments and remnant woods, swamps, brambles and 
fished-out lakes, and I couldn’t help thinking that everyplace I set down my 
sneakered foot was a place where dozens of others had stepped before me. It was 
all so used, landscape like second-hand clothing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F207f38837a26d371544ecf8d674a3a2e579cb142%2F0_114_5616_3630%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20wild%20west%20of%20my%20dreams%3A%20California%E2%80%99s%20Sequoia%20national%20forest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20wild%20west%20of%20my%20dreams%3A%20California%E2%80%99s%20Sequoia%20national%20forest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F207f38837a26d371544ecf8d674a3a2e579cb142%2F0_114_5616_3630%2F5616.jpg>
 Writing desk in TC Boyle’s mountain cabin 
The first time I did manage to venture west of the Hudson I was in my mid-20s 
and on my way to theIowa Writers’ Workshop <http://writersworkshop.uiowa.edu/>. 
Attending the workshop was an inestimable experience both professionally and 
artistically, but if anything, wild nature in Iowa seemed more remote than 
ever, unimpeded skies opening up above geometrically precise farmers’ fields 
that went on forever. On graduating, I found myself in Los Angeles, a 
sun-blasted desert city clogged with traffic, which was about as far as I could 
imagine from the wild west of my dreams. It was then, just as I’d given up 
hope, that I discovered my mountain.

I like my experience of nature to be unmediated by the presence of other 
members of my species

Note the possessive. It’s not actually mine – it belongs to all the citizens 
of the US, and beyond that, to all the citizens of the world – but it holds 
such a powerful grip on me I can’t really think of it in democratic terms. The 
place I’m talking of, the place where I spend several months a year, is part of 
the Giant Sequoia national monument, which comprises over 500 square miles, 
contains the only extant groves of the world’s largest tree and sits at an 
elevation of 7,200 feet above the San Joaquin valley. It is just south of 
King’s Canyon, which in turn is just south of Yosemite national park. (I know 
this as a matter of fact but not experience: though from my mountain I can see 
as far north as Mount Whitney – the tallest peak in the contiguous US – I’ve 
never been there, nor to Yosemite nor even King’s Canyon.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F192a339157dbc54e1826616dd8895df18e2a45f5%2F0_636_6496_3898%2F6496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20wild%20west%20of%20my%20dreams%3A%20California%E2%80%99s%20Sequoia%20national%20forest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20wild%20west%20of%20my%20dreams%3A%20California%E2%80%99s%20Sequoia%20national%20forest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F192a339157dbc54e1826616dd8895df18e2a45f5%2F0_636_6496_3898%2F6496.jpg>
 The area attracts walkers and rock climbers 
All these places are far better-known and more heavily visited than the little 
settlement of Ponderosa (population 19) where I stay, which is perhaps why I’ve 
never ventured north. I am not a misanthrope (or not entirely) but I like my 
experience of nature to be unmediated by the presence of other members of my 
species, and so I stay away from the venues where the tourists gather en masse. 
I have had the awe-inducing pleasure of standing alone among the giant trees, 
both sequoias and redwoods, and hearing nothing but the chatter of the 
squirrels and the high wind in the tallest branches. My favourite spot, 
generally untouristed, is the Freeman Creek grove of redwoods, just a few miles 
from my house. Our skyscrapers are impressive, but they will fall (“Look on my 
works, ye mighty, and despair!”), yet these trees, some of them dating from the 
time of Christ, endure. That is something to wrap your mind around. In 
stillness. And solitude.

When I first began visiting, this community was part of the Sequoia national 
forest, but that designation changed in 2000, when President Clinton 
rededicated the park as a national monument, which means mineral and timber 
extraction is no longer permitted. Formerly, I would go deep into the 
backcountry and encounterclearcuts <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clearcutting>
, where trees had been shaved off the sides of slopes like whiskers off a stony 
chin. The land is dedicated now to recreational use only and it abuts the 
Golden Trout wilderness, which can only be entered with a permit from the 
Forest Service. (Thegolden trout 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/3/31/Goldentroutwiki.jpg>, 
native only to a small area of these mountains, is a subspecies of rainbow 
trout that blazes with red and gold during its spawning season; I have caught 
bushels of them over the years, not out of hunger or to satisfy my predatory 
instinct, but just to marvel at the beauty of them, after which I give each one 
a little kiss before releasing it to go on living its fishy life in peace. 
Peppermint Creek, with its sculpted canyon and its plunge downslope to the Kern 
river canyon, flows within three miles of the house, and the Tule river tumbles 
down the other side of the mountain into the San Joaquin valley. Both have been 
stocked in the past with the more common rainbow trout, but there is a movement 
afoot to end the practice and keep these waterways pure for the native goldens.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57e67d36623185a522be3ee8f2b20b8f5bf3220e%2F0_386_6496_3898%2F6496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20wild%20west%20of%20my%20dreams%3A%20California%E2%80%99s%20Sequoia%20national%20forest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20wild%20west%20of%20my%20dreams%3A%20California%E2%80%99s%20Sequoia%20national%20forest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57e67d36623185a522be3ee8f2b20b8f5bf3220e%2F0_386_6496_3898%2F6496.jpg>
 Giant Sequoia contains the only extant groves of the world’s largest tree 
In addition to fly fishermen, the area attracts rock climbers from all over 
the world. Most of them scale Dome Rock, a big exfoliated granite monolith that 
offers 360-degree views of the mountain range, from the aforementioned Mount 
Whitney to the north to the Kern gorge (famous for its whitewater rafting) to 
the south. Many a summer evening I’ve gone out to Dome Rock to lie back on the 
smooth stony surface, prop my head on a granite pillow and contemplate the 
deeps of the Milky Way while wondering how the indigenous tribes of the world 
manage to translocate our creeping satellites to their cosmogony.

Often, while my children were young and still in school, I would spend periods 
alone on the mountain, working through the morning and into the afternoon, 
after which I’d typically hike out to one of my favourite waterfalls with book 
and dog, experiencing nature in a Wordsworthian way, my conscious mind gone 
into hiding. Again, these are the occasions when I do not invite interaction 
with my fellow humans, and I must say that in all the years I’ve been wandering 
these woods, I have never seen anyone else (if you except winter, deep snow, 
and the blur and roar of the infernal snowmobiles). Once, during the Memorial 
Day holiday (at the end of May), when the tourists were sure to be abroad, I 
was crossing a logging road on my afternoon hike and heard a vehicle coming 
around a bend up ahead. I was presented with a quandary: I could stand there 
and either wave to or ignore whoever might have been so rude as to intrude upon 
my solitude in a public space on a public road, or I could just … duck into the 
bushes and hide. Which is precisely what I did: I crouched in the depths of a 
mesquite bush till the offending car was out of sight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F091ec21d82bfd2336cc1c42b039c5ca06fbfa0d1%2F0_85_6496_3898%2F6496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20wild%20west%20of%20my%20dreams%3A%20California%E2%80%99s%20Sequoia%20national%20forest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20wild%20west%20of%20my%20dreams%3A%20California%E2%80%99s%20Sequoia%20national%20forest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Ftc-boyle-california-giant-sequoia-forest-wilderness%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F091ec21d82bfd2336cc1c42b039c5ca06fbfa0d1%2F0_85_6496_3898%2F6496.jpg>
 The writer finds another tranquil spot 
This is why I love my mountain. I can do that. And I can tramp through 
snowstorms late at night when no one is stirring and feel the kind of 
excitement John Muir (father of the US national parks) must have felt when he 
spent a stormy night up a tree just to embrace it and know what it endured in 
the absence of reportorial creatures. (And then there was the night – snowing, 
below zero, very late – when I was two miles out in the woods and lubricated by 
a judicious squirt or two from my bota bag (wineskin) and it was the dog that 
brought me back to my senses, as in, what are we doing here when there’s a fire 
at home, and a bed too?)

Is that dangerous – to be inebriated in a snowstorm on a very cold night on 
the top of a very cold mountain without a soul around? I suppose so. But it is 
liberating, too, and certainly in the moment it felt essential as a way of 
connecting with the pulse of the Earth, which is what this is all about in the 
first place. It’s rugged country and unforgiving. People do get lost up here. 
People die. But most of us manage to find our way back to those beds, whether 
they be at thePonderosa Lodge <http://brewersponderosalodge.com/>, in the back 
room of a rented cabin or on a campsite, atop a neoprene pad. There are wild 
animals here, animals that can cause grievous harm – the most dangerous of 
which happens to be the common deer mouse. And why is that? Because the faeces 
of this adorable little rodent can infect humans with hantavirus, which 
produces an often fatal respiratory illness. (Second place goes to ground 
squirrels, which harbour the fleas that carry bubonic plague, a few cases of 
which are reported in California each summer.)

I've been fortunate to encounter lions on four occasions and on two of those 
the lion was closer than I would have liked

As for larger creatures – the ones I dreamed about as a boy – we have an 
abundance of bears (the black bear,ursus americanus; the grizzly, despite 
continuing to appear on the state flag, was exterminated in California nearly 
100 years ago), coyotes, mule deer and mountain lions. Most visitors to these 
mountains never catch a glimpse of a lion – it’s a melt-into-the-shadows sort 
of beast that primarily hunts at night – but lion tracks and scat are fairly 
common. I have been fortunate enough to encounter lions on four occasions over 
the years, and on two of those the lion was closer than I would have liked.

Let me set it up for you. There I was, a peripatetic novelist with a head full 
of words, hiking out to the Nobe Young waterfall – where I have frequently 
observed the scat of these creatures – and oblivious to anything beyond the 
pleasure of a warm summer’s day, when I stepped on a twig, which snapped, 
precipitating an answering snap no more than 40 feet away. This answering snap 
was the result of a mountain lion’s rupture of a similar twig as it bolted in 
headlong panic away from me. This was a primal scene, predator and prey, and 
yet, though my blood was pounding, the news was good: better the creature 
should be running from me than toward me, no? And so, that evening, back at the 
cabin, I phoned my wife, who was home in Santa Barbara, and told her of the 
excitement I’d experienced, this jolt of wild nature (nearly) fallen in my lap. 
She was noncommittal.

A week later, far down the same watercourse, I was doing precisely what you 
are not advised to do in lion country: minimising my height. I was fly-fishing 
for golden trout on a shadow-infested evening in a silence as deep as the 
world, and was crouching low to avoid alerting the fish to my presence. For a 
long while I worked a pool by the side of an enormous mesquite bush, until 
finally I heard just the faintest noise, as of movement there. When I parted 
the bush to investigate, I saw, as in the cinematic version, the fresh paw 
print of my lion, slowing seeping with water. She had been right there, just 
feet from me, curious cat, observing the odd behaviour of this novelistic ape 
who’d come to invade her territory. This time, when I phoned my wife to fill 
her in on my adventures, she had one thing only to say: “Will you please stop 
harassing that poor animal?”

Indeed. And that is the essence of it. I was invading the lion’s territory and 
not vice versa. But then that is the privilege of living on my mountain, among 
the big trees and the wild creatures that can’t help but persist in spite of us.

• Rooms at Ponderosa Lodge <http://www.brewersponderosalodge.com/default.htm> 
cost from $46 a night. Lettings site VRBO <https://www.vrbo.com/253134> has a 
cabin in the area from $117 a night (sleeps seven)

TC Boyle’s latest novel, The Harder They Come (Bloomsbury) is out in paperback 
on 7 April, price £8.99. To order a copy for £7.19 including UK p&p, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/389932/>
 