
Three months ago it looked like a reasonable assumption. In the light of the 
UK’s referendum on EU membership, the annual meeting of theInternational 
Monetary Fund <https://www.theguardian.com/business/imf>would surely be a 
re-run of the knife-edge affair in October 2008, held less than a month after 
Lehman Brothers went bust and no western bank was deemed safe.

Brexit, low growth and the spectre of protectionism stalk an IMF in sombre mood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/01/imf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit>
The expectation was that the Brexit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>vote would push the UK 
economy into an immediate recession, with severe knock-on consequences for the 
eurozone. Financial markets would be sent into a tailspin, just as they were 
eight years ago when finance ministers and central bank governors assembled in 
Washington with the global banking system hanging by a thread. Credit had dried 
up, trade had stopped, factories were being mothballed. Talk of a return to the 
1930s was common and not misplaced.

But history has not repeated; Brexit has not proved to be nearly as disruptive 
to global financial markets as many feared. The strongest echo of 2008 is the 
speculation surrounding Deutsche Bank; but unlike Lehman Brothers, Deutsche 
will survive. There will be no talk this week of a second Great Depression.


Yet there is a sense in which the challenge for policymakers is even more 
testing than it was back then. At least in 2008, they knew what they had to do. 
It was obvious the banks needed a lot more capital to ensure they remained 
solvent and it was also clear that the public sector would have to provide it.

Instead of the normal lengthy communique, the G7 issued a succinct five-point 
plan <http://www.g8.utoronto.ca/finance/fm081010.htm>designed to show that the 
world’s leading industrial nations would act swiftly and decisively. 
Recapitalisation of the banks was followed in the ensuing months by aggressive 
measures to boost growth: deep cuts in interest rates, quantitative easing, 
extra public spending and reductions in taxes.

That, in retrospect, proved to be the easy bit. Global capitalism lost its 
mojo in 2008 and never got it back.Growth has remained weak and fragile, even 
though central banks have kept monetary policy looser for longer than even the 
deepest pessimist expected when the stimulus programmes began 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/21/no-economy-is-even-close-to-achieving-its-personal-best>
. Brexit is the manifestation of a problem that surfaced in 2008 and has never 
remotely been solved: how to make the globalised model of finance-dominated 
capital work for the mass of voters in the developed world. Voters are no 
longer satisfied when they hear politicians say there is little they can do in 
the face of global forces. They think that is a cop out, which indeed it is. 
Governments retain enormous powers: they just have to be prepared to use them. 
Governments of the left have proved to be just as pusillanimous as governments 
of the right, which helps explain why the politics of the post-crisis period 
has not gone to script.


The belief on the left was that 2008 sounded the death knell for the model of 
capitalism that dominated the last quarter of the 20th century and the first 
decade of the 21st; one based around privatisation, trickle-down economics, and 
a shift in the balance of power away from organised labour and towards 
international banks. Lehman’s bankruptcy would prove to be the equivalent of 
the Opec oil shock of 1973, the moment the pendulum swung, only this time from 
right to left.

It didn’t work out like that. There was no social democratic moment because 
social democratic parties had largely bought into the idea that markets knew 
best. They had no critique of what had gone wrong so they lacked a strategy to 
put things right. What’s more, they still don’t, which is why challenges to 
Jeremy Corbyn from his Labour party rivals have been so feeble.

While the social-democratic left has been flailing around, the public mood has 
darkened. In Britain at least, this cannot be blamed on rising inequality 
because inequality as measured by the Gini coefficient has not risen since the 
financial crisis and has stayed pretty much unchanged for the past 25 years.

The problem in the UK has been that living standards for those on average 
incomes have flatlined while those of the 0.1% at the very top have continued 
to rise. In the years leading up to the crisis, rising living standards meant 
there was less anger among the workers on £20,000 at the generous pay deals 
being awarded to their bosses. Now there is barely disguised fury and a 
political backlash against globalisation that has made negotiating new trade 
deals a thankless task.

Individual governments can sniff the way the wind is blowing. As John Gray 
wrote in a recent edition of the New Statesman: “Most people are unimpressed by 
visions of an imaginary egalitarian capitalism. They turn instead to the power 
of the state to protect them from the anarchy of the market.”

Hence the appetite among voters for controls. Ask them whether they support a 
financial transactions tax and they answer yes. Ask them whether they support 
curbs on the dumping of cheap Chinese steel that isthreatening jobs in Port 
Talbot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/tata-steel-financial-aid-pledge-remains-despite-scrapping-of-sale>
 and they answer yes. Ask them if they want controls on immigration and they 
answer yes.

In this, the public shows more consistency than the politicians. Conservative 
Brexiters are in favour of free movement of capital and goods, but not of 
people. The Labour party is up for controls on money and goods but supports 
free movement of labour. The freedoms integral to globalisation are 
increasingly at odds with democracy. Something has to give.


In the introduction to a recently published book of essays 
<http://eu.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-1119120950.html>*, Michael 
Jacobs and Mariana Mazzucato say that the state has a crucial role to play in 
making economies more prosperous and successful, not least through the role the 
state can play in nurturing and supporting innovation. This runs counter to the 
idea that governments should limit themselves to correcting occasional and 
short-lived market failure, but as Jacobs and Mazzucato rightly note markets 
are the result of political decisions.

The past eight years have been spent trying and failing to get the pre-2008 
model of capitalism back on its feet. In its recent trade and development 
report, UNCTAD conjured up the memory of Karl Polanyi, the Hungarian-American 
economist who insisted thata “great transformation” was needed to ensure that 
markets delivered a stable and prosperous future for all 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Great_Transformation_(book)>. 

As UNCTAD wrote:

“Trust would have to be rebuilt, regulations strengthened, and rights and 
representation expanded. Western governments after the second world war were 
able to strike a balance between market-driven efficiency and the demands for 
shared prosperity and greater economic security.”

There is one big difference with eight years ago. Central banks have become 
hyperactive in their determination to prevent weak growth and low inflation 
becoming recession and deflation. Ironically, the great transformation of 
central banks has helped ensure that nothing else has fundamentally changed.

*Rethinking capitalism; Wiley; £14.99 
<http://eu.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-1119120950.html>

 