
Queens Beach

The seaside suburb of Sea Point has many beaches (Sea Point itself, Rocklands, 
Granger Bay and Saunders beach) that are always busy. But tucked away off its 
famous promenade is the lovely but forgotten Queens Beach. From the beautifully 
situated Sea Point public swimming pool, it’s a five-minute stroll to this 
quiet, wind-free beach. Its overlooked by hotels and apartment blocks – but 
unbelievably it is also overlooked by most beachgoers. It is only ever really 
crowded on New Year’s Day, when every beach in South Africa is pretty much 
bursting at the gills.

Queens Beach boasts what the the locals call a “big and mushy” break for 
surfers, plus white sand to laze on and, for families, starfish in rock pools, 
interesting shells and rocks for children to clamber over.


While there are no lifeguards, the swimming is generally safe. Like all 
Atlantic seaboard beaches, however, the Benguela current means the water 
temperature is what can only politely be called cold. Although in summer, when 
temperatures can hit the upper 30s, locals prefer to call Atlantic seaboard 
swims “refreshing” rather than “refrigerating.”


Getting there: Take the MyCiti bus and alight at the Queens Beach stop, or 
drive, cycle or walk along the Sea Point Promenade.


When to go: Mid- to late-afternoon, after a morning of shopping in town or at 
the Victoria and Albert Waterfront. Linger to watch the glorious sunsets.

Glen Beach
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5c47d0b3715600e2e370d52e1fa99c19aeb05d2%2F0_111_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20world's%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20world%27s%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5c47d0b3715600e2e370d52e1fa99c19aeb05d2%2F0_111_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
While Camps Bay is one of the world’s most famous and glitzy beaches, in 
season (December and January) it’s very busy, both on the sand and along its 
strip. On such days, beachgoers looking for something less “pumping” should 
consider the relative peace and quiet (and also refuge from the wind) at its 
more laid-back neighbour, Glen Beach. Tucked away behind sand dunes and granite 
boulders, it’s a spot where local surfers guard its “wedgy right” and, out of 
season, take their dogs to chase frisbees and socialise. It is surrounded only 
by small bungalows, and the majestic Twelve Apostles mountains are its looming 
backdrop.

Vendors sell refreshments by singing decades-old jingles (“Iced-lollies to 
make you jolly” and “ice-creams to make you dream!”) or it’s a 10-minute stroll 
over the sand dune to Camps Bay and its takeaways, restaurants, bars and buzz.

Getting there: Take the MyCiti bus, or drive the winding road down from Kloof 
Nek, through The Glen, towards Camps Bay. Glen Beach is badly signposted, but 
you will see parking spaces on the side of Victoria Road, before turning left 
to Camps Bay or right to Clifton. Look out for the two sets of steps either 
side of the beach.

When to go: Late morning or late afternoon. This side of the mountain gets sun 
later in the morning, sunsets are superb and Camps Bay has many restaurants and 
bars for sundowners and dinner.


Beta beach

Beta beach is actually a series of picture-perfect, tiny beaches and coves of 
white sand and azure water, beneath small, luxury bungalows. The beach has a 
perfect view of Camps Bay and Lion’s Head and offers peace, fantastic sunsets 
and safe, though of course, chilly swimming.


Getting there: Follow Victoria Road through Camps Bay, turn right on to Beta 
Road, park as far along the road in the direction of the beach as possible, 
then follow the walkway through the bungalows to the beach.

When to go: At low tide; at high tide the beach can be very small and cramped. 
Check the tides on a reliable site such asMagic Seaweed 
<http://magicseaweed.com/Cape-Town-Surf-Report/81/>.


Oudekraal beach
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb83b9da9ba82f91d1f6f37d17ac0f74b16ed05f%2F0_27_4254_2552%2F4254.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20world's%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20world%27s%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb83b9da9ba82f91d1f6f37d17ac0f74b16ed05f%2F0_27_4254_2552%2F4254.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
A 10-minute drive along Victoria Road (the dramatic coastal route from Camps 
Bay) towards the better-known and busier Llandudno, Oudekraal is an 
exceptionally beautiful little beach, completely off the average tourist’s 
radar. The surroundings have historical and spiritual significance to the 
peninsula’s Muslim community, as, at the turn of the 18th century, it was used 
as a refuge for escaped slaves, among them Muslim spiritual leaders. The 
ravines of the Twelve Apostles, above the beach, provided seclusion and safety 
and allowed spiritual leaders to continue teaching Islam to their disciples.

The beach is now best known as a launch spot for scuba divers, but it also 
offers safe, wave-free swimming and interesting and varied snorkelling, if you 
can handle cold water.

There are picnic and braai (barbecue) areas above the perfect cove, which is 
shady and protected, both by massive granite boulders and Milkwood trees. As 
the beach is part of Table Mountain national park, a conservation fee of 30 
rand for adults and 15 rand for children (around £1.70/85p) is payable upon 
entry.

Getting there: Drive 6km along Victoria Road, the coastal road out of Camps 
Bay, and look out for signs once you pass the 12 Apostles Hotel.


When to go: Go early in the morning. Anyone who arrives around 9am is almost 
guaranteed the gorgeous white sand and aqua sea to themselves for at least a 
couple of hours.

Sandy Bay
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8670cf0104b0a8e4886fe86d4d25baab52c4ceb9%2F0_122_5251_3151%2F5251.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20world's%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20world%27s%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8670cf0104b0a8e4886fe86d4d25baab52c4ceb9%2F0_122_5251_3151%2F5251.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
A wide sweep of white sand surrounded by boulders and pristine fynbos (the 
indigenous shrubland of the Cape), Sandy Bay is one of Cape Town’s most 
unspoiled beaches. Sheltered and secluded, it is also its only nudist beach. 
More popular with men than women, it is obviously not for everyone. Like at the 
other Atlantic Seaboard beaches, the water is chilly.

Getting there: Drive out of Camps Bay on Victoria Road. Follow the signs for 
Llandudno and then the signs down to Sandy Bay. From the parking area, an easy 
15-minute amble along the path takes you to the beach.

When to go: During the day, only and always go in groups as there have been 
muggings along the path. Take care.

Dalebrook
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a896da07666613315220a4d4b40d8ef64c0e99e%2F0_547_3505_2103%2F3505.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20world's%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20world%27s%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a896da07666613315220a4d4b40d8ef64c0e99e%2F0_547_3505_2103%2F3505.jpg>
 Photograph: Getty Images 
If the Atlantic seaboard is Cape Town’s Riviera, the Indian Ocean suburbs 
along the False Bay coast (Muizenberg, Kalk Bay, St James, Danger Beach and St 
James) are its bohemian, shabby-chic relation. But the Indian Ocean coast has 
one asset the billionaires of Clifton can never buy: warm sea water.

Beachgoers along this stretch of coastline are spoiled for choice: for the 
bold, the pretty and popular Danger Beach (which gets its off-putting name from 
its rip current and large waves ) offers lifeguards, charm, rock pools and 
exhilarating swimming and surfing. Nearby St James is home to the iconic 
multi-coloured beach shacks so popular on Cape Town postcards. Muizenberg, just 
beyond Danger Beach, is where everyone learns to surf, but Dalebrook is the 
tidal pool and beach locals keep to themselves. Visitors duck under a little 
subway under the railway line to access it.

Never crowded (most people prefer the sociable St James tidal pool) and 
sheltered, the Dalebrook tidal pool’s manmade concrete retaining walls allow 
waves to break over its edge, keeping the water clean and the swimming 
experience both safe and exciting. There is a shower and changing room on the 
beach and plenty of golden sand.


When to go: In the morning, as the False Bay coast is close to the mountains 
and loses the sun early. Spend the afternoon exploring the delightful little 
seaside suburb of Kalk Bay.


Getting there: The adventurous should go by train, alighting at Dalebrook 
station. But be aware that trains are not the safest form of transport in Cape 
Town, so take care if you choose this option. Or it’s 45 minutes’ drive from 
central Cape Town, along the M25 highway to Muizenberg and St James. Park in 
one of the many designated parking areas, around the sign for Dalebrook, or on 
the side of the road.

Water’s Edge

There are no private beaches in South Africa but Water’s Edge, near Simonstown 
(a beautiful hour’s drive south-east from central Cape Town), certainly looks 
and feels like one. Visitors access the beach through what looks exactly like 
someone’s garden gate. This is what discourages many people from exploring 
further and what makes this perfect spot a jealously guarded secret. Don’t be 
discouraged.


The protected little cove has sweeping views of False Bay and the Hottentots 
Holland mountain range in the distance. It is perfect for children and safe for 
swimming, with lovely big boulders to jump off. It also has starfish- and 
anemone-filled rock pools and crystal clear, warm water, which is perfect for 
snorkelling.


Getting there: Drive through Simonstown and look for signposts for Seaforth 
beach and park in front of Seaforth restaurant. Set off in a southerly 
direction, downhill. Take a sharp right, with the sea on your left. The path 
will continue: look out for a large slatted gate and the follow the path down 
to the beach.

When to go: Any time. There is a restaurant at Seaforth 
<http://www.seaforthrestaurant.co.za/>, where you can grab an unpretentious 
plate of fish or seafood, as well as use the ablution facilities.

Windmill Beach

Seeing the penguin colony at Boulders Beach is almost obligatory for any 
visitor to Cape Town. Boulders itself is a beautiful beach, but in season it 
gets overrun with tourists – and penguinssmell, something most tour guides fail 
to mention. Once you’ve seen them, I’d suggest returning to the parking space 
at the bottom of Links Road and following the signs to Windmill Beach.


Windmill is just as beautiful as Boulders, with the same distinctive giant 
granite boulders and turquoise water, but no penguins. The cove is shallow and 
safe, and although there are no lifeguards on duty, swimming is safe for small 
children – though of course they should always be watched. The sand is white, 
the beach is sheltered from the wind and the rocky, inland reef is an excellent 
dive site. This is also a perfect beach from which to kayak.

Getting there: Drive on the M4 through Simonstown to Froggy Pond. Take the 
Bellevue Road down past the golf course and park at the bottom of the road. Be 
sure not to leave any valuables in your car.


When to go: Morning and early afternoon. The wind can sometimes pick up in 
late afternoon.

Smitswinkel Bay
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb3c0f538d6e1bc467f69a65b79bc41beeb26768%2F0_164_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20world's%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20world%27s%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb3c0f538d6e1bc467f69a65b79bc41beeb26768%2F0_164_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Down a steep cliff, just before the entrance to the Cape Point nature reserve, 
Smits, as it is affectionately known, is reached by a 20-minute hike down a 
zigzag path. The beautiful, white, sandy beach is protected from the prevailing 
south-easterly wind and is an excellent spot for a picnic. (Visitors have to 
take everything they need for a day on the beach, as there are a few privately 
owned shacks on the beach, but nothing else.) Smits is beloved by locals for 
its excellent swimming, angling, snorkelling and diving (there are five wrecks, 
teeming with fish, starfish and other marine life, in the bay). There are rock 
pools and caves at the south side of the beach to explore at low tide. Visitors 
should be warned not to feed or fraternise with the baboon troop that calls the 
mountains above Smits their home.

Getting there: Drive. Look out for signs on the M44, just before the entrance 
to the Cape Point nature reserve. Parkin the parking space at the top of the 
path, but be careful not to leave any valuables or food in your car.

When to go: Stay all day! No point in all that effort going up and down the 
track for anything shorter.

Platboom Beach
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F036e2bde7dca38745d58bfd6e3127d4569cb8d7a%2F0_129_5200_3121%2F5200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20world's%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20world%27s%20best%20hidden%20beaches%3A%20Cape%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fworlds-best-hidden-beaches-cape-town%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F036e2bde7dca38745d58bfd6e3127d4569cb8d7a%2F0_129_5200_3121%2F5200.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
There are many beaches to choose from in the Cape Point nature reserve, on the 
southerly point of the Cape peninsula (such as Diaz, Buffels, Oliphants and 
Maclear), but Platboom (meaning flat tree) beach in the extreme south of the 
reserve is particularly spectacular. It’s wild and unspoiled and more popular 
with birds than humans – terns, gulls, kiewietes (plovers) and sandpipers 
proliferate. There are large sand dunes to surf down (beg or borrow aboogie 
board), rock pools to explore at low tide and the conditions are excellent for 
kite- and windsurfing. Wild animals such as baboons, antelope and even ostrich 
are often spotted on the beach. However, you swim here at your own risk – the 
waves are large and there are no lifeguards. Entry to the reserve costs 105 
adult and 50 rand child (around £6/£2.90).

Getting there: By car to Cape Point nature reserve.

When to go: It’s easy to spend a whole day here, picnicking and exploring, but 
there are no facilities on the beach, so take every thing you need.
 