
On a road that winds before the Arabian Sea in wealthy south Mumbai, a 
middle-aged man stands on the balcony of his apartment, incensed. His building 
is named after the sea it overlooks, but something less picturesque is getting 
in the way of his view. He storms down, crosses over to a homeless family 
sitting on the sidewalk and flings their meal on the ground.

“He has done this more than once,” says Lalitha Raju Singh, a mother-of-three 
who earns a subsistence wage cutting vegetables at a roadside stall. “He often 
makes obscene gestures and curses us. He calls us beggars, and files complaints 
against us at the police station. But we’re workers! We slogged to put our kids 
through school. And we’ve lived here for 26 years. This place is our home, as 
much as it is his.”


'When you have a museum you count': Inside Mumbai's first exhibition in a slum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/07/when-you-have-a-museum-you-count-inside-mumbais-first-exhibition-in-a-slum>
Unlike those that live in informal settlements in Mumbai, the city’s homeless 
population remains largely unknown and invisible. According to the2011 census 
<http://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-newdelhi/homeless-population-falls-to-18-lakh/article5432253.ece>
, 54,416 people are homeless in Mumbai, although housing rightsactivists say  
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/census-pegs-homeless-at-18-lakh-but-activists-dispute-it/article5434196.ece>
that this is a gross underestimation. The real figure,they say 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/homeless-in-a-wet-city/article4989176.ece>
, is well over 150,000. Although homelessness is viewed as a temporary state – 
endured by young male migrants until they find work – in India’s financial 
capital it is a life-long, even multi-generational problem.


A survey <http://www.buildindia.org/Binder2.pdf> by Build 
<http://buildindia.org/>, a Mumbai-based non-profit that works on affordable 
housing, estimates that 96% of the city’s homeless families have been on the 
streets for more than 5 years, and about 58% for more than 20 years – sometimes 
in the same spot of a sidewalk or a park, which was handed down to them through 
generations. And contrary to the views of some, more than 70% of the city’s 
homeless population works.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fthe-exhibition-giving-a-voice-to-mumbais-invisible-homeless-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ab990dbfd10e58b9587bd20823f07553b7c5c2f%2F0_276_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20exhibition%20giving%20a%20voice%20to%20Mumbai's%20'invisible'%20homeless%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fthe-exhibition-giving-a-voice-to-mumbais-invisible-homeless-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20exhibition%20giving%20a%20voice%20to%20Mumbai%27s%20%27invisible%27%20homeless%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fthe-exhibition-giving-a-voice-to-mumbais-invisible-homeless-population%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ab990dbfd10e58b9587bd20823f07553b7c5c2f%2F0_276_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 The exhibition shows the detail put into the homes that sometimes provide 
shelter for three generations of the same family. Photograph: BIND 
Without Walls, a recent exhibition held in Mumbai, puts names, faces and 
stories to this chronic and ever-increasing problem. A collaboration between 
Pehchan, a non-profit which helps the homeless access rights and benefits, the 
photography collective BIND, design and research space Studio X Mumbai, and 
Megalopolis, a new multi-disciplinary group that works on shaping more 
inclusive cities, the exhibition tries to give viewers an intimate 
understanding of the lives of Mumbai’s homeless.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fthe-exhibition-giving-a-voice-to-mumbais-invisible-homeless-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01cace500ac25aa9f17037801e771b3a029649ba%2F0_108_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20exhibition%20giving%20a%20voice%20to%20Mumbai's%20'invisible'%20homeless%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fthe-exhibition-giving-a-voice-to-mumbais-invisible-homeless-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20exhibition%20giving%20a%20voice%20to%20Mumbai%27s%20%27invisible%27%20homeless%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fthe-exhibition-giving-a-voice-to-mumbais-invisible-homeless-population%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01cace500ac25aa9f17037801e771b3a029649ba%2F0_108_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Carlin Carr, the co-curator of the exhibition, says there is little 
information about the homeless population on the streets of Mumbai. Photograph: 
BIND 
Video interviews let visitors accompany the hardworking homeless through their 
punishing everyday routines: men who work as caddies or bus cleaners, and women 
who spend day and night mending discarded clothes, before bartering them for 
new pots in a night market and trading them in for more clothes. An array of 
headphones let visitors listen to homeless women talking about their fears – of 
being set upon by drunk men at night, of having their plastic sheets 
confiscated by the municipal authorities before the monsoons – and their hopes 
of getting their children educated.

Panoramic photographs and life-size drawings show in intimate detail the 
living environment of a single settlement located on the footpath that runs 
alongside a swanky Mumbai sports club. You see homes painstakingly put together 
– the oil cans which store water, the bundles of clothing stashed away in trees 
when the municipal workers threaten to come on a “clearing drive”, and the 
grill fenced walls which house idols, teddy bears and plastic tubs of utensils. 
A roof made of strips of discarded cloth provides shelter for three generations 
of a single family.


“We all drive by this scene, and quickly see a bit of a mess,” says Carlin 
Carr, an urban development professional and long-time Mumbai resident who 
co-curated the exhibition. “But when you take a minute to look, you see all the 
elements of a home – a space to cook, a sense of privacy, a protective 
environment for kids.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fthe-exhibition-giving-a-voice-to-mumbais-invisible-homeless-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc022e33cccac8116f350b75cc51bc02ebac5f499%2F0_200_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20exhibition%20giving%20a%20voice%20to%20Mumbai's%20'invisible'%20homeless%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fthe-exhibition-giving-a-voice-to-mumbais-invisible-homeless-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20exhibition%20giving%20a%20voice%20to%20Mumbai%27s%20%27invisible%27%20homeless%20population&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fthe-exhibition-giving-a-voice-to-mumbais-invisible-homeless-population%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc022e33cccac8116f350b75cc51bc02ebac5f499%2F0_200_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Headphones at the exhibition play the voices of homeless women sharing their 
hopes and fears. Photograph: BIND 
When she first heard about the magnitude of the problem three years ago, she 
was shocked. She was further surprised when she heard how poorly informed her 
peers were about the issue. “People told me, ‘Oh, they’re tribes, they like 
living on the street,’” she says. “There’s so much information out there on 
slums, but no one had looked into this [homelessness], so what was floating 
about was just assumptions, myths. I wanted to replace them with a qualitative 
picture, of who this population is and how they live.”


How art is helping Syrian refugees keep their culture alive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/02/art-helping-syrian-refugees-keep-culture-alive>
By forcing viewers to slow down and take a close look at what they barely 
glance at as they drive past, the organisers hope to spark interest, empathy and
monetary support <https://www.ketto.org/mumbaihomeless>for a pressing unmet 
need: family shelters. A 2010 Supreme Court order mandates that every state 
provide one shelter for every 100,000 people. This works out at 574 in Mumbai, 
but the city only has 7woefully sub-standard 
<http://www.newslaundry.com/2014/10/29/unfinished-95-8-of-homeless-shelters-in-indias-richest-state/>
 shelters. They want to set up the city’s first shelter that responds to the 
needs of the homeless, by providing not just a place to sleep – but also food, 
security and education.

“The idea is to create a model for the municipal corporation to follow,” says 
Brijesh Arya, the founder of Pehchan. However, they have raised only one 
percent of their 1.7 million rupee target (17,240 GBP). “That barely covers 
what was spent on the exhibition,” he says, “and sadly, half of those donations 
came from us.”


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 