
Podcasts are quickly becoming an important part of the presidential election, 
with Hillary Clinton launching her own podcast, calledWith Her 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/with-her/id1143509380?mt=2>. In the first 
episode of the show, which is hosted by Longform’s Max Linsky, Clinton talks 
about how she stays focused on the campaign trail.

Clinton becomes first presidential candidate to launch campaign podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/12/hillary-clinton-campaign-podcast-with-her>
Recode’s Too Embarrassed to Ask 
<http://www.recode.net/2016/8/5/12369172/dnc-hack-security-passwords-voting-machines-too-embarrassed-to-ask-podcast>
 conscripted the Verge reporter Russell Brandom to look at what would happen if 
voting machines were hacked. While Brandom doesn’t think it’s particularly 
likely, he thinks it could be done. “You’re not hacking Bank of America, where 
someone has spent a lot of money to make sure that no one can get into that,” 
Brandom said. “I’m worried about voting machines just not working. I don’t know 
if it’s extremely likely, but the results would be so catastrophic to the body 
politic.”

The FiveThirtyEight Elections 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/its-unskew-season-8-8-16/id1077418457?i=1000373889427&mt=2>
 show explains why this is the perfect year for a third-party candidate, while
On the Media <http://www.wnyc.org/story/on-the-media-2016-08-05/> explores what 
could happen if a viable third party ever took root in the US political 
landscape. They also examine how so-called strategic voting could shake things 
up in the coming election. Speaking of the upcoming election, the New York 
Times has launched its own election podcast calledThe Run-Up 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/reckless-rhetoric/id1142083165?i=1000374054543&mt=2>
. Hosted by Michael Barbaro, the show, which will drop episodes twice a week, 
features interviews with New York Times reporters and columnists, as well as 
guests like Newt Gingrich and Donald Trump’s construction manager. As for Trump 
himself, onMTV’s The Stakes 
<https://soundcloud.com/mtvnews/the-stakes-crossroads>, Marcus Ellsworth wrote 
a lullaby for the baby Trump kicked out of his political rally.

If politics makes you want to change the channel, Song Exploder took a close 
look at theBoJack Horseman theme <http://songexploder.net/bojack-horseman>, 
which was created for the Netflix series by Patrick Carney, one half ofthe 
Black Keys <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Black_Keys>, and his uncle, Ralph 
Carney <http://www.akroncracker.com/>, a multi-instrumentalist who has worked 
with artists such as Tom Waits, St Vincent, and Galaxie 500.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrQvIR1oL1vE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrQvIR1oL1vE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrQvIR1oL1vE&media=>
The Worst Bestsellers 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/episode-54-r.l.-stine/id922310447?i=1000373579366&mt=2>
, the auditory book fair hosted by a librarian and a writer, opened up its 
collection of books byRL Stein <http://rlstine.com/>, the teen-friendly horror 
master, including Goosebumps and Fear Street. Turns out they may not be as good 
as you remember.The Penumbra Podcast 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/11-juno-steel-midnight-fox/id1090666976?i=1000373591057&mt=2>
, a storytelling show that gives classic tales a head-spinning twist, released 
an entertaining intergalactic whodunit. Over onHarry Potter and the Sacred Text 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/hope-nicolas-flamel-book-1/id1096113994?i=1000374088781&mt=2>
, a podcast that – as its name implies – treats JK Rowling’s fictions as if 
they were gospel, looks at the message of hope inside Harry Potter and the 
Sorcerer’s Stone, including the so-called “sacred space of Quidditch”.

Inside Amy Schumer head writer Jessi Klein stopped by the Earwolf podcast 
Ronna and Beverly <http://www.earwolf.com/episode/jessi-klein-you-gotta-lie-up/>
 to chat about the joy of motherhood, the bigger joy of shaking Gwyneth 
Paltrow’s hand, and her new book You’ll Grow Out of It.

In other literary news, the rather fusty series Selected Shorts, which has 
famous people read short stories on air, has gotten a makeover for the podcast 
age. The new series,Welcome to Selected Shorts: Too Hot For Radio 
<http://www.selectedshorts.org/2016/08/welcome-to-our-new-podcast/>, is hosted 
by comedian Aparna Nancherla and seems determined to shake off any lingering 
dustballs. The showkicked things off 
<http://www.selectedshorts.org/2016/08/too-hot-for-radio-episode-1-stephen-king/>
 with an intense take on the relationship between Batman and Robin by Stephen 
King, read by Avatar star Stephen Lang.

Politics for humans: a new podcast from Guardian US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/audio/2016/jul/18/politics-for-humans-podcast-2016-election-conventions>
Speaking of odd takes on pop cultural phenomena, have you heard the one about 
Beyoncé holding Sia prisoner?Internet Explorer 
<https://www.acast.com/internetexplorer/isbeyonceholdingsiacaptive-> takes a 
deep dive into the Brazilian conspiracy theory and it’s definitely an 
eye-opening story. For its season finale, the Buzzfeed podcast also got
legendary film-maker Werner Herzog 
<https://www.acast.com/internetexplorer/isbeyonceholdingsiacaptive-> to talk 
about the internet’s favorite movies – cat videos.

Another famous director stopped by podcast-land when so-called Sultan of Sleaze
John Waters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/03/john-waters-multiple-maniacs-baltimore-criterion>
 stopped byThe Talkhouse 
<http://thetalkhouse.com/zach-clark-white-reindeer-talks-john-waters-talkhouse-film-podcast/>
 for a chat with White Reindeer director Zach Clark. The entertaining and 
wide-ranging conversation covered everything from the time Waters met Justin 
Bieber to his mother’s reaction to seeing his first film, and his love-hate 
relationship with Terrence Malick’s movies. In other movie news,Dead Last 
Podcast 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/07-masculinity-101-predator/id1104789470?i=1000374131497&mt=2>
 was joined by comedian Owen Linders for a very in-depth discussion of the 
movie Predator.

Whether you’re waiting for a Predator showing, a cronut, a ramen burger, or a 
brunch reservation (or something non-food-related),Freakonomics 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/what-are-you-waiting-for/id354668519?i=1000373995066&mt=2>
 looked at the psychology of standing in line.

The Guestlist 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/38-open-mike-eagle-mick-foley/id509851764?i=1000373857928%253Fmt%253D2&ign-mpt=uo%253D4>
 got rapper – and once upon a timeSecret Skin podcaster 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/secret-skin-infinite-guest/id911365308?mt=2>
 – Open Mike Eagle to talk about his own psychological profile and how he uses 
his educational background in his songwriting. Eat, Pray, Love author Elizabeth 
Gilbert’s podcast,Magic Lessons 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/magic-lessons-ep-203-know/id1138081319?i=1000374062291&mt=2>
, asked comedian and How to Be Amazingpodcaster Michael Ian Black 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/17/michael-ian-black-podcast-wet-hot-american-summer>
 to coach an up-and-coming improv comedy performer on how to create a 
compelling one-man show.
 