
By way of a gloomy seasonal party game, try this. Take the proverbial back of 
a cereal box, divide it into six rectangles, and on each one, write a supposed 
cause of the political turbulence now gripping the west: “the financial crash 
of 2008”, “inequality”, “racism and xenophobia”, “Tony Blair, basically”, and 
all the rest. Then get out the gin, maybe put on aRadiohead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/may/08/radiohead-a-moon-shaped-pool-review>
 album, and enjoy hours of doom-laden conversational fun.

Were I daft enough to play the game myself, on one rectangle, I think I’d 
write an explanation so far barely mentioned in the acres of coverage of 2016’s 
chaos, but one right at the heart of it all: “Ever-increasing complexity, and 
the diminishing returns it now creates.” It’s not the snappiest conversation 
starter, I know. But if you’re looking for a grand catch-all theory that ties 
togetherDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, Brexit, 
and the general sense of a world spinning into chaos, it might not be a bad 
place to begin.

Complexity, after all, is a 21st-century leitmotif, captured in those 
news-channel screens on which scrolling tickers and stockmarket data combine to 
create the impression of a world so elaborate it is beyond anyone’s control. 
The average browse on Twitter creates exactly the same impression; so does a 
scroll through a Facebook news feed, now rendered even more confusing by the 
fact that a great deal of its content may well not be authentic “news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/challenge-facebook-reach-power-overdue-mark-zuckerberg>
” at all.

Individual lives are more scrambled and complicated than they have ever been. 
For a lot of us, modernity is a mess

Perhaps more crucially, individual lives are surely more scrambled and 
complicated than they have ever been. For a lot of us, in fact, modernity is a 
mess: not just of multiple user accounts, passwords, contracts for smartphones 
and Wi-Fi, and the generalised insanity of consumerism, but working lives that 
now have to undergo endless peaks, troughs and reinventions. The latter applies 
even to those who think of themselves as relatively successful, let alone 
people at the blunt end.

From the US tax code <http://time.com/4286921/complex-tax-code/> to the 
structures of the European Union (an organisation so complex that leaving it is 
starting to look all but impossible), all this complication is also reflected 
in the workings of states and governments. Moreover, though they were sold to 
us as a means of simplifying the tangled messes weaved by bureaucracies, the 
endless marketisation and contracting-out that now define policies across the 
planet have only made things worse.

Consider what the American thinker David Graeber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/06/the-utopia-of-rules-on-technology-stupidity-and-the-secret-joys-of-bureaucracy-david-graeber-review>
 calls his “iron law of liberalism”: “Any market reform, any government 
initiative intended to reduce red tape and promote market forces will have the 
ultimate effect of increasing the total number of … regulations, the total 
amount of paperwork, and the total number of bureaucrats the government 
employs.”

There perhaps was a time when the idea that increasing complexity would 
benefit most people just about held true: the 1990s maybe spring to mind. But 
now? As we all know,wages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/ifs-warnsf-biggest-squeeze-on-pay-for-70-years-autumn-statement>
 are continuing to stagnate. Acrossthe UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/06/uk-productivity-back-at-pre-financial-crisis-level-office-for-national-statistics>
,Europe 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/22/europes-sluggish-growth-bigger-threat-world-stability-brexit/>
 andthe US 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/dailyshot/2016/12/06/the-daily-shot-the-hard-truth-about-u-s-productivity/>
, there areincreasing worries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/01/imf-annual-meeting-agenda-economics-growth-brexit>
 about sluggish-to-flatlining productivity and disappointing economic growth. 
Automation is already disrupting millions of working lives. Therein, of course, 
lies huge opportunities for the insurgents now defining the political 
zeitgeist. Their basic approach is: a withering look at the labyrinthine 
realties of trade, technology, population movement, international agreements 
and the rest, followed by the simplest of answers: “Take back control”, “Make 
America great again”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ftrump-brexit-society-complex-people-populists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c05587c1184c223ce7837ac3387b645422a4b1e%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20lesson%20of%20Trump%20and%20Brexit%3A%20a%20society%20too%20complex%20for%20its%20people%20risks%20everything%20%7C%20John%20Harris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ftrump-brexit-society-complex-people-populists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20lesson%20of%20Trump%20and%20Brexit%3A%20a%20society%20too%20complex%20for%20its%20people%20risks%20everything%20%7C%20John%20Harris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Ftrump-brexit-society-complex-people-populists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c05587c1184c223ce7837ac3387b645422a4b1e%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘Declining returns make complexity a less attractive problem-solving 
strategy.’ Photograph: Andrew Kelly/Reuters 
All this began to sit in my thoughts as I was putting together a radio 
documentary about the new populism, and reading a book by the US anthropologist 
and historian Joseph Tainter, which brims with implied parallels between 
far-flung periods of history and more recent events. It may be some token of 
our turbulent times that it’s titledThe Collapse of Complex Societies 
<http://www.cambridge.org/gb/academic/subjects/archaeology/archaeological-theory-and-methods/collapse-complex-societies?format=PB&isbn=9780521386739>
: I was alerted to it after reading a brilliant post-Brexit piece authored by 
French writerPaul Arbair 
<https://paularbair.wordpress.com/2016/07/05/brexit-the-populist-surge-and-the-crisis-of-complexity/>
, and I have been dipping into it ever since.

The book was published in 1988, just before the fall of communism was about to 
offer another case study in what it describes. One key pattern, it argues, 
applies to whole chunks of history: the way that increasingly complicated 
systems initially deliver big economic benefits, only for diminishing returns 
to set in, as systems of power and control become overstretched. 
Ever-increasing burdens are not matched by material rewards, and popular 
resentment kicks in.

Don’t fall for these dishonest attacks on the ‘metropolitan liberal elite’ | 
Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/23/dishonest-attacks-metropolitan-liberal-elite>
Tainter’s text covers the demise of ancient Rome and collapse of Mayan 
civilization in the 9th century, the Minoans and Hittites, and the Chinese Zhou 
dynasty. He talks about common features of these societies’ fall: “revolts and 
provincial breakaways”, the end of long-distance trade, resource depletion, 
declining economic growth, and a point many societies have eventually crashed 
into: when they are “able to do little more than maintain the status quo”. 
Currencies become debased; “bridges and roads are not kept up”. Precipitous 
changes in climate often underlie what happens.

At certain points in history, Tainter says, “declining returns make complexity 
a less attractive problem-solving strategy”. Under such conditions, the option 
to “sever the ties that link localised groups to a regional entity” could gain 
traction. If you understand “regional” in a global rather than national sense, 
that’s surely a pretty good summary of Brexit, and the resentments now 
festering all across Europe.

I got in touch with Tainter, and though he cautioned me against generalised 
comparisons, he agreed that complexity held the key to a lot of current 
developments. “The simpler past seems more attractive than today’s complex 
reality, and so people vote [thanks to] inchoate frustrations,” he told me. 
“They choose simplicity and locality over complexity; identity over 
internationalism. Politicians promote themselves by giving voice to this. 
Hence, in addition to Brexit, we have calls forScottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/nicola-sturgeon-snp-referendum>
, Catalan independence, and so forth.” If complexity and globalisation gave 
recognisable benefits, he said, the phenomenon would not be so widespread. 
Quite so, but this is the exact way in which modernity is failing.


Visions of imminent social collapse might be taking all this a bit too far. Or 
maybe not, for as Tainter writes: “Civilisations are fragile, impermanent 
things.” Are modern societies vulnerable? It’s a common belief, he says, that 
our technological capacity, energy resources and our knowledge of economics and 
history mean our civilisation should be able to survive “whatever crises 
ancient and simpler societies found insurmountable”.

But as a corrective, he then quotes the revered German classicist Ulrich von 
Wilamowitz-Moellendorff’s sobering take on the lessons of the Roman empire. Gin 
and Radiohead at the ready, then: “Civilisation can die, because it has already 
died once.”

 * John Harris presents The New World: Us versus Them 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b086s60b>, on BBC Radio 4, 9am, Wednesday 4 
January  