
It’s not only Leslie Jones who’s having an emotional Olympics experience. 
While the Ghostbusters star has achieved ahappy notoriety for her pro-Games 
enthusiasm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/08/leslie-jones-olympics-twitter-rio-nbc-invite>
 – and fellow actor Samuel L. Jackson impressed for something best described as 
tweet-length joyous fury – the intensity of peak international sporting 
competition seems to provoke in the famous and unknown, supporters and 
detractors, a collective psychological thrall both of some mass and diversity.
Samuel L. Jackson (@SamuelLJackson) 
Most MUTHAFUKKA OF A LEG by AquamanPhelps!!! Hella swim by All!! Go USA!!!!
 <https://twitter.com/SamuelLJackson/status/762482934892810241> August 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SamuelLJackson/status/762482934892810241> 
The tender instrument of social media has exposed to me those spectators who 
tremor with an unexpected patriotism in moments of national victory. And that 
others are moved to Scrooge-sized humbug of the expense, the scale, the 
spectacle, the sponsorships. And yet others whose habitual stoicism crumbles 
amid the sporting narratives of personal triumph and disappointment.

Rio Olympics: Phelps v Lochte in the 200m individual medley – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/11/rio-olympics-2016-day-six-swimming-rowing-cycling-rugby-sevens-live>
I write this as one among many surprised at the depth – and the type – of my 
own emotional reaction to the Games, for they’ve inspired in me a sudden, 
confusing contradiction in my feminist politics. Watching female athletes sweat 
and jostle, leap, thrust, charge and tear in sporting competition, I am, for 
the first tangible time in my adult life, consumed with female body envy.

I am short, bespectacled and – otherwise happily – a little plump. As a 
teenager I was never quite sincere in any expressed admiration for the willowy 
models, actors and popstars that contemporary pop culture encouraged me to ape.

 It always struck me as odd – when it was, more than once, suggested to my 
face in change rooms – that to remedy a dress that didn’t stretch over my 
breasts I should cut myself to fit the garment rather than, you know, alter the 
material.

When the late-teenage realisation dawned that a little plumpness was no 
disincentive at all to the attentions of young gentlemen, I dispensed self 
doubt entirely, and helped myself to many pies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fthe-female-strength-on-display-in-rio-is-worth-getting-excited-about%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bb107119aed7aaeceea094d49c716c34c15a845%2F0_0_2739_1842%2F2739.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20female%20strength%20on%20display%20in%20Rio%20is%20worth%20getting%20excited%20about%20%7C%20Van%20Badham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fthe-female-strength-on-display-in-rio-is-worth-getting-excited-about%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20female%20strength%20on%20display%20in%20Rio%20is%20worth%20getting%20excited%20about%20%7C%20Van%20Badham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fthe-female-strength-on-display-in-rio-is-worth-getting-excited-about%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bb107119aed7aaeceea094d49c716c34c15a845%2F0_0_2739_1842%2F2739.jpg>
 Egypt’s Doaa Elghobashy controls the ball in front of Canada’s Kristina Valjas 
during a women’s beach volleyball qualifying match. Photograph: Yasuyoshi 
Chiba/AFP/Getty Images 
But I gaze at today’s Olympian women, like the extraordinary Simone Biles, and 
I suddenly regret almost all my physical choices in life, longing to have 
worked out, toughened up, added muscle. Perhaps it is a combination of Biles, 
as well as the inclusion of women’s rugby this Olympiad, the harder competition 
demanded of those working to break records on the track or in the pool, the 
exposure given the brutality of women’s cycling, the singular physical 
adeptness of Caster Semanya or the refreshing recontextualisation given beach 
volleyball by the Egyptian women who took proudly to the sand to play their 
game well covered up, but this year like no other have I been attuned to the 
Olympics as a showcase of growing pride in female bodily strength.

It could just be me; I’m hitting my 40s, one of my knees is a little wobbly, 
and the demands of mid-life domestic duty has left me more than disappointed 
that I’m strained and out of breath. But it could be a silent zeitgeist of 
feminist realisation that one of the final great taboos restricting the agency 
of women – the social policing of femininity – is finally, finally starting to 
wither.



In the west, we inherit terrible, powerful messages that disassociate what it 
means to a woman from what it means to be physically strong. The New 
Testament’s insistence that women should be desired for being “weaker vessels” 
obliging men to dominate and steer them is an example of what’s created if we 
perform gender as one of only two cultural options, defined in opposition. As
Australian gender theorist Jamila Rosdahl 
<https://theconversation.com/how-to-be-a-man-clue-denigrating-women-is-not-a-good-start-32897>
 puts it: “that men should be strong, aggressive and in control and women 
should be weak, passive and powerless.”

It’s why the Victorians found erotic appeal in the corset for fetishising 
womanly “physical weakness and vulnerability ... juxtaposed with man’s 
strength.” It’s why in the second world war, the American military purposely 
excluded “masculine” women from service in the belief that physically strong 
women performing in traditionally male roles would “produce lesbians” and 
destabilise the social order. Ooh, imagine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fthe-female-strength-on-display-in-rio-is-worth-getting-excited-about%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff469c745fa370b4455bdce1807d20663f8014ba5%2F0_0_5167_3425%2F5167.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20female%20strength%20on%20display%20in%20Rio%20is%20worth%20getting%20excited%20about%20%7C%20Van%20Badham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fthe-female-strength-on-display-in-rio-is-worth-getting-excited-about%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20female%20strength%20on%20display%20in%20Rio%20is%20worth%20getting%20excited%20about%20%7C%20Van%20Badham&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fthe-female-strength-on-display-in-rio-is-worth-getting-excited-about%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff469c745fa370b4455bdce1807d20663f8014ba5%2F0_0_5167_3425%2F5167.jpg>
 Serena Williams of the United States in action against Elina Svitolina of 
Ukraine during a women’s singles third round match. Photograph: Cameron 
Spencer/Getty Images 
Mack Horton has set something in motion. Is this the line in the sand on 
doping in sport? | Caroline Riot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/12/mack-horton-has-set-something-in-motion-is-this-the-line-in-the-sand-on-doping-in-sport>
And it’s informed an outspoken sexism that persists in sport: like in 1999, 
when Martina Hingis described a teenage Amelie Mauresmo as “half a man”, or in 
2012 when Dominika Cibulkova said playing Sam Stosur was “like playing a man”, 
or 2014, when a Russian tennis official referred to Serena and Venus as “the 
Williams brothers”. And that’s just in the sport of tennis where, by the way, 
Tomasz Wiktorowski, the coach of Agnieszka Radwanska, boasted – in 2015! – of a 
decision to keep his player “as the smallest player in the top 10.” Why? 
“Because, first of all she’s a woman, and she wants to be a woman.”

But maybe it’s the sport of tennis that’s also helped to de-lace the cultural 
corset of the old gender binary, because when I think of the woman I want to 
be, it’s Serena Williams’s example to which I aspire, not Agnieszka Radwanska’s.

Because while Williams may be leaving Rio after a shock upset to the Ukraine’s 
Elina Svitolina, the cultural victory is already hers. As one of the most 
decorated athletes, of either gender, in any sport, of all time, her example is 
proudly one amid the many women of this Olympic generation unafraid to define 
what it means to be a woman, free from the old traditions that oblige weakness 
– and entirely on her own terms. And that, more than any race, heat, triumph, 
loss or medal in this Olympics, is worth being excited about.
 