
I am a member of the oldest choir in the world. As early as the 5th and 6th 
centuries there are records of singers being part of the papal entourage, 
today, some 1,500 years later, the role of the Sistine Chapel choir 
(officially, theCappella Musicale Pontificia 
<http://www.cappellamusicalepontificia.va/content/cappellamusicale/it.html>) 
remains the same, namely, to sing for the pope.


You will have heard of the phrase “a capella” singing. This literally refers 
to the Sistine Chapel (the “capella”), and to the unaccompanied style in which 
the choir has been singing ever since it was installed in the world famous 
“Cappella Sistina” in the 15th century.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmark-spyropoulos-sistine-chapel-choir-pope-vatican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe13dd585629e857853ca4677573d679e8f678603%2F120_0_973_584%2F973.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20voice%20of%20God%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20pope's%20choir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmark-spyropoulos-sistine-chapel-choir-pope-vatican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20voice%20of%20God%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20pope%27s%20choir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmark-spyropoulos-sistine-chapel-choir-pope-vatican%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe13dd585629e857853ca4677573d679e8f678603%2F120_0_973_584%2F973.jpg>
 Mark Spyropoulos in the Sistine Chapel Photograph: PR 
The choir has had various high and low points over the centuries. The 1500s 
Renaissance golden age and the1900s Perosi revival 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorenzo_Perosi> are some of the highs. But in 
the second half of the 20th century, the choir went through a period of decline 
and found itself with the nickname “the Sistine screamers”. Today, after a 
period of intense study and hard work, we’re very happy to have left that 
particular moniker far behind, and to be breaking new ground in recordings, 
repertoire and research.

But changes come slowly – this is the Vatican after all. It was only 100 years 
ago that thelast castrato retired, after 30 years of service in the choir 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alessandro_Moreschi>. Today, the high parts are 
sung by boys’ treble voices – as they would have been in Renaissance times – 
the men no longer have to be ordained, unmarried, or even Italian, although I’m 
still one of only three foreigners in the choir and I’m its first British 
full-time member. I still have to pinch myself as I stand underMichelangelo’s 
extraordinary frescoes 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gallery_of_Sistine_Chapel_ceiling>, singing 
music much of which was written five, 50 or 500 years ago for this very choir 
to be performed in this very place, for this very acoustic.

When you are a singer – or any kind of artist – looking for work, you 
invariably spend a lot of time being in the wrong place at the right time and 
the right place at the wrong time. If you’re lucky and persistent you may end 
up being in the right place at the right time. I joined the choir two years 
ago. My previous job was as the flower presenter at Covent Garden. Yes that is 
actually a job – although not one you can retire on – but for me, a trainee 
singer, what I learnt standing in the wings and watching the world’s most 
incredible singers night after night was as valuable as several years at a 
conservatoire.

I had come to Italy to research its opera houses, and it was in that capacity 
I went to talk to Massimo Palombella, the Sistine chapel choir’s director. We 
discussed at length the British and Italian choral traditions – he is very 
knowledgeable about the English choral tradition and reveres it greatly. Next 
door, the choir happened to be just about to start a rehearsal, and, at the end 
of our meeting he opened the door saying, “Right, there’s the choir, go and 
join them!” and so I joined the basses. It’s quite a way to do an audition! I 
must have done OK, as there followed several return trips to Rome to sing with 
the choir, and eventually a four-month trial period, and in September 2015 I 
was accepted as a full-time member.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmark-spyropoulos-sistine-chapel-choir-pope-vatican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F103010df733aa43d04bf6b5163f48c254141f67f%2F0_0_2800_1792%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20voice%20of%20God%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20pope's%20choir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmark-spyropoulos-sistine-chapel-choir-pope-vatican%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20voice%20of%20God%3A%20life%20inside%20the%20pope%27s%20choir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fmark-spyropoulos-sistine-chapel-choir-pope-vatican%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F103010df733aa43d04bf6b5163f48c254141f67f%2F0_0_2800_1792%2F2800.jpg>
 A view of Michelangelo’s fresco The Creation of Adam on the Sistine Chapel’s 
ceiling. Photograph: MUSEI VATICANI/ANSA/CLAUDIO PERI/EPA 
Maestro Palombella was appointed by Pope Benedict in 2010 under strict 
instruction to transform this ancient institution into a world-class choir. The 
unfortunate “Sistine screamers” tag had come about because over the past few 
decades the choir had grown in size and had moved from the small chapel into 
the vast St Peter’s Basilica, and was singing Palestrina and our revered 
Renaissance heritage as if it were bel canto opera, and this was being 
broadcast around the world live on Vatican Radio and TV.

Maestro Palombella is the Indiana Jones of Renaissance polyphony

And so the first thing Maestro Palombella did was to electronically map the 
acoustic in the Sistine Chapel. We’re the Sistine choir and must sing in a way 
that is pertinent to the Sistine Chapel even if our bread and butter job is to 
sing for papal masses in the Basilica once or twice a week. The Sistine’s 
intimate acoustic was then reproduced in the Basilica using speakers and 
microphones. So now, when we sing in the much larger space, we’re amplified in 
a way that recreates the authentic Sistine acoustic and we can hold on to the 
choir’s core repertoire – the many Renaissance masterpieces of early polyphony 
– and take them it out into the big public showroom.

Another crucial change that Maestro Palombella has wrought has been the 
revival in Renaissance singing, and an “authentic” style. By which I mean 
singing the music in the most appropriate and pertinent way to get as close as 
we can to how the music was intended to sound.


Italian music is always about melody (in contrast to German music, say, which 
is more harmonically driven). The emphasis must always be on the overall sweep, 
on the melodic line and phrasing. It is an idea that developed in the 
Renaissance and goes all the way through Italian music even to Puccini. And it 
was developed here, in the Sistine Chapel, in particular with Palestrina. Each 
part in Palestrina’s choral music is a song which fits in with another song, 
and they all fit together.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgEVttXtWMZg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgEVttXtWMZg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DgEVttXtWMZg&media=>
It is not enough to have reverence and respect for historical tradition, we 
must also have genuine curiosity and enquiry. Maestro Palombella is the Indiana 
Jones of Renaissance polyphony. He – and he alone – has 100% access to the 
Vatican’s archives, the biggest collection of Renaissance music in the world. 
Two years ago he found the earliest edition ofAllegri’s Miserere (Sistine codex 
1661) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6t5fEnPtYzs> perhaps the most famous 
work written for the choir. Previously, everyone had been singing an edition 
from around 1900 that includedthe famous top Cs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1FQND5YFIqA> and elaborate ornamentation. But 
no Renaissance composer ever wrote a top C – that was an embellishment added by 
showing-off castrati. Prior to the codex being excavated from the Vatican’s 
archives, no-one had ever heard what Allegri actually wrote. We recorded that 
here in the chapel itself, in the the first ever studio recording made in the 
Sistine Chapel for our 2015 albumCantate Domino 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fc5YRYtclsM>.


For me, though, Palestrina’s music is the culmination of the Renaissance, and 
the Missae Papae Marcelli is his masterpiece, a sublime and graceful marriage 
of words and music. Our new album Palestrina features his astonishing Missa 
Papae Marcelli, as well as a Palestrina motet written for the choir but that 
had been gathering dust in the archives for perhaps over 400 years: his
Benedixisti, Domine <https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B01JRIWYGI/ref=dm_ws_tlw_trk10>
.

Palestrina was Director of Music for the Cappella Guilia – the choir of St 
Peter’s Basilica next door (he was married so couldn’t be part of the Sistine 
Chapel choir whose singers had to be ordained), but he knew the singers of 
Cappella Musicale Pontificia well and wrote much of his music for them and to 
sing in the Sistine Chapel. Recording this and every other piece on the CD in 
the Sistine Chapel means that we’re recording in the exact acoustic these 
pieces were written for. It’s rare you can make that claim.

In our quest for an authentic sound, we put down carpets in the Sistine Chapel 
for recording in order to soften the reverberation, as we know that in 
Palestrina’s time there would have been theRaphael tapestries 
<http://mv.vatican.va/3_EN/pages/z-Info/MV_Info_Arazzi.html> (now in the 
next-door Vatican museum) on the wall which would have affected the acoustic.

We have to forget our modern way of understanding and reading music, and 
understand the music in a way which is pertinent to the 15th century. 
Palestrina wrote for a choir of around 18 singers, for boys and men, but not 
for castrati (they came to Italian choral music later), and he wrote music 
without bars or a time signature. That’s not to say that he wrote in a 
non-rhythmic way – he wrote according to the text. The phrasing, the words, 
were everything. Meanwhile there was no such thing back then as equal 
temperament. That wasn’t to come until almost two centuries later. The idea of 
a fixed “C” simply didn’t exist. And the reason we know which note to start on 
is because we know that the alto line would not have gone higher than what we 
now call a B-flat, so everything is tuned according to the top note of the alto 
line. So long as everything is in relation to that, everything fits.

 Of course we don’t know if we’re absolutely right, but we think we’re getting 
there. But then again perhaps 50 years from now people will look back and say, 
“What they hell were they doing?! … don’t they realise it should all be sung 
with … I don’t know … tambourines!?”

 * Sistine Chapel choir’s album Palestrina 
<http://www.deutschegrammophon.com/gb/cat/4796131?> is out now on Deutsche 
Grammophon.
 