
Democracy is “hard work” and must not be taken for granted, said Barack Obama 
during his farewell visit to Europe last week. How right he is. The challenges 
confronting western democracies as 2016 draws to a ragged close are of a 
breadth and intensity not seen since the early 1980s, whenLeonid Brezhnev’s 
Soviet Union <https://www.britannica.com/biography/Leonid-Ilich-Brezhnev> was 
expanding its nuclear arsenal and suppressing Solidarity in Poland. Today, 
Russia under Vladimir Putin is again building bombs and meddling in neighbours’ 
affairs. But he is not the only or even the biggest problem. Much of the danger 
to democracy comes from within.

Angela Merkel, Germany’s long-serving chancellor, and Obama struggled with 
this issue during meetings in Berlin that included walk-on parts for the 
leaders of France, Britain, Italy and Spain. The (Republican) elephant in the 
room was Donald Trump. Nobody mentioned him by name. But the threat to 
democratic values and the transatlantic alliance that sustains them implicit in 
his victory was the subject of a pointed articlewritten by Obama and Merkel, 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/11/17/op-ed-president-obama-and-chancellor-merkel-future-transatlantic>
 and published in a German weekly.

Obama and Merkel call for continued transatlantic cooperation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/barack-obama-and-angela-merkel-call-for-continued-transatlantic-cooperation>
So great is the uncertainty about the political direction of travel in the US 
andEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> that the two leaders 
went back to basics, stressing their “shared commitment to personal freedom and 
dignity, which only a vibrant democracy under the rule of law can guarantee”. 
This included “joint responsibility to protect and preserve our way of life,” 
they wrote. “Today we find ourselves at a crossroads – the future is upon us 
and we will never return to a pre-globalisation economy.”

Merkel and Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/barack-obama-and-angela-merkel-call-for-continued-transatlantic-cooperation>
 were evidently talking about a Trumpist agenda that questions the 
Euro-Atlantic settlement and Nato’s relevance, mocks climate change, opposes 
free trade and treats refugees, Muslims and foreigners in general as potential 
enemies. Their references to pluralism and international law were obvious shots 
across Putin’s bows. But their message was also directed at Europe. Their 
concerns are justified. The fear now is that the populist and nationalist 
insurrections witnessed in Britain in June and in the US this month may be 
replicated across Europe in coming months, further shredding the west’s liberal 
democratic moorings.

France is of foremost concern. This weekend saw the start of a primary process 
to select the centre-right’s candidate for two-stage presidential elections 
next spring. This decision is crucial since the French left is largely 
discredited. Its leader, François Hollande, is a deeply unpopular president. 
Should Alain Juppé, a former PM, beat rivals Nicolas Sarkozy and François 
Fillon for the centre-right’s nomination, as polls suggest, it is assumed he 
will win asecond round run-off 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-france-election-poll-idUSKBN13C191> in May.

It is a dangerous assumption. Conventional wisdom has never been more 
discredited. Pollsters tread treacherous ground. And Juppé, 71, is very ancien 
regime. He lost the prime ministership 20 years ago amid a revolt against 
Jacques Chirac. He was later convicted of criminal abuse of public funds. Last 
week, Juppé was forced to reject comparisons with the US election 
<http://in.reuters.com/article/france-election-clinton-idINKBN13D0TZ>. “I am 
not Hillary Clinton. And France is not America,” he declared.

Frexit, Nexit or Oexit? Who will be next to leave the EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/frexit-nexit-or-oexit-who-will-be-next-to-leave-the-eu>
His protestations will do nothing to quiet the many voices now suggesting 
Marine Le Pen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>, the far-right, 
anti-immigration Front National leader and ardent admirer of Trump and Nigel 
Farage, has a chance to score another populist upset. It is taken for granted 
that Le Pen, 48, will reach the second round. But for the first time, the idea 
she could then beat Juppé, or any other centre-right candidate, and win 
outright is taken seriously. Manuel Valls, France’s prime minister, admitted 
last week it was entirely possible. It is a dreadful prospect.

France may be part of a trend. If polls are correct, parliamentary elections 
in the Netherlands in March could see the triumph ofGeert Wilders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/geert-wilders-faces-possible-5000-fine-for-hate-speech>
, an anti-Islam extremist who advocates a Dutch exit (Nexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/frexit-nexit-or-oexit-who-will-be-next-to-leave-the-eu>
) from the EU. Wilders predicts he will win partly because of Merkel’s 
“stupidity” in opening Europe’s doors toSyrian refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2015/sep/01/mama-merkel-the-compassionate-mother-of-syrian-refugees>
. In Italy, the centre-left prime minister,Matteo Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/matteo-renzi-repeats-vow-quit-italian-pm-loses-referendum>
, looks set to lose a controversial referendum on constitutional reform, and 
his job, next month. Pollsters say the “no” campaign, led by the 
anti-establishmentFive Star movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/italy-five-star-movement-protest-problem-solving-elections>
 (M5S), is benefiting from a “Trump effect”.

Germany has elections, too, next year, which if she stands again, Merkel will 
be expected to win. But even in Berlin, the electoral balance is shifting in 
threatening, ugly and intolerant ways as the populist Alternative forGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and the anti-Islamists of Pegida 
advance. With Obama no longer around to defend the west’s liberal democratic 
order, Merkel could be the last woman standing.
 