
This is one of the greatest backyards ever created – and we get to spend a few 
months of every year in it. There are no towns inside the park, just five 
lodges and a few campgrounds. Most employees live in dormitory accommodation in 
the park: we’re here to help guests experience the park the way Mother Nature 
intended.

Glacier national park has 700 miles of hiking trails. It’s open all year 
round, but the bus tours only run between May and September, so many of us work 
here in summer and then go on to winter seasonal jobs at places like ski 
resorts.

I’ve had Al Gore, Laura Bush, Robin Williams and David Letterman on my red bus.
 Group tours last between three and eight hours, but visitors can also do 
private tours. One of my favourite stories involves Ronald Reagan, who was here 
to shoot his 1954 movie Cattle Queen of Montana. Reagan had the day off and 
wanted to go fishing but his guide Roscoe had to finish cleaning the hotel 
rooms before he could leave. Apparently, Reagan rolled up his sleeves and 
started making beds and cleaning bathrooms so he could spend more time fishing.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmontana-glacier-national-tour-guide-david-eglsaer-worlds-best-workplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe90703d3180f30b0446eeaabc2d241336382fb11%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20world%E2%80%99s%20best%20workplace%20%E2%80%A6%20Glacier%20national%20park%2C%20Montana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmontana-glacier-national-tour-guide-david-eglsaer-worlds-best-workplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20world%E2%80%99s%20best%20workplace%20%E2%80%A6%20Glacier%20national%20park%2C%20Montana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmontana-glacier-national-tour-guide-david-eglsaer-worlds-best-workplace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe90703d3180f30b0446eeaabc2d241336382fb11%2F0_0_3264_2448%2Fmaster%2F3264.jpg>
 David Eglsaer with one of his red tour buses 
My very first week in the park, just after I’d arrived from Texas, I came 
across a bear. I froze and we just stared at each other. Remembering my 
orientation training, I looked down and slowly backed away. Luckily the bear 
didn’t follow, and as soon as I’d backed around a bend I took off at a sprint. 
The next two times I tried that trail, the same thing happened – I was turned 
around by a bear. By the fourth time, the bear and I had reached an 
understanding and I finally completed the trail.

Looking for the perfect log cabin? Try Montana
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/aug/17/-sp-log-cabin-montana-usa> 
My favourite type of guest is one from a big city who’s never seen snow-capped 
peaks. When they get on the bus, I see them checking their phone, frustrated if 
there isn’t much service. Then we start up Going-to-the-Sun Road and the phone 
is forgotten. The road is surrounded by spectacular peaks – the highest is 
Mount Cleveland, at 3,200 metres. Logan Pass sits on the Continental Divide, at 
2,000 metres.

The roads can be scary for those with a fear of heights. There are places 
where you have a huge mountainside to the right and a 900-metre drop to the 
left. I had one passenger who was so afraid she sat right behind me for the 
entire trip, holding on to the back of my seat. But at the end I got a big hug 
of thanks for allowing her to see the park.

Some days you actually drive up through the clouds, to Logan Pass. From there 
you get to look down on the clouds with the peaks poking through. I tell my 
passengers that it’s like looking down from heaven.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmontana-glacier-national-tour-guide-david-eglsaer-worlds-best-workplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F067fc69d4a6efc349afc2d0b6355fc5e19784b0e%2F0_0_5509_3673%2F5509.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20world%E2%80%99s%20best%20workplace%20%E2%80%A6%20Glacier%20national%20park%2C%20Montana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmontana-glacier-national-tour-guide-david-eglsaer-worlds-best-workplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20world%E2%80%99s%20best%20workplace%20%E2%80%A6%20Glacier%20national%20park%2C%20Montana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmontana-glacier-national-tour-guide-david-eglsaer-worlds-best-workplace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F067fc69d4a6efc349afc2d0b6355fc5e19784b0e%2F0_0_5509_3673%2F5509.jpg>
 The view east from Logan Pass.
 Photograph: Tom Nevesely/All Canada Photos/Corbis 
In June there are waterfalls and wildflowers galore. In the summer, it’s 
perfect every day, with blue skies and sunshine. I know some people don’t want 
to hear this, but we get tired of perfect days and every now and then hope for 
rain, clouds or just something different. Fall is my favourite time. The leaves 
are changing colours, the mountains have a dusting of snow and there aren’t 
many crowds. In the winter, the park is basically asleep until spring, under a 
blanket of snow.

Nothing beats a turkey sandwich and a bag of Oreos at the top of a peak. There 
are several restaurants in the park but my favourite lunch spot is on top of 
Grinnell Point, which overlooks theMany Glacier Hotel 
<http://www.glaciernationalparklodges.com/>. From here I can see for miles in 
all directions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmontana-glacier-national-tour-guide-david-eglsaer-worlds-best-workplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3349f06540bf0b64c67fc0b18378bc9b8852749%2F0_0_5100_3829%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20world%E2%80%99s%20best%20workplace%20%E2%80%A6%20Glacier%20national%20park%2C%20Montana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmontana-glacier-national-tour-guide-david-eglsaer-worlds-best-workplace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20world%E2%80%99s%20best%20workplace%20%E2%80%A6%20Glacier%20national%20park%2C%20Montana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F30%2Fmontana-glacier-national-tour-guide-david-eglsaer-worlds-best-workplace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3349f06540bf0b64c67fc0b18378bc9b8852749%2F0_0_5100_3829%2F5100.jpg>
 Grinnell Point at sunrise from Many Glacier. Photograph: Kerrick James/Corbis 
I looked up from Logan Pass one night to see an amazing display of stars and 
the Milky Way. I had dropped some passengers off and pulled in to stretch my 
legs. Just as I was about to leave, the northern lights appeared, along with a 
few shooting stars.

Whether it’s air pollution, global warming or overcrowding, there will always 
be concerns about the park’s future. Luckily, there will also always be those 
who dedicate their lives to protecting places like this. The most important 
thing for a tour guide is to try and find a connection to the park for every 
passenger. The more people have that connection, the more people will try to 
preserve this park.

• For park information see nps.gov/glac <http://www.nps.gov/glac/index.htm>
 