
Land of Hope and Glory and Rule, Britannia! have been banished from their 
traditional place on the Last Night of theProms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms>.


As William Glock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/may/05/classicalmusic>, the 
BBC’s controller of music explained, the aim has been to make the programme 
“attractive to 40 million viewers in Europe” as well as to those in this 
country. As a concession to patriotic feeling, Parry’s Jerusalem is being 
retained, but in a version – not heard since 1922 – that Elgar made for the 
Three Choirs festival.


Sir Henry Wood’s Fantasia on British Sea Songs 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YUXBrek5N9g> will be given in its full 
version, not generally heard in recent years. Colin Davis, conductor of the BBC 
Orchestra, bravely shouldered the mantle of Sir Malcolm Sargent last year, but 
he has made it plain for some time that he was impatient with the “Last Night 
of the Proms” ritual in its old, rigid form.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR2-43p3GVTQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR2-43p3GVTQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DR2-43p3GVTQ&media=>
Land of Hope and Glory at the 2014 Proms 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R2-43p3GVTQ> 
Editorial: Cold feet on the Prom
The last night at the Proms is certainly one of the odder London occasions. 
Too odd, theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has decided, for 40 
million European television viewers. So Auntie, in another bout of cold feet, 
has decided to throw out Land of Hope and Glory and Rule Britannia from the 
wind-up community singing – because they hardly represent the spirit of the age 
or the search for a new role in the world. Quite so, but the point about this 
famous Albert Hall occasion was that it was an unblushing piece of English 
nonsense. Are we now going to be ashamed of our national eccentricities? At 
this rate the English will soon have nothing much left to boast about.

After all, the last night of the Proms has never been the occasion to parade 
our new-found musicality, though this does happen to be one of the more 
important things about the quality of British life today. The programme has 
quite deliberately tended towards the corny, and this year an extended version 
of Sir Henry Wood’s Fantasia on British Sea Songs will musically be no advance 
onRule, Britannia! <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yHNfvJc99YY>, while Elgar’s 
arrangement ofParry’s setting of Jerusalem 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E5MaLVaN6tI> is, some would say, a retreat 
from Land of Hope and Glory. And if we are going to worry about overseas 
opinion, what will the Arabs make of transplanting Jerusalem to England’s green 
and pleasant land?

The dismissal of Rule, Britannia! in this way makes a sad comparison with its 
introduction in 1744. Described in the advertisement as “a favourable ode in 
honour or Great Britain”, it had its first performance in Dublin of all places.


Public pressure led to the decision being overturned:
 The Guardian, 19 July 1969.  