
Amid the fragments of negotiating strategy glimpsed this week in Downing Street
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/uk-unlikely-to-stay-in-single-market-tory-document-suggests>
, one phrase offered momentary cheer to those still hoping to “have their cake 
and eat it” when Britain leaves the EU.


The “Canadian model” is not another admiring reference to the country’s prime 
minister, Justin Trudeau, but his government’s success in negotiating an EU 
trade deal that provides a possible template for Britain’s future relationship 
with the bloc.

After years of negotiations, the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement 
(Ceta)signed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/eu-canada-sign-ceta-free-trade-deal-trudeau-juncker>
 by Trudeau and the commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, last month is 
all the more alluring because it comes without the ties demanded of closer 
neighbours such as Norway and Switzerland.

But those involved behind the scenes of this hard-fought trade deal warn that 
looks can be deceptive when it comes to judging its suitability in a British 
context.

Though Ceta provides for the liberalisation of trade barriers and customs 
duties 
<http://pm.gc.ca/eng/news/2016/10/30/canada-and-eu-sign-historic-trade-agreement-during-eu-canada-summit>
 required by Britain’s manufacturing exporters, there is little to match the 
“passporting” agreements for financial services that the City of London 
currently enjoys inside the EU.

“It’s quite difficult to compare the Ceta negotiation process with Brexit 
because the EU and UK are negotiating the terms of a divorce after a 40-year 
period of economic, legal and social integration,” said Christophe Bondy, who 
spent five years advising the Canadian government on the deal before joining 
London law firm Volterra Fietta.

“There is already a very deep relationship in place between the UK and the 
EU,” he added. “The question is what to keep of that, and on what terms.”

Inasmuch as anything concrete can be read into a handwritten note 
<https://twitter.com/ChrisJones_1/status/803262701900271617/photo/1> snapped 
from afar by press photographers, this crucial difference appears to be 
acknowledged by those inside the British government too.

The notes – carried by an aide to the Tory vice-chair Mark Field after a 
meeting at the Department for Exiting the European Union – talked of the need 
to seek “Canada plus” with “more on services”. David Davis, the Brexit 
secretary, also described the Canadian model as “optimum” in aspeech 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/platform/2016/02/david-davis-britain-would-be-better-off-out-of-the-eu-and-heres-why.html>
 last February, but only a “starting point”.

Yet, even passing a fairly limited and straightforward trade deal with Canada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> proved far more difficult than 
anyone expected. Adding more layers on top within the two-year timeframe 
allowed for Britain’s departure could prove far from a cakewalk.

The Canadian deal was arguably 22 years in the making. This was how long ago 
the then prime minister, Jean Chrétien,first mentioned the idea 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/rob-commentary/after-a-tortuous-two-decades-ceta-is-a-trade-deal-worth-celebrating/article33053341/>
 in a speech to the French senate. Formal negotiations started back in 2009.

They were almost derailed at the last minute too. Under the terms of a “mixed 
treaty” – affecting both EU and national law – negotiators had to seek 
individual ratification from all member states.

In the case of Belgium, this even required agreement from six regional 
assemblies, something that led to the near collapse of talks in October when
Wallonia objected to aspects of the deal that affect environmental, labour and 
consumer standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/14/eu-canada-free-trade-deal-ceta-in-jeopardy-belgium-wallonia-parliament-vote>
.

The Walloons were particularly anxious about terms that would allow 
multinational investors to take states to a special arbitration court in the 
case of disputes – echoing similar concerns among campaigners about the 
struggling EU/US trade deal known as TTIP (transatlantic trade and investment 
partnership).

“It seems obvious that the EU is now not capable of having an international 
agreement, even with a country that shares European values such asCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>, even with a country that is so kind 
and patient,” said dispirited Canadian trade minister Chrystia Freeland after 
Ceta almost collapsed. “Canada is disappointed. I am personally very 
disappointed. I have worked very, very hard. We have decided to go home. I am 
truly very, very sad.”

Some tweaks put the bulk of the trade deal back on track, but there is still 
the possibility that the investor resolution scheme could be blocked before it 
is voted on inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and 
campaigners were organising protest demonstrations in London again on Tuesday.

Ironically, Britain’s past insistence of preserving the right to intervene in 
EU-wide negotiations makes it even more likely that a future Brexit deal would 
besubject to the same “mixed treaty” rules 
<https://www.monckton.com/ceta-tells-us-brexit/> requiring national 
ratification in future.

Even if these steps go more smoothly in the case of divorce, there is still 
bemusement among many Canadians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/brexit-canada-trade-deal-eu-model-next-steps>
 that such an approach could possibly provide any improvement on all the trade 
advantages that Britain already enjoys.

“The Canada-EU deal is an ambitious, forward-looking agreement. It seeks to 
build new economic ties between Canada and the EU by easing existing barriers 
to trade and investment,” said Bondy. “ But even with the Ceta, Canada and the 
EU are a long way from the level of deep economic, legal and social integration 
you get from being an EU member state.”
 