
““I’m a very happy man and I heard someone say the other day that happy people 
never change the world. That’s absolutely right. But they might just give you a 
reason not to want to die.” The choreographer Jean-Christophe Maillot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/26/les-ballets-monte-carlo-romeo-juliet-review-prokofiev-pinot-plinth>
 chuckles with pleasure at this pronouncement. He is talking about his version 
ofThe Taming of the Shrew for the Bolshoi Ballet – a transformation of 
Shakespeare’s play into a joy-filled and stylish dance drama. “It’s not 
Shakespeare’s play. It’s a ballet about the play,” he explains of the 
production, which is about to come to London as part of the Bolshoi’s summer 
season at Covent Garden.

Maillot, a 56-year-old Frenchman who has run the Ballets de Monte-Carlo as 
choreographer and director since 1992, couldn’t have taken on the project in 
worse circumstances. It wasSergei Filin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2016/jan/04/bolshoi-babylon-film-ballet-acid-attacks-sergei-filin-russia>
, the Bolshoi’s then director, who tempted him to make a new ballet for the 
great Russian company; but in January 2013, just months before Maillot was due 
to arrive in Moscow,Filin had acid thrown into his face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/feb/03/bolshoi-director-sergei-filin-acid-attack>
 and was partly blinded. The attack was prompted by rivalries within the 
company, and opposition to Filin’s directorship.

“I was terrified that something like that could happen in dance. Where goes 
the world when you see something like that? And then I was so destroyed for 
Sergei,” Maillot says. “Whatever we think and whatever we find out about the 
reason why these things happened to him, it is just unacceptable that it 
happened. His life is destroyed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnew-taming-of-the-shrew-ballet-bolshoi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dc9b5449f7cb5126181a976f5ac33e39c45b608%2F0_190_3392_2035%2F3392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Taming%20of%20the%20Shrew%20%E2%80%93%20a%20show%20of%20unity%20from%20the%20Bolshoi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnew-taming-of-the-shrew-ballet-bolshoi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Taming%20of%20the%20Shrew%20%E2%80%93%20a%20show%20of%20unity%20from%20the%20Bolshoi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnew-taming-of-the-shrew-ballet-bolshoi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dc9b5449f7cb5126181a976f5ac33e39c45b608%2F0_190_3392_2035%2F3392.jpg>
 Elizabeth Taylor as Katherine in Franco Zeffirell’s film. Photograph: SNAP/REX 
Shutterstock 
His initial instinct was that his Taming of the Shrew, due to open in July 
2014, would have to be postponed. Other choreographers pulled out of planned 
projects at theBolshoi <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/bolshoi> at the same 
time. But then Filin asked him if he would go ahead. “He said: ‘Please, if you 
don’t come, these guys win and I lose.’ And I thought he was right.

“It was impossible to let my fear command what I would do. It is the job of an 
artist somehow to resist. It is nice to have big speeches about freedom, about 
liberty, but if you don’t act what’s the point? Sergei said: ‘If you come you 
can have bodyguards.’ And I said I don’t want any fucking bodyguards. I could 
die in a plane or in a car accident, so let’s go. I cannot be a coward. I have 
to go there and make this ballet.”

***

It was not the most obvious choice. George Bernard Shaw famously called The 
Taming of the Shrew “an insult to womanhood and manhood from the first word to 
the last”. The tale of Katherine and Petruchio’s courtship appears to have been 
problematic almost since it was first staged in the 1590s.

The Taming of the Shrew: 'This is not a woman being crushed'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jan/17/taming-of-the-shrew-rsc> 
The complications of its gender politics culminate in Katherine’s long, final 
speech of submission, in which she offers to place her hand beneath her 
husband’s foot, as part of a bet Petruchio makes with the other husbands in the 
play. Writing in 1897 Shaw observed that “no man with any decency of feeling 
can sit it out in the company of a woman without being extremely ashamed of the 
lord of creation moral implied in the wager and the speech put into the woman’s 
own mouth.”

Any unease he felt has magnified as the years have passed. Some productions 
have played up the farcical elements of the plot, suggesting that Shakespeare 
intended to show the male behaviour as unacceptable; most stress a strong 
current of desire between Katherine and Petruchio, which is somehow meant to 
excuse his appalling behaviour. Sometimes, though you have to wrench the text 
to prove this, they are complicit in a joke played on the rest of society. 
Caroline Byrne’s current radicalinterpretation at the Globe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/06/the-taming-of-the-shrew-review-shakespeares-globe-london-feminism>
, which updates the play to the time of the Easter Rising in 1916, is one of 
the few to make clear sense of the conflicting tensions in the play; it 
fiercely and thrillingly turns the final speech into Katherine’s public shaming 
of her husband for his treatment of her. There is a glimmer of hope that they 
may reach an accommodation whereby her rights are respected.

In the 1967 film version of the play, starring Elizabeth Taylor and Richard 
Burton, the directorFranco Zeffirelli  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/may/04/theatre.artsfeatures>
understandably made much of the basic sexual attraction between his two leads, 
whose beauty illuminates the screen – yet he also just about allows the wife 
the upper hand in that final speech. There is no sense that Taylor, as Kate, 
believes what she has said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnew-taming-of-the-shrew-ballet-bolshoi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc962f7e754c39ca8d1951de9492bf0c41f149495%2F523_119_830_1037%2F830.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Taming%20of%20the%20Shrew%20%E2%80%93%20a%20show%20of%20unity%20from%20the%20Bolshoi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnew-taming-of-the-shrew-ballet-bolshoi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Taming%20of%20the%20Shrew%20%E2%80%93%20a%20show%20of%20unity%20from%20the%20Bolshoi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnew-taming-of-the-shrew-ballet-bolshoi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc962f7e754c39ca8d1951de9492bf0c41f149495%2F523_119_830_1037%2F830.jpg>
 The choreographer John Cranko. Photograph: Douglas Burn/Getty Images 
In her Ballet Lover’s Companion 
<http://criticaldance.org/book-review-the-ballet-lovers-companion-by-zoe-anderson/>
, the critic Zoë Anderson suggests it is possible that when John Cranko was 
creating his 1969 ballet version ofThe Taming of the Shrew, he was influenced 
by the robust physical comedy of the film – yet he dispenses with that 
emotional subtlety. His ballet, premiered in Stuttgart where he was artistic 
director of Stuttgart Ballet, reveals a vigorous delight in knockabout 
jousting, keeping the plot of the play, but reducing its themes to broad 
slapstick and heart-felt romance.

Cranko’s Kate, played initially by Marcia Haydée 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/mar/27/dance>, stood with her feet 
planted firmly on the ground to attack her suitors, fighting them every step of 
the way. Haydée managed to suggest a certain vulnerability, but Richard Cragun 
as Petruchio simply swept her off her feet with his charm and his seductive 
appeal. Any suggestion that her resistance and power were valuable was lost in 
a conventionally happy ending.

Nevertheless, and despite the rise of feminism at exactly the same period, the 
ballet proved popular. When it was performed by HamburgBallet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> some years later, Maillot, then an 
aspiring young soloist, danced two parts: as a rejected suitor and a put-upon 
servant. Even at the age of 20, he felt uneasy; he was impressed by the 
ballet’s story-telling but worried by its failure to take on board the queasy 
sexual politics of the play. “I felt this kind of vision of the relation of the 
man to the woman was pretty unacceptable,” he says. “Playing on the comic 
dimension was a way of making it acceptable – and I didn’t find that 
acceptable.”

The idea of creating his own version of the story lodged in his mind, and 
stayed there. His own view was that “Katherine and Petruchio are just two 
exceptional people who cannot accept the idea of spending their lives with 
someone common and conventional.

“This woman is the most beautiful character for me because she has the 
strength, the will, the sense of independence. She has no desire to compromise. 
She is just looking for someone as extraordinary as she is, and I wanted to put 
the piece more on that angle and use the other couples to reveal the mediocrity 
of relationships and show that sometimes what appears in society to be extreme 
might be more respectable than what appears to be respectable.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnew-taming-of-the-shrew-ballet-bolshoi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9ade952dc999f8fcb5b9372903d2229053b1278%2F0_71_3668_2201%2F3668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Taming%20of%20the%20Shrew%20%E2%80%93%20a%20show%20of%20unity%20from%20the%20Bolshoi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnew-taming-of-the-shrew-ballet-bolshoi%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Taming%20of%20the%20Shrew%20%E2%80%93%20a%20show%20of%20unity%20from%20the%20Bolshoi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fnew-taming-of-the-shrew-ballet-bolshoi%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9ade952dc999f8fcb5b9372903d2229053b1278%2F0_71_3668_2201%2F3668.jpg>
 Maillot asked the Bolshoi dancers to look at his work and then decide if they 
wanted to audition for him. Photograph: Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP 
This was the vision that he took to Moscow.

***

Maillot is unusual. Once his career as a dancer was abruptly ended by a knee 
injury, he knew he not only wanted to be a choreographer – he wanted to run his 
own company.

“For me choreographing is meeting with people. That is what makes the work of 
being a choreographer different from all other art forms. I wish sometimes I 
could be a writer or a painter, because then I just have to connect my arm 
directly from my brain to the result. But choreographing is sharing, it is 
having to meet people. I am reluctant to create in a company where I don’t know 
the people, because I am not in love enough with my work as a choreographer to 
just enjoy making steps – I have to enjoy sharing.”

For that reason, for 20 years he has worked exclusively with Ballets de 
Monte-Carlo. But then Filin gave him the opportunity to get to know the dancers 
in the Bolshoi – and to create whatever he wanted. “That’s a dream. It is very 
rare for a director to say, ‘I want you to work with them because I believe you 
have something to share, and the only way to do it is to let you do what you 
want.’”

He could have made a short ballet, or an abstract piece, but faced with the 
technical and dramatic abilities of the Bolshoi, he decided onThe Taming of the 
Shrew; he asked the dancers to look at his work and then decide if they wanted 
to audition for him. “As a choreographer you have to fall in love with dancers 
but you have to also hope that some dancers fell in love with you,” he says.

Sergei Filin may be as much a victim of Bolshoi politics as acid attack | 
Judith Mackrell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/18/sergei-filin-bolshoi-politics-acid-attack>
By the time he flew to Moscow, the company was still reeling from the attack 
on Filin and the arrest of dancerPavel Dmitrichenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/01/bolshoi-ballet-dancer-jailed-for-acid-attack-released-on-parole-pavel-dmitrichenko>
 who had hired the assailant. “When I arrived, the atmosphere was extremely 
strange, but thank God I don’t speak Russian so I could not identify what was 
going right or wrong, and I felt that I was just diving into what I was doing,” 
Maillot says. “I think that is why something magical happened. Everybody at the 
Bolshoi, from technicians to dancers, felt that if this creation didn’t work 
something would somehow fall apart. I felt that everybody wanted to just let 
the beauty of our work speak.”

The work is certainly beautiful – and unusual for the Bolshoi in that it 
allows the personalities of the dancers in both first and second casts to 
shine. It is both contemporary and classical, with a strongly stylised setting 
and a small cast of soloists telling a modified and concentrated story, in 
which Bianca (Katherine’s sister) is not quite the good girl of the play. Quite 
by chance, Maillot chose dancers from two different groups in the company – 
those who wanted, and those who opposed, change. “Somehow in my innocence 
things happened and I think it helped them to heal.”

Olga Smirnova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/aug/18/bolshoi-jewels-olga-smirnova-review>
, who plays Bianca in the first cast, says: “We really felt we were part of the 
creative process and were very happy about the production. We felt it was ours 
– it gives us a lot of pleasure and happiness.”

As far as Maillot is concerned, the production marks the start of a 
collaboration that he hopes will continue. Filin’s contract as director was not 
renewed, but he is continuing to work with the Bolshoi, supervising aspiring 
choreographers. The new director, Makhar Vaziev, has confirmed another Maillot 
project for 2018.

“What is really special in the Bolshoi is how devoted the dancers are to what 
they do,” Maillot says. “It is so rare now. They live, they think, they eat 
ballet. For them there is nothing else. When they have two days free they go 
into a gala somewhere. They are obsessed with dancing. It is magnificent the 
way they give themselves, very unique.”

• The Taming of the Shrew is part of the Bolshoi Ballet’s season at the Royal 
Opera House, London WC2, from 25 July to 13 August.roh.org.uk 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/the-taming-of-the-shrew-by-jean-christophe-maillot>
.
 