
If you’ve ever planned a family hiking trip, you’ll know that such enterprises 
are often tricky. And tackling Slovakia’s High Tatra was definitely ambitious. 
I’d tried hard while in the UK to gather information from the web, but most of 
it was in Slovak and anyway it all depended on our capabilities, a factor I 
hardly knew how to explain. Maddy, 12, was adamant that she hated walking and 
loved only swimming; my partner, Sophie, liked walking, but hated the cold. I 
passed responsibility to a hiking agency in Slovakia and prayed they would 
understand.
Tatra Slovakia map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/travel_slovakia/giv-30080CSYpV6Lxbol3/>
Weeks later, we were in the Slovakian city of Poprad, gateway to the Tatra 
mountains, which rise abruptly to the north, intimidatingly massive and jagged. 
We were packing. I was trying to explain that every gram of unnecessary weight 
would be regretted, while playing down the challenges ahead. I did not mention, 
for example, that one 2,422-metre peak went by the name of Satan, nor that our 
ultimate goal, Rysy, was even higher. I had started to sound like a supermarket 
self-service checkout: “Unexpected item in bagging area!” From a pile of gear 
that would send shivers through a Sherpa, I pulled out a huge pink bottle. 
Sophie trembled. “You can’t expect me to go without moisturiser!” Our 
preparations took some time.

From Poprad a train service runs up to the Tatra’s skirts. There are small 
towns even closer to the mountains: Stary Smokovec and Tatranska Lomnica being 
the largest and best-placed. From the latter a cable car can even take you to 
over 2,600 metres, but I didn’t tell Maddy that.

We started at a trailhead called Biela Voda. We had, after much frank 
discussion, weeded our equipment down to three day packs – the huts would 
provide bedding and food. Three hours of gentle walking brought us to our first 
overnight stop: Zelenom hut, on the shores of a small lake and surrounded on 
three sides by towering peaks. On a sunny afternoon in August the place was 
heaving with walkers grabbing lunch, helpfully explained with a series of 
photos:kapustova, hearty cabbage soup, for example, and halusky, small potato 
dumplings covered in bacon and sheep’s cheese. Every hut also makes its own 
herbal tea,chai, from mountain herbs, and this was always excellent.

We had reserved beds that night, but some hikers were arriving in hope: the 
huts will always find a place, especially if the weather turns bad. Our first 
day had been easy, for which I offered up thanks to Lenka, who’d organised our 
route. There were no mutinies – yet.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fgreat-eastern-europe-road-trip-slovakia-high-tatra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441298018398%2Fcf18cfc3-879b-4db4-a805-fe07023fc1cc-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20eastern%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20five%3A%20Slovakia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fgreat-eastern-europe-road-trip-slovakia-high-tatra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20eastern%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20five%3A%20Slovakia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fgreat-eastern-europe-road-trip-slovakia-high-tatra%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441298018398%2Fcf18cfc3-879b-4db4-a805-fe07023fc1cc-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Zelenom Hut at dawn. 
At dawn the mountains were bathed in golden light, but cloud was rolling up 
from below by the time we tackled our first major ascent, to a 2,000-metre 
pass. We were in cloud and glad of waterproofs and warm jumpers (packed in 
drybags). This was also our first taste of relentlessly stony High Tatra 
footpaths – good boots are essential. There were sections where chains provided 
extra handholds, too. Lunch came at a ski station, then we yomped down to 
Zamkovskeho hut, an idyllic Swiss-style chalet just below the treeline. It was 
built in 1942 by pioneering local mountaineer Stefan Zamkovsky, who used it as 
a sanctuary for Jewish and political refugees in the second world war. He later 
fell foul of the communist authorities and was exiled. As with most of the 
huts, supplies are ferried in on foot by porters: some are professionals, but 
others are volunteers who earn a free cup of tea for their efforts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fgreat-eastern-europe-road-trip-slovakia-high-tatra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441298165749%2Ff7810ba4-e813-41e0-a95f-baa1f78dfff8-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20eastern%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20five%3A%20Slovakia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fgreat-eastern-europe-road-trip-slovakia-high-tatra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20eastern%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20five%3A%20Slovakia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fgreat-eastern-europe-road-trip-slovakia-high-tatra%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441298165749%2Ff7810ba4-e813-41e0-a95f-baa1f78dfff8-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Inside Swiss-style Zamkovskeho Hut 
Day three was an eight-hour tramp on the Tatranská Magistrála route, which 
gives fabulous views of the peaks above, all dramatically draped in torn 
curtains of cloud. The last few miles were a steady climb back up to 2,000 
metres, then a precipitous drop down to Popradske Pleso. Every hut, we were 
learning, has its own character, and this one, busy with school groups, was 
noisy and impersonal. We had other things to worry about: the weather was 
deteriorating and next day was supposed to be the big one: the ascent of Rysy.

At 6.30am we were up and eating breakfast – except Sophie, who was a bag of 
nerves. “There won’t be any chains will there? I don’t like the steep stuff 
with chains.”

Maddy, however, the non-walker, was finding her power, striding ahead when we 
set out, singing cheerfully to herself to the tune of Big Rock Candy Mountain: 
“In the Big Rock Tatra Mountains, the trails are made of rocks, and you can 
bust an ankle, and bleed right through your socks.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fgreat-eastern-europe-road-trip-slovakia-high-tatra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441298215828%2F34450ec1-b08c-4100-a9a1-9bf7f6ab8548-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20eastern%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20five%3A%20Slovakia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fgreat-eastern-europe-road-trip-slovakia-high-tatra%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20eastern%20European%20road%20trip%20part%20five%3A%20Slovakia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fsep%2F05%2Fgreat-eastern-europe-road-trip-slovakia-high-tatra%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F3%2F1441298215828%2F34450ec1-b08c-4100-a9a1-9bf7f6ab8548-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Maddy on top of Rysy, at 2,499m 
Rysy is one of the most popular big peaks in the area – it’s on the border 
with Poland and attracts hikers from both sides – but like all the summits it’s 
prone to extreme weather changes and high winds. There is a small hut with the 
promise of hot coffee 250 metres below the summit, a great motivating force. 
Just before it, however, there is one nasty section with chains and iron-hoop 
footholds. In sunshine this would not trouble most fit individuals, but we were 
in the clouds and buffeted by cold winds. A group of chamois skittered away 
from us, making it all look rather easy. We went slowly and reached the hut 
safely. With its massive tiled stove and friendly staff it would make a great 
overnight stop for a dawn ascent to magnificent panoramas, but for us the 
weather did not relent. The last climb was tricky, a search for the waymarks in 
dense cloud. Suddenly another hiker appeared. “The top is just there,” he 
shouted, and within a minute we had made it.

By 7pm that evening we were back in Poprad, watching Rysy soar out of the 
clouds, impossibly distant and unattainable. We had a real sense of achievement 
and next morning rewarded ourselves with a trip toAquacity 
<http://www.aquacityresort.com/>, a geothermal fun park. Maddy swam, but my 
knees insisted on a prolonged soak in the hot pool.

• The trip was provided by Travel Slovakia (+421 918 320908, travelslovakia.sk 
<http://www.travelslovakia.sk/>), which has a range of self-guided and guided 
walking tours in the High Tatra. A six-day self-guided hike between mountain 
huts costs from €376pp half-board, including briefing, maps and insurance. The 
Vysoke Tatry 2. 1:25000 (ISBN 978-80-8042-552-4) walking map is essential. It’s 
available locally but also tryAmazon  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Hohe-Tatra-2130-GPS-kompass/dp/3854913745/ref=pd_cp_14_2?ie=UTF8&refRID=0M3BAB5575W8ZC1Z77FN>
orStanfords 
<http://www.stanfords.co.uk/Activities-and-Interests/Walking/High-Tatras-25K_9783854913740.htm>
. For information on the 14 huts in the High Tatra and more, visit
vysoketatry.com <http://www.vysoketatry.com/>. Huts all have websites and can 
be booked by email or phone. Novasol (0845 680 5856,novasol.co.uk 
<http://www.novasol.co.uk/>) has 120 self-catering holiday homes in Slovakia 
and across central Europe from £239 a week
 