
By the time we disembark from the ferry at Zeebrugge, I’m wondering if our 
great European adventure is going to be sunless. The drab landscape is 
apparently hammered flat by cold rain. We turn south-east and drive all 
morning, until a horrible rattle from under the car starts just before the 
Luxembourg border.

The whole idea for this escapade came from a feeling that eastern and central 
Europe are a vast under-explored region – particularly by me. I’m more familiar 
with Papua New Guinea than Poland, or any one of a dozen other European 
countries. In a cold English spring I sketched out a plan for a massive summer 
road trip, an ambitious loop around the Balkans, then up through Europe as far 
as the Baltic. I calculated the distances – around 5,000 miles – and decided 
six weeks would be sufficient.

The route threw up immediate questions. Does British vehicle insurance cover 
Albania? Answer: normally, no. I switched companies. What other paperwork and 
equipment was required? Answer: lots. Green cards, vignettes,international 
driving permits (1949 convention) <http://www.theaa.com/getaway/idp/>, a fire 
extinguisher, a Croatian fishing licence and more. On the last shopping day 
before departure, I filled the car with an inflatable canoe and piles of 
outdoor gear. My wife Sophie and daughter Maddy (12) refused to allow a 
speargun, but compromised on the lobster pot.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438772445971%2Ff247ac8c-3093-4307-b032-8d2e199128ec-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20one%3A%20island%20hopping%20in%20Croatia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20one%3A%20island%20hopping%20in%20Croatia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438772445971%2Ff247ac8c-3093-4307-b032-8d2e199128ec-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Crossing the Alps on the Grossglockner High Alpine Road in Austria. 
Photograph: Kevin Rushby for the Guardian 
On that road near Luxembourg we discover that our car’s front trim is hanging 
off, but rattle on into Germany and spend a superb first night at Camping am 
See near Augsburg. The next day we wind up through the Alps, avoiding motorways 
and piercing the ghost of the iron curtain at the Wurzen Pass on the Austrian 
border before arriving at Slovenia’s Lake Bled.

The next day, still in heavy rain, we enter Croatia and the sun emerges. Our 
first stop isPag Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/may/15/croatia-festivals-music-beach-dj>
, which we reach via a ferry from the fishing port of Prizna. The queue for the 
ferry is massive and filled with young men high on Red Bull, beer and the rest. 
Pag, they tell us, is a party island. Sophie pulls me aside. “Aren’t you 
writing about the best, most secluded spots in Croatia?” I nod, a little 
nervously. I’m hoping my contacts are not mistaken.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438772694322%2F89f60e5f-cbcf-44b1-9b01-cffa24687022-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20one%3A%20island%20hopping%20in%20Croatia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20one%3A%20island%20hopping%20in%20Croatia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438772694322%2F89f60e5f-cbcf-44b1-9b01-cffa24687022-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A paški sir cheese factory in the village of Kolan, Pag island … most cheese 
there is still made in cottages. Photograph: Kevin Rushby for the Guardian 
Pag itself is like a bone: wind-dried and white. We leave the partygoers 
behind (they all head for the beaches around the town of Novalja) and find an 
elemental landscape with stirring views of an improbably blue sea. On every 
corner there is someone selling home-grown olive oil, liquors and cheese – 
home-produced shopping that is to prove one of the great pleasures of Croatia. 
We stock up onprošek (a thick sweet dessert wine), paški sir (the island’s own 
rich, salty sheep’s cheese) and olive oil, then locate Branimir, the owner of 
the cottage we are booked into. He adds to our shopping a bottle of his father’s
travarica, a spirit infused with 12 herbs, and takes us to a little stone 
cottage by the sea with a shady terrace and steps to a rocky shoreline.

We explore the coast by canoe and soon realise that selecting the “10 best 
beaches of Croatia”, as some websites do, is like picking the 10 best stars 
from the Milky Way. Everywhere we look there are perfect little coves and clear 
deep blue water speckled with schools of fish that are far too wily to be 
caught. At the northern end of the island we discover theancient olive groves 
of Lun <http://www.visitnovalja.hr/centuries-old-olive-grove>, a 24-hectare (60 
acre) labyrinthine marvel of curving stone walls and trees that date back an 
average of 1,200 years – one tree is 1,600 years old. Inevitably, there are 
perfect small coves for swimming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438773027942%2Fa5412834-02f5-4c66-bc8d-aba72a7a0782-2060x1364.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20one%3A%20island%20hopping%20in%20Croatia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20one%3A%20island%20hopping%20in%20Croatia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438773027942%2Fa5412834-02f5-4c66-bc8d-aba72a7a0782-2060x1364.jpeg>
 Sophie paddles along the shoreline of Pag island. Photograph: Kevin Rushby for 
the Guardian 
Croatia, you might think, has long been on the tourist radar. Back in 1964 
Alfred Hitchcock declared the sunsets from Zadar, south of Pag, the best on 
Earth. But the truth is that most visitors head for a few well-known spots, 
leaving many areas to be discovered. The north has some fantastic islands such 
as Rab (great sandy beaches and historic town), Cres (griffon vultures fly over 
this idyllic island) and Silba (not even bicycles are allowed to disturb the 
peace). Further south you could try Šolta or Vis, both accessible by ferry from 
Split. There are 47 inhabited islands – a further 671. The inflatable canoe, I 
declare to a sceptical family, is ready.

One evening Branimir invites us to a beach party at the secluded cove of 
Girenica, where we drink fine red wine from the Pelješac peninsula and eat 
grilled fish followed byfritules, sweet dumplings. A guitar appears and 
everyone sings Croatian songs which are, apparently, all about love or the sea. 
One of Branimir’s mates even fixes our car and when we move on, southwards, we 
don’t rattle any longer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438772920215%2Fe8890534-1326-40c2-9207-68727790e4c1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20one%3A%20island%20hopping%20in%20Croatia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20Eastern%20European%20road%20trip%2C%20part%20one%3A%20island%20hopping%20in%20Croatia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fgreat-european-road-trip-croatia-pag-island-zadar-neum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F5%2F1438772920215%2Fe8890534-1326-40c2-9207-68727790e4c1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 In good spirits … Branimir (third from left), host of House Tomislav and 
friends at Girenica Bay on Pag island. Photograph: Kevin Rushby for the Guardian
The Croatian mainland coast is 1,104 miles (1,777km) long and we cover a lot 
of it over the next few days. Island hopping with a car seems relatively 
simple: turn up at a port, buy a ticket and wait until there is space. Waiting 
was never so easy: you swim off the sea walls, picnic and shift the car when 
need be. On the island of Hvar, a lush contrast to Pag’s austere moonscape, we 
drive through a mile-long single-track tunnel and emerge to find the idyllic 
Kamp Lili campsite, a clutch of tents under shady pines with several coves to 
swim around.

There are few reminders of the Balkan war of the 1990s here, but there is a 
25km section of Bosnia-Herzegovina to negotiate before Croatia resumes. Here, 
in the town of Neum, the atmosphere is suddenly very different: ladies in stout 
swimwear lying in the shade of the bombed-out post office, a victim of Serbian 
army artillery. This tiny corridor of land was ceded to the Ottoman Empire in 
1699, a buffer between the independent city state of Dubrovnik and the then 
Venetian-controlled north. We push on south, back into Croatia, stopping 
briefly in stylishDubrovnik <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/dubrovnik>, 
then onwards, as I write, through Montenegro, heading for our next stop, 
Albania. The adventure is definitely under way.

• Ferry crossing was provided by P&O Ferries (Hull-Zeebrugge one way for a car 
plus two adults and one child, with cabin from £200,poferries.com 
<http://www.poferries.com/splash>). Accommodation on Pag island was provided by 
Croatia Tourism (croatia.hr <http://croatia.hr/en-GB/SummerIsHere>): House 
Tomislav can be booked through Adriagate (adriagate.com 
<http://www.adriagate.com/>) which has a range of cottages on the mainland and 
islands, some only accessible by boat, from £16pppn. Camping am See (tent and 
car £6, adults £5, children £3,bauer-caravan.de <http://www.bauer-caravan.de/>; 
Camping Bled (from £16 for tent plus two adults,sava-hotels-resorts.com <http:>
); Kamp Lili (£6 per adult, children £3, under three free, price includes tent 
and car,kamplili.hr <http://kamplili.hr/Home.aspx>). For information on 
Croatian ferries see (jadrolinija.hr/en/ferry-croatia 
<http://www.jadrolinija.hr/en/ferry-croatia>)

Books: Kevin read Rebecca West’s classic travelogue Black Lamb and Grey Falcon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/aug/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview2> 
which he says “is proving to be an astonishing companion, full of memorable 
images and quotations: ‘I had come to Yugoslavia to see what history meant in 
flesh and blood.’”
 