
I first went to Yellowstone national park, a huge area of wild country in the 
Rocky Mountains in Wyoming, in the winter of 1992, while learning how to film 
wildlife with my girlfriend (now wife) Mary-Lou. We had almost no money and, 
having found it was too cold to camp, self-catered by secretly cooking noodles 
in the shower of a motel room in Gardiner, Montana. Mary-Lou filmed elk and I 
filmed dippers in a geothermal river.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fyellowstone-national-park-winter-bbc-wildlife-john-aitchison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1875eed0215917bdb8f579e830253f8f05c979ba%2F0_409_1754_1052%2F1754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20glory%20of%20Yellowstone%20national%20park%20in%20winter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fyellowstone-national-park-winter-bbc-wildlife-john-aitchison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20glory%20of%20Yellowstone%20national%20park%20in%20winter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fyellowstone-national-park-winter-bbc-wildlife-john-aitchison%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1875eed0215917bdb8f579e830253f8f05c979ba%2F0_409_1754_1052%2F1754.jpg>
 John Aitchison. Photograph: Charlie Philips 
Nowhere in Yellowstone is lower than the top of Ben Nevis. Its many high peaks 
make a spectacular backdrop to meadows, forests, rivers and geothermal areas. 
The park is still home to the animals, including wolves and bison, that were 
there when the first Europeans arrived. I’ve spent about 12 weeks there in 
total, mostly in the winter, when it can be -20C or colder for days on end.

One of the most exciting natural events I have ever filmed was when heavy snow 
had isolated many elk in the beautiful Lamar Valley. The wolves chased one bull 
elk into a small river where he held them at bay, up to his belly in the water. 
The most experienced wolves knew to leave him there, as the water chilling his 
body would make him easier to catch. Each time the elk tried to leave, the 
wolves chased him back. In the end, he escaped into the forest.
 Bison in Lamar Valley. Photograph: Jouko van der Kruijssen/Getty Images 
National parks have been described as America’s greatest idea, and Yellowstone 
was the world’s first, opened in 1872. Conserving places for nature has never 
been more important. It really matters that there are still wild animals, 
living in wild places like this.

At Obsidian Cliff you can see a natural outcrop of black volcanic glass that 
Native Americans shaped into arrowheads

Entering the park is an adventure in itself. You can drive from Gardiner to 
Cooke City, along the only road to be kept open by snowplows, or you can ride 
in a snow coach (a quirky vintage vehicle, like a Citroën Dyane on tracks and 
skis) from West Yellowstone or Mammoth Hot Springs to the Old Faithful geyser. 
Either journey gives spectacular views and there’s a chance of seeing bison, 
coyotes, wolves, elk, trumpeter swans and otters. There are guided day trips by 
skidoo as well.

February is one of the best winter months for seeing wolves – it’s their 
breeding season so they move around more and sometimes that brings them close 
to the road. On still mornings or evenings, listen for wolves howling, one of 
the best sounds in nature.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fyellowstone-national-park-winter-bbc-wildlife-john-aitchison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa865dd81ec6f184139794f392d1adabf947f8c18%2F0_128_3946_2367%2F3946.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20glory%20of%20Yellowstone%20national%20park%20in%20winter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fyellowstone-national-park-winter-bbc-wildlife-john-aitchison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20glory%20of%20Yellowstone%20national%20park%20in%20winter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fyellowstone-national-park-winter-bbc-wildlife-john-aitchison%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa865dd81ec6f184139794f392d1adabf947f8c18%2F0_128_3946_2367%2F3946.jpg>
 There he blows … the Old Faithful geyser. Photograph: Mark Ralston/AFP/Getty 
Images 
In winter the geothermal areas look all the more impressive, when their hot 
water produces clouds of vapour. With fewer people then, too, you may only have 
to share Old Faithful with some bison standing in the steam to keep warm. The 
park’s largest waterfalls are mostly frozen and look spectacular, the spray 
freezing into complex shapes. Yellowstone Lake is a good place to find otters 
fishing in small holes in the ice.

Rocky mountain road trip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/may/19/rocky-mountain-road-trip-colorado-wyoming>
There is a good place to swim, even in winter, because Yellowstone sits on top 
of a super-volcano and has very hot water not far underground. Just inside the 
park’s northern entrance, the Gardiner River joins a smaller geothermal stream. 
You can float with one hand in water that’s almost too hot to touch, and the 
other icy cold. For the slightly less adventurous, there is the outdoorChico 
Hot Spring Pool <http://www.chicohotsprings.com/>, at Pray, between Livingston 
and Gardiner. It has a restaurant and bar. AtObsidian Cliff 
<http://www.nps.gov/yell/learn/historyculture/obsidiancliff.htm> you can see a 
natural outcrop of black volcanic glass that Native Americans shaped into 
arrowheads.

I took my kids to Yellowstone when they were six, eight and 10. My son loved 
spending the night with me in a quinzee we’d made. A quinzee is a kind of 
igloo, built by piling snow on to rucksacks covered by a groundsheet. Once the 
snow had frozen in position, we pulled the bags out through a hole and crawled 
inside. It was -30C that night, but we were snug and happy inside our sleeping 
bags, in the small space warmed by our body heat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fyellowstone-national-park-winter-bbc-wildlife-john-aitchison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa38f0adb3cec6578262a366aeebc16d1c9ef1c09%2F0_39_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20glory%20of%20Yellowstone%20national%20park%20in%20winter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fyellowstone-national-park-winter-bbc-wildlife-john-aitchison%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20glory%20of%20Yellowstone%20national%20park%20in%20winter&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Fyellowstone-national-park-winter-bbc-wildlife-john-aitchison%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa38f0adb3cec6578262a366aeebc16d1c9ef1c09%2F0_39_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Chico Hot Springs, Yellowstone. Photograph: Kene Sperry 
Much of the accomodation closes in the autumn and winter. The Old Faithful 
Snow Lodge 
<http://www.yellowstonenationalparklodges.com/lodging/winter-lodges/old-faithful-snow-lodge-cabins/>
, in the Upper Geysir Basin, is wonderfully located but quite expensive. More 
affordable cabins can be booked through theNational Park Service website 
<http://www.yellowstonenationalparklodges.com/lodging/winter-lodges/>. There is 
another winter lodge and cabins atMammoth Hot Springs 
<http://www.yellowstonenationalparklodges.com/lodging/winter-lodges/mammoth-hot-springs-cabins/>
, as well as self-catering cabins, a hotel and some guesthouses in or near 
Cooke City and Silver Gate. Yellowstone Expeditions runs ayurt camp 
<http://www.yellowstoneexpeditions.com/html/camp/yurt_camp.html>.

US road trip: a guide to Route 66
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/feb/28/us-road-trip-route-66> 
Jackson Hole <http://www.jacksonhole.com/>, Wyoming, lies south of the park, 
with the spectacularGrand Teton national park 
<http://www.nps.gov/grte/index.htm> in between. It’s an interesting town, home 
to lots of wildlife galleries and a museum, as well as the ski resort. On the 
outskirts, there is arefuge for the many elk <http://www.nps.gov/grte/index.htm>
 that migrate out of the parks in winter. You can move among them in a 
horse-drawn sleigh.

• John Aitchison’s The Shark and the Albatross: Travels with a Camera to the 
Ends of the Earth is published by Profile Books, £17.99. To order a copy for 
£14.39 including UK p&p visitguardian bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323547/> or call on 
0330 333 6846
 