
EIGHTIES BARÇA OR MODERN BARÇA: WHICH IS BEST? 

Twenty-five years ago is, by any common metric, a very long time. Back then, 
Big Cup was known as the European Champion Clubs Cup. The Queen’s Celtic had 
won it more times than Barcelona. Indeed, the Catalan giants were mainly famous 
for throwing hands, launching absurd two-footed lunges, missing quite a lot of 
penalties, and losing all the time to Dundee United. But time passes, money 
gets spent, and things change. The world is now totally jiggered, competitive 
football isn’t in much better nick, and neither are the Queen’s Celtic. 
Barcelona, meanwhile, keep winning Big Cup every other year. They’re pretty 
good to watch, to be fair, though in The Fiver’s book, 90 minutes of 
predictably one-sided tiki-taka is beaten every time by a donnybrook 
culminating in a studs-first high-kick to the chest. Oh for it to be 1983 all 
over again.

Luis Enrique gives Lionel Messi to Manchester City rumours short shrift
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/luis-enrique-lionel-messi-manchester-city-barcelona-celtic>
Anyway, it’s not, and on Wednesday night the Queen’s Celtic have to try and 
somehow forget memories of September just gone, when they suffered a 
club-record 7-0 defeat at Camp Nou. They face Nice New Barça again at Parkhead, 
and will be hoping that Lionel Messi, who scored a brilliant hat-trick in that 
thumping win, has had an uncomfortable time sleeping in the woods, which is 
where he spent Tuesday night if the current wild state of his beard is any 
measure. For the record, the needle on our Fungus-o-meter has gone past the 
Designer Stubble, Noel Edmonds, Hipster and Al Fresco Buckfast Consumer 
readings, and is nudging dangerously close to Craig Levein When Scotland Were 
Doing Particularly Badly. We’re worried about him, reader.

The Queen’s Celtic might also take succour in the fact that Neymar’s mind may 
be elsewhere. Spanish prosecutors have called for the Brazilian striker to be
banged in the slammer for a couple of years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/spain-public-prosecutor-calls-neymar-prison-sentence-two-years>
 for his part in his allegedly corrupt transfer from Santos in 2013. The 
details are far too boring to go into here, and no we’re not just saying that 
because we can hardly decipher a till receipt from the Co-op, never mind a 
complex tax return. But he’ll be up before the beak soon enough if Judge José 
Perals has his way. Not that Brendan Rodgers is taking anything for granted. 
“No matter who plays, we know Barcelona are a very good side,” says the coach 
whose recent record against Spanish opposition is played three, lost three, 
scored none, conceded 11. Here’s hoping the Bhoys can bhuck that pitiful trend 
and record a shock victory. Or at the very least start a memorable 
bench-emptying brouhaha, in the style of Old Barça. Either is fine by us.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Jacob Steinberg from 7.45pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of Arsenal 1-1 PSG, 
while Scott Murray will be at the tiller for Borussia Mönchengladbach 2-1 
Manchester City, and Bryan Graham for the Queen’s Celtic 1-3 Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“We sometimes laughed on the bench. It reminded me of funfair football. One 
more ride, who wants to score, who has not scored yet?” – Dortmund’s Michael 
Zorc on his team’s Big Cup record8-4 shellacking of Legia Warsaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/champions-league-roundup-borussia-dortmund-legia-warsaw>
. To go with their 6-0 win in the first game.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fthe-fiver-queens-celtic-barcelona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03e8a9fc326cbdd33b0da10b52395d1abc471115%2F355_38_3357_2413%2F3357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20The%20world%20is%20now%20totally%20jiggered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fthe-fiver-queens-celtic-barcelona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20The%20world%20is%20now%20totally%20jiggered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fthe-fiver-queens-celtic-barcelona%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03e8a9fc326cbdd33b0da10b52395d1abc471115%2F355_38_3357_2413%2F3357.jpg>
 We’d 8-4 you to be using the obvious. Photograph: Action Press/Rex/Shutterstock
FIVER LETTERS

“As a reader from USA! USA!! USA!!! I was surprised to learn on Monday that 
the men’s soccerball team was sure to qualify for Big Kerfuffle 2018 in Russia. 
1,000% sure, no less. However, The Fiver could not see that our comeback in 
form would be without trusty Jurgen Klinsmann at the switch. Today, though, we 
learned that my home country will be treated to a footballing Bruce 
Arenaissance as we mow down powerhouse Honduras. Who could possibly forget what 
many consider the gaffer’s ‘signature game’, the 2002 draw to South Korea? Or 
the cagey Italian own goal, making up half of the team’s offense for the 2006 
tournament? Or his eye candy 7-3-0 attacking formation? It’s a brand new day 
here, and good riddance to those fancypants European ideas, we’ll make American 
football great again” – Thad Brown.


“Re: Mark Harwood not wanting to wreck something of value while reading The 
Fiver in disgust (yesterday’s Fiver letters), may I suggest to him that hard 
copies of articles are generally found in actual newspapers, which are easily 
disposed of in anger. However, unfortunately for Mark, even Big Paper has 
enough good taste to not print The Fiver. As you were, Mark” – Travis Giblin.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
letter o’the day isThad Brown, who receives a copy of Football Manager 2017 
<http://www.footballmanager.com/games/football-manager-2017> from those good 
people at Football Manager Towers, and it’s out now! We’ve got a couple of 
copies left to give away, so if you want one, get busy writing.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

José Mourinho’s bid to inject more pace into his Manchester United side has 
continued with the club taking up its optionto extend Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s 
contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/manchester-united-extend-zlatan-ibrahimovic-contract>
 for a further year; since signing for the club, Ibrahimovic has notched a 
whopping eight goals in 17 appearances. “He is happy, he’s committed and he is 
loving his life as a football player at Manchester United,” cheered Mourinho of 
one of the world’s best-paid players.


After Spurs’ early exit from Big Cup, Mauricio Pochettino has been taking 
stock. “Maybe we need to add more quality in the squad,” he tooted, remaining 
curiously silent as tohis own role in the abject failure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/mauricio-pochettino-change-spurs-monaco-champions-league>
. “We have quality, yes, to compete in the Premier League but, today, you could 
say we struggled a little bit. When you have problems, injuries, it is 
difficult to be competitive.” Curiously, he was less loquacious on the subject 
of resting key players for key games.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fthe-fiver-queens-celtic-barcelona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff88d7e1f198bc22bcb442e281fc4a721fa478484%2F0_0_4194_2796%2F4194.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20The%20world%20is%20now%20totally%20jiggered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fthe-fiver-queens-celtic-barcelona%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20The%20world%20is%20now%20totally%20jiggered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fthe-fiver-queens-celtic-barcelona%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff88d7e1f198bc22bcb442e281fc4a721fa478484%2F0_0_4194_2796%2F4194.jpg>
 Fresh players, out of shot. Photograph: Valery Hache/AFP/Getty Images 
Gareth Bale has knacked his ankle, with Real Madrid declaring: “He has been 
diagnosed with a traumatic dislocation of the peroneal tendons.”

Meanwhile, He has been holding court on the subject of Portugal’s European 
Championship win. “I had the feeling of doing a specific job, because the 
players see me more as a leader, someone who helps them and protects them,” he 
said of his shouting, huffing and gesticulating.

Despite the rumours, there will be no hilarious joking about Robbie Keane 
having supported Shamrock Rovers since childhood. “So many people asking if 
we’re moving back to Ireland,” tweeted his wife, Claudine. “We will be home for 
Christmas, but not for long, maybe in a few years from now.”

And Welsh FA suits are seething after Fifa’s fashion police charged them over 
fans wearing poppies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/welsh-football-association-charged-fifa-spectators-wearing-poppies>
 in the crowd at last week’s game against Serbia.

STILL WANT MORE?

Great things were tipped for Tony Watt after his famous winner for the Queen’s 
Celtic against Barcelona in 2012. But it hasn’t quite worked out for the 
striker, now at Hearts,reports Ewan Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/tony-watt-demise-celtic-teen-barcelona-2012>
.

David Hytner on where it went wrong for Spurs in Big Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/23/why-tottenham-failed-champions-league>
.

He’s dreamy, he’s talented, he misses too many big chances in big games. Paul 
Doyle looks at theEdinson Cavani conundrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/23/edinson-cavani-psg-arsenal>
 as the PSG striker rolls into town to face Arsenal in Big Cup.

Goals! Goals! Goals! From Marco Reus to the Milan derby to Toni Duggan – our 
roundup of this week’s most spectacular strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/best-goals-week-marco-reus-robin-van-persie>
.

Do three home draws prove Manchester United really are the unluckiest team in 
the Premier League, as José keeps complaining/mind-gaming?Paul Wilson is 
sceptical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/23/manchester-united-jose-mourinho-arsenal-burnley-stoke-draws>
.

And this week’s Knowledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/which-players-and-referees-have-been-confused-by-penalty-rebounds>
 looks at players and referees being flummoxed by penalty rebounds, among other 
items of exquisite nerdery.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>

IF YOU’RE GOING TO SCORE IN OFF THE POST, MAY AS WELL DO IT FROM DOWNTOWN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/23/barnets-joe-barnet-score-spectacular-goal-from-halfway-line-video>
 