
It is hard to anticipate whether Turkey’s unprecedented military incursion 
into Syria this week will change the dynamics of the multiple wars that have 
ravaged the region and put civilians through hell. If things already seemed 
complicated in the Middle East, they may have just become even more so. What 
started on Wednesday ranks as the largest Turkish military operation inside 
Syrian territory since the civil war began five years ago. A dozen tanks, 
reportedly followed by a bus transporting Syrian rebels, rolled into northern 
Syria to drive Islamic State forces fromthe town of Jarablus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/24/turkey-and-us-unite-to-oust-isis-curb-kurds-syria>
, one of their last footholds on the Turkish-Syrian border. Today Turkey sent 
more tanks in and told the YPG Kurdish armed group it had one week to retreat 
from the border areas.

Western anti-Isis coalition forces facilitated Operation Euphrates Shield with 
air strikes. It came days after a terrorist attack killed 54 people at a 
Kurdish wedding in Gaziantep, close to the Syrian border – highlighting both 
how exposedTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> has become to the 
insurgency and the multiple pressures the Kurds face.

Although Turkey carried out this operation with US back-up, its priority – 
evident in other recent foreign manoeuvrings, such as detente with Russia and 
overtures to the Syrian president,having previously urged him to quit 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-turkey-syria-idUSTRE7AL0WJ20111122> – is to 
curtail the territorial ambitions of Kurdish combatants, some of which happen 
to be US proxies in the war against Isis. Turkey is in effect deploying forces 
in Syria with US support, with the aim of pushing back Kurdish groups that the 
US also supports. The US has equipped and trained local forces to fight Isis, 
under the label “Syrian Democratic Forces”. They are dominated by Kurds, but 
include anti-Assad rebels. Nuances easily get lost: united against Isis, these 
groups are less so when it comes to confronting Bashar al-Assad’s forces. 
Little noticed in Aleppo’s plight is the fact that Syrian Kurdish fighters have 
played no small role in the siege of the city. The YPG has been more of a 
problem for the Syrian opposition than for the Assad regime.

Turkey’s advance now puts these Kurdish groups under pressure, especially 
given its warming relations with Russia. Moscow may have qualms about Kurdish 
groups working tightly with the US and its protest against Turkey’s move into 
Syria may have less to do with protecting the Kurds than keeping the upper hand 
in Syria’s quagmire. As the Jarablus operation unfolded, US vice-president Joe 
Biden was in Ankara to attempt to woo Turkey back from Russia. Relations 
between the US and its Nato ally have been fraught sinceJuly’s coup attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/turkey-coup-attempt-military-ankara-istanbul>
, but getting them back on track now seems a shared objective. So, having used 
Kurdish forces totake Manbij 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/12/isis-kidnaps-human-shields-manbij-syria>
 andstalk Raqqa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/us-military-photos-syria-soldiers-fighting-isis>
, Mr Biden warned the YPG to move back across the Euphrates or lose US support.

Syria is racked by multiple wars in which protagonists claiming to share 
common goals pursue their own distinct priorities. Turkey is part of the 
anti-IS coalition but wants to fight Kurdish militants in Syria as it does the 
PKK in its own south-eastern regions. Its role has shrunk from active 
intervention on multiple fronts to more narrowly defending its border. Even the 
renewed enthusiasm for Syrian rebels is not about toppling Mr Assad, but 
ensuring that theKurds <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kurds> do not prop 
him up. Russia claims its military involvement is all about combatting Isis but 
has done much more to ensure the survival of the Assad regime. Syrian Kurdish 
groups have been “recruited” by the US against Isis, but their ultimate goal is 
to carve out an autonomous region. Anti-Assad revolutionaries have all along 
wanted to get rid of a dictatorship but are increasingly associated with 
radical Islamist groups, largely for a desperate lack of other options. The US 
has prioritised bombing Isis but at the expense of forging a solution to 
Syria’s civil war, which has helped Isis grow. With its tanks, Turkey has 
played one more card in a multi-pronged war that has created immense suffering 
and has no end in sight.
 