
Miami in five words

Voracious, steamy, between two worlds.


The sound of the city?

Forget about the headlines of politicians doing this or that - it’s the Cuban 
mamacitas that really run this city. Without them, we literally couldn’t 
function - they make ourcafecitos, they remind us of what’s important, they 
give us the love that glues us all together. The musical sounds of their 
interactions are all around us, all the time.


Everyone’s tuned into … 

Alicia Menendez <http://fusion.net/show/alicia-menendez-tonight/>. She’s 
smart, classy, direct – and gives voice to a lot of things we want to talk 
about.

The place to be?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Finsider-cultural-guide-miami-beach-flashy-trashy-hot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432735470119%2F2ec1f8b6-a55e-486e-8ea9-c6243d42337d-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20cultural%20guide%20to%20Miami%3A%20Flashy%2C%20classy%20and%20hot!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Finsider-cultural-guide-miami-beach-flashy-trashy-hot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20cultural%20guide%20to%20Miami%3A%20Flashy%2C%20classy%20and%20hot%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Finsider-cultural-guide-miami-beach-flashy-trashy-hot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F27%2F1432735470119%2F2ec1f8b6-a55e-486e-8ea9-c6243d42337d-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Vagabond Hotel poolside bar - an oasis of haute chill. Photograph: Dalia 
Lagoa 
The poolside bar of the Vagabond Hotel <http://www.thevagabondhotel.com/> in 
Mimo/Little River is a fresh new spot to hear live music and DJs on the rise, 
from both local and visiting talent passing through Magic City. When the sun 
goes down, the retro-luxe mid-century modern bandshell features Latin Beats on 
Thursdays, Rewind old skool Fridays, Saturday Vagabond Vibes and Sunday Jazz to 
bring the weekend to a close. The sounds float out across the pool and into the 
night sky, toward the bar/lounge area, which pairs nicely with the creativity 
of the mixologists. This former Biscayne Boulevard no-tell motel has been 
transformed into an oasis of haute chill, a truly stunning makeover.

Musician of the moment?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIipHc__z9-M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIipHc__z9-M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIipHc__z9-M&media=>
 Nelson O’s ‘Bacharengue’ 
Nelson O is the only Miami <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/miami> 
musician that I listen to every single day. Of course, it helps that he is my 
life partner, so it’s the soundtrack of our home. His music is infectious, 
happy-go-lucky, energetic, Dominican, bouncy – a lot of my favorite things.

Favourite local artist ?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbwu1XfqlTgE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbwu1XfqlTgE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbwu1XfqlTgE&media=>
 A teaser trailer for ‘Dolphin Lover’ 
Kareem Tabsch and Joey Daoud are making offbeat, daring short documentaries on 
some of our strangest and most eclectic south Floridian characters. Miami can 
be right up there with LA or Vegas for bragging rights to the kookiest and the 
weirdest. Last year Tabsch/Daoud brought usCherry Pop: The Story of the World’s 
Fanciest Cat <http://www.coffeeandcelluloidproductions.com/project/cherry-pop/> 
and this year they’ve leapt right into the deep end with Dolphin Lover, about 
one Florida man’s conjugal interspeciesrelationship with a dolphin 
<http://www.coffeeandcelluloidproductions.com/project/dolphin-lover/>. These 
shorts juxtapose the animal kingdom with our own animal instincts, and ask us 
to examine how deeply subliminal the latter can be in each of us.

What’s the style on the street … or beach?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Finsider-cultural-guide-miami-beach-flashy-trashy-hot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432898846651%2Feadbcf49-2896-4d92-acc7-0ae2c398cbd0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20insider's%20cultural%20guide%20to%20Miami%3A%20Flashy%2C%20classy%20and%20hot!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Finsider-cultural-guide-miami-beach-flashy-trashy-hot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20insider%27s%20cultural%20guide%20to%20Miami%3A%20Flashy%2C%20classy%20and%20hot%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2015%2Fjun%2F01%2Finsider-cultural-guide-miami-beach-flashy-trashy-hot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F29%2F1432898846651%2Feadbcf49-2896-4d92-acc7-0ae2c398cbd0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gino Campodonico moonlights as a Miami fashion blogger. Photograph: Jipsy/The 
Mannequin Party 
For men, I’d look to Gino Campodonico 
<https://instagram.com/p/0sKQrcu_gr/?taken-by=ginocampodonico>, and for women, 
I’d go withGinger Harris 
<https://instagram.com/p/2E7wAkgr17/?taken-by=gingerharris>. Both of them 
capture the essential Miami need to literally keep cool while looking cool. 
Light and breezy are the ways to work it.


Comedy gold

Pepe Billete 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2QtF8F73CHI&index=1&list=PLlcLtAqgix8GbPRt8ybXNvAK969oNod0d>
 is just so wrong in so many ways, but the crude and rude Hialeah puppet that 
lampoons every outsized dinosaur cliche of the #305 has a huge following.

Best Instagram account?

Shayna Batya’s eye is incredible, not just for what she sees (she picks out 
soulful details many of us would pass by) but for her incredible compositions. 
She has a deep love and respect for this city’s many characters.


The big talking point?


The cascade of changes in Cuba-US relations over the past five months has 
really been a lot to process, and as the changes begin to come even more 
rapidly, they’ll continue to be a topic of conversation for everyone. Miami is 
ground zero for the Cuban émigré community that left after the revolution, and 
they are by far the biggest population group in our city. Right now there are 
just a lot of emotions to process, much anger and many regrets to reconcile, 
and much intergenerational conversation and compassion taking place. We’re 
figuring it out.

What does Miami do better than anyone?


Combine the high and the low. The locals here have a term-of-endearment 
expression … “It’s SO Miami”. This is basically used every time you see 
something really flashy, expensive or high quality combined with something 
cheap, simple and basic – that anywhere else would be incompatible but in Miami 
is totally normal. Like when you see someone decked out in fantastic, gorgeous 
fashion – with a 99-cent pair ofchancletas (flip-flops) for footwear. Or you 
see a Ferrari going through a Pollo Tropical (inexpensive Latin fast food chain 
restaurant) drive-thru. It’s part of the giddy fun of living in this place.

Best piece of street art?
 A section of Purvis Young’s mural in Gibson Park Photograph: Jaie Laplante 
This is a detail from the late Purvis Young’s mural in Gibson Park covering an 
entire wall of the Overtown/Culmer public library. It’s actually from 1991, but 
was completely restored in 2012 by Addonis Parker, so I’m counting it as 
recent. Trendy street art comes and goes, but Purvis’ work has an enduring 
impact – a symbol of transforming troubled emotions into hope in a complicated 
neighbourhood . This piece calls for community, freedom and solidarity.


Big cultural moment?



Art Basel  
<http://www.e-flux.com/announcements/successful-premiere-of-art-basel-miami-beach/>
establishing a Miami Beach outpost in 2002 raised the bar for Miami artists 
from numerous disciplines, not just the visual arts. It was an inspirational 
moment that brought a heady array of top international work to our city. The 
effect was, I think, to give all working in the cultural field new heights of 
aspiration. I’ve seen all kinds of exciting art, film and music mushroom since 
2002. Art is a transformational force, and I’ve seen it smooth out a lot of 
Miami’s troubles over the past decade.

From me
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FeKu3qFDutD3&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FeKu3qFDutD3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2FeKu3qFDutD3&media=>
Jaie Laplante is director of Miami Dade College’s Miami International Film 
Festival <https://www.facebook.com/MiamiFilmFestival>, currently celebrating 
its 33rd season. Follow him on@jaieinmiami <https://twitter.com/jaieinmiami>

Five to follow


World Red Eye <http:// https://instagram.com/worldredeye/>


New Tropic Miami <https://twitter.com/newtropicmiami> 

Tropicult <https://www.facebook.com/Tropicult> 

Miami Street Art  <http://miamistreetart.tumblr.com/>

Elastic Bond <https://soundcloud.com/elastic-bond> 
 