
With so many new dining and socialising options emerging, especially in major 
cities, the hotel industry has got its work cut out trying to lure external 
customers into its restaurants and bars.


Coupled with the need to maximise the profitability of its communal areas, 
this is what sparked a bold idea at Marriott International: what if 
entrepreneurs – experimental foodies and bar visionaries – could be enticed to 
transform unused corners of its hotels into something edgy and different that 
might attract a new crowd?

The resulting Canvas Project – a food and beverage talent incubator – has now 
entered its second year, with the launch of rooftop bar and restaurant Notch at 
London’s Marriott Park Lane hotel.

There you can try Japanese street food and homemade cocktails in cans, which 
take inspiration from the millennial hotspots of Brooklyn and Berlin. Designed 
as a sky-high industrial playground for adults, Notch mixes reclaimed school 
tables, scaffolding and swings with a vibrant bar and open kitchen, Fudo Shack.

Notch has taken the baton from the site’s previous pop-up, Roofnic, which 
turned over a profitable £500,000 during its three-month summer run last year. 
The same man, Ashley Dawes, is responsible for both. Originally the general 
manager of Marriott Park Lane’s main restaurant and bar, his execution of 
Roofnic was so successful that he left to set up a restaurant and bar 
consultancy,DenLDN <http://www.denldn.com/>. 

The idea for Canvas Project came out of a company brainstorming event, where 
managers were encouraged to reconsider Marriott’s global restaurant and bar 
strategy. “Rather than take the traditional ‘We know best’ approach, we wanted 
to see what would happen if we started from the ground up, the idea being that 
we would learn from the entrepreneurs,” explains Ed Viita, director of food and 
beverage at Marriott Europe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fpop-ups-made-hotel-revenues-go-sky-high%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F771d7a09cc323cf770be5931383bfa7948808003%2F811_901_3756_2254%2F3756.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20pop-ups%20that%20made%20hotel%20revenues%20go%20sky%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fpop-ups-made-hotel-revenues-go-sky-high%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20pop-ups%20that%20made%20hotel%20revenues%20go%20sky%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fpop-ups-made-hotel-revenues-go-sky-high%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F771d7a09cc323cf770be5931383bfa7948808003%2F811_901_3756_2254%2F3756.jpg>
 Colourful cocktails on offer at Notch. Photograph: Gregory Davies 
Moving away from the standard hotel restaurant and bar experience would enable 
Marriott to appeal to a new demographic, attracting locals as well as guests 
staying in the hotel. “One of the most common questions to our concierges is 
where the locals eat,” Viita notes. “Our aim was to become that place.”

Following the 2014 brainstorm, teams were sent away to develop four “concept 
labs” for launch the following year. Viita took his own inspiration from 
Europe’s popular pop-ups and street food ventures.

“The model is completely open to interpretation; there are no restrictions,” 
Viita says. Once a location has been identified, internal staff and local 
entrepreneurs are invited to pitch their ideas. The creator of each winning 
concept is offered a minimal budget – typically£35,000 per project – to build 
and develop the restaurant or bar.

Park Lane’s Roofnic is held up as the big success story. Taking inspiration 
from British music festivals such as Latitude and Bestival, Dawes took an 
unused roof terrace and transformed it into a rustic garden, with simple wooden 
benches, folding garden furniture and affordable prices. The summer bar often 
had queues down the street and was selling 1,000 cocktails a day.

Then came St Pancras MI+ME, an urban cheese and charcuterie bar at London’s St 
Pancras Renaissance Hotel, targeted at travellers. At Marriott’s Courtyard 
Berlin hotel, the #Hashtag Coffee Shop serves comfort food with a local twist, 
such as baked potatoes served with curry wurst and doner kebab.

In Budapest, Marriott has partnered with a local entrepreneur, Imre Toth, to 
create the Marionett Craft Beer House. Toth launched his concept within two 
months of being selected. If a project is working well, Marriott allows the 
outlet to continue to operate, and the Marionett Craft Beer House has now been 
running for 10 months.

So how does the model work for both parties? All intellectual property related 
to the concept such as name, logo and trademarks remain the property of the 
entrepreneur, Viita notes. The percentage of the profits the entrepreneur 
receives is negotiated on an individual basis. In February, Toth renegotiated 
his contract and started paying rent and now receives a larger share of the 
profits.

If the entrepreneur is operating the pop-up, there is an expectation that they 
will devote their energy to the success of the project. “However, we also 
partner with entrepreneurs as consultants,” Viita notes, pointing to the new 
relationship with Dawes, who branched out on his own but set up Notch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fpop-ups-made-hotel-revenues-go-sky-high%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6db8ed94a3722bc0ae079fa83f9fe6a9d6ca412%2F559_592_1562_937%2F1562.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20pop-ups%20that%20made%20hotel%20revenues%20go%20sky%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fpop-ups-made-hotel-revenues-go-sky-high%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20pop-ups%20that%20made%20hotel%20revenues%20go%20sky%20high&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fpop-ups-made-hotel-revenues-go-sky-high%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6db8ed94a3722bc0ae079fa83f9fe6a9d6ca412%2F559_592_1562_937%2F1562.jpg>
 Ashley Dawes: a man with a rooftop plan. 
For Dawes, working externally has enabled him to get his name out in the wider 
market and be paid for his ideas. He describes the Canvas Project as the 
opportunity he had been waiting for. “The idea came through on a company email 
when I was working at Marriott. It looked great, and the guys behind it were 
very enthusiastic,” he says.

Roofnic offered a fun time at non-Mayfair prices, setting it apart from 
Windows, the premium bar and restaurant at the top of the Park Lane Hilton. 
“Before we took over the rooftop space, there was nothing there – it was 
concrete, there was no electricity. We opened in eight weeks, and take-up was 
epic from day one.”

He left once the season finished, taking a well-earned holiday. With his new 
consultancy business up and running, he started on Notch in March, opening it 
on 1 May. Within two months it had a reach of 875,000 people across social 
media.

Running his own ship has improved the rewards. As an internal employee, Dawes 
had only really received a ‘token’ for his hard work, he says. “That side of 
things didn’t really work out,” he says, of whether he received a big bonus.

“But it was an opportunity to show what I could do. I’m doing some work for 
Marriott in LA at the moment – the company will always be a big partner. 
They’ve led the way: they came up with a great idea and have seen it through, 
in a market where it can be hard to make change.”

How Cape Town's tech entrepreneurs are solving problems for small business
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jul/12/cape-towns-tech-entrepreneurs-solving-problems-for-small-business>
The figures stand up to scrutiny. Worldwide, Marriott launched 10 of 17 
proposed Canvas projects last year, investing just over $300,000 (£230,000) and 
achieving top-line revenues of nearly $2m (£1.5m). Low start-up costs and high 
turnaround mean revenues are delivered quickly and profitably. This year, to 
date, Marriott launched 12 additional projects globally – with more in the 
pipeline. In Europe, Canvas has delivered the new audience Marriott was looking 
for: 75% of customers have been millennials, exceeding the target. Over 60% are 
locals.

“In culinary hotspots like London, the appetite for new and fresh ideas is 
strong and pop-ups are a great solution,” says Peter Ducker, chief executive at 
the Institute of Hospitality. “This is a brave move from Marriott: they are at 
the front of the curve and should be applauded.

“One major drawback of pop-up facilities though is that the workload can be 
equal to opening a permanent restaurant. If you’re including a new kitchen from 
scratch, you still need all the same regulatory compliance. But working through 
a company as well-resourced as Marriott should make life easier.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 