
9-year-old Trisha McFarland goes on a hike with her mother and older brother. 
Along the way her mother is constantly arguing with her older brother. Trisha 
is sick of listening to them, so she wanders off from the path to have some 
privacy. Then she realizes that she needs to pee so she goes even further into 
the forest. She thinks that as long as she can hear the voices of other 
tourists she can’t get lost, but that turns out to be a huge mistake. As she is 
going back to the path she realizes that she has got no idea where she is, so 
she starts looking for the right way, but she goes even further into the deep 
forest.

That is when her fight for survival starts. With only a little source of food 
and water, she tries to survive in the forest. The only company she has is a 
walkman radio on which she listens to her favourite baseball team, the Red Sox. 
Will it be enough for her to survive in a forest where something dangerous is 
hiding in the shadows, watching her every move as it wants to rip her throat 
apart.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-girl-who-loved-tom-gordon-stephen-king-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd1f845098c5132bac81652f0edce50f5a6fda0%2F0_0_650_984%2F650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Girl%20Who%20Loved%20Tom%20Gordon%20by%20Stephen%20King%20-%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-girl-who-loved-tom-gordon-stephen-king-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Girl%20Who%20Loved%20Tom%20Gordon%20by%20Stephen%20King%20-%20review&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2016%2Fmar%2F07%2Fthe-girl-who-loved-tom-gordon-stephen-king-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdd1f845098c5132bac81652f0edce50f5a6fda0%2F0_0_650_984%2F650.jpg>
This book is one of my favourite books written by Stephen King. The thing that 
I like about this book is that it makes you feel like you are the one in the 
forest fighting for survival. I never thought that a book could scare me this 
much. You know that kind of book when you just one to rip the page off, because 
of all the thrill that is going on in it? Well than this is that kind of book. 
If you are a fan of mystery, thriller or horror than put everything down and go 
read this book.


• Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/girl-who-loved-tom-gordon.html>

Want to tell the world about a book you’ve read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 