Timeline 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/middletown-timeline/embed.html>
From the vantage point of the second floor of Chris Hiatt’s print shop, the 
prospects for Donald Trump’s presidential campaign do not look so bad. Every 
two weeks theCitizens of Delaware County for Good Government 
<http://www.forgoodgovernment.com/>, a conservative group, meets here primarily 
to discuss campaigning on local issues.

Nationally Hillary Clinton is ahead in most polls 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/latest_polls/elections/>; regionally 
they suggest she is mounting a challenge in states such asUtah, Georgia and 
even Texas 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/card/clinton-campaign-makes-play-arizona-buys-ads-texas-n667706>
, where Democrats haven’t won in decades;early voting 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/10/what-the-early-voting-numbers-are-telling-us.html>
 is on balance looking promising for the DNC. But when I ask the 12 people in 
the room how many still think he has a shot, they nearly all raise their hands.


{{atom}}

A reader of this project suggested I contact Hiatt, who told me: “I don’t 
necessarily think the polls are rigged. But I think there’s a hidden vote and 
people are giving the PC answer they think people want to hear rather than how 
they’ll actually be inclined to vote.”

Secret Trump supporters are waiting to cause an earthquake, goes the theory. 
To the CDCGG members present, the alternative – that Trump loses – is 
unthinkable. “If she gets elected ...” says Judy Campbell and then shakes her 
head where the end of her sentence might be. “People can’t seriously be 
thinking about voting for that woman. I mean what in the world ... What can 
they be thinking?”

“A lot of what he’s done and said is indefensible,” says Jim Arnold. “But when 
you compare it to what she’s done they’re not comparable.”

“It makes me worry about the intelligence of some of these people,” says 
Margaret Niccum.

“Well you can’t fix that,” says Arnold. 

More than 50 million people are likely to vote for Trump, even if he goes down 
in flames. It would be unhelpful to generalise about all of them, reducing them 
to caricature only to dismiss them. Something is happening here and it behooves 
people to try to understand it, whether or not they like it. From interviews 
with a range of Trump voters in Muncie, it’s clear most are not blind to his 
flaws, even if they wouldn’t necessarily describe them in the manner of his 
detractors.

The CDCGG was originally set up to repeal property taxes in Indiana which the 
group argued were exorbitant. After a successful campaign, they gained the ear 
of the governor and won a cap on property taxes statewide, and transformed 
themselves into a local group rallying around local issues. Mostly small 
businessmen and retirees, half male, half female, all white, it feels like a 
reconstitution of the Tea Party.

Good government, in this context, means small government; with Muncie’s 
Democratic administration under investigation by the FBI for corruption 
<http://www.ibj.com/articles/58583-muncie-mayor-says-fbi-investigating-city-government>
 they feel like they are pushing at an open door and would push harder if the 
local Republican hierarchy were not so reticent. The atmosphere in the room is 
cordial; these are not just ideological allies, with a keen sense of civic 
engagement – two are running for local office and the conversation touches on 
water rates, sewage rates and teachers’ contracts among other things – but also 
friends.

Only a couple had wanted Trump to win in the Republican primaries earlier this 
year. Most preferred Ted Cruz, the Texan who has tried to style himself as a 
Reaganesque disruptor of Republican politics, or Marco Rubio, the 
Cuban-American senator from Florida. “I would have been happier with almost 
anyone else,” says Arnold. “I wanted [Ben] Carson, then Cruz then Rubio. Trump 
would have almost been my last choice.”

{{callout link}}

When I ask if they are worried that he will do something embarrassing again 
they mostly laugh and nod.

Dave Jamison, who is retired and voted for Obama twice, says he thought Trump 
was an “arrogant SOB when he was on The Apprentice”, but his hunting buddies in 
southern Indiana persuaded him to take a second look and now he’s thinking 
seriously of voting for him.

Jamie Walsh, who is in her early 30s and training to be a mortician, variably 
describes Trump as “garbage” and a “word-butcher”. Walsh, who got in contact 
with the Guardian through this project, grew up in Muncie but moved away 
because she saw drugs, single parenthood or incarceration claiming her peers on 
the southside – the white working class part of town – and felt the need to 
escape. She now lives in the Indianapolis suburb of Brownsburg and probably 
would have voted for John Kasich, one of the more moderate Republicans in the 
primaries, if she had registered for a party. “I hated Donald Trump during the 
primaries,” she says. “He was a mockery.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fmiddletown-trump-muncie-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f46b0f1f895a60c804d632b3af5de701337d68c%2F0_58_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20view%20from%20Middletown%3A%20'Trump%20speaks%20to%20us%20in%20a%20way%20other%20people%20don%E2%80%99t'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fmiddletown-trump-muncie-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20view%20from%20Middletown%3A%20%27Trump%20speaks%20to%20us%20in%20a%20way%20other%20people%20don%E2%80%99t%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fmiddletown-trump-muncie-clinton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f46b0f1f895a60c804d632b3af5de701337d68c%2F0_58_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 A Trump and Pence election sign outside a house near downtown Muncie 
Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Walsh has only voted in a presidential race once: for Obama in 2008. She is 
likely to vote for Trump now, but says of him: “He’s a 70-year-old white man. 
He’s been supported in bigotry his entire life. He’s been validated his entire 
life. And people wonder why he acts like this. No wonder he acts like this.”

One local senior Republican tells me privately: “Look, he’s a bully. Everyone 
can see that.”

The question of why they would vote for a man of whom they apparently have 
such a low opinion brings us to something else that connects most of them: 
their loathing of Hillary Clinton.

It is a disdain of such depths that not a single virtue can be salvaged; a 
contempt nurtured and tended with such animus and anomie over the decades that 
she has been in the public eye that any redeeming features she might claim have 
long been stripped away. “Unlike Hillary, he hasn’t done anything criminal,” 
says Hiatt.

Niccum believes this moment is the culmination of a longstanding plot hatched 
by the Clintons several years ago. “She’s been planning this since she was in 
college,” she says.

“How do you let all this stuff go?” asks Walsh, referring to things Clinton 
has been accused of of late. “That’s crazy stuff going on in these emails if 
you read ’em. This is all the stuff the crazy people have been talking about 
for years and now it turns out it’s most likely true ... She’s a professional 
politician. How do you make millions of dollars as a politician? You’re 
supposed to be a civil servant.”

Jamison is rare among Trump supporters I’ve met, in saying he could vote for 
Hillary, if Trump were “to go off the deep end again”.

But for the overwhelming majority, Hillary hatred 
<http://www.dailykos.com/story/2016/2/8/1478776/-Why-Do-People-Hate-Hillary-Clinton-So-Much>
 is their driving force. What they see as the apocalyptic scenario of Clinton 
running the country has them reaching for the largest immovable object to stop 
her. This cannot simply be dismissed as misogyny. Until just a couple weeks ago 
Clinton and Trump were running almost even among white women, while white women 
without college degreesstill favour him 51-42 
<http://www.langerresearch.com/wp-content/uploads/1184a12016ElectionTrackingNo1.pdf>
.

“What has she ever done for women?” asks Campbell. “Just look at the kind of 
women she has standing behind her.”

When Trump called Clinton a “nasty woman” at the last debate he not only 
faithfully reflected their sentiments – he actually understated it. They do not 
only think she is dishonest, they think she is a criminal, scheming, cheating 
snob who will sell America to the highest bidder and pocket the proceeds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fmiddletown-trump-muncie-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F173ddacb9ab862b73b7405fc4a2c0aefc9336dcc%2F160_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20view%20from%20Middletown%3A%20'Trump%20speaks%20to%20us%20in%20a%20way%20other%20people%20don%E2%80%99t'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fmiddletown-trump-muncie-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20view%20from%20Middletown%3A%20%27Trump%20speaks%20to%20us%20in%20a%20way%20other%20people%20don%E2%80%99t%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fmiddletown-trump-muncie-clinton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F173ddacb9ab862b73b7405fc4a2c0aefc9336dcc%2F160_0_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Trump window sticker in Muncie. Photograph: Gary Younge for the Guardian 
“They look at things through the global order,” says Will Statom, the head of 
the Delaware Republican party. “A lot of people are looking at Hillary Clinton 
as nothing good. It’s laughable that she can relate to the middle class – 
laughable. They’re elitists. They have always have been elitists. They were 
elitists in Arkansas. They have just found a way to get ultra rich with that 
sham called the Clinton Foundation.”

There are policies of Trump’s they like too. “Underneath all the crap there 
are decent ideas but people don’t see them,” says Walsh. “You have to go 
looking for them. That’s his own fault. His position on tax reform, trade 
reform – they’re not bad. And the plan to privatise the Veterans 
Administration, that’s a really good plan.”

The US Department of Veterans Affairs is the government agency that is 
supposed to provide services, including healthcare, to those who have served in 
the military. It is so notoriously badly run thatJon Stewart made improving it 
a campaign on The Daily Show 
<https://www.armytimes.com/story/entertainment/2015/08/06/jon-stewart-vs-va-how-tv-host-raged-against-red-tape/31207623/>
. Walsh’s husband served in Iraq and has PTSD and hearing loss, following an 
IED explosion. The VA care he is entitled to is hard to access and inadequate 
when he does get it, so he uses his employer’s health insurance instead.

“Once they get home the VA just hands them pills and sends them home,” says 
Walsh. “But psychological pills aren’t one size fits all. You need therapy and 
treatment and they’re not getting that. It’s like a flow chart of pills. It’s a 
mess. We have soldiers killing themselves in epic proportions and it’s because 
they’re waiting for care.”

For Arnold it’s the supreme court – currently hanging in the ideological 
balance after the death of the conservative Justice Antonin Scalia left a 
four-four split between liberal and conservative judges. “That can change our 
lives,” he says. “I can’t see how anyone who calls themselves a Christian can 
vote for her. There’s Roe v Wade, LGBTQ and then she says she’s for the second 
amendment but then she’ll tell you all the restrictions she’ll put on gun 
owners.”

But the economy is the biggest issue of all in a town like Muncie, which lost 
much of its manufacturing base as companies moved south. About a third of what 
was once a thriving blue-collar town lives in poverty;huge factory plants lie 
abandoned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/oct/25/middletown-muncie-factories-photo-essay-midwest>
, sitting like gigantic art installations depicting the post-industrial era. 
The broad consensus is that the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta), 
which liberalised trade between the US, Canada and Mexico, helped kill the 
economic life of this town:an agreement championed by Bill Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/08/hillary-bill-clinton> 
and supported by Hillary.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fmiddletown-trump-muncie-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feff3198f199983f8af88503d0f93057c8c32f681%2F0_0_5000_3256%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20view%20from%20Middletown%3A%20'Trump%20speaks%20to%20us%20in%20a%20way%20other%20people%20don%E2%80%99t'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fmiddletown-trump-muncie-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20view%20from%20Middletown%3A%20%27Trump%20speaks%20to%20us%20in%20a%20way%20other%20people%20don%E2%80%99t%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fmiddletown-trump-muncie-clinton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feff3198f199983f8af88503d0f93057c8c32f681%2F0_0_5000_3256%2F5000.jpg>
 The Indiana Steel & Wire Co used to employ 300 people but closed operations in 
2002 and now only two staff members remain on site. Photograph: David Levene 
for the Guardian 
As Statom drove me around the empty factories, elegising about the loss of 
both jobs and communities, the tumbledown streets where his grandparents lived 
and the shuttered buildings where they and his father used to work, he tells me 
he helped load the last machines on to the trucks in nearby Anderson that took 
the jobs to Mexico. “I’m not anti-union,” he said. “But the unions got greedy. 
That was part of it. And then Nafta did the rest.”

“That’s why I like Trump,” says Jamison. “Get America back, middle-class jobs 
and everything. I think we need some of that.” Do you think those jobs are 
coming back? I ask Jamison. “No, I don’t,” he says.

The devastation wreaked by that hollowing-out is what Walsh felt the need to 
escape when she left Muncie. “I have friends from high school who were 
incarcerated for bank robbery. One of the guys I went to high school was killed 
not so long ago. My best friend, who has a daughter, she’s on her own. It’s 
just a mess. People addicted to drugs. There’s nothing to do. It’s a sad 
situation. It’s textbook of how you create an inner city.”

During the primaries, when all but a couple of the Republican contenders had 
dropped out, Trump did well on the southside where Walsh grew up. The white 
working class – and particularly white men without a college degree among whom 
he leads by a whopping 60-21 – form a significant part of Trump’s core support. 
But it would be a mistake to conclude from that that he has the bulk of support 
in these areas.Nationally, Trump supporters are generally wealthier than most 
Americans 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/the-mythology-of-trumps-working-class-support/>
 and considerable wealthier than those who voted for Clinton.Democrats 
outpolled Republicans by a significant margin 
<http://www.dcelectionday.com/2016-2/primary-election-2016/> during the 
primaries in most, if not all the southside precincts in Muncie. Bernie 
Sanders, the “democratic socialist” insurgent on the Democratic side, got more 
votes than Trump on the southside and even though Clinton lost to Sanders 
there, she wasn’t far behind Trump in vote totals.

“Nobody speaks up for the poor,” says Walsh, explaining Trump’s appeal to 
those she grew up with. “There is systemic racism but black people have 
advocates. Poor white people don’t. They’re afraid. They’re afraid that they’re 
stupid. They don’t feel racist, they don’t feel sexist, they don’t want to 
offend people or say the wrong thing. But for them white privilege is like a 
blessing and a curse if you’re poor. The whole idea pisses poor white people 
off because they’ve never experienced it on a level that they understand.

“You hear privilege and you think money and opportunity and they don’t have 
it. I understand how it works but I don’t think most people do. So when Trump 
says stuff, they can understand what he’s saying and he speaks to them in a way 
other people don’t. And then you’ve got people calling them stupid and 
deplorable. Well how long do you think you can call people stupid and 
deplorable before they get mad?”

Pictures by David Levene and Gary Younge

 * Producing in-depth, thoughtful, well-reported journalism is expensive – but 
supporting us isn’t. If you value and enjoy this approach to covering politics, 
please help to fund our journalism bybecoming a Guardian Supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_trumpmuncie_footer>
. 
{{newsletter signup}}
 