
Has anyone in Downing Street actually realised that Rupert Murdoch’s 21st 
Century Fox has lodged a bid for Sky? If you trawl through newspapers and the 
internet looking for comments from the government about theproposed £11.7bn deal
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/rupert-murdoch-sky-bid-pay-tv>
, you will not find much.

Matt Hancock, the junior culture minister, appeared in the Commons to answer 
an urgent question from Labour on the matter early last week, and that was it. 
“Any transaction will be looked at on its merits, on a case-by-case basis,” he 
said. How insightful.

Theresa May, Philip Hammond and Greg Clark, the business secretary, have been 
silent on the matter. Karen Bradley, Hancock’s boss and the culture, media and 
sport secretary, wasapparently unavailable to answer the urgent question in 
parliament. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/12/murdoch-sky-bid-culture-secretary-to-answer-urgent-question>

This all rather surprising when you consider that other investments in the UK 
from other overseas companies since the vote to leave the European Union have 
led to swift comments from the prime minister and chancellor praising their 
commitment to the country. The boss of Softbank, the Japanese company that 
bought technology group Arm for £24bn,even posed for photos with Hammond 
outside 11 Downing Street. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/jul/18/philip-hammond-softbank-takeover-arm-holdings-overseas-investors>

Now, the government’s silence on this issue may be because Sky shareholders 
have yet to vote on the proposal, or because it wants to leave the matter to 
Ofcom and other regulators. Hancock told MPs that the government must be 
“scrupulously fair and impartial” and that Bradley’s role is “a quasi-judicial 
one and it’s important she acts independently and is not subject to improper 
influence”.

But that hasn’t stopped the government before. Softbank’s trip to Whitehall 
came on the day its bid was revealed, before the shareholder vote and before 
any regulator had cast an eye over the transaction.

Instead, the government’s silence looks like an attempt to distance itself 
from the Sky deal and depoliticise it. May has not even made a clear, public 
pledge to properly analyse the transaction.

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
In contrast, Gordon Brown, Vince Cable, Tom Watson and plenty of other 
politicians outside government have had lots to say about the proposal – mainly 
that May must ensure that Ofcom conducts a public-interest test on the deal, 
seriously consider whether the Murdochs are fit and proper people to control 
Sky and its news operations, or even simply block the proposal.

The government’s silence is further evidence that the deal could be railroaded 
through by21st Century Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox> 
and Sky before any opposition is allowed to build up a head of steam.

Supporters of the takeover claim that much has changed since Murdoch last 
tried to buy Sky in 2011 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/phone-hacking>. His 
business has been split in two, with newspaper brands such as theSun and the 
Times held within News Corp and the TV and film assets run through Fox. Also, 
Google and Facebook now dominate the digital advertising market, transforming 
the outlook for news and content providers.

But both of these defences are easily dismantled. Firstly, splitting News Corp 
and Fox does not change the fact that one family could end up with 
extraordinary influence over British media. Take a look at the boards of News 
Corp and Fox – Rupert and Lachlan Murdoch are the co-chairs of both, while 
James Murdoch is chief executive of Fox, on the board of News Corp, and chair 
of Sky.

Secondly, recent changes in the media industry simply reinforce the importance 
of the established news providers emphasising their independence, credibility 
and quality. If the public question the veracity of what they read in 
newspapers or see on TV news, then it simply pushes more people to Facebook, 
Google and fake news.

The government must not sleepwalk its way through this issue. The Fox-Sky deal 
must be rigorously tested, and the Murdochs should be called to appear in front 
of MPs to make guarantees about the future of the brands they could control.

A short-term boost for US


In the weeks since the US presidential election, financial markets have had a 
change of heart about Donald Trump’s victory over Hillary Clinton.

The knee-jerk reaction when the result came in was to assume the worst. 
Trump’s programme was sketchy but seemed worrisome. He was threatening to get 
tough with China. He talked about protectionism. He had made minatory noises 
about the Federal Reserve. Put simply, Trump meant uncertainty, so markets sold 
off.

This mood did not last long. Wall Street bulls quickly discovered a silver 
lining: Trump’s plan to cut taxes and increase spending on America’s creaking 
infrastructure.

Dealers in New York think looser fiscal policy means stronger US growth, which 
in turn will lead to higher profits for companies quoted on Wall Street. Hence 
the surge in the Dow towards the 20,000 mark.

The upbeat mood was only briefly interrupted by the Fed’s interest-rate 
announcement last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/us-federal-reserve-raises-interest-rates-second-time-since-2008>
. Wall Street quickly shrugged off the quarter-point rise in borrowing costs 
and the indication that 2017 would see three further increases.

There were two main reasons for this. First, recent form suggests the Fed 
might not go ahead with next year’s monetary tightening. When it raised rates a 
year ago, it hinted at four increases in 2016. Only one was actually delivered: 
the one last week. Second, Wall Street thinks that even if the Fed does go 
ahead, the economic impact will be modest.

In the short term, at least, both assumptions seem reasonable. The Fed is 
certainly not trigger-happy when it comes to rates and Trump’s fiscal policy 
should guarantee growth next year. But investors need to be wary. Most of the 
fiscal boost is going to come through tax cuts, which will inject both demand 
and inflation into an economy already running up against capacity constraints. 
At some point in 2017 the Fed will adopt a more aggressive stance. Shares will 
suffer as the economy slows down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Ffox-sky-row-not-going-away-ministers-ignore-it-rupert-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d083642685df7103f2d5c0ea78d5f6e155ec1e4%2F0_204_3636_2182%2F3636.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fox-Sky%20row%20isn%E2%80%99t%20going%20away%2C%20no%20matter%20how%20much%20ministers%20ignore%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Ffox-sky-row-not-going-away-ministers-ignore-it-rupert-murdoch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fox-Sky%20row%20isn%E2%80%99t%20going%20away%2C%20no%20matter%20how%20much%20ministers%20ignore%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Ffox-sky-row-not-going-away-ministers-ignore-it-rupert-murdoch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d083642685df7103f2d5c0ea78d5f6e155ec1e4%2F0_204_3636_2182%2F3636.jpg>
 Jeff Bezos, chief executive officer of Amazon, during the meeting with Donald 
Trump last week. Photograph: Drew Angerer/Getty Images 
Tech v Trump? Could be interesting


Rarely can so much wealth and power have gathered around one table. In a 
meeting at Trump Tower last week the president-elect of the United States, 
Donald Trump,held talks with a group of technology bosses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/14/donald-trump-google-facebook-amazon-microsoft>
 that included Tim Cook of Apple, Jeff Bezos of Amazon, Sheryl Sandberg of 
Facebook, Larry Page and Eric Schmidt of Google’s owner Alphabet, and Elon Musk 
of Tesla.

The executives left claiming it had gone well: Bezos even said he was 
“super-excited” about the prospect of working with an “innovation 
administration”. But photos of the meeting show a different story. Bezos looked 
grim, even frightened at times.

This is hardly surprising. Trump waged a war of words with Bezos throughout 
the election, pledging to cause “problems” for Amazon. He has also criticised 
Apple for its factories in China. The dynamics between Trump and tech – which 
will involve issues of trade, security and manufacturing – promises to be 
fascinating.
 