
As books that give answers go, there’s one classic that often gets overlooked 
– the dictionary. So next time you’re wondering whether a £10 tub of the latest 
miracle food can really stave off cancer, diabetes and heart disease, and get 
rid of a podgy belly in time for summer, run your finger down to the word 
“miracle” where you will find this definition: “an extraordinary and wondrous 
event” – so far so good – “that cannot be explained by natural or scientific 
laws”.

“Whether it’s coconut oil, chia seeds or apple cider vinegar,” says Duane 
Mellor, an assistant professor in dietetics at the University of Nottingham and 
a spokesperson for the British Dietetic Association, “there is no scientific 
evidence to suggest that if you top up your diet with any ‘miracle’ or special 
food that you’ll get any of the promised effects. The idea is almost entirely a 
marketing vehicle, but when people read claims online, they start to think 
differently and can start believing it.” One of the reasons people might 
believe the hype is because as with any good miracle – or magic trick – the 
success lies in smoke and mirrors. With miracle foods, while the magical health 
food salesman is conjuring a few extra coins out of our pockets, we’re left 
bamboozled by scientific terminology.

“Many products tend to be accompanied by all sorts of horrendous scientific 
jargon, like ‘maintains cognitive function’,” says Mellor, “which are watery, 
scientific-style claims that people tend to read as being something meaningful 
to human health. Then there’s antioxidants and free radicals, which are some of 
the most feared and misunderstood words used.”

Free radicals are unstable elements that come spinning off any oxygen-using 
chemical reaction in the body. They are unstable because they are missing an 
electron and, in a bid to restabilise themselves, they steal an electron from 
elsewhere. This could be from the fats in cell membranes or from your DNA. The 
damage they do when bullying other elements into handing over an electron is 
called oxidative stress, and this can be associated with heart disease, cancer 
and diabetes.

You can’t detox your body. It’s a myth. So how do you get healthy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/dec/05/detox-myth-health-diet-science-ignorance>
Free radicals, however, are also involved in beneficial processes. They help 
to destroy invading bacteria and play a part in cell communication. To limit 
their role to only those things that benefit us, our bodies make things called 
antioxidants that, much like people standing outside nightclubs handing out 
hugs and hot chocolate to pacify drunken revellers, provide free radicals with 
the electrons they need so they don’t cause damage elsewhere.

“But if you look at the antioxidants circulating in our bodies,” says Mellor, 
“by far the most common are the ones we make ourselves – glutathione and uric 
acid – followed by vitamins A, C and E, which we get from normal food anyway. 
Many of the antioxidants in things like chia seeds are there to stop the plant 
oils going rancid, or to protect them from sunlight damage, and may not be that 
available to our bodies anyway. So although the EFSA [European Food Safety 
Authority] allows manufacturers to claim that their products are rich in 
antioxidants – because they are – manufacturers are not allowed to claim any 
health benefits. If you look carefully, it’s sort of legalese what they end up 
claiming.”

Even when used as supplements, antioxidants don’t seem to provide any benefit. 
A largestudy <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM200001203420302> 
published in theNew England Journal of Medicine that followed nearly 10,000 
people over an average of four-and-a-half years showed no benefit from vitamin 
E supplements in the prevention of heart disease. Studies for other antioxidant 
supplements have been equallydiscouraging 
<http://jnci.oxfordjournals.org/content/88/21/1550.short>.

Part of this confusion is because diet is complex. It’s tough to tease apart 
the contribution of individual components because the nutrients in many foods 
become available to us only when eaten as part of a wider diet: studies have 
shown that only whenwe cook carrots 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00394-003-0430-6> can their 
beta-carotene become more available and; the lycopene in tomatoes is most 
readily availablewhen they are eaten with oil 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15927929>.

But what about all the other vague claims about foods that can help you lose 
weight, or support a healthy immune function, or lead to a healthy heart? They 
all sound good and sort of make sense, don’t they? According to Ali Khavandi, a 
cardiologist at the Royal United Hospital in Bath, these claims are vague for a 
reason – they are based on experiments carried out on animals or on human cells 
in a lab. They have not been shown to have any effect on people, and until such 
effectiveness is shown, he says, we should stay open-minded but cautious about 
exaggerated claims.

“As doctors I think we’ve taken our eyes off the prize,” he says of the 
importance of a healthy diet in avoiding the major chronic diseases such as 
heart disease and diabetes. “For the past few years, at least for heart 
doctors, I think we’ve been more interested in the sexier side of preventing 
disease – new drugs, stents, and operation techniques – and we’ve left the diet 
arena a little unmanned. It’s now been populated by unqualified people and 
celebrity health gurus spreading misinformation. As doctors I think we have an 
obligation to reassert an authoritative voice when it comes to healthy eating.”

Yanking the spotlight back from celebrities and fad food products might be a 
difficult task. “The problem,” says Khavandi, “is that the message we try to 
get across – which is based on proper, robust evidence that has been shown time 
and time again – is not very interesting to people. They have heard it all 
before.”

The messages he is talking about include the fact that fruit and vegetables 
are good for you. As are wholegrain cereals and nuts. For fats, which you need, 
choose unsaturated fats such as olive oil and those directly taken from marine 
sources such as oily fish. Neutral foods, he says, are saturated fats like 
butter or coconut oil and unprocessed red meats – eat these in moderation and 
they’re unlikely to do any harm. Stay away from excess white-flour products, 
processed meats, and trans fats such as vegetable oils and palm oils found in 
fast foods.

Simple enough advice on the face of it, but with sensationalised articles 
emerging daily about the benefits or dangers of specific foods, people get 
confused and lose sight of the simple messages. A complication nowhere more 
true than with cancer.

“There is certainly no such thing as an anti-cancer diet,” says Justin 
Stebbing, a consultant oncologist and professor of cancer medicine and oncology 
at Imperial College London. “But I have patients asking me things about these 
foods all the time.” He puts a finger on why cancer-busting food is such an 
appealing concept. “As a patient, disease makes you lose control. People 
immediately want to regain that control and a very easy way for them to do that 
is by diet, and they can get all sorts of things off the internet. We should 
understand that the internet is a double-edged sword and if we’re looking for 
information we should go to reputable sites.”

Such sites, says Stebbing, are NHS Choices 
<http://www.nhs.uk/livewell/healthy-eating/Pages/Healthyeating.aspx>, Cancer 
Research UK <http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/cancer-info/healthyliving/>, 
Diabetes UK <http://www.diabetes.org.uk/> and the British Heart Foundation 
<https://www.bhf.org.uk/>, which all give clear, evidence-based dietary 
recommendations. Duane Mellor has another simple rule of thumb for 
distinguishing cherrypicked claims from bona fide scientific evidence. “The 
EFSA is very clear – and very strict – about what health messages it allows 
companies to use in the marketing,” he says.

“If you see a claim on a blog, and if it’s persuasive and looks good, ask 
yourself why has the company not used it in their marketing? If the product 
really did prevent cancer or heart disease, do you not think it’d be plastered 
all over the packaging?”

Mythbuster: the facts about five ‘miracle foods’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423573449645%2F8f15a4a8-8ae3-4244-a1b0-50564a7fb421-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20%E2%80%98miracle%20foods%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20from%20chia%20seeds%20to%20coconut%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20%E2%80%98miracle%20foods%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20from%20chia%20seeds%20to%20coconut%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423573449645%2F8f15a4a8-8ae3-4244-a1b0-50564a7fb421-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Coconut oil: good in a Thai dish. Photograph: Zoonar GmbH/Alamy 
1. Coconut oil
The claim: Coconut oil is a saturated fat. While not the heart-clogging evil 
they were once thought to be, it would take a leap of faith to proclaim that 
they are good for you. A recent review of studies suggested that saturated fats 
raise levels of both good and bad cholesterol. The oil is predominantly a 
medium-chain triglyceride that, proponents state, might carry benefits for 
weight loss, but this claim has not been shown in human studies. Other 
suggestions for the benefits of coconut oil include helping blood glucose 
regulation and preventing strokes and Alzheimer’s – again, none of these 
benefits have been shown in people.

Dietetics professor Duane Mellor’s verdict: Probably best to enjoy a little 
coconut oil in a Thai dish occasionally rather than using it daily!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423573566341%2Fd890a5d1-816c-4989-b4f9-c4a4d1b0cbfd-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20%E2%80%98miracle%20foods%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20from%20chia%20seeds%20to%20coconut%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20%E2%80%98miracle%20foods%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20from%20chia%20seeds%20to%20coconut%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423573566341%2Fd890a5d1-816c-4989-b4f9-c4a4d1b0cbfd-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Apple cider vinegar: save for your salads. Photograph: Bon Appetit/Alamy 
2. Apple Cider Vinegar
The claim: Doubtless a tasty condiment, but has been anecdotally linked with 
an eye-wateringly long list of potential health benefits in areas including: 
digestive disorders, sore throats, high cholesterol, indigestion, preventing 
cancer, dandruff, acne, energy boosting, cramps, and helping with blood sugar 
control. The EFSA, however, hasn’t approved any of these claims. Many of the 
studies have been on animals or in laboratories using human cells.

Mellor’s verdict: Vinegar is probably best kept as a condiment. Use it on 
salads instead of high calorie oils and mayonnaise and to add flavour to sauces 
to help reduce salt intake – it might help, not because of anything it 
contains, but because it would be replacing less-healthy foods.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423573665705%2F8640ae52-5b0f-4819-9392-845cdd1111a2-2060x916.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20%E2%80%98miracle%20foods%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20from%20chia%20seeds%20to%20coconut%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20%E2%80%98miracle%20foods%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20from%20chia%20seeds%20to%20coconut%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423573665705%2F8640ae52-5b0f-4819-9392-845cdd1111a2-2060x916.jpeg>
 Manuka honey: vague claims. Photograph: Dorling Kindersley ltd/Alamy 
3. Manuka Honey
The claim: A medical-grade version of this honey is used in sterile wrappings. 
As with most honeys it has hydrogen peroxide, which gives it its antibiotic 
qualities. It also has methylglyoxal, an antibacterial component, in much 
higher quantities than found in other honeys. Studies have suggested that 
manuka honey might help to ease symptoms of infections such as coughs, but it’s 
not clear whether the honey is having an antimicrobial effect or whether it is 
just soothing like all syrups.

Mellor’s verdict: Any of the claims for eating manuka honey, all of which have 
been rejected by regulators, are vague. Any health benefits must be balanced 
against the very high quantities of sugar compared with the very small amounts 
of these proposed active compounds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423573746330%2F5bb443cc-3d81-4dca-accc-facb33227d33-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20%E2%80%98miracle%20foods%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20from%20chia%20seeds%20to%20coconut%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20%E2%80%98miracle%20foods%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20from%20chia%20seeds%20to%20coconut%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423573746330%2F5bb443cc-3d81-4dca-accc-facb33227d33-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Spirulina: stick to fruit and vegetables. Photograph: Eskymaks/Alamy 
4. Spirulina
The claim: This is another proposed miracle food for which regulatory 
agencies, this time the US National Institutes forHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, say there is not enough 
scientific evidence to support any health claims. Rejected claims include those 
relating to metabolic and heart disorders (eg blood pressure control and 
diabetes), and also mental health disorders such as anxiety, depression and 
ADHD. It does have useful nutrients – calcium, niacin, potassium, magnesium, B 
vitamins, iron, and essential amino acids – but the jury is out on whether your 
body can use these nutrients in plant form.

Mellor’s verdict: Spirulina shouldn’t be relied on as a source of nutrients. 
Rather than taking such supplements, it would be better to spend your money on 
vegetables and fruit – this will help to make your whole diet better rather 
than adding a supplement and not thinking about the food you actually eat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423573847573%2F7dce81d5-fa1b-40af-bb5e-05c70c9bed99-2060x1568.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20truth%20about%20%E2%80%98miracle%20foods%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20from%20chia%20seeds%20to%20coconut%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20truth%20about%20%E2%80%98miracle%20foods%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20from%20chia%20seeds%20to%20coconut%20oil&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F15%2Ftruth-about-miracle-foods-chia-seeds-coconut-oil%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423573847573%2F7dce81d5-fa1b-40af-bb5e-05c70c9bed99-2060x1568.jpeg>
 Chia seeds: no evidence of weight loss benefit. Photograph: Ruaridh 
Stewart/ZUMA Press/Corbis 
5. Chia seeds
The claim: Packed with antioxidants, but many of these are of plant origin so 
less likely to be available to us. They have high omega-3 content, too, but our 
bodies are not great at using omega-3 oils from plants – it’s best to get these 
oils from oily fish such as salmon. But for people who don’t eat fish, chia and 
other seeds can be a good substitute. Other potential pluses are linked to 
their high protein and fibre content, which have led some to suggest they might 
help you lose weight by reducing hunger. However, two trials to date have shown 
no evidence of any benefit in terms of weight loss or reduced risk of heart 
disease.

Mellor’s verdict: Chia seeds can add an interesting texture to bread. Linseed 
and hemp seed are also rich in omega-3 fatty acids, so chia is not unique and 
should be enjoyed more for its effect on texture rather than any particular 
health effects.
 