
In a two-part series in the New York Times entitled Man vs Marathon, 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/15/sports/two-hour-marathon-yannis-pitsiladis.html>
 Jeré Longman took a thorough look at Yannis Pitsiladis’s project to accelerate 
the process that will, almost certainly, lead to a human being running the 
arbitrary distance of 26.2 miles in two hours. In the article, Pitsiladis, a 
sports psychologist, says that the most likely candidate to achieve this feat 
would be an Ethiopian or Kenyan with a hard, rural upbringing, and that the 
best way for them to run that fast for that long would be to minimise the 
amount of weight on their feet, probably by running barefoot or with merely “a 
film that covers the bottom of the foot”.


I read the first article while I was staying at a rural training camp in 
Gondar, Ethiopia, where I am doing anthropological fieldwork with aspiring 
young Ethiopian runners. They happen to fit Pitsiladis’s model: they come from 
remote rural areas and spent much of their childhood and adolescence running 
barefoot or in cheap plastic sandals. I read the second sitting at the side of 
a field in nearby Debre Tabor with some of the young distance runners from the 
camp, waiting for the start of the Cultural Sports Games, where people from the 
nine different states inEthiopia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia> 
came together to compete in horse riding,gena (resembling hockey with 
rough-hewn wooden sticks and fewer rules) andtigel, a form of Ethiopian 
wrestling. We were sitting at the side of the field for the second time that 
day, having been told at the proposed start time of 9am that people didn’t feel 
like it quite yet and we should come back at 3pm. At 3.30pm, there was still no 
sign of any action. The runners had put on traditional Amhara clothing for the 
occasion and didn’t seem concerned. “This is cultural sport, Mike. This is the 
good life, no one is in a hurry.” And running, I ask. Is that the good life 
too? “Sort of,” I’m told. “But running is always about condition, every day 
worrying about condition, condition, condition.”


This seems to be a good time to ask them about the possibility of a two-hour 
marathon one day; is there a way for them to work even harder, to go even 
faster? “Two hours in the marathon?” my friend Telahun* replies, before 
relaying the question for the others. “Yikabadal,” they murmur together: “This 
is heavy …” Telahun thinks for a while then adds, respectfully: “Maybe for 
Kenenisa (Bekele, world record holder at 5,000m and 10,000m) he says, “but the 
Kenenisa of six or seven years ago.” He then asks the question that 
Pitsiladis’s research seems to have missed: “Why is this man so obsessed with 
that anyway? Aren’t we running fast enough already?”


I tell them that the project is looking for $30m (£24m) of investment, and 
they raise their eyebrows.Running 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/running> clubs in Ethiopia pay modest 
salaries to their athletes of around $100 a month. “So he’ll start a club with 
good salaries?” Telahun asks. I’m not so sure about that, I tell them. The 
irony is that the sub-two hour project is focusing on cutting-edge science to 
shave the remaining 177 seconds off the marathon world record. The project 
epitomises modernity’s project to keep pushing forwards, and to accelerate at 
all costs. And yet the life that Pitsiladis demands of his subjects is the 
opposite of this. His ideal candidate should avoid footwear at all costs. They 
should live off the land. Preferably they should live a life that enables them 
to practise discomfort, and they should have to walk long distances as well as 
run hard. On our way back from a training session the other day, we waited for 
an auto rickshaw to give us a ride back to the camp. A middle-aged woman pushed 
in front of us in the queue, eyeing our tracksuits and saying: “You’re 
sportsmen, you can go on foot!’ No doubt Pitsiladis would agree.


When I asked my sub-agent friend Gebre about Pitsiladis’s project, he told me 
that he thought it might be possible, but that you’d need to have a special 
training camp focused exclusively on that goal. “You’d have to lock them in,” 
he told me, “and only let them out to fly to races. And after the race they’d 
need to be straight back on the plane and back to the training camp.” He 
explained that most runners who run fast marathons and win good prize money 
want to enjoy life in the city a little bit. “They’ll buy a car, and drive back 
to Bekoji [the small town where much of Pitsiladis’s reseach is based], and 
then it’s finished for the two-hour marathon for them,” he told me.

Is there really anything wrong with these young men wanting to live their 
lives? One of the main problems with marketing distance running is that 
coverage fails to bring out the personalities of the athletes. Forcing an even 
more Spartan approach to training is hardly likely to solve this problem. 
Having become good friends with some Ethiopian marathon runners over the past 
year, this is a real shame for the sport.


My worry is that the obsession with the two-hour marathon will lead to races 
where a phalanx of identically dressed pacemakers attempt to escort one 
exceptionally talented athlete to a world record. Yet the most exciting 
marathons in recent years, have been the duals, the tactical victories and the 
upsets; Wanjiru vs Kebede in Chicago 2010, Stephen Kiprotich’s Olympic title in 
2012 or Meb Keflezighi’s 2014 Boston win. Also, given the problems with 
performance-enhancing drugs both Kenya and Ethiopia are currently facing, now 
may not be the time to obsess over the watch. The athletes in Gondar were 
sceptical about the possibility until I mentioned drugs. “Well, yeah, with 
doping of course it’s possible,” they said, “with doping you can run like a 
car.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Ftwo-hour-marathon-sub2hr-yannis-pitsiladis-kenenisa-bekele%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dc8cb043f6ec395c46797dc58f5a1fc2eb4e14a%2F0_0_640_640%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20two-hour%20marathon%3A%20who%20is%20it%20for%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Ftwo-hour-marathon-sub2hr-yannis-pitsiladis-kenenisa-bekele%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20two-hour%20marathon%3A%20who%20is%20it%20for%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fthe-running-blog%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Ftwo-hour-marathon-sub2hr-yannis-pitsiladis-kenenisa-bekele%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6dc8cb043f6ec395c46797dc58f5a1fc2eb4e14a%2F0_0_640_640%2F640.jpg>
 Athletes playing pool in Debre Tabor, Gondar Photograph: Michael Crawley 
It is important to think about who the two-hour marathon is for. At one point 
in the interview with Pitsiladis, he talks about testing new and eccentric 
training theories, stating “it may not work but let’s try it and see what 
happens” and says he is a “risky person”. This attitude is fine if we’re 
talking about an experiment in a lab, but these are young men from poor 
backgrounds whose livelihoods depend on their running. Pitsiladis is taking his 
risks with other people’s bodies. They have hopes, dreams and often families 
and other dependants to support. They are not merely expendible sources of 
research data.


The project’s hypothesis goes something like this: “In spite of the fact that 
no one has so far got within 177 seconds of breaking the two-hour marathon thus 
far, and given the widespread accusations of doping in Ethiopia and Kenya, we 
can assume that some of those athletes were taking drugs. We nevertheless 
believe we can develop special drinks, ‘pre-hab’ exercises and other 
unspecified technologies that we can’t go into the details of to make it happen 
within five years, without drugs.”


In Berlin, Kenenisa almost certainly the most talented distance runner in 
history, ran 2.03.04, having worked with theSub2Hr project 
<http://www.sub2hrs.com/> for the last few months. He and Wilson Kipsang ran 
the fastest half-marathon split ever recorded in a marathon, 61.11. Yet to run 
sub-two hours you would have to replicate that fastest-ever half-marathon split 
and then follow it with a 58.48 half marathon, that is, with the sixth fastest 
half marathon of all time.


So why would the Sub2Hr project claim to think it will happen so soon? Let’s 
start by considering how they wrote about Kenenisa’s incredible run in Berlin. 
On their website they published an article about a special drink: “We are proud 
of the fact that in just a few months we were able to take two minutes off his 
marathon PB.” Kenenisa, in this statement, did absolutely nothing to effect the 
change: it was all in the drink. Kipsang was only a few seconds behind, in 
spite of not having access to the magic drink.


The article goes on to discuss the founders of the company of the drink, 
listing their names and inviting their reader to ask the questions they seem to 
think we all want answers to: “Is the drink commercially available?” and: “When 
will the new product be available?” In the “our objectives” section of their 
website, they list “major and unlimited prospects for commercial benefit”. Now 
it starts to make more sense.


Timing

I want to make clear that I think a project that took a long-term approach to 
breaking the two-hour barrier, and which genuinely did focus on investment in 
the grassroots of the sport, could be extremely successful. My criticisms of 
the project, however, are twofold.


Firstly, timing. I think it is inevitable that someone will eventually run the 
marathon in under two hours, and I will be as excited as any other athletics 
fan when it happens. I’ve spent more than a year in Ethiopia as an 
anthropologist. However, I’ve learnt Amharic and spent countless hours talking 
to people about doping, and people’s concerns (in a context where the 
anti-doping infrastructure is in its infancy and many athletes live too far 
away to be tested) have grown louder in the course of my stay. Here is the 
coach I work with speaking to the athletes on the subject of gradual 
improvement:


You have to plan to increase your performance level over a long period of 
time. It needs strategic planning that brings development for you and brings 
progress through time. If you are concerned only with running fast, then most 
of the time you will be exposed to doping. Short cut.

As we have seen with the revelations surrounding the Oregon project and 
unnecessary therapeutic use exemptions (TUEs) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/chris-froome-urgent-action-tues-cycling-bradley-wiggins>
, there is an extremely fine line between “science” and “medicine’. As far as 
I’m concerned, injecting huge amounts of money into helping a select group of 
athletes, regardless of whether they are technically overstepping the line, is 
not in the spirit of the sport.

Motivation

When I spoke to Kenenise’s first coach in Bekoji, he became animated when I 
asked him why he thought Kenenisa was so good. He took the Oromo newspaper he 
had in his hand and rolled it into a telescope, peering through it at me. This 
is what he said:

When he was 13, he knew what he wanted. He was like this (he mimes looking 
through his newspaper telescope). He told me he wanted to be world and Olympic 
champion. He was so focused so young.

This is the kind of motivation athletes need, and it is intrinsic, not 
extrinsic. Coach Sentayehu shared with me his concerns about the money in the 
marathon. He couldn’t see himself producing another Kenenisa, capable of 
breaking world records on the track, he said, because all of his runners want 
to move to the marathon when they’re too young to do so, in his opinion. I 
worry that the Sub2Hr project will merely exacerbate that problem.


The Sub2Hr project describes itself thus: “The first research initiative made 
up of specialist multidisciplinary scientists striving to achieve the 
sub-two-hour marathon with a scientific approach.” The athletes themselves are 
notably absent from this statement. The implication is that it is the work of 
the scientists themselves that will “achieve” the two-hour marathon. Is this 
the kind of sport we want? One that pits various groups of scientists against 
each other? “Science is forfarenj (foreigners)”, the athletes often tell me, 
“running is for us”.


Rather than seeing elite athletes as sources of data for the betterment of 
science and medicine, we should spend time with the athletes themselves, and 
find out what kind of sport they want to be involved in.


*I have changed the athletes’ names to protect their anonymity.


A shorter version of this piece was first published on the University of 
Edinburgh’s Sport Matters blog. Michael has extended the piece to address the 
concerns raised by theSub2Hr project’s response to the original article 
<http://www.sub2hrs.com/news-events/why-strive-for-a-sub-2-marathon/>.

 