
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> may have 
shocked the American political establishment with his refusal to say whether he 
will accept the results of next month’s presidential election, but he is far 
from the only candidate for high office in the United States who has cast 
serious doubt on the integrity of the system and the campaign tactics of his 
opponents.

Over the past 16 years – ever since the epic, 36-day presidential showdown in 
Florida in 2000 that was resolved not by a full recount of the votes, but by a 
supreme court split along partisan lines – accusations of vote-rigging and 
out-and-out theft have become increasingly common among partisans on both 
sides, and the electoral process has become ever more politicized, rancorous 
and fraught with mistrust.

“I will tell you at the time,” Trump said at last Wednesday’s debate when 
asked if he would accept the election result on 8 November. “I’ll keep you in 
suspense.” The Republican candidate has repeatedly claimed, without evidence,
that the election is “rigged” against him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/17/man-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims>
. “Of course there is large-scale voter fraud happening on and before election 
day,” he tweeted last week.All available evidence shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/donald-trump-fact-check-rigged-election-voter>
 that in-person voter fraud is exceedingly rare.

What would happen if Donald Trump refused to concede this election?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/20/donald-trump-refuse-concede-election-electoral-college>
Opinion polls suggest that Trump’s charges of a “rigged election” have struck 
a nerve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/republicans-reject-us-election-result-hillary-clinton-win>
: 41% of voters believe him when he says the election could bestolen 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/poll-41-percent-of-voters-say-the-election-could-be-stolen-from-trump-229871#ixzz4NyQ6BbyQ>
, according to one survey. More than two-thirds of all Republicans believe that 
if Hillary Clinton is declared the winner, it will be because ofillegal voting 
or vote-rigging 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-poll-rigging-idUSKCN12L2O2>, 
according to another.

Those attitudes are almost certainly the result of Republicans beating the 
drum for more than a decade about elections being skewed by the illegal 
participation of dead people, illegal immigrants and even the occasional 
household pet. To this day, many in the GOP are convinced Barack Obama was 
elected only because community organizing groupssuch as Acorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/21/acorn-prostitution-videos> – now 
defunct – registered extraordinary numbers of ineligible or nonexistent voters 
in the inner cities, and because busloads of Mexicans came over the border to 
vote using someone else’s name.

Eight years before Trump ever publicly uttered the words “rigged election”, 
Obama’s first Republican opponent, John McCain, said in a presidential debate 
that Acorn was “on the verge of perpetrating one of thegreatest frauds 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2008/oct/17/sorting-truth-obama-acorn/>
 in voter history in this country, maybe destroying the fabric of democracy”. 
No credible evidence ever emerged of a single fraudulently cast ballot arising 
from Acorn’s activities.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-pledges-to-accept-election-results-if-he-wins-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20pledges%20to%20accept%20election%20results%20...%20if%20he%20wins%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-pledges-to-accept-election-results-if-he-wins-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20pledges%20to%20accept%20election%20results%20...%20if%20he%20wins%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fdonald-trump-pledges-to-accept-election-results-if-he-wins-video&media=>
Donald Trump pledges to accept election results ... if he wins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/20/donald-trump-pledges-to-accept-election-results-if-he-wins-video>
While Democratic candidates have rarely resorted to such inflammatory 
language, their rank-and-file supporters certainly have, suggesting the problem 
crosses party lines. The 2004 election, which saw George W Bush re-elected 
despite the mounting unpopularity of the Iraq war, saw an explosion of 
unfounded conspiracy theories that Republicans were in cahoots with the 
manufacturers of electronic voting machines and would never lose an election 
again. (The theory fell apart as soon as Democrats retook control of the House 
of Representatives two years later.)

This year, a hard core of Bernie Sanders supporters remains convinced that the 
senator from Vermont was cheated out of the Democratic presidential nomination 
by the underhanded maneuvering of the Clinton campaign and the Democratic 
National Committee – despite the fact that Clintonwon 3m more primary votes 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/the-system-isnt-rigged-against-sanders/>.

American history is hardly lacking in examples of real voter manipulation and 
electoral skullduggery, especially in the segregation-era deep south. To this 
day, the US electoral system is widely viewed as ananomaly 
<http://kimalex.blogspot.com/2004/12/jimmy-carter-on-npr-air.html> in the 
western world because of persistent problems with the reliability of its voting 
machinery, frequent bureaucratic incompetence, the lack of uniform standards 
from state to state or even county to county, the systematic exclusion ofmore 
than 6 million felons 
<http://www.sentencingproject.org/issues/felony-disenfranchisement/> and 
ex-prisoners, and the tendency of election officials to adopt rules that 
benefit their party over democracy itself.

Until 2000, though, these issues were not widely aired in public. Then the 
battle over Florida ripped a veil off a dysfunctional system and offered an 
opportunity not just for meaningful electoral reform – a slow and frustrating 
process – but also for new forms of political warfare unseen since the darkest 
days of the segregation era in which the electoral process itself became fair 
game, particularly for the Republicans.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fdonald-trump-rigged-election-bush-gore-florida-voter-fraud%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7457c2bbdb7242882d04cec113b8c9a50a47473c%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20history%20of%20'rigged'%20US%20elections%3A%20from%20Bush%20v%20Gore%20to%20Trump%20v%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fdonald-trump-rigged-election-bush-gore-florida-voter-fraud%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20history%20of%20%27rigged%27%20US%20elections%3A%20from%20Bush%20v%20Gore%20to%20Trump%20v%20Clinton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fdonald-trump-rigged-election-bush-gore-florida-voter-fraud%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7457c2bbdb7242882d04cec113b8c9a50a47473c%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Attorney Nicole Pollard, Judge Charles Burton and attorney John Bolton review 
questionable ballots for the 2000 presidential election in Florida. Photograph: 
Rhona Wise/EPA 
It began, perhaps, when the hand recount of punch card ballots requested by Al 
Gore and the Democrats – something both parties had routinely pressed for in 
previous contested elections – was recast by many leading Republicans in their 
talking points as a form of “slow-motion grand larceny 
<http://transcripts.cnn.com/TRANSCRIPTS/0011/22/ip.00.html>”.

Then, in Missouri, Republican Senator Kit Bond took one look at African 
American voters in overcrowded precincts in St Louis casting ballots beyond the 
official poll closing time – something that has since become standard practice 
in many states – and denounced what he called a “major criminal enterprise 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/story?id=122543>”.

Soon, a narrative took hold that Democrats were habitual vote-stealers – 
something that was indubitably true in the days of Boss Tweed in 1860s New York 
but now took the form of a racist dog-whistle because the voters under most 
suspicion were black or Latino. Within a few years, politicians such as Sarah 
Palin were openly distinguishing “real Americans 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2008/10/rep-says-liberals-hate-real-americans-014797>
” – meaning white Republicans – from the rest, and states under Republican 
control were passing voter ID laws to crack down on a problem – voter 
impersonation fraud – that experts have repeatedly found to berare to 
non-existent 
<http://www.pressherald.com/2016/10/18/analysis-heres-why-vote-fraud-is-less-likely-than-being-struck-by-lightning/>
.

As the federal courts have now begun to find 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/31/north-carolina-voting-rights-law-republicans-november-elections>
, the effect of these laws has in fact been to discriminate against groups of 
voters – the transient, the elderly, students and the poor – who are much more 
likely to support Democrats.

Given the level of mistrust, rank-and-file members of both parties have 
increasingly come to define democracy by the elections their side wins, and any 
other outcome as prima facie evidence of theft and corruption.

Royal Masset, a former political director of the Texas Republican party, once 
described how he would receivedozens of calls 
<http://blog.chron.com/texaspolitics/2007/04/a-republican-his-mother-and-voter-id/>
 from disappointed candidates after election day complaining about some 
unsubstantiated outrage, usually involving illegal immigrants or lightning-rod 
political figures such as Jesse Jackson. “Human beings do not accept defeat 
easily,” he observed in 2007.

If Trump is different, it is only because he began complaining about 
vote-rigging months before election day and because he threatens to depart from 
the tradition that says you fight as hard and as dirty as you want, but only 
until the final results come in.

The sheer volume of his complaints, however, may be doing his prospects little 
good: afascinating 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/10/21/trumps-election-rigging-claim-will-backfire-heres-the-evidence/?tid=pm_politics_pop_b>
 American National Election Study survey conducted in 2012 shows that people 
are less likely to vote when their faith in the integrity of the system has 
been shaken, and much more likely to vote if they think the ballots are counted 
fairly. In other words, Trump’s rhetoric may just be depressing his own turnout 
and making defeat all the more likely.


 * Andrew Gumbel is author of Down for the Count: Dirty Elections and the 
Rotten History of Democracy in America  