
The Todd Carney cup for bad publicity in the NRL

It was a bumper year of on-field and off-field misbehaviour in the NRL, with 
incidents including but not limited toa player being knocked out with a fire 
poker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/sydney-roosters-star-dylan-napa-reportedly-knocked-out-at-charity-party>
 at a charity party (admit it,nobody had that on their NRL player behaviour 
bingo card), apositive cocaine test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/08/ben-barba-released-by-cronulla-sharks-after-positive-drugs-test>
, fraud squadraids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/20/four-nrl-agents-raided-by-nsw-squad-as-part-of-parramatta-investigation>
, match-fixingallegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/08/nrl-in-the-shadow-after-match-fixing-allegations-but-thats-nothing-new>
,coin toss deceit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/02/nrl-wade-graham-coin-toss-deceit>
 (where will it end?), theCorey Norman/MDMA/muscle relaxant/Star Casino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/21/eels-nrl-star-corey-norman-stood-down-for-eight-weeks-and-fined-20000>
 quadrella (we’re actually leaving out a few items there, too), andJunior Paulo 
disguising himself as a third-grade player 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/13/nrl-star-junior-paulo-disguises-himself-and-plays-in-third-grade-park-match>
, which we thought was great fun.


But the winner in a unanimous points decision (a boxing career surely isn’t 
far off) is poor old Jarryd Hayne, who managed to get the words “pornography”, 
“Gold Coast”, “mishap and “school”into the one headline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/07/nrl-star-jarryd-hayne-in-pornography-mishap-at-gold-coast-school>
. “It’s unfortunate and all I can say [is] it definitely was not Jarryd’s 
device,” said a representative for Norton, for whom Hayne was giving a talk on 
Wi-Fi security to 200 high school kids when some suspicious internet search 
history information flashed up on the screen. We’re certain it was an 
educational experience for all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fade4730e66324bc4ec536963a6bf3d2d990b9256%2F0_0_3000_2402%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia's%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia%27s%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fade4730e66324bc4ec536963a6bf3d2d990b9256%2F0_0_3000_2402%2F3000.jpg>
 Online security: Jarryd Hayne managed to combine he words ‘pornography’, ‘Gold 
Coast’, ‘mishap’ and ‘school’ into one headline. Photograph: Ian 
Hitchcock/Getty Images 
Honourable mention: Jason Taumalolo and Tautau Moga, who were fined $2,500 
apiece by the North Queensland Cowboys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/13/jason-taumalolo-and-team-mate-fined-by-cowboys-over-egging-incident>
 for egging cars. We’re just glad the club brought an end to the schoolboy 
hijinks before any innocent party received an atomic wedgie.

The Arthur Tunstall award for public oratory

Yes, Eddie McGuire has effortlessly scooped this prize again, doubling down on 
his rank stupidity of previous years by joking that the AFL journalist Caroline 
Wilson should be held under water and drowned. Turns out that was an image 
instilled in McGuire as a young boy,when his older brother Frank’s friends used 
to try to hold him under the water at the local pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/eddie-mcguires-banter-exposes-the-rank-hypocrisy-of-afl-football>
. Paging Dr Freud.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea3af2897a946f489ae0f95c8586361e8bf374b7%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia's%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia%27s%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea3af2897a946f489ae0f95c8586361e8bf374b7%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 ‘Perfumed excrement’: Sam Newman weighs in on the Eddie McGuire controversy. 
Photograph: AFL Footy Show 
In the aftermath, The Footy Show’s leery bozy-in-residence Sam Newman fumed at 
the “second-tier media” types and“perfumed excrement” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/from-the-outer-sanctum-what-its-like-to-be-called-excrement-by-sam-newman>
 always seeking to bring him and his friend down, which perhaps didn’t say much 
for the emotional resilience of either. Regardless, Newman’s hateful outburst 
was at least an insight into the thoughts clanging around inside the vast chasm 
of his mind – it has been many years since his mood could be read from facial 
expressions alone.

The Coach Taylor perpetual windbreaker for inspirational coaching gestures

When Luke Beveridge draped his Jock McHale medal over the shoulders of the 
injured Bulldogs captain, Bob Murphy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/01/luke-beveridges-kindness-to-bob-murphy-a-moment-for-footy-to-be-proud>
, he not only honoured a champion and a long-suffering club, he put his 
muscular arm around the entire game and told us that we can occasionally put 
aside petty sniping and give each other a hug.

The Mike Jedinak golden microphone for unfortunate gaffes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4731efd29a6430a5c70a6a923b1910e6a28c4d0%2F0_0_2858_1980%2F2858.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia's%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia%27s%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4731efd29a6430a5c70a6a923b1910e6a28c4d0%2F0_0_2858_1980%2F2858.jpg>
 ‘South Coast Mariners’: Harry Redknapp takes the golden microphone for 
unfortunate gaffes. Photograph: Raad Adayleh/AP 
Goes to Harry Redknapp <https://www.theguardian.com/football/harry-redknapp> 
for his unfortunate start to life as a Central Coast Mariners “football 
consultant”, a role that apparently didn’t extend to actually learning the 
club’s name. When asked the name of his new club, Redknapp replied: “It’s the 
South Coast Mariners. I met the owner, he’s a great guy, an English guy. Peter 
Storrie’s involved and they’ve got an English coach as well. They asked me if I 
would do a bit as an adviser.” Good work if you can get it.

The Jerry Maguire golden globe for terrible pay deals

First the AFL lowballed its women players with a startlingly low pay offer, 
then responded to howls of outrage and met them halfway towards something 
respectable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/10/welcome-upgrade-to-womens-pay-deal-shows-afl-is-listening>
, though it’s still hard to believe a game swimming such riches can only afford 
scraps for players putting their bodies on the line and providing lucrative TV 
content. The wildly popular all-stars encounter aired on primetime TV in 2016
drew more than a million eyeballs for broadcaster Seven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/04/impressive-viewing-figures-for-exhibition-match-at-odds-to-paltry-womens-afl-pay>
, far more than a lot of your average men’s games.

But outdoing that stinginess again was the FFA in its ongoing failure to 
adequately compensate W-League players, who are becoming more susceptible to 
code switches and strikes by the year.Entire W-League squads are still paid a 
salary roughly equivalent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/08/matildas-success-highlights-need-to-pledge-for-parity-in-womens-football>
 to that received by the youngest members of A-League men’s teams. Just sort it 
out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5b900257585919ee1d6f4781b86c9449e6eef79%2F0_0_3583_2389%2F3583.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia's%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia%27s%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5b900257585919ee1d6f4781b86c9449e6eef79%2F0_0_3583_2389%2F3583.jpg>
 Cut-price code: Stephanie Catley of Melbourne City crosses the ball during a 
W-League match against the Western Sydney Wanderers. Photograph: Cameron 
Spencer/Getty Images 
The Robert Groenewegen tankard for post-season revelry

Has to go to Tom Liberatore, whose behaviour in the immediate aftermath of the 
Bulldogs’ grand final win 
<https://www.triplem.com.au/sport/afl/news/tom-liberatore-gives-the-loosest-interview-during-his-lap-of-honour/>
 suggested he doesn’t need a lick of booze to come up with truly strange 
behaviour. The clincher was his club-angeringpost-season cameo for the Vietnam 
Swans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/18/tom-liberatores-cameo-on-vietnam-holiday-irks-western-bulldogs>
 Australian Rules team in the middle of his end-of-season holiday. “Young Tom 
shouldn’t be doing those things,” said the Bulldogs list manager, Jason 
McCartney, in a moment of controlled understatement.

Problems endure but 2016 was a big year for women in Australian sport | Merryn 
Sherwood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/26/problems-endure-but-2016-was-a-big-year-for-women-in-australian-sport>
The Frederick Exley gold-plated defibrillator for fan commitment

Bulldogs fan Rob McCarthy almost had his own Spike Milligan “I told you I was 
ill” moment as his side streaked away to a drought-breaking victory in the 2016 
AFL grand final. “They’d wanna have an ambo parked out the front if we get up,” 
McCarthy said to a fan sitting next to him and, sure enough,in the dying stages 
of the game he had a heart attack, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/did-the-doggies-win-bulldogs-fan-survives-afl-grand-final-heart-attack>
 only to be revived by an off-duty paramedic to the triumphant strains of the 
club song. McCarthy’s first words upon his resuscitation: “Did the Doggies win?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7abb53548b6fd1fa9cb277a19cbd8918c0870d28%2F0_0_4500_2995%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia's%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia%27s%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7abb53548b6fd1fa9cb277a19cbd8918c0870d28%2F0_0_4500_2995%2F4500.jpg>
 Bulldogs supporters celebrate their team’s 2016 AFL premiership. Photograph: 
Tracey Nearmy/AAP 
The Allan McAlister award for comfortable racism

This was the year blatant racism went mainstream in all walks of life, of 
course, and footy was no different from the rest of society. An Adelaide father 
claimed his daughter had been “demonised” for throwing a banana a 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/woman-who-threw-banana-at-eddie-betts-has-been-demoni-says-father>
t 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/woman-who-threw-banana-at-eddie-betts-has-been-demoni-says-father>
 the Crows’ Indigenous star Eddie Betts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/woman-who-threw-banana-at-eddie-betts-has-been-demoni-says-father>
 (an “unambiguous racist act”, countered the AFL), while a Perth mother 
described the blackface Nic Naitanui costume she painted on her son was a 
“parenting win” (in a Facebook post later removed), adding: “I grew a set of 
balls and painted my boy brown and he looked fanfuckingtastic.”Naitanui’s 
verdict: I don’t think so. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/26/mother-who-put-son-in-blackface-costume-needs-education-says-nic-naitanui>
 Ours: absolutelyfuckingnot.

The Lance Armstrong wristband for wins people found hard to enjoy

The story of Cronulla’s premiership triumph was either a fitting win for a 
beleaguered and persecuted group of fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/03/cronullas-nrl-premiership-pays-back-the-loyal-fans-of-the-shire>
 ora bit hard to stomach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/29/cronullas-potential-drought-breakers-the-nrl-grand-final-fairytale-that-isnt>
, depending on your personal allegiances, but there is no denying the joy in 
its sheer novelty. Paul Gallen got the key to the shire, Scott Morrison looked 
for the briefest moment like a bloke you’d actually have a beer with, and the 
fans were left Shark clapping in their sleep after the end of a 50-year 
drought. All good for the league’s soul, we reckon.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf67846ede117eae464dbeab03f56b2a421129ce%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia's%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia%27s%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf67846ede117eae464dbeab03f56b2a421129ce%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 A bloke you’d like to have a beer with? Scott Morrison at the Cronulla Sharks 
NRL grand final celebrations. Photograph: Brendon Thorne/Getty Images 
The Foxtel shield for completely misunderstanding your core audience

Would go to Foxtel for their bungling of the Premier League rights if we were 
being very lazy, but this time it has to go to FFA, Melbourne Victory and the 
security contractors who completely alienated active Victory fans andforced 
many to seek alternative entertainment on weekends 
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/football/a-league/the-north-terrace-reveal-why-they-indefinitely-ceased-all-active-support-of-melbourne-victory/news-story/cbb2d5f0810c201d71fccb3e5987a359>
. It’s almost like the entirely unique attendance culture was the reason that 
people actually pumped money into the A-League’s coffers in the first place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78c2eed563b4d132a25a350a35dfd4e1d58f9366%2F0_0_3281_4921%2F3281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia's%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia%27s%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78c2eed563b4d132a25a350a35dfd4e1d58f9366%2F0_0_3281_4921%2F3281.jpg>
 A fading memory: Joe Mennie walks off after being dismissed during day four of 
the second Test match between Australia and South Africa in Hobart. Photograph: 
Robert Prezioso/Cricket Australia/Getty Images 
The Scott Muller sympathy card for being thrown to the wolves

Poor Joe Mennie. He didn’t pick himself, after all, but the South Australian 
quick timed his run into the Test side both brilliantly – in thatthe end of the 
Rod Marsh selection era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/rod-marsh-quits-as-australias-chairman-of-selectors-in-wake-of-test-defeats>
 put literally anyone in contention – but also disastrously, in that he should 
be called up for a debacle like the Hobart Test. Six team changes and many 
thousand airings of the David Warner OLED TV commercial later and poor Mennie 
is a fading memory, but they can never take that baggy green cap away from him.

The SK Warne pizza voucher for most Shane Warne thing of the year

This is obviously a foregone conclusion, but boy weren’t there some beauties 
in 2016? There was WarnieMojis,the app literally nobody asked for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/12/say-it-with-shane-warniemojis-is-the-app-no-one-asked-for>
, theWarnie bong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/20/shane-warne-bongs-created-by-australian-designer-in-honour-of-420-day>
, released in honour of 420 Day, and the various travails ofthe Shane Warne 
Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/shane-warne-foundation-consumer-watchdog-assesses-auditors-report>
 (with a guest appearance from Waleed Aly), but in a packed field the story 
that stood out for us was Warne’s calm assertion during his stint on I’m a 
Celebrity that human beings evolved from … drum roll … aliens.

“If we’ve evolved from monkeys, then why haven’t those ones evolved?” Warne 
asked the dancer Bonnie Lythgoe, a fellow contestant, as they lounged on a 
riverbank in South Africa’s Kruger national park. “Because, I’m saying, aliens. 
We started from aliens.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fshane-warne-questions-evolution-we-started-from-aliens-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F15%2F1455525289652%2FKP_1792434_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shane%20Warne%20questions%20evolution%3A%20'We%20started%20from%20aliens'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fshane-warne-questions-evolution-we-started-from-aliens-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shane%20Warne%20questions%20evolution%3A%20%27We%20started%20from%20aliens%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fshane-warne-questions-evolution-we-started-from-aliens-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F15%2F1455525289652%2FKP_1792434_crop_640x360.jpg>
Shane Warne questions evolution: ‘We started from aliens’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/feb/15/shane-warne-questions-evolution-we-started-from-aliens-video>
 “Look at those pyramids, Bonnie. You couldn’t do them. You couldn’t pull 
those ropes, huge bits of brick and make it perfectly symmetrical. Couldn’t do 
it. So who did it?” Maybe they turned a few monkeys into humans and said, 
‘Yeah, it works.’” The whole episode proved there really are topics of 
conversation other than leg-spin and pizza toppings with which the cricket 
great can captivate the nation. Good areas 51, Shano.

The Nick D’Arcy commemorative premix can for Olympic transgressions


I guess we should be thankful that it was something as tame as ticket 
tampering that led to threats of the slammer for Australian athletes in Rio and 
not some Stilnox-infused Games village orgy, but the$47,000 in fines levied on 
the “Naughty Nine” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/21/kitty-chiller-defends-australias-olympic-naughty-nine-after-47000-fine>
 made headlines for days.

Speedo and Swimming Australia: 60 years of Aussie cossies – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gallery/2016/dec/21/speedo-and-swimming-australia-60-years-of-aussie-cossies-in-pictures>
The Karmichael Hunt poisoned chalice for falling victim to the Swisse curse

Went in spectacular style to the Campbell sisters, Cate and Bronte, who 
promised the world, delivered relay gold but couldn’t get it done in their 
individual events after months of pre-loaded Swisse vitamins TV commercials had 
placed them in David Warner-OLED territory in the minds of a slightly puzzled 
Australian public.

It was older sister Cate who saved the day with a brutally honest post-race 
interview after bombing out in the final of the women’s 100m freestyle. “That 
hurt, not as much as it’s hurting right now,” Campbell said. “I’ve always said 
that I didn’t need a gold medal to have self-worth and I guess that that’s 
being put to the test at the moment.” It was heartbreaking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac9f4ff03d5fd16a60987d7e4a4c52fa3618ccd9%2F0_0_4096_2764%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia's%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia%27s%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac9f4ff03d5fd16a60987d7e4a4c52fa3618ccd9%2F0_0_4096_2764%2F4096.jpg>
 Cate Campbell, left, and Bronte Campbell with coach Simon Cusak during the 
team’s first training session at the Rio Olympic Games aquatics centre in Rio 
de Janeiro. Photograph: Dave Hunt/EPA 
The John McEnroe broken racket for winding up the general public

It was another weird and wonderful year for Nick Kyrgios, who played like a 
dream at times and also did his level best to troll the entire universe at 
every opportunity. Hebailed out of a tournament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/19/nick-kyrgios-pulls-out-rotterdam-open-nba-celebrity-game>
 to play in a celebrity NBA game, had his “Nick, you can’t play like that. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/12/nick-kyrgios-row-serving-without-effort-not-returning-shanghai-masters#img-1>
 It’s just not professional” moment, and in between times,actually won 
tournaments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/09/kyrgios-wins-third-title-japan-open>
 (something his harshest critics tend to ignore). But his most Nick Kyrgios 
moment was surelyhis public battle with Australia’s Olympic chef de mission, 
Kitty Chiller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/10/nick-kyrgios-calls-australian-olympic-chiefs-bluff-over-rio-snub-threat>
, whose criticisms of Kyrgios and his countryman Bernard Tomic brought a fairly 
predictable response.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F482113c9457de776ce8957c8c06e7cb28e51230d%2F0_0_2278_1600%2F2278.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia's%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20Rusties%3A%20Guardian%20Australia%27s%20alternative%20sporting%20awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthe-2016-rusties-guardian-australias-alternative-sporting-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F482113c9457de776ce8957c8c06e7cb28e51230d%2F0_0_2278_1600%2F2278.jpg>
 Nick Kyrgios: doing his best to troll the entire universe at every 
opportunity. Photograph: Thomas Peter/Reuters 
“I mean, if you don’t want to pick me or Bernard, you know, there are plenty 
of others you can pick to represent your country as well,” Kyrgios said. “If 
you don’t want two of the best players in Australia to represent your country, 
so be it.” He kind of had a point there.
 