
HIV: The Long View is a forward-looking public health report which 
investigates future healthcare trends in order to evaluate potential 
implications, opportunities and challenges for HIV treatment, prevention and 
education today.


The report is the result of an in-depth research process, where a coalition of 
stakeholders collaboratively reviewed, scrutinised and translated a range of 
research on health trends to suggest the future state of HIV healthcare over 
the next two decades.


In addition to emphasising the importance of addressing HIV in underserved 
communities as fundamental to progress against the epidemic,HIV: The Long View 
outlines steps that support long-term health and wellbeing for people living 
with, and at risk of, HIV including:


 * Eradicating stigma related to sexual behaviour, sexual health and HIV 
status so that everyone who needs HIV care and prevention counselling feels 
comfortable seeking it 
 * Ending the one-size-fits-all approach to HIV prevention, treatment and 
education by tailoring HIV-related efforts to specific at-risk populations 
whenever possible 
 * Developing pathways to collect more HIV patient data to enhance the body of 
knowledge about HIV, inform treatment algorithms and ensure people with HIV 
have every opportunity to benefit from advances in personalised medicine 
 * Educating and empowering every person at risk of, and living with, HIV to 
take charge of their prevention and care now to prevent or delay the onset of 
chronic conditions in the future 
 * Pushing for the adoption of evidence-based HIV guidelines in healthcare 
practices to ensure access to preventive counselling and care, regular HIV 
testing, and immediate connection to and retention in care for those who test 
positive. 
The outlook for HIV is shifting for the better. With early detection and 
proper treatment, HIV can be a long-term manageable chronic disease for many.


Much of this progress can be attributed to advocacy work, which helped 
transform research and public policies. Now, 35 years after the start of the 
epidemic, this report stresses that the public health crisis is not over.


This report emphasises that everyone has a role to play in creating a better 
future for HIV. To learn more, we encourage you to download and explore theHIV: 
The Long View report here <http://hivthelongview.com/>. A healthier future 
starts today.

Content on this page is paid for and provided by Gilead 
<http://www.gilead.com/>, a sponsor of the Guardianâ€™s Global Development 
Professionals Network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/global-development-professionals-network>.
 