
In 1855, a young American poet named Walt Whitman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/11/josie-long-why-i-love-walt-whitman-standup>
 announced, with typical gusto, that “the United States themselves are 
essentially the greatest poem”, and made good on this claim in a landmark 
collection of poems,Leaves of Grass, transforming America’s literary 
imagination for ever. When, exactly 100 years later,Jack Kerouac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/18/jack-kerouac-letters-for-auction-love-and-sex>
 began to hammer out the typescript of his own masterpiece, he was consciously 
responding to Whitman’s challenge “to express the inexpressible”. This would 
become Kerouac’s lifelong ambition and it expressed itself asOn the Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/23/long-lost-letter-that-inspired-kerouacs-on-the-road-to-go-up-for-auction>
. The book would be an ur-text for the James Dean decade.

Long-lost letter that inspired Kerouac's On the Road to go up for auction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/23/long-lost-letter-that-inspired-kerouacs-on-the-road-to-go-up-for-auction>
To Kerouac, Whitman’s “I hear America singing” was almost an epigraph. On the 
Road <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/aug/05/fiction.jackkerouac> 
pulsates to the rhythms of 1950s America: jazz, sex, drugs, and the desperate 
hunger of a new generation for experiences that are passionate, exuberant and 
alive to the heartbreaking potential of the present moment. Kerouac was an 
artist, but he was not immune to the charms of the American dream.On the Road 
is perhaps the supreme American romance, a contemporary version ofHuck Finn’s 
longing to “light out for the territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/24/100-best-novels-huckleberry-finn-twain>
”. Indeed, although acclaimed as a prophet of 1960s counterculture, Kerouac’s 
own idea of himself and his work was to reclaim the gritty individualism and 
frontier spirit of the pioneering days of the American past.

The narrative opens in the depths of winter in New York City, 1947, with 
Salvatore Paradise “feeling that everything was dead”. Sal, an 
Italian-American, is hanging out near Columbia University with a bunch of 
fellow “Beats” (a new term), restless and disaffected bohemians who include 
Carlo Marx (aka the poetAllen Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/30/grocery-rhymes-poetry-supermarkets-tesco-sonnet-students>
) and Dean Moriarty (aka the original Beat himself, Neal Cassady). Everyone is 
feeling the call of the wild, aching to hit the road and head out west. That, 
in a sentence, is whatOn the Road is all about: the quest for ultimate 
fufilment before the sun goes down. Kerouac called this magic moment “It”, and 
devoted his life, through free association, and literary improvisation, to the 
pursuit of ecstatic inspiration. For the Beats, it’s the journey, not the 
arrival, that matters. Sal Paradise will chase girls, drink late into the 
night, and walk on the wild side, but “It” will always elude him. The reader 
follows him (and the charismatic Dean Moriarty) as a mystical and poignant 
reminder of lost youth, and those sublime years when everyone feels immortal.

A note on the text
 Carolyn Cassady’s photograph of Neal Cassady and Jack Kerouac on the cover of 
the novel. Photograph: pr 
Perhaps no manuscript of any book in this series had such a strange artistic 
and physical history as the famous text ofOn the Road. Jack Kerouac, who was 
born in Lowell, Massachusetts, in 1922, had begun to write fiction while 
working as a merchant seaman in the second world war. In 1943, he completed a 
novel entitledThe Sea Is My Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/25/kerouacs-lost-debut-novel-published>
, and first met some of the characters, young “Beats”, who would eventually 
find their way intoOn the Road. It was always Kerouac’s fictional method 
ruthlessly to plunder his autobiography.

In 1948, he completed his first novel to be published, The Town and the City, 
an account of his life from 1935-45. It was published in 1950, but drew poor 
reviews and did not sell. However, the writing of this novel introduced him to 
Beat avatarNeal Cassady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jan/18/beat-poets-cassady-kerouac-ginsberg>
, the model for Dean Moriarty. Their meeting in Harlem early in 1947 is 
described in the opening chapter ofOn the Road. Soon after completing The Town 
and the City, Kerouac began one of the first versions of On the Road, using a 
“factualist” way of writing in imitation ofTheodore Dreiser (No 33 in this 
series) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/05/100-best-novels-sister-carrie-theodore-dreiser>
. Kerouac began to revel in what he described as “a greater freedom in writing” 
than hitherto.

At this stage in its long gestation, On the Road (the title hardly ever 
varied) was planned as a quest novel likeBunyan’s The Pilgrim’s Progress (No 1 
in this series) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/23/100-best-novels-pilgrims-progress>
. The narrator who would eventually become the Italian-American Salvatore 
(“Sal”) Paradise, was no longer called Ray Smith but “Smitty”, while Dean 
Moriarty was now Red Moultrie. Kerouac was deep into this version when Harcourt 
Brace offered to publishThe Town and the City, demanding some substantial 
editorial cuts. So he put his “road book” aside to meet this request, and did 
not return to it until June 1949. At this point, coming back to it afresh, he 
was dissatisfied with what he had done, and headed out to San Francisco to join 
Cassady, an excursion that became absorbed into part three ofOn the Road. Then, 
in March 1950, Cassady took him to Mexico (part four of the novel), where 
Kerouac got married toJoan Haverty <http://www.cosmicbaseball.com/haverty7.html>
. He continued, meanwhile, to slog away atOn the Road, and developed his 
friendships withWilliam Burroughs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/20/william-s-burroughs-a-life-barry-miles-review>
,Allen Ginsberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/feb/23/allen-ginsberg-howl-poem-film> 
and Cassady, all of whom would have a decisive influence on the published text 
of the novel. Occasionally, his new wife, Joan, would ask about his exploits 
with Cassady, and he began to fashion his “road book” as a kind of explanation, 
a first-person narrative of what had happened before their marriage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-best-novels-no-76-on-the-road-jack-kerouac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F23%2F1424692115607%2F459268ff-1617-4fd2-a2d2-042b501c1f54-1020x524.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20100%20best%20novels%3A%20No%2076%20%E2%80%93%20On%20the%20Road%20by%20Jack%20Kerouac%20(1957)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-best-novels-no-76-on-the-road-jack-kerouac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20100%20best%20novels%3A%20No%2076%20%E2%80%93%20On%20the%20Road%20by%20Jack%20Kerouac%20%281957%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F02%2F100-best-novels-no-76-on-the-road-jack-kerouac%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F23%2F1424692115607%2F459268ff-1617-4fd2-a2d2-042b501c1f54-1020x524.jpeg>
 Still rolling … part of Jack Kerouac’s original manuscript for On the Road. 
Photograph: Ann Heisenfelt/AP 
At this time, Kerouac also developed the non-stop typing style he pioneered to 
get the “kickwriting” momentum he needed to achieve the literary effect he was 
after. It was now, crucially, that he taped together 12ft-long pieces of 
drawing paper, trimmed them to fit, and fed them into his typewriter as a 
continuous roll. (This may not make much sense to readers who have grown up 
with laptops.) It was essential to the non-stop typing method not to have to 
pause to insert new paper. This, said Kerouac, was the start of “a new trend in 
American literature”. Sweating profusely, changing his T-shirts throughout the 
day, fuelled bypea soup and benzedrine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/07/on-the-road-mark-ellen>, he 
embarked on a typing marathon – three weeks in April 1951 – in which the 
essential draft (nearly 90,000 words) ofOn the Road would be completed. Perhaps 
only theFaulkner of As I Lay Dying (No 55 in this series) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/06/100-best-novels-as-i-lay-dying-william-faulkner>
 had such an intense creative experience.

But Kerouac was still not done. After that spring frenzy, he would continue to 
revise and retype the original MS roll many times. In October 1951, he was 
still reworking it in the belief that his “wild form” of narrative had not 
captured his subject to his satisfaction. This became an alternative version, 
entitledVisions of Cody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/24/jack-kerouac-13-volume-memoir>, 
in which Cassady became “Cody Pomeray”.

In March 1953, Kerouac’s struggles with his masterpiece reached a 
turning-point whenMalcolm Cowley, an editorial adviser at Viking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/22/on-the-road-jack-kerouac-ipad-app>
, expressed interest in Kerouac’s work and then, having read it, told him 
frankly that he preferred thetypescript roll version 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/on-the-road-27.html> to all others. By now, 
Kerouac’s work and originality were beginning to attract attention, and, after 
many more vicissitudes, in December 1956, Kerouac again revised his text for 
Viking. Publication, finally, was scheduled for September 1957. His publishers 
knew they were dealing with a writer trapped in an obsession: they never sent 
him galley proofs and Kerouac was dismayed by some of the editorial changes 
wrought by Cowley.

Mark Ellen: how Kerouac changed my life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/oct/07/on-the-road-mark-ellen> 
It hardly mattered. On publication, Kerouac awoke to find himself famous. Just 
before midnight on 4 September 1957, Kerouac left his apartment on New York’s 
Upper West Side to wait at the 66th street news-stand for the next day’s 
edition of theNew York Times. He had been tipped off that his novel was going 
to be reviewed byGilbert Millstein 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1999/05/11/arts/gilbert-millstein-83-reviewer-who-gave-early-boost-to-kerouac.html>
, but he cannot have anticipated the critic’s excitement. Millstein declared 
thatOn the Road’s publication was “a historic occasion in so far as the 
exposure of an authentic work of art is of any great moment in an age in which 
the attention is fragmented and the sensibilities are blunted by the 
superlatives of fashion”. The novel, Millstein continued, was “the most 
beautifully executed, the clearest and the most important utterance yet made by 
the generation Kerouac himself named years ago as ‘Beat’, and whose principal 
avatar he is.”

The rest is literary history.

Three more from Jack Kerouac

The Town and the City (1950); The Dharma Bums (1958); Big Sur (1962).

On the Road is published by Penguin (£8.99). Click here to buy it for £7.19 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/on-the-road-24.html>
 