
1) Jimmy Connors, 1991 US Open

The eight-times grand slam winner had already got people talking at Flushing 
Meadows before his fourth-round match with the top-10 ranked Aaron Krickstein. 
That an ageing Connors had gone so far as a wildcard was a truly remarkable 
feat in itself. He was the world No174 going into the tournament; a brief cameo 
was about as much as anyone expected.

But it is testament to his fighting spirit and no little skill that Connors 
was able to knock over a collection of talented young opponents on his way to 
what would be a titanic tussle with Krickstein on Stadium Court on his 39th 
birthday. Having lost the first set, Connors fed off the support of the 
vociferous Labor Day crowd to mount a fightback in the second, forcing a 
tie-break and flooding his veins with Incredible Hulk levels of testosterone.

Pablo Cuevas in wee bit of bother during Wimbledon doubles defeat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/04/pablo-cuevas-pee-controversy-wimbledon-doubles-marcel-granollers-jonny-marray-adil-shamasdin>
It was here that a bad call led to him blowing his top in spectacular style. 
“He called the ball good, you didn’t see the God darn ball,” yells Connors, 
having scurried towards the umpire David Littlefield’s chair like an irate 
Yorkshire terrier. “It was clearly out,” counters Littlefield. “Clearly bull 
crap! Bull crap!” is Connors’ reply, his worst volley of the day by a country 
mile.

It soon became clear that Connors had perhaps gotten a little carried away 
with his own underdog story. “I’m out here playing my butt off at 39 years old 
and you’re doing that! Get your ass out the chair! Get your ass out of the 
chair! You’re a bum! You’re a bum!” Remarkably, Connors wasn’t sanctioned for 
the abuse, which included Littlefield being called an “abortion” among other 
things. The reason? The umpire chose not to report him.

Connors was well known for putting pressure on umpires and was often accused 
of bullying – perhaps here his tough-guy image helped him avoid a fine or 
worse. He kept up his bullish Captain America antics, going on to beat 
Krickstein in five sets, having trailed 5-2 in the last. “Happy birthday to 
you,” sang the crowd on Stadium Court. Perhaps that’s all Connors wanted – a 
bit of credit for flying the flag for middle-aged men.

He was finally made to look his age by Jim Courier, 18 years his junior, in 
the semi-finals, being beaten in straight sets. Connors had made his last big 
noise at a grand slam. A thoroughly entertaining and furious one.GB
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPlgJtyUIhqM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPlgJtyUIhqM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPlgJtyUIhqM&media=>
2) Jeff Tarango, Wimbledon 1995

With a name like Jeffrey Gail Tarango, Jeffrey Gail Tarango was always likely 
to understand ire. And at Wimbledon in 1995 he proved it as both provokee and 
provocateur, turning humdrum into historic amid the kind of scenes that no one 
wants to see, that everyone with a soul is desperate to see.


In the first round of the doubles he and his partner, Henrik Holm, were two 
sets to one down against the local favourites Tim Henman and Jeremy Bates. 
Playinga third set tie-break <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qaU36uLT_jE>, 
Henman became upset after losing a point to a net-cord, so belted a loose ball 
only to crack a 16-year-old ball-girl in the side of the head. Down she went, 
crying. Naturally, Tim was tigerish in his compassion. “There’s hard and very 
hard,” he told the umpire, “and I hit the ball hard. It wasn’t as if I bulleted 
it, and she’s standing there and she runs straight across in front of me.” 
People doing their jobs without regard for the childish petulance of others; 
disgusting.

Tarango, meanwhile, smelled the sweet scent of opportunity. “With the speed of 
the ball, it could have killed the girl,” he piously observed, as the 
tournament referee appeared on the scene. Amazingly, even Henman’s display of 
first-name terms could not save him, and “Alan” Alan Mills duly defaulted him. 
It was a desecration of everything that Wimbledon represents.

Wimbledon 2007: The day Tarango walked
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jun/30/tennis.wimbledon9> 
A few days later, Tarango played Alexander Mronz in the third round of the 
singles.Finding himself 6-7, 1-2 and break-point down 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qmwQTydi-eQ>, he was denied an ace when a line 
judge called a fault – only for the umpire to overrule and declare a let. This 
was ill-received. “No, that was an ace,” he insisted. It was not, said the 
umpire. “No, it was an ace.” It was not, said the umpire. “Nonononononono, I’ve 
seen it on TV a million times, that was an ace.”

At this point, the most passionate and knowledgeable crowd in all of sport was 
forced to intervene. Its legendary sense of fair play had been mortally wounded 
by Tarango’s intervention earlier in the week so, cognisant of the opportunity 
to incite some serious entertainment, it began to heckle with shouting, 
laughter and ilk. “Oh shut-up” was Tarango’s tame response, prompting Bruno 
Rebeuh, the umpire, to demand some attention of his own. “Code violation,” he 
announced. “Audible obscenity, Mr Tarango”.

As the crowd cheered further, Tarango approached the chair. “How is that an 
audible obscenity,” he queried, with good reason. “Well how come they can say 
whatever they want to me?” he continued with teenage logic. After which he 
reverted to call centre tactics. “Can you call a supervisor please?” he asked 
Rebeuh. “I have a big beef.”

Rebeuh was reluctant, but Tarango was robust. “No no no, I’m not playing any 
more,” he said. So out came Stefan Fransson, who told Tarango to get on with 
it. So Tarango got on with it. “You are the most corrupt official in the game 
and you can’t do that!” he told Rebeuh, earning another code violation for 
verbal abuse, this time with a point penalty. The game was gone and so, 
probably, was the set. “That’s it. No way! That’s it!” he ranted to increasing 
mirth, slamming down the balls in his hand and making the finished gesture. He 
then grabbed his bag and stalked off court, the first person so to do in 109 
years of Wimbledon history.

Rebueh, of course, snared the last word, defaulting Tarango who, by the press 
conference, was calm and focused. There, he explained a conspiracy whereby 
Rebeuh favoured certain players in return for the gift of their friendship, 
information gleaned from two women Rebeuh had tried to pick up at a party.


Tarango did, though, admit regret at stomping off, before hinting at something 
more elemental. “I don’t feel that I should be pushed around for my whole life 
and let people take advantage of me,” he said. “I just felt that I was backed 
into a corner and that I had no recourse for defending myself.” Mrs Tarango did 
not bother with such prevarication, simply slapping Rebeuh across the face, 
twice. “I don’t think it’s bad,” she said. “I think it’s good, because this guy 
deserves a lesson at some point. He can do whatever he wants because he’s in 
the chair. It’s just not fair.”

“Well, you know,” explained her husband. “Women are emotional.” Unlike, of 
course, Jeffrey Gail Tarango.DH

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqmwQTydi-eQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqmwQTydi-eQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqmwQTydi-eQ&media=>
3) Serena Williams, US Open 2011

There is absolutely loads to be said for generic, foul-mouthed rage. Consider, 
say, Andy Murray splashing bad words all over Adel Aref, a moment of honesty 
and simplicity so pure as to be almost moving. But the technique is effective 
only in the moment, an explosion without depth charge – no subject is likely to 
wonder about themselves thereafter. But the focused, discursive meltdown – that 
is another sport entirely, and a far less comfortable one too.


In the 2009 US Open, Serena Williams was 4-6, 5-6, 15-30 and second serve down 
to Kim Clijsters, whereuponshe was foot-faulted 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Pg1AYtaL-Q>. This forced her to remonstrate 
with the offending line judge. “I swear to God I’ll fucking take the ball and 
shove it down your fucking throat,” she offered. So far, so unimaginative, but 
the line judge grassed to the umpire anyway, the umpire grassed to more senior 
officials, and she was duly disqualified.

Two years later, Williams faced Samantha Stosur in the final 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z43rhazVhWA>. This time, she found herself a 
set and 30-40 down, saving break-point with a dazzling forehand winner. “Come 
on!” she hollered – a nanosecond before Stosur tried to return it, and though 
that was never happening, the touch of racket on ball was enough for her to be 
deemed put-off.

“It’s her point,” said Eva Asderaki, the umpire. “I don’t understand,” 
Williams replied. “Because when you called out, she got distracted,” came back 
the explanation. “Then maybe you should replay the point,” advised Williams. 
“I’m not giving her the game.”


Serena Williams tarnishes her legacy with abuse of US Open umpire | Kevin 
Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/sep/12/serena-williams-abuse-us-open>
But Asderaki was steadfast. “This is not a replay,” she insisted. “It’s her 
point because when you shouted she went to the ball and touched the ball.” At 
which point things took a turn for avant-garde. “Are you the one that screwed 
me over the last time here?” asked Williams. “You’re nobody. You’re ugly on the 
inside.” Ouch.


And that was not it, either; barely had Asderaki time to ponder these profound 
existential issues before Williams was at her again. “We were in America last 
time I checked,” she said at changeover. “Don’t look at me. If we’re ever 
walking down the street, stay on the other side. You’re totally out of control. 
You’re a hater and you’re unattractive inside. What a loser.” Gulp.


Though Williams broke back immediately, Stosur won the match 6-2, 6-3. 
Afterwards, Williams was unrepentant, refusing to cow before those keen to 
judge her without a clue what it was like to be her. “I was in a zone,” she 
said. “We live for these moments.”


Moments that were, in this case, indisputably awkward, unpleasant and unkind. 
But who can say with certainty that they would have handled them differently?DH
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ43rhazVhWA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ43rhazVhWA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DZ43rhazVhWA&media=>
4) Jerzy Janowicz spits on the line at Australian Open 2013


Who else remembers the Wimbledon final between Novak Djokovic and Jerzy 
Janowicz in 2013? No one, that’s who. It never happened. But it almost did. The 
first Polish man to reach the last four of a grand slam event, Janowicz won the 
first set on a tie-break in his semi-final against Andy Murray, dropped the 
second and led by a break midway through the third. Denting Murray’s armour 
with his huge serves, and mixing up his power play by throwing in the odd drop 
shot here and there, he looked in control of the match.

But if anyone had reached that conclusion as the light over Centre Court 
gradually faded, they hadn’t reckoned with Murray’s relish for a stirring 
comeback. It arrived, inevitably and the Scot swept into the final in typically 
obdurate style, although not without the controversy of a disagreement about 
the roof at the end of the third set. Janowicz wanted it on and argued his case 
vociferously, saying that he was struggling to see the ball as darkness fell, 
while Murray wanted to maintain his momentum. The Pole won that battle, but 
lost the match, and he did not endear himself to the crowd with some of his 
antics, that deep frown of his lending him a menacing air.

Janowicz was an emotional presence on and off court in those days, weeping 
with joy during a live television interview after reaching the final of the 
Paris Masters in 2012, attracting derision when he delivered a petulant 
underarm serve during a match at the US Open. His most memorable outburst, 
however, came at the Australian Open in 2013 and it was a classic of the genre, 
a hot blast of steam brought on by a tight line call going against him during a 
tense tie-break with Somdev Devvarman. Enraged when Devvarman saved a set point 
with a winner that looked out, Janowicz let rip, making a name for himself with 
the sheer showmanship of his tantrum. “How many times?” he roared. “How many 
times?”

Australian Open 2013: Jerzy Janowicz admits he 'went nuts' at umpire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/16/australian-open-jerzy-janowicz-nuts>
Briefly it seemed that he was about to grab a microphone and launch into a 
power ballard, which probably would have been preferable to what happened next, 
as he gobbed in the general vicinity of where Devvarman’s shot had landed. 
Offputting though spitting is, it was difficult not to see the funny side of 
the melodrama and utter ludicrousness of Janowicz taking out his frustration on 
an inanimate object that way. If a branch had been close by, it sends a shudder 
down the spine to think of the thrashing the blue concretewould have received 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mv0onXhyLlE>.

Janowicz lost the tie-break, a development he accepted in predictably good 
humour. He hit the umpire’s chair and tossed a water bottle across the court. 
Although he fought back to win the match, he was fined £1,576 for his 
behaviour. “I went nuts,” Janowicz said.

Later that year, he appeared to be on the verge of making headlines of a 
rather more positive nature after pushing Murray hard at Wimbledon. But when he 
met Djokovic in the US Open last month, it was in the first round instead of 
the latter stages. Injuries have caused the 25-year-old’s ranking to tumble and 
Janowicz is in danger of becoming one of tennis’s forgotten men, in danger of 
being remembered more for the time he spat the dummy out than for anything he 
has achieved with a racquet.JS
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7hfTDuISM4U&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7hfTDuISM4U>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7hfTDuISM4U&media=>
5) Andre Agassi, US Open 1990

When Andre Agassi declared “image is everything” in a 1991 Canon Rebel camera 
advert <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E78OnfyQiWo> – in which he spent most 
of his time running his hands through his mullet while driving a Jeep and 
spinning his racket on his finger against the backdrop of a mountain range – it 
wasn’t necessarily unusual for AA MK 1, though the timing certainly was.

At 21 years old, Agassi was among the best paid players in the game, but had 
yet to win a grand slam – in fact he had just lost three finals on the bounce 
and had refused to appear at Wimbledon for the third year running due to the 
dress code – so this was perhaps an odd time for another declaration of style 
over substance. Agassi’s slogan and the advert were also odd for featuring 
almost the exact outfit – cropped lime, black and white shirt, matching 
headband, gold jewellery – that he had worn not a year earlier at the US Open, 
in which he spat and cursed at an umpire.

Q&A: Andre Agassi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/02/andre-agassi-interview> 
In his second-round match against Petr Korda, and in front of a live TV 
audience,Agassi lost it <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x298JDtqDpE>. After a 
shot of his was called out, tennis’s biggest star marched towards the umpire 
Wayne McKewen and impolitely asked: “Are you bullshitting me?” before turning 
on his heels with an ill-timed “fuck!” as he retreated back to the baseline. A 
code of court violation was issued by McKewan, causing Agassi to repeat his 
journey to the chair, this time wailing at point-blank range with all the 
protestation of a young boy that knows he in the wrong: “I didn’t say anything! 
I didn’t say anything … you son of a bitch!”

Agassi was lucky that McKewan somehow didn’t hear this last self-defeating 
utterance but at the next changeover, on his way to his own chair, Agassi spat, 
with his saliva landing on McKewan’s leg and foot. Immediately the umpire 
called tournament director Ken Farrar out on to court. “Spit on you? No. It was 
an accident, really,” explained Agassi. “Here, do you need a towel?” Farrar 
gave Agassi the benefit of the doubt and issued no penalty but later saw the 
condemning footage that changed his mind. “I made the mistake of not being out 
on court, because when I went out, the situation was very serious and I was 
flying a little bit blind. I gave the player the benefit of the doubt because I 
hadn’t seen what had happened. After I saw the tape, I realised I shouldn’t 
have done that. It’s clear from the tape that he spit in McKewen’s direction.”

Agassi went on to win in four sets but received a fine of $500 for his 
swearing and $2,500 for the spitting. After victory in his next match, he 
appeared unrepentant: “The whole thing wouldn’t have happened if the umpire had 
been doing his job.”MB
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx298JDtqDpE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx298JDtqDpE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dx298JDtqDpE&media=>
6) Andy Roddick, Australian Open 2008

There was, indeed there still is, a lot to like about Andy Roddick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andy-roddick>. He is a fabulous pundit these 
days, sharp of tongue, quick witted and insightful. When he first broke through 
in 2003, with all the impish recklessness of Steve Stifler, he instantly became 
the darling of the media, becoming the youngest American No 1 since records 
began after 140mph-serving his way to the US Open in 2003.

But by 2008, the wheels had started to come off: still marooned on one grand 
slam title, 2007 had been an injury-blighted year and at the beginning of the 
next at the Australian Open, public opinion soured when he not only made 
personal insults against an official, but undermined the entire umpiring 
profession.

It had been a frustrating night for Roddick. By the end of it, the sixth seed 
would depart the Rod Laver Arena after 2am, defeated by 29th seed Philipp 
Kohlschreiber despite serving a then career-best 42 aces. Umpire Emmanuel 
Joseph bore the brunt of it, and after an overturned out call,Roddick let rip 
with all the explosiveness of a forehand 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ff6_UTPDO9s>. “You’re an idiot. You’re lying 
to yourself. Seriously, do you have to be like a second-grade dropout to be an 
umpire? Did you go to school until you were eight years old? I think you quit 
school before you were 10.” Then he addressed the jeering crowd, shouting at 
the top of his lungs: “Stay in school kids or you’ll end up being an umpire!”JS

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dff6_UTPDO9s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dff6_UTPDO9s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dff6_UTPDO9s&media=> 