
“What if I’d had more time?” Across the US, it is the question public 
defenders often find themselves asking the most. Would a young, pregnant 
African American woman in Lexington, Kentucky, who faces minor fraud charges 
laid down in April still be in jail if her lawyer had the time to appeal 
against an impossible $40,000 bail bond?

Could the 50-year-old illiterate white man in Cole County, Missouri, charged 
in August with vehicular assault and facing over a decade in prison, ever be 
assigned an attorney with the resources to defend him?

How many of the 30 defendants present for a single “mass plea” hearing in 
Louisiana’s 16th judicial district in June would have pleaded not guilty if 
they’d had more than 20 seconds of legal counsel?

In 1963, the landmark Gideon v Wainwright supreme court ruling 
<https://www.oyez.org/cases/1962/155> enshrined the constitutional right for 
indigent criminal defendants – those who cannot afford to pay for a lawyer – to 
access legal counsel. But 53 years on, as the rate of incarceration across the 
country has more than quadrupled and up to90% of criminal defendants in the US 
qualify as indigent <https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/bja/181160.pdf>, this 
cornerstone principle of the justice system has been eroded to breaking point.

As Ed Monahan, Kentucky’s public advocate and chief defender said: “We’re in 
crisis in Kentucky and in America.

“Public defenders are the pack mules of the system,” he said. “Pack mules can 
carry a lot. But you put one more box on an overburdened mule, and it won’t be 
able to function.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flouisiana-public-defender-system-black-men-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Louisiana%2C%20race%20and%20the%20consequences%20of%20a%20broken%20public%20defender%20system%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flouisiana-public-defender-system-black-men-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Louisiana%2C%20race%20and%20the%20consequences%20of%20a%20broken%20public%20defender%20system%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Flouisiana-public-defender-system-black-men-video&media=>
Louisiana, race and the consequences of a broken public defender system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/07/louisiana-public-defender-system-black-men-video>
 * Louisiana, race and the consequences of a broken public defender system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/07/louisiana-public-defender-system-black-men-video>
. Video by Laurence Mathieu-Léger 
In recent years the US has begun to reckon with its role as the world’s 
biggest jailer, home to a manifestly unequal justice system that 
disproportionately punishes poor people of color. In diagnosing the causes of 
this problem much of the focus has centered on sentencing reform, but in a 
country where95% of criminal cases are settled by plea deal 
<http://www.cato.org/publications/commentary/devils-bargain-how-plea-agreements-never-contemplated-framers-undermine-justice>
, little attention has been given to the critical state of indigent defense. 
Around the US, defenders routinely report an increase in overburdening and 
underfunding, caused by a variety of structural, political and economic drivers.


Up-to-date figures are scant, but according to a 2008 estimate by the American 
Bar Association 
<http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/administrative/legal_aid_indigent_defendants/ls_sclaid_def_expenditures_fy08.authcheckdam.pdf>
, state and county governments spent a total of $5.3bn on indigent defense 
systems a year, just 2.5% of the roughly $200bn spent on criminal justice by 
states and local government every year. The depth of crisis varies in each 
state, indicative of the complex patchwork of defense systems that are funded 
and administered differently dependent on jurisdiction.

In Missouri, for example, where the defender office is funded entirely at the 
state level, Governor Jay Nixon hasrepeatedly blocked 
<http://www.columbiamissourian.com/news/legislature-gives-governor-takes-away-public-defender-system-increase/article_319f5927-f50b-52a8-ab64-b5e607d84667.html>
 the passage of state legislation to cap defenders’ workloads and increase 
their funding. Most recently,in July 
<http://www.stltoday.com/news/local/govt-and-politics/less-new-money-for-public-defenders-in-missouri-as-governor/article_3962607e-b4cf-586b-b491-f18d7c6f96a7.html>
, Nixon withheld $3.5m of a relief fund approved by the state legislature to 
hire additional staff. As a result, the Missouri system is chronically 
overburdened,according to a 2014 study 
<http://www.americanbar.org/content/dam/aba/events/legal_aid_indigent_defendants/2014/ls_sclaid_5c_the_missouri_project_report.authcheckdam.pdf>
, which found the office was in need of 270 more staff to meet increasing 
caseloads.

Instead, said the director of the state’s defender program, Michael Barrett, 
the office has lost 30 staff members since 2014 due to funding cuts, and is 
taking on 12% more cases – now 82,000 a year. Barrett said this meant defenders 
were often juggling upwards of 150 cases at a time, with an average of $350 
available for each client, ranging from minor misdemeanor cases to non-capital 
murders.

In Cole County, Missouri, defenders work more than 225% above the recommended 
caseload limits

“Let’s put that in context: if you or I were to hire counsel for a simple DUI, 
it would cost thousands of dollars,” Barrett said.

Last month, Barrett took a novel approach to mitigate the crisis. He attempted 
to compel Nixon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/04/missouri-public-defender-jay-nixon-governor>
, a former attorney general and private-practice lawyer, to represent a 
50-year-old illiterate white man in Cole County – a right Barrett claimed he 
has under state law.

“Given the extraordinary circumstances that compel me to entertain any and all 
avenues for relief, it strikes me that I should begin with the one attorney in 
the state who not only created this problem, but is in a unique position to 
address it,” Barrett wrote.

The case itself was not extraordinary, Barrett said, but the defender’s office 
in Cole County is one of the most overburdened in the state, where defenders 
work more than 225% above the recommended caseload limits.

At a preliminary hearing weeks later, a judge handed down a single-page ruling 
which found that Barrett did not have the authority to compel the governor. “I 
was disappointed but not surprised,” said Barrett, adding that the case has now 
been assigned to one of his own overloaded attorneys.

The situation in Kentucky, another state-funded system, is a little different; 
funding difficulties are tied to the legislature rather than the governor’s 
office. Although the defender program was spared fromsweeping budget cuts 
across the state 
<https://thinkprogress.org/kentuckys-governor-dramatically-cut-education-funding-now-he-s-getting-sued-22c46d80f48#.do3rqljga>
, earlier this year the state senate rejected a$6.2m budget increase 
<http://www.wkyt.com/content/news/Ky-Court-Concerns--600-jobs-in-jeopardy-while-millions-in-additional-resources-cut-from-budget-373765891.html>
 handed down by a sympathetic Republican governor, Matt Bevin, which would have 
created 44 new positions in the defender’s office.

Kentucky defenders took on average 448 cases in the past year 
<http://dpa.ky.gov/NR/rdonlyres/601051E3-4025-4452-B205-3A69B0612B58/0/AnnualReportFY2015optimized.pdf>
, 54% above recommended national standards. Attorneys take on 11% more cases 
than they did a decade ago, and in areas such as Louisville now take close to 
double the national standard. The department received $49m last year – less 
than 0.5% of the overall state budget.

Even in Colorado, a state-funded system where the defender’s office is subject 
to a number of legislative safeguards that makes it one the most well funded in 
the country, agency executive Doug Wilson said his department was operating at 
a 10% staffing deficit. “I’m not telling you we’re fully funded and everything 
is peachy,” Wilson said. “I’m just telling you, we’re in better shape than most 
agencies across the country.”

In Utah, an estimated 62% of all misdemeanor defendants had no access to 
counsel at all, and at the very least 35% of public defense attorneys are 
overloaded with cases. Again, the root causes are different. Indigent defense 
is funded entirely at the county level, and in all but two counties indigent 
defense is provided by contracted attorneys – rather than defender’s offices – 
who are subjected to no state oversight and are paid a fixed fee per case. As 
such, concludeda recent study by the Sixth Amendment Center 
<http://sixthamendment.org/6ac/6AC_utahreport.pdf>, defense providers in most 
of Utah are essentially incentivized to work their cases quickly instead of 
effectively, and are thereby systematically subjected to a conflict of interest.

But perhaps nowhere in the US is this crisis felt more acutely than in 
Louisiana <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/louisiana>, where Americans are 
incarcerated at a higher rate than any other state, and where the defender 
system is already on the brink of meltdown.

Unlike any other state, Louisiana pays for its defense system primarily 
through speeding tickets and other local revenue

Unlike any other state <http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/idsus0812.pdf>, 
Louisiana pays for its indigent defense system primarily through speeding 
tickets and other locally generated revenue, rather than guaranteeing funds 
through the budgeting process. As a result, the finances of each defender’s 
office are subject to an extraordinarily high level of uncertainty, especially 
in districts without major highways – and during floods and other emergencies, 
when the police and courts are doling out fewer tickets.

Earlier this year, that unstable system was thrown into further disarray by 
Louisiana’s worst budget crisis in decades, which came in the wake of a steep 
drop in oil prices and years of tax-slashing by former governor Bobby Jindal. 
Around the state, defenders went into triage, putting thousands of their 
clients on waitlists for a lawyer.


But national attention on the crisis has waned, in part because conditions 
have improved in the city that receives no shortage of media coverage, New 
Orleans. After receiving a small influx of funds, the public defender’s office 
there ended its hiring freeze while reducing its waitlist to fewer than 40 
defendants.


Out in Louisiana’s 63 other parishes, however, much of this summer’s 
improvement in the indigent defense system is shallower than it appears. In 
Caddo Parish, the courts have addressed the public defender’s funding problems 
by appointing all the lawyers in town – including tax, real estate and adoption 
attorneys – to the cases that were being neglected, which has superficially 
resolved the waitlist. In Winn Parish, a prosecutor is now working part-time as 
a defender, another makeshift and constitutionally questionable way of making 
do in the absence of funding.


In the 16th judicial district, up to 50 poor defendants are convicted and 
sentenced – at once – for major felonies carrying up to decades in prison, 
while the single public defender representing all of them struggles to present 
any of the facts and arguments in their separate cases. And in the 20th 
district, exactly one lawyer is now employed to run a defender’s office that 
covers two parishes and more than 900 cases.

Over the next two days, the Marshall Project, in collaboration with the 
Guardian, will focus on the dire state of public defense in Louisiana and the 
often bizarre coping strategies some parishes have been forced to take.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpublic-defender-us-criminal-justice-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb05f26fae394d34b37bdde19c720e677732734ef%2F129_0_1898_1139%2F1898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20human%20toll%20of%20America's%20public%20defender%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpublic-defender-us-criminal-justice-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20human%20toll%20of%20America%27s%20public%20defender%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fpublic-defender-us-criminal-justice-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb05f26fae394d34b37bdde19c720e677732734ef%2F129_0_1898_1139%2F1898.jpg>
 Louisiana’s funding of public defenders – primarily through local court fees 
and traffic tickets – has left the system on the brink of meltdown. Photograph: 
Laurence Mathieu-Léger for the Guardian 
How bad is the picture around the country? Frustratingly, the scale of the 
problem remains unknown as dozens of states and jurisdictions produce no 
reliable data at all on the condition of their public defense systems.

The last nationwide survey of public defender offices was carried out almost 
10 years ago by the Department of Justice’s bureau of justice statistics (BJS). 
The findings were stark:73% of county-operated defender systems 
<http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/clpdo07.pdf>, utilized in 27 states, were 
functioning above the maximum recommended caseload level.

In the 22 state centralized defender programs 
<http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/spdp07.pdf>, 15 ran on caseload levels that 
exceeded the recommended case limit. In a world of meagre measurement and 
inadequate oversight, many argue the findings were a significant underestimate 
of the nationwide strain on the system.

In 2013, the BJS embarked on a follow-up survey, aiming to examine all forms 
of indigent defense systems – not just the defender’s offices examined in 2013. 
But the process has been arduous. Although the department has had a full 
response rate among state-administered offices, only 70% of county-based 
programs have responded, meaning publication of this side of the research may 
be delayed until spring of next year.

Suzanne Strong, the statistician leading the research, described many of the 
county-based systems as a “completely unknown universe”.

Despite the urgency of the crisis, recognized by both the US attorney general, 
Loretta Lynch 
<https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/attorney-general-loretta-e-lynch-delivers-remarks-white-house-convening-incarceration-and>
, and her predecessor,Eric Holder 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/eric-holder-defendants-legal-rights-undermined-by-budget-cuts/2013/08/22/efccbec8-06bc-11e3-9259-e2aafe5a5f84_story.html?utm_term=.774ebf342613>
, the issue remains intractable. Congressional bills offering defender’s 
offices easier access to federal grant money have gone nowhere.

And in an election year during which Hillary Clinton has explicitly promised 
to “reform our criminal justice system from end to end”, dealing with the 
crisis in funding defense of the poorest people coming before the courts does 
not feature on her platform for change. Donald Trump, who has promised to be 
“the law and order candidate”, has a vision for reform that goes no further 
than a vow to appoint “the best prosecutors and law enforcement officials in 
the country”.

In Washington, Democratic congressman Ted Deutch introduced in 2013 the 
National Center for the Right to Counsel Act 
<https://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/113/hr3407>, legislation that would 
create a private, non-profit centre to provide training, research initiatives 
and grant funding to defender’s offices around the country. Although the 
legislation was endorsed by a spectrum of legal groups, including the American 
Bar Association, it got nowhere in the House and was subsequently reintroduced 
last year.

“There has been a lot of bipartisan conversation here about criminal justice 
reforms, but most of that is focused on sentencing reform,” Deutch said. “We 
will continue to struggle with mass incarceration if we don’t do something to 
stop the system from feeding people into our prisons.

“In Washington, it sometimes takes a long time to help people recognize the 
problem that exists and that we have to grapple with.”

A few days spent in the courtrooms of rural Louisiana might be a start.

 * Tomorrow, the ruinous effects of Louisiana’s inadequate public defense 
funding, leaving real estate and adoption attorneys – and even prosecutors – to 
fill the gaps  