
To meet the climate change targets agreed at Paris, billions of pounds of 
green investment will be needed to upgrade the UK’s energy and transport 
infrastructure. The Green Investment Bank has so far done a sterling job of 
attracting capital to low-carbon infrastructure projects in the UK that might 
otherwise have struggled to find funding. The privatisation of the GIB (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/02/green-investment-bank-foreign-buyers-energy>
, 3 March) could move its focus away from novel and riskier low-carbon projects 
in favour of easier, more commercial projects.

I am not opposed to privatisation if it can be shown that it is the right 
policy tool to get the job done. But the decision to sell the GIB seems to have 
been rushed through just to get it off the government’s balance sheet. The 
Commons environmental audit committee found that the decision was taken without 
due transparency, consultation or proper consideration of alternatives. 
Ministers have simply not yet proved to parliament that the bank will achieve 
its aims better in the private sector. The government has relied heavily on 
assurances from potential shareholders and executives that stand to benefit 
from the sale. If the sale goes ahead, the government should ensure that the 
GIB remains accountable to parliament by reporting annually on the pay of its 
top team.

The EAC recommended 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/environmental-audit-committee/news-parliament-2015/green-investment-bank-report-15-16/>
 that the government undertake proper consultation and evidence-gathering 
before any sale, and that protecting the GIB’s green identity should be 
paramount. I welcome the secretary of state’s pledge to protect the bank’s 
green status with a special share, as my committee recommended, but I am 
concerned that without locking this in legislation it may not be secure.

I will be supporting amendments to that effect when the sale is debated in the 
Commons this week. If the government cannot guarantee that the GIB will 
continue to invest in smart, energy-efficient, low-carbon projects, the sale 
should not go ahead.
Mary Creagh MP 
Chair, Environmental audit committee 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 