
When I was 16 and studying The Crucible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/aug/06/classics.features>, I hated the 
girls in Arthur Miller’s play: those terrifying teenage beasts who organised 
themselves into a ferocious pack to bring down their prey. Held in check by the 
Puritans’ repressive strictures, the girls’s sexual urges were perverted and 
projected into charges of witchcraft hurled against neighbours. I didn’t want 
to be associated with that sort of female ferocity. Now, I think that was the 
point.

Why can't we just let teenage girls enjoy their sexuality?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/sep/28/-sp-let-teenage-girls-enjoy-sexuality-caitlin-moran-lena-dunham>
The only teenage girls I ever read about in literature classes were powerless; 
except for their sex, which we were made to understand made men weak. Abigail 
Williams and John Proctor. Hester Prynne and Arthur Dimmesdale. Cleopatra and 
Julius Caesar and Mark Antony. When I graduated from my high school in 1980, 
teenage girls were being used as messy political weapons by the US’s nascent 
religious right, to build its power. Our access to birth control, to abortion, 
and our rights to have sex as freely as young men, became one of the major 
issues around which the “Moral Majority” organised itself. As a young woman, I 
wrote articles aboutPlanned Parenthood <https://www.plannedparenthood.org/>, I 
escorted friends to clinics to get contraceptives, but I never talked about my 
own femaleness. There was a political conversation happening about my body, but 
it was not one I could read about outside newspapers. Later, I would discover 
the writing of Marge Piercy and Margaret Atwood, but at that time I felt alone.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fhorror-of-female-adolescence-literature-robin-wasserman-emma-cline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6d9d191cd148681725b0d17508147b844256176%2F0_0_2363_3078%2F2363.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20horror%20of%20female%20adolescence%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20write%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fhorror-of-female-adolescence-literature-robin-wasserman-emma-cline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20horror%20of%20female%20adolescence%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20write%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fhorror-of-female-adolescence-literature-robin-wasserman-emma-cline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6d9d191cd148681725b0d17508147b844256176%2F0_0_2363_3078%2F2363.jpg>
 ‘Preternatural’ … Sissy Spacek in the film adaptation of Carrie, by Stephen 
King. Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Redbank 
When it does appear in literature written by men, the depiction of 
“femaleness” too often veers into problematic territory. A woman’s sexual drive 
is reduced to something animalistic and strange – think Philip Roth’s Consuela 
Castillo in The Dying Animal, “superclassically the fertile female of our 
mammalian species ... caroming about with her eyes shut, off in a child’s game 
of her own”. Or revolting and alien, like in Jeffrey Eugenides’s The Virgin 
Suicides: “He felt her clammy shins, her hot knees, her bristly thighs, and 
then with terror he put his finger in the ravenous mouth of the animal leashed 
below her waist.”

Indeed, a thread of fascinated revulsion with women runs through Eugenides’s 
tale of five sisters who all take their own lives over the course of a year. 
The chorus of adolescent boys who narrate the book remark on the sisters as 
“creatures”, the youngest one a “deranged harlot”.Menstruation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/menstruation> is elevated to some 
mysterious blood rite: “In the trash can was one Tampax spotted, still fresh 
from the insides of one of the Lisbon sisters. Sissen said that he wanted to 
bring it to us, that it wasn’t gross but a beautiful thing, you had to see it, 
like a modern painting or something.”

Eugenides is not alone in portraying female puberty as something 
preternatural; the most iconic example isStephen King’s Carrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/24/rereading-stephen-king-carrie>, 
when the sheltered Carrie gets her period for the first time and becomes the 
butt of her schoolmates’ jibes:

“PER-iod!”

It was becoming a chant, an incantation. Someone in the background (perhaps 
Hargensen again, Sue couldn’t tell in the jungle of echoes) was yelling, “Plug 
it up!” with hoarse, uninhibited abandon.

Sister act: female friendship in fiction from Woolf to Ferrante and Zadie Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/06/women-friendship-wold-ferrante-zadie-smith-fiction-alex-clark>
Far too often, very ordinary phenomena like female sexual desire or the onset 
of puberty are elevated by male writers to something remarkable, frightening. 
Young women are either the animalistic bearers of the erotic urge, or bodily 
reminders of how sin enters the world. And other elements of female adolescence 
not associated with sex – like the intensity of friendships or familial bonds 
at that stage of life – are left off the page, or reduced to dramatic displays 
of hormonal cattiness.

One of the side-effects of locking women, or people of colour, or members of 
the working class, out of the publication market is that when those people 
appear in literature written by authors who are not them, they may not 
recognise themselves. When critics have been schooled to recognise “art” 
through representations of the status quo, new works from authors outside of 
that end up classified as “lesser”– think of the genre labels “ethnic 
literature”, “chick lit”, “popular fiction”. “Watching boys do stuff” is the 
stuff of literature – and reading male writers who view women as something 
alien has been the flipside of that literature for a long time.

What a relief it was, then, to read two books this summer in which two female 
authors wrote about teenage girls doing stuff:Robin Wasserman’s Girls on Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/04/the-best-recent-crime-novels-review-roundup>
 andEmma Cline’s The Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/08/the-girls-by-emma-cline-review-charles-manson>
. Both books feature at their heart the intensity of teenage girl friendship, 
that love that got me through the combination of adolescent hormones and 
bumping up against the strictures of class and gender that US high schools 
present.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fhorror-of-female-adolescence-literature-robin-wasserman-emma-cline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7723a5499b054ef92ec64c02ce0de4750f9fac85%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20horror%20of%20female%20adolescence%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20write%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fhorror-of-female-adolescence-literature-robin-wasserman-emma-cline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20horror%20of%20female%20adolescence%20%E2%80%93%20and%20how%20to%20write%20about%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fhorror-of-female-adolescence-literature-robin-wasserman-emma-cline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7723a5499b054ef92ec64c02ce0de4750f9fac85%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Authors Robin Wasserman, left, and Emma Cline. Composite: Robin 
Wasserman/Getty Images 
The cool girls, good girls and bad girls of modern books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/may/28/women-modern-books-gone-girl-girls-on-fire>
Wasserman’s Girls on Fire <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/girls-on-fire.html>
 is set in early 1990s rust belt Pennsylvania, about best friends Lacey and 
Dex. While it is a mystery, the true strength of the novel comes from the 
honesty of the girls’ portrayal. When Dex describes her friendship with Lacey, 
I wanted to search for my long-lost high-school friend and read her this 
passage:

[O]ther people were irrelevant to us; that they existed only for the pleasure 
of dismissing them, simulacra of consciousness, walking and talking and 
pretending at an inner life but hollow inside. Nothing like us … The only real, 
certified and confirmed, is you and me.” Wasserman nails that tone of 
adolescent intellectual bravado and insecurity that drove so many of my own 
teenage conversations.

When The Girls <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/the-girls.html> came out, 
almost all critics focused on Cline’s re-creation of the events leading up to
the Helter Skelter murders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/aug/02/charles-manson-linda-kasabian-polanski>
. But it was not Cline’s imagining of life inside Manson’s compound that made 
me squirm, it was the evocation of the mother-daughter relationship that made 
me want to call my own mother and apologise. When character Eve suspects her 
father is having an affair, her anger is instead directed at her mother,

who’d let it happen, who’d been as soft and malleable as dough. Handing money 
over, cooking dinner every night, and no wonder my father had wanted something 
else … My mother must have known and stayed anyway, and what did that mean 
about love?”

Cline’s depiction of the scorn and pity some teenagers feel towards their 
mothers is painfully true; she truly sticks her finger in that wound and digs 
around.

Grip-lit? Psychological thrillers were around long before Gone Girl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/29/psychological-thrillers-grip-lit>
The Girl on the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jan/08/the-girl-on-the-train-paula-hawkins-review-novel>
; Gone Girl; Girl With the Dragon Tattoo: much has been made of the “girl” 
titles in the past few years. Some have attempted to place such writing in its 
own category of literature, as if writing about women – again – can be lumped 
into one large pile and undifferentiated because women are the main players. 
But The Girls and Girls on Fire, for starters, should be discussed as works of 
literary fiction that contribute to our understanding of what it feels like to 
be a teenage girl or young woman. I want to see men write books like these; 
truly, I hope male writers who wish to write about young women use Wasserman 
and Cline as models – just for starters – and make bids to free young women 
from the literary occult where they’ve been hidden.
 