
A wise man <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Beecham> once said, “There 
are two golden rules for an orchestra: start together and finish together 
<http://www.azquotes.com/quote/22205>. The public doesn’t give a damn what goes 
on in between.” Asa German pianist and conductor 
<http://www.larsvogt.com/Home.html> who has recently become music director of 
theRoyal Northern Sinfonia 
<http://www.sagegateshead.com/about-us/northern-sinfonia/> in Gateshead, it 
would seem to make sense for me to look to a legendary British conductor for 
guidance. But on this occasion Sir Thomas Beecham was wrong. The public knows 
quality when it hears it – not only in the sense of whether it’s any good or 
not, but the precise sounds that a specific orchestra makes. That’s all the 
more pronounced with Royal Northern Sinfonia, because it is a chamber orchestra.

Growing up in Düren, Germany – going mostly to concerts in Aachen, with its 
symphony orchestra – I didn’t even know what a chamber orchestra was until my 
early 20s. Now I know how wonderful, how vital it is. And how much of a labour 
of love it is to ensure its future.


In Mozart’s time, a chamber orchestra was the orchestra. It's what he, Brahms 
and Schumann all worked with

Back in Mozart <https://www.theguardian.com/music/mozart>’s time, a chamber 
orchestra wasthe orchestra. That’s what he, Brahms and Schumann all worked 
with, and they enjoyed working with it (as we know from Brahms, for instance, 
and his extremely fruitful connection with the Meiningen Court Orchestra). It’s 
not that alien from a symphony orchestra, just fewer players. Perhaps 30, as 
opposed to at least 90 musicians. Big difference?Big difference.


Nowadays, we’re told that size really matters. We’re all obsessed with what’s 
big in entertainment; the next big thing. The blockbuster film with its 
enormous spaceships and outsize special effects. Towering stage sets. In 
classical music, that trend was set by the huge orchestral forces demanded by 
Mahler, Bruckner and Wagner (who, of course, used the larger orchestra for 
music that needed those big forces).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Flars-vogt-chamber-orchestra-mozart-brahms-schumann-royal-northern%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fe18788726934d98a5479c4a8173661b0731b35%2F123_30_837_930%2F837.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20chamber%20orchestra%3A%20why%20small%20is%20beautiful&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Flars-vogt-chamber-orchestra-mozart-brahms-schumann-royal-northern%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20chamber%20orchestra%3A%20why%20small%20is%20beautiful&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Flars-vogt-chamber-orchestra-mozart-brahms-schumann-royal-northern%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7fe18788726934d98a5479c4a8173661b0731b35%2F123_30_837_930%2F837.jpg>
 Conductor and pianist Lars Vogt Photograph: Neda Navaee 
Yet to think about music only in that way is to misunderstand it. All music 
making, be it with one musician, a trio or quintet, a chamber orchestra or 
symphony orchestra, is far more about intensity, energy and intimacy than about 
volume. For example, I heard Claudio Arrau in concert, aged over 80, playing 
Beethoven’s Appassionata sonata, and it seemed to me that he never went beyond 
a mezzo forte. But the intensity was so immense as to render that performance 
full of weight, depth and real inner drama.

That’s what you get from a chamber orchestra. You hear every last bit of 
concentrated detail in the playing. Every player is much more exposed, every 
instrument is not just heard but is somehow alive, in full characterisation. 
You can almost see the different characters – the oboe, the bassoon, the 
clarinet, the violins – and they have conversations. Suddenly it’s as though 
you have an opera stage in front of you and everything is alive upon it, 
telling its story.

In an age where new writing is constantly under threat, composers need chamber 
orchestras to be their champions

And yet chamber orchestras too often cede the limelight to their larger 
cousins. Composers today tend to want to go large, ruling out smaller groups 
like ours approaching their work. That’s a critical mistake, not only in terms 
of possibilities of performance but also in the development of the composer, as 
writing for a chamber orchestra has such different challenges which I’m 
convinced make a composer grow. If we as a society lose the feel for Mozart’s 
orchestra, we lose what Mozart and the others got from it: a sense of the 
centre of the music – because chamber orchestras are so closely related to 
everything from the bustle of opera down to small-scale instrumental writing; 
an inner sense of structure – they didn’t just decide to write, say, a fugue 
into a work… the fugue demanded to be put there because the architecture 
required it. It couldn’t be any other way. Composers got structure in their 
bones from feeling the dynamics of the chamber orchestra.


In an age when new writing is constantly under threat, composers need chamber 
orchestras to be their champions. It’s more economic for one to put on a new 
work than it is for a massive symphony orchestra with its enormous hall, high 
overheads and many thousands of seats to sell.


 We want to be there for composers and, in turn, new music sustains us. With 
no present, no orchestra can have a future. That’s why, in a season where we’re 
re-examining Mozart himself, Royal Northern Sinfonia has run a competition for 
young composers called “Mozarts of Tomorrow”, inviting young composers to 
connect with and write for a Mozart-sized symphony orchestra. The winners’ 
concert is this weekend at Sage Gateshead, which I’m happy to be conducting. 
We’re proud, as a UK orchestra in an iconic venue, to shine a spotlight on 
composing for chamber orchestras. Composers need that. And Mozart’s orchestras 
need composers. Contrary to what Sir Thomas insisted (though I’d like to think 
he didn’t really mean it!) audiences know how to listen to what happens in 
between. When chamber orchestras and composers unite, we can create something 
really special. After all, Mozart did.

Lars Vogt <http://www.larsvogt.com/Home.html> conducts the Royal Northern 
Sinfonia in the winning Mozarts of Tomorrow pieces, alongside works by 
Tchaikovsky, Chopin and Weber atSage Gateshead on 22 January 
<http://www.sagegateshead.com/event/rns-lars-vogt36077/>.

 