
At the turn of the millennium, after a decade free of racially motivated 
unrest, it seemed such violence had been consigned to Britain’s past. Yet just 
a year later, race riots broke out in Oldham, Bradford and Burnley, taking the 
political class unawares. Ted Cantle’sindependent review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/dec/11/race.world5> concluded these towns 
had been characterised by communities divided along ethnic lines, living a 
“series of parallel lives”. His report created a frenzy of government activity 
in its wake: new Whitehall units set up, experts deployed, targets set.

Fifteen years later, the publication of a new government review on integration 
byLouise Casey <https://www.gov.uk/government/people/louise-casey> this week 
offers us the opportunity to reflect on how much has changed.

There is a positive face to the story. As Britain grows increasingly diverse, 
racist attitudes havesharply declined  
<http://www.britishfuture.org/articles/less-racist-anxious/>in the last two 
decades and we have become one of themost racially tolerant 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/world-values-survey-racial-tolerance-britain-468205> 
countries in the world. But tolerance does not make the intersection of 
parallel lives inevitable. Cantle has spoken of his concer 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/10889897/Muslim-schoolchildren-are-still-leading-parallel-lives-to-the-mainstream.html>
n that parallel lives remain as much a feature of Britain today as in 2001. The 
Social Integration Commission last year highlighted  
<http://socialintegrationcommission.org.uk/SIC_Report_WEB.pdf>the lack of 
mixing across all ethnic groups, apart from people of mixed race, taking into 
account the diversity of the areas in which people live.

This should worry us. Segregation introduces a fragility to the tolerance that 
has been so hard won, creating fertile territory for resentment. Communities in 
which there is more mixing between diverse groups are more resilient, enjoying 
higher levels of trust in others.

Government cannot nor should not dictate the way we live our lives and with 
whom we decide to spend them. But public institutions such as schools and 
community centres have an important role to play in nudging us to rub shoulders 
with those from other backgrounds, rather than aiding and abetting our natural 
tendency to mix with others like ourselves.

Yet the school system seems to be promoting rather than discouraging 
segregation: levels of ethnic segregation are higher among children of school 
age than 18-34 year-olds. Government could do more to encourage schools to 
avoid segregation through admissions codes and catchment areas and should 
oblige schools to ensure children from different backgrounds have the 
opportunity to mix, even if that meansjoint provision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/06/faith-british-schools-hope>
 with other schools. There is a range of other measures local government can 
take to promote greater mixing through public services and community 
institutions, as argued by the social integration charityThe Challenge 
<http://the-challenge.org/uploads/documents/TCN-Integration-City.pdf>.

The political response from both left and right has left much to be desired. 
Politicians on the right have done too little to acknowledge the economic and 
structural barriers that minority groups face in integrating and the pernicious 
impacts of societal discrimination that can make it harder for groups such as
Muslim women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/bradford-muslim-women-integration-casey-report>
 and young black men to get jobs. Both David Cameron and Theresa May have 
slipped into using irresponsible soundbites that sensationalise already fraught 
debates, such as threatening to forceMuslim women to learn English  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/18/david-cameron-stigmatising-muslim-women-learn-english-language-policy>
at the risk of deportation and requiring companies to disclose how many foreign 
workers they employ.

Muslim women are not just held back by societal discrimination, but by gender 
discrimination within conservative Asian communities and not just with respect 
to employment. Some 30-40% of Muslim marriages are ceremonies that are
unrecognised <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37838496> by the state, leaving some 
women vulnerable and without legal rights, with their only option to seek 
divorce in sharia councils.

Too often, the left has failed to challenge these behaviours in minority 
communities that contravene its fundamental values and act as a barrier to 
women in those communities. The “multicultural” model, in which local politics 
is characterised by close relationships between elected officials and 
self-appointed community leaders claiming to represent whole ethnic groups, 
with funding flowing from councils to community groups to provide services for 
specific communities, was discredited more than a decade ago in the wake of the 
2001 riots.

Yet there is evidence it has stubbornly persisted in Labour areas 
characterised by diversity, such as Tower Hamlets and Bradford. This is at 
least in part because it evolved into the patronage-style politics found in 
parts of the Indian subcontinent, with community leaders helping to provide 
electoral support for Labour from their communities.

This close relationship between local Labour parties and Asian communities has 
a dark side that has sometimes resulted in the left looking the other way. 
Several Muslim female candidates have come forward saying they have experienced 
misogyny and intimidation from Muslim men involved in local Labour parties. Yet 
Labour hasrejected calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/06/activist-condemns-labour-response-to-jeremy-corbyn-letter-charges-of-bias-against-muslim-women>
 from the Muslim Women’s Network to hold an inquiry into systemic misogyny 
within the party. The independent inquiry into child sex abuse in Rotherham 
partly attributed the Labour council’s failure to take action to a fear of 
broaching ethnically-sensitive issues, as most perpetrators were men of 
Pakistani heritage.

In the wake of the Casey review, it is likely both parties will issue warm 
words about the importance of and their commitment to integration. But there is 
a danger of history repeating itself: that like the Cantle report that preceded 
it, it inspires a flurry of activity aimed at trying to get us to mix more, but 
with neither party confronting their inconvenient truths.

The right must face up to its continued reluctance to tackle the economic and 
structural barriers faced by many minority groups. The left must face up to its 
failure to consistently challenge illiberal behaviours wherever they are found. 
A failure to do so would be to jeopardise the tolerant society we have built 
over decades.

SOCIETY
 