
Little noticed amid the uproar over last week’s terrorist attacks in Izmir and 
Istanbul <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-38521549>has been Turkey’s 
linked escalation of a bitter dispute with Washington over US actions in Syria. 
Supporters of Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Turkey’s president, say that by aiding and 
arming Syrian Kurdish fighters, Washington is, in effect, facilitating 
terrorist outrages of the kind that left 39 people dead in an Istanbul 
nightclub on New Year’s Eve and claimed four lives at Izmir’s courthouse on 
Thursday.

While Islamic State claimed responsibility for the nightclub attack, Kurdish 
extremists are regularly blamed for similar atrocities such as last month’s
Istanbul football stadium bombings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/bomb-outside-istanbul-football-stadium-causes-multiple-casualties>
. In Izmir, Turkish authorities say heavily armed PKK separatists from Turkey’s 
large Kurdish minority, allied to Syria’s Kurdish PYD, were behind a plot that, 
had it not been thwarted by the mortal bravery of a lone policeman,Fethi Sekin, 
could have produced mass casualties 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/turkeys-painful-diplomacy-in-the-anti-terror-fight.aspx?PageID=238&NID=108254&NewsCatID=409>
.

Repeated Turkish demands that the Obama administration cut its ties to the 
PYD, which shares its aim of toppling the Syrian regime, have been ignored. A 
day after Izmir, defence minister, Fikri Işık, voiced Ankara’s mounting anger 
and frustration. If the US did not think again,Turkey could bar US and western 
coalition forces from the İncirlik air base 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/turkey-can-end-us-use-of-base-if-interests-hurt.aspx?pageID=238&nID=108221&NewsCatID=352>
 used for operations against Isis. More than that, he warned, Turkey would 
review its membership of Nato.

“The US chose the PYD as a partner in the fight with Daesh (Isis). From the 
beginning, we have been saying this is wrong,” Işık said. “The PYD is the 
Syrian wing of the PKK. The US made a strategic mistake. We are paying its 
price as the US will also pay the price... The US is our ally inNato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato>. The basis of our alliance should be 
transparent and genuine. In the absence of these, it would be hard to sustain 
this alliance.”

Işık’s implicit threat brought a quick response from the Pentagon. “We are 
operating out of İncirlik… and we look forward to that continuing,” a spokesman 
said. No mention was made of the possible loss of a strategically vital Nato 
ally. Nor was any response offered to an earlier Turkish complaint that the US 
was failing to give air support to Turkish groundforces fighting Isis in 
northernSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.

Turkey fears that increased Kurdish autonomy, whether in Syria, northern Iraq, 
or south-easternTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, threatens 
its territorial and national integrity. By allying itself with Syria’s Kurds, 
Washington has prioritised its Syrian objectives over its relationship with 
Ankara. Yet given Obama’s overall failure in Syria, where he has been 
comprehensively outmanoeuvred by Russia and Iran, this now looks short-sighted.

Erdoğan’s increasing collaboration with Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president and 
Obama’s chief bogeyman, over a Syria ceasefire and possible peace deal adds to 
the sense ofdeepening unease. Turkey, positioned at the disputed nexus between 
Europe, Eurasia and the Middle East, has long been viewed as a key western 
ally. But under Erdoğan’s authoritarian, neo-Islamist and anti-western 
leadership, the old ties are fraying. This process precedes the Obama era, 
dating back to the 2003 refusal to allow US invasion troops to transit Turkey 
into Iraq.

So the looming question – “Who lost Turkey?” – is not one that can be fairly 
directed at Obama alone. But it is a question that is becoming increasingly 
pertinent. The successful drawing of Turkey into Russia’s widening orbit, 
cemented in place by converging security interests, canny diplomacy, energy 
deals and shared disdain for the Americans, would be a strategic coup for 
Putin. It would confirm Moscow’s return as a majorMiddle East player and extend 
its military reach across the Black Sea and eastern Mediterranean regions.

Related: Turkey coup attempt: Erdoğan demands US arrest exiled cleric Gülen 
amid crackdown on army – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/jul/15/turkey-coup-attempt-military-gunfire-ankara>

As Erdoğan scolds the US and cosies up to Putin, Turkey’s relationships with 
other traditional partners, notably the western European democracies and the 
EU, are also deteriorating. Erdoğan fiercely rejects their criticism of the 
massdetentions andsackings and human rights abuses 
<https://uk.news.yahoo.com/thousand-fired-wave-turkey-coup-purges-063310574.html>
 that followed last July’s failed army coup (which he claims was a US-based 
conspiracy). Likewise, foreign dismay over hisarrests of leading pro-Kurdish 
politicians 
<http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/im-not-a-pkk-manager-member-spokesperson-or-sympathizer-hdp-co-chair-demirtas-.aspx?pageID=238&nID=108240&NewsCatID=338>
, his undermining of Turkey’s secularist tradition and his 
brazen,anti-democratic bid to create an all-powerful executive presidency 
receive short shrift.

Yet at the very moment Erdoğan is emerging as the supposedly most powerful 
Turkish leader since Ataturk, the deeply divided country he dominates is riven 
by justified fear of more terrorist outrages and civil strife, more Stalinesque 
purges and more instability spilling over from Syria. Perhaps, after all, the 
question “Who lost Turkey?” can be answered in one word: Erdoğan.

Comments will be opened later
 