
With an arid climate <http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ER.H2O.INTR.PC>, one 
of thelowest GDPs per capita 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD> in the world and a recent 
history of political upheaval, it is perhaps remarkable that most of Burkina 
Faso’s capital has access to piped water. The Office National de l’Eau et de 
l’Assainissement (ONEA), the utility in charge of water and wastewater services 
in the capital Ouagadougou and other urban areas, provides piped water to 94% 
of the population pretty much round the clock.

Sustainability in the pipeline: securing water and sanitation for the future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/14/sustainability-in-the-pipeline-securing-water-and-sanitation-for-the-future>
This wasn’t always the case. In 2000, just half of the population had access 
to piped water 
<http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/316751472482999236/pdf/108074-WP-P147350-PUBLIC-add-series.pdf>
 [pdf] and water shortages were the norm during the dry season. The turnaround 
was down to a series of reforms, and a willingness to push the boat out to 
serve the poor.

About 25% of Ouagadougou’s 2.5 million inhabitants live in informal 
settlements, but ONEA’s mandate means it can only serve formal areas. To get 
around this, the utility designed five-year concession contracts for private 
operators to build and operate water networks in five informal settlements. 
ONEA sells bulk water to the operators and tariffs are regulated. The average 
price of water in the concessions is 40p per cubic metre. “It’s not because 
people live in informal settlements that they do not have the right to water,” 
says Hamado Ouedraogo, ONEA’s chief executive.

The model has been so successful since it started in 2013 that the utility has 
added two more concessions in Ouagadougou and three in the town of Houndé last 
year. Another should be ready by the end of the year in Bobo-Dioulasso.

All too often utilities assume that they have to choose between being 
financially sustainable and serving the poor
Chris Heymans 
ONEA is one of a handful of utilities identified by the World Bank as 
providing good water and sanitation services to the poor. Despite challenging 
operating environments – water scarcity, galloping urbanisation, limited 
financial resources, legal constraints etc – these water companies also happen 
to be some of the best performing on the continent, with positive cash flows 
and low non-revenue water (water lost through leaks or theft).

All too often utilities assume that they have to choose between being 
financially sustainable and serving the poor, says Chris Heymans, senior water 
and sanitation specialist at the World Bank. “What we’re trying to show is that 
it’s not an inevitability.”

In fact, the two issues are closely connected. Common arguments are that 
low-income consumers don’t pay their bills and that there isn’t enough water to 
extend services to the poor. “But if you radically reduce losses in the system, 
you have more water,” says Neil Jeffery, chief executive of Water and 
Sanitation for the Urban Poor (WSUP), a non-profit working with utilities in 
the developing world. WSUP’s work with water services company Jirama in 
Antananarivo,Madagascar <https://www.theguardian.com/world/madagascar>, for 
example, managed to increase the water supply to benefit 700,000 low-income 
customers.

How do you solve a problem like a broken water pump?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/22/how-do-you-solve-a-problem-like-a-broken-water-pump>
Jeffery says that working on improving operating efficiencies is a useful 
point of engagement with utilities that have a negative perception of service 
provision for the poor. “We want to demonstrate in the same breath how the 
business can function better so that they can deliver to [the poor], but also 
how it can work better per se,” he says.

The World Bank found that the utilities that serve the poor well all had their 
houses in order – reduced non-revenue water, increased billing and collection 
efficiency, improved productivity – before investing in service extension to 
low-income customers. Tariffs were also set so that the companies can recoup 
their costs. Profits then allowed the utilities to pay for extensions to the 
network and added capacity.

Following this model, the World Bank calculated that if Mowasco, Mombasa’s 
struggling utility, achieved similar levels of efficiency as the continent’s 
star performers, it could generate enough cash to provide universal piped water 
access across the city and annual tariff increases to a minimum.

The other thing that set successful utilities apart was their ability to 
innovate, says Heymans. Cross-subsidising tariffs (where commercial consumers 
pay more than households) is one thing; accommodating irregular income or 
having to adapt services to informal settlements is another.

It’s genuinely helped enhance our knowledge base of our customers and get a 
sense of closeness with [them]
Rose Kaggwa 
eThekwini, Durban’s municipality, has developed electronic flow limiters to 
monitor water consumption: poor residents are entitled to a free water 
allowance of 300 litre per household per day and, to prevent them from going 
over their entitlement, flow slows down to a trickle. Nairobi City Water and 
Sewerage Company has developed an arsenal of mobile tools including Jisomee 
Mita, an innovative billing system that allows low-income customers to pay as 
they go: they can read their meters as often as they like and pay (using mobile 
money) in smaller instalments than the usual monthly bill.

Other utilities have set up “low-income” or “pro-poor” units. In some cases, 
they have achieved little more than adding another level of bureaucracy but in 
others, they have become real assets. “In [our] case, it’s genuinely helped 
enhance our knowledge base of our customers and get a sense of closeness with 
[them],” says Rose Kaggwa, director of business and scientific services at the 
National Water and Sewerage Corporation in Uganda, one of the continent’s star 
performers.

Dry dams, leaky pipes and tanker mafias – Karachi's water crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/28/karachi-pakistan-water-crisis>
The World Bank hopes that the findings will inspire other utilities to 
initiate – and embed – reforms. Much of it comes down to leadership, and 
although Heymans agrees that it is important for utilities to operate 
autonomously from political interference, utilities should not shy away from 
engaging with politicians. “[Defining] yourself as a purely technical 
institution doesn’t work,” he says. “[The sector] is so political. You have to 
confront the reality to move forward and change.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter, and have your say on issues 
around water in development using#H2Oideas 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23H2Oideas&src=typd>.

• This article was amended on 4 October 2016. An earlier version described 
Water andSanitation <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/sanitation> 
for the Urban Poor (WSUP) as a charity rather than a non-profit and gave an 
incorrect figure for the impact its work had.
 