
More than two decades into a mandate he promised would last a billion years, 
Yahya Jammeh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
, the autocratic Gambian president, last week shocked his west African nation 
by accepting defeat at the ballot box and promising to retire to live as an 
ordinary farmer.

Gambians had come to expect surprises from their leader – cruel, violent and 
capricious in power – just not ones that set the whole nation dancing in the 
streets and sent shockwaves of joy and inspiration across the continent. Now 
many are looking at other long-term presidents in a region where Jammeh counts 
as a relative newcomer and wondering if he could inspire change far beyond his 
tiny country’s borders.

The Gambia’s President Jammeh concedes defeat in election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
Jammeh’s 22 years in power make him a relative newcomer compared with Yoweri 
Museveni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/20/ugandan-election-yoweri-museveni-wins-arrests-opposition-leader-besigye>
, Uganda’s president for 30 years,Omar al-Bashir, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/omar-al-bashir> who has ruled Sudan for 27, 
and Robert Mugabe, who led Zimbabwe to independence 36 years ago.

Election officials appeared to surprise even themselves by announcing Jammeh 
had conceded. “It’s very rare this happens,” said a nervous-looking election 
commission head,, Alieu Momar Njie. Jammeh had given no indications he intended 
to preside over and respect a genuine election. He has a long track record of 
jailing, torturing and killing opponents and in the run-up to polling day 
declared himself “proud” to be a dictator called his opposition “evil vermin”, 
and vowed to bury them nine feet deep.

That made his televised address freely conceding defeat the day results came 
in utterly extraordinary. “You have spoken in no uncertain terms,” he told the 
Gambian people, an unusually wide grin on his face. “I want to make it very 
clear that I will never rule this country without your mandate and I will never 
cheat.”

The Gambia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gambia> is one of Africa’s 
smallest and least important countries, so its unexpected shift to democracy 
will not bring political or economic pressure to bear on dictatorial neighbours 
or more distant nations. But opposition politicians and activists across the 
continent are hopeful it could serve as inspiration to voters, challengers and 
autocrats, particularly if the change continues peacefully and brings foreign 
support for an impoverished nation.

“Yahya Jammeh has recognised his defeat! Who would have thought it? There is 
hope!” said Fred Bauma, a democracy activist in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo, who has been jailed and threatened with the death penalty for his work. 
The mandate of the incumbent DRC president,Joseph Kabila 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/23/joseph-kabila-democratic-republic-of-the-congo-elections-transfer-power>
, is meant to expire in two weeks, but instead of organising elections, he has 
negotiated a deal with a small sliver of the opposition to stay in power. Bauma 
urged Kabila to show the same respect for DRC’s constitution that Jammeh has 
for the Gambia’s.

Adding to the sense that change could be in the air, the Angolan president, 
Eduardo Dos Santos, who has ruled for more than three decades, announced just 
hours after Jammeh’s concession that he plans to step down next year. And last 
week the 92-year-old Mugabe is said to have hinted to a group of war veterans 
that he would retire “properly”, without explaining what that might mean.

It could encourage people to open up a little bit, or it could encourage 
others to double down on their repression
Steve Cockburn, Amnesty International 
For some countries, such as Gabon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gabon>, 
the Gambia’s change has come too late to inspire much hope. An August election 
sawAli Bongo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/24/gabon-court-rules-president-ali-bongo-rightful-winner-of-september-election>
 extend his family’s 50-year rule, with several people killed and about 1,000 
arrested in violence after polls closed.

The past few years have also seen a spate of leaders changing constitutions 
and rigging elections to allow them to stay in power. But the continent has 
more positive historical examples to follow. In Zambia, Kenneth Kaunda lost 
power via the ballot box in 1991; in Malawi, Hastings Banda lost in 1994 and 
then Joyce Banda lost in 2014; and in Madagascar, such transitions have 
happened three times. And though it took years of huge international pressure, 
South Africa’s apartheid government eventually agreed to make way for democracy.

Autocrats across Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> might 
respond to Jammeh’s demise in two ways, says Amnesty International’s Steve 
Cockburn. “It could encourage people to open up a little bit to avoid the same 
situation or it could encourage others to double down on their repression,” he 
said.

It is still baffling even to most Gambians why their dictator turned unlikely 
democrat almost overnight. But perhaps the master of erratic behaviour was just 
trying to keep the world on its toes.
 