
Now is the time for top clubs to prove that to be forewarned really is to be 
forearmed. Everyone knew that theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> was on the agenda for 
early 2017 and now, with 23 Premier League players among those heading off to 
Gabon to compete for their countries in what their employers view as the 
world’s worst-timed international tournament, rich clubs must show they are 
resourceful enough to cope. Otherwise they will pay a heavy price.

Liverpool’s matchwinner Sadio Mané will head to Gabon with a heavy heart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/liverpool-sadio-mane-africa-cup-of-nations-senegal>
For Liverpool and Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> that could mean 
slipping further off Chelsea’s pace in the title race. For clubs such as 
Sunderland, Leicester City and Hull City, it may result in falling deeper into 
relegation trouble.

Of the 99 signings that Sir Alex Ferguson made as manager of Manchester United 
only four were African – and one of the reasons for that was the Scot’s 
wariness about losing a key player in the middle of a campaign. When forking 
out around £30mfor Ivory Coast’s Eric Bailly last summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/08/eric-bailly-signs-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-defender>
, José Mourinho obviously figured that some players are so good that the risk 
is worth running, a feeling that Ferguson once had about Eric Djemba-Djemba.

Mourinho’s judgment looks sounder on that score, with Bailly emerging as 
United’s best centre-back of the season so far. United kept a clean sheet 
without himat West Ham United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/west-ham-united-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 in their last match but, depending on Ivory Coast’s progress in Gabon, they 
may have to contest another seven matches while he is away with his country. 
That schedule includes the high-stakes duel with Liverpool on 15 January. On 
the plus side for United, Liverpool will be deprived of Sadio Mané for that 
match, as the forwardwill be on duty with Senegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/20/liverpool-sadio-mane-africa-cup-of-nations-senegal>
.

As two of their rivals are depleted, Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, who used to fret about the 
departures of players such as Didier Drogba, Michael Essien and Salomon Kalou, 
can smile at being unhindered by the Africa Cup of Nations.

Nigeria’s slightly surprising failure to qualify for the tournament means that 
Victor Moses remains available to Antonio Conte (so does Mikel John Obi, 
although Conte may not consider that a relevant observation).

Chelsea, then, can be confident that this year’s Afcon could be as beneficial 
to them as the last one was in 2015, when Manchester City missed Yaya Touré 
terribly. Two years ago the title race was a lot closer at this stage, as 
Chelsea were neck and neck withManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> before the latter lost 
Yaya Touré and Wilfried Bony to the Afcon. City missed Touré terribly and were 
seven points behind Chelsea by the time their Ivorians returned. Earlier in 
this season it seemed as if Pep Guardiola might not have cared if Touré went 
travelling for a month, now the fact that the midfielder has retired from 
international football means one headache fewer for a manager who has much to 
ponder at the moment. City will have no players at the Afcon.

Nor will Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur>, while Arsenal look to 
have enough cover to withstand the loss of the Egypt midfielder Mohamed Elneny. 
Sunderland and Leicester would like to be able to say something similar but 
both are set to lose three important players and cannot be certain of coping.

Sunderland are to be shorn of their Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast> centre-back Lamine Koné, 
their Gabon midfielder Didier Ndong and their Tunisia midfielder Wahbi Khazri.

All three of those players featured in the club’s last Premier League win, the 
1-0 victory against Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/17/sunderland-watford-premier-league-match-report>
 on 17 December. The loss of Koné looks to be especially unwelcome to David 
Moyes, who has been keenly aware of the downside to losing a centre-back to the 
Afcon since 2004, when his Everton team tumbled into relegation peril by losing 
four matches while their Nigeria defender Joseph Yobo was away at the 
tournament. Koné’s absence is likely to mean regular deployment by Moyes of a 
central defence featuring John O’Shea and Papy Djilobodji. The latter was not 
deemed worthy of a call-up by Senegal and Moyes will be hoping the player’s 
performances over the next few weeks do not vindicate that decision.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fpremier-league-winners-losers-2017-africa-cup-of-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb49bdbb0bd208af10a56d7f87e028b09296616a8%2F12_46_2174_1304%2F2174.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Premier%20League%E2%80%99s%20likely%20winners%20and%20losers%20from%202017%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations%20%7C%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fpremier-league-winners-losers-2017-africa-cup-of-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Premier%20League%E2%80%99s%20likely%20winners%20and%20losers%20from%202017%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations%20%7C%20Paul%20Doyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fpremier-league-winners-losers-2017-africa-cup-of-nations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb49bdbb0bd208af10a56d7f87e028b09296616a8%2F12_46_2174_1304%2F2174.jpg>
 Wilfried Bony, who plays for Ivory Coast, is one of three Stoke City players 
who will be absent for the club while at the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations. 
Photograph: Eddie Keogh/Reuters 
If the Afcon goes the way that bookmakers expect, then Algeria will be in the 
tournament right to the end, in which case Leicester will be without Riyad 
Mahrez and Islam Slimani for at least four league matches on top ofthe FA Cup 
tie against Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/fa-cup-third-round-draw>. 
Mahrez has not been as consistently good this season as he was last term, when 
he wasvoted the Premier League’s player of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/24/leicester-riyad-mahrez-pfa-player-of-the-year>
, but Claudio Ranieri would surely liked to have had him available for upcoming 
jousts with Chelsea, Southampton and Manchester United, not to mention the 
meeting with Burnley, who were tipped to struggle at the start of the campaign 
but are currently two points above the ailingchampions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/leicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season>
. Leicester will also be adversely affected by the loss of their Ghana 
midfielder Daniel Amartey, who has been improving in recent weeks.

On the positive side, Mahrez’s absence represents a big opportunity for 
Demarai Gray, the young winger who has regularly impressed coming off the bench 
and performed splendidly when given a rare startagainst West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/leicester-city-west-ham-united-premier-league-match-report>
 last weekend. It could also turn out to be a chance for Ahmed Musa, the 
Nigerian who has so far failed to make much of an impact at Leicester since his
arrival in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/08/leicester-ahmed-musa-confirm-signing>
. Slimani’s absence, meanwhile, could lead to regular redeployment of the Jamie 
Vardy-Shinji Okazaki partnership that worked so well last season.

Hull City’s attempt to haul themselves out of the relegation zone will be 
complicated by two significant absences from a thin squad. The Egyptian 
defender Ahmed Elmohamady has played in all but one of the club’s league 
matches so far this season, while the Congolese striker Dieumerci Mbokani has 
served as the fulcrum of the team’s attack in recent games, even though he has 
yet to score for the club.

Sam Allardyce may be wishing he used his one England match to cap Wilfried 
Zaha, who has sincepledged his allegiance to Ivory Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/wilfried-zaha-ivory-coast-squad-africa-cup-of-nations>
 and will therefore leave Crystal Palace for the best part of a month. Palace 
will also be without one possible replacement for Zaha, with Bakary Sako 
hooking up with Mali. Watford will also lose a key winger because Nordin 
Amrabat will be competing for Morocco.

Wilfried Bony has been less influential than was hoped for by Stoke City this 
season afterarriving on loan from Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/wilfried-bony-signs-stoke-manchester-city-loan>
 but the manager, Mark Hughes, would still rather the striker had not been 
picked by Ivory Coast. Bony is one of three departures from Stoke, with the 
tricky young winger Ramadan Sobhi joining up with Egypt while Mame Biram Diouf, 
the forward who has been successfully converted into a right wing-back by 
Hughes this season, will be part of Senegal’s attack.

Wilfried Zaha accepts Ivory Coast call-up for Africa Cup of Nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/wilfried-zaha-ivory-coast-squad-africa-cup-of-nations>
Senegal have enough talent to go far in the tournament and that would be a bad 
development for West Ham, for whom Cheikhou Kouyaté is important. The London 
club will also be without André Ayew and whatever relief they felt after 
Algeria’s decision not to select Sofiane Feghouli can now be fully appreciated 
after his ban following Mike Dean’s decision tosend him off against Manchester 
United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/02/slaven-bilic-rails-against-red-card-west-ham-sofiane-feghouli>
 was overturned on Wednesday.

Progress by Senegal would be especially problematic on Merseyside and not only 
because of Liverpool’s need for Mané. Idrissa Gueye has been the linchpin of 
Everton’s midfieldsince joining from Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/02/everton-sign-idrissa-gueye-aston-villa>
 in the summer.

Villa, meanwhile, are proof that the Afcon affects English clubs beyond the 
Premier League, as Steve Bruce’s attempt to steer the club into the 
Championship play-off places is made more difficult by the loss of three 
players, including his Ivorian top scorer Jonathan Kodjia.

 Premier League players selected for Gabon 2017

Arsenal Elneny (Egypt)

Bournemouth Gradel (Ivory Coast)

Crystal Palace Zaha (Ivory Coast), Sako (Mali)

Everton Gueye (Senegal)

Hull City Mbokani (DR Congo), Elmohamady (Egypt)

Leicester City Amartey (Ghana), Mahrez and Slimani (Algeria)

Liverpool Mané (Senegal)

Manchester United Bailly (Ivory Coast)

Southampton Boufal (Morocco)

Stoke City Bony (Ivory Coast), Sobhi (Egypt), Diouf (Senegal)

Sunderland Koné (Ivory Coast), Ndong (Gabon), Khazri (Tunisia)

Watford Amrabat (Morocco), Guedioura (Algeria)

West Ham United Kouyaté (Senegal), Ayew (Ghana)
 