
For a visiting student without a car, Los Angeles is a difficult city to make 
home. It’s vast, sprawling over almost 5,000 square miles, with an infamously 
poor public transport system. The Last Bookstore is tricky to reach – an hour’s 
journey from my apartment, but well worth the pilgrimage. While I treat all 
bookstores as sacred spaces, this spot in downtown LA is uniquely beautiful.

The Last Bookstore is California’s largest used and new book and record store, 
having opened in 2005 in a downtown loft. It has grown since then to 22,000 
square feet, a softly lit labyrinthine collection of books and records, with 
space for literary, musical and theatrical events. Slices of chocolate cake 
were handed out at a book signing I attended – and that secured my undying 
devotion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fthe-last-bookstore-los-angeles-great-little-place-i-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fb8e0289fd8e6d7aa8f3771387fc9209072a108%2F0_176_2645_1587%2F2645.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Last%20Bookstore%3A%20a%20literary%20treasure%20trove%20in%20downtown%20LA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fthe-last-bookstore-los-angeles-great-little-place-i-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Last%20Bookstore%3A%20a%20literary%20treasure%20trove%20in%20downtown%20LA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fthe-last-bookstore-los-angeles-great-little-place-i-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fb8e0289fd8e6d7aa8f3771387fc9209072a108%2F0_176_2645_1587%2F2645.jpg>
 Photograph: Kim Garcia 
The Last Bookstore encourages selling and trading of books and records based 
on its fluctuating inventory needs, as part of a mission to “keep the paper and 
ink book business alive in an era of e-readers and digital downloads”.

The bookstore downstairs is exciting enough, but the best treasures are kept 
upstairs. Visiting the mezzanine level, browsers are greeted by hanging books, 
suspended in flight as they erupt from a bookcase. Further on, there are 
tunnels built from books, hidden side rooms with more than 100,000 used books 
for sale, plus freestanding sculptures and mobiles. This is theSpring Arts 
Collective <http://www.springarts.org/>, an eclectic space displaying the work 
of five artists: it’s filled with sculptures and paintings, bold prints and 
metalwork.

The Last Bookstore’s home page tells a bleak truth: “What are you waiting for? 
We won’t be here forever.” Independent bookstores are in decline as online 
booksellers dominate the market, but I’m rooting for this one to be the last 
bookstore standing.

• 453 South Spring Street, lastbookstorela.com <http://lastbookstorela.com/>
 