
When is a free tour not a free tour? When it is, more accurately speaking, a 
pay-what-you-want tour. The concept of a city tour where there is no set charge 
and tourists show their appreciation by leaving a tip is becoming increasingly 
popular across Europe and beyond. An increase in budget-conscious travel, a 
growth of savvy operators, and the ease of word-of-mouth internet marketing is 
helping drive the trend.

For the tourist, the approach is simple: you check the tour's website to find 
the daily meeting place; take the tour alongside anyone else who happens to 
turn up; and then leave a tip at the end (knowing full well that "free" is 
loosely employed as a marketing tactic and you are expected to part company 
with more than a handshake). For the operator, it can be surprisingly lucrative 
on a good day and favourable reviews are pushing the best ones up the ranks on 
peer-to-peer review sites. (On Tripadvisor,Bowl of Chalk's pay-what-you-like 
tours of London 
<http://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Attraction_Review-g186338-d2556071-Reviews-Bowl_Of_Chalk_Private_Tours-London_England.html>
 are currently rated number 15 out of the 431 activities listed in the capital.)
 Columbia Road flower market, one of the stops on Bowl of Chalks' east London 
tour. Photograph: Andy Barker/Loop Images/Corbis 
Europe is firmly at the centre of this growing trend, with research by 
Bulgaria's365 Association <http://freesofiatour.com/contacts/> (which runs free 
tours in Sofia, Plovdiv and Varna) showing that there are now 67 "free" tours 
across the continent 
<https://docs.google.com/file/d/0BzNQESxcrc6JTDBGYzhhZXdVcDA/edit>, with the 
largest number in recession-hit Spain.

The tours are akin to Berlin's long-established "honesty" bars and restaurants 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/travel/2009/feb/11/berlin-honesty-bars-restaurants>, 
where patrons pay what they think the meal is worth. Many of the new tours are 
set up by lone entrepreneurs, but a handful have found success as multi-city 
businesses.Sandemans New Europe tours <http://www.neweuropetours.eu/>, which 
pioneered the idea back in 2004, now runs its "famous free tours" in 18 cities 
– although it hascome under scrutiny for its approach 
<http://www.toytowngermany.com/lofi/index.php/t168465.html>, which requires 
self-employed guides to pay a set fee per tourist, regardless of how much, or 
little, people tip.

The nature of the tour brings no hard and fast rules; some operators are more 
up front than others. Some avoid the word "free" or state that tips are not 
obligatory; some are run by certified guides as a business; others are just a 
weekend hobby. Jonnie Fielding from Bowl of Chalk, who offers three different 
tours of London (dates on his website 
<http://www.bowlofchalk.net/weekend-walks.html>), says he set up his tours as a 
more honest alternative to another "free tour" he took, which ended with "a sob 
story, guilt-tripping people into handing over cash".

Fielding, who initially advertised the tours by putting posters up around east 
London, says the model has worked well from him. "If people have paid up front 
for something, they tend to complain about stuff: the weather (one woman 
demanded her money back because it rained), the fact they thought it was a bus 
tour, it was not quite what was billed on the website, if others in the group 
are slow etc."

For tourists, the other advantage is that it allows for more spontaneous 
travel: if you oversleep or the weather is bad, you just try again next time.

Jonathan Evans – a British expat who runs the similarly principled Buenos 
Aires Local Tours <http://www.buenosaireslocaltours.com/> and who, like 
Fielding, took to outdoor guiding to escape an office job – says he doesn't 
suggest how much his tourists should tip. "I would feel very uncomfortable 
suggesting how much people tip, because I advertise it as free. If I get to the 
end and tell you how much to give, then it's not free. A handful of times 
people have gone without leaving anything, but it's all part of the game."

Evans also says attempts to deviate from this approach or lay down rules can 
backfire: "I went on a free tour in another city and I had an amount in my head 
that I was going to leave, but at the end he gave us a suggested amount, which 
was actually half the tip I was going to give."

The UK-based Guild of Registered Tour Guides says they do not support the 
model. "Being a tour guide is a professional job," says spokesperson Maggie 
Barnes. "All our members have trained and passed extensive exams to earn their 
qualification: the Blue Badge. Guides should be paid a fair rate for the job, 
not obliged to work for goodwill or gratuities."

It seems that free tour is to guiding what Airbnb.com 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/> is to the hotel industry – impossible to regulate, 
looked on sceptically by traditional operators, and yet a big hit with a 
growing fan base.

Pay-what-you-want tours around the world
 Budapest. Photograph: William Manning/Corbis 
Sofia
 Typically led by a Bulgarian student or graduate, the English-language Free 
Sofia Tour <http://freesofiatour.com/> gives a two-hour hit of the city's main 
attractions. The tour is Sofia's number-one activity on Tripadvisor and has the 
backing of the city municipality. On the back of its success, its founder has 
co-created theUnited Free Europe <http://unitedeuropefreetours.com/> network, 
which also features similar tours in nine other European cities, including 
Lisbon, Prague and Berlin.

Barcelona
Founded by a Spanish-Irish couple in 2010, Runner Bean tours 
<http://www.runnerbeantours.com/> has expanded to a team of six enthusiastic 
guides. Gaudí and the old city are the themes of their two free tours. Other 
(paid) walking tours include a kids and family tour, with plenty of games along 
the way, and a spooky night tour, which regales legends and historical fact.

Budapest
Free Walking Tours Budapest <http://www.triptobudapest.hu/> offers a general 
city tour, alongside other free tours themed on the Jewish quarter or 
communism. With three tours a day, seven days a week, it is one of Europe's 
most established operators. The policy is "no fixed price, pay what you can 
afford". If you prefer to pay upfront, its other themed tours (street art, 
sweet foods, flea markets) cost €15-20.

Buenos Aires
Buenos Aires Local Tours  <http://www.buenosaireslocaltours.com/>takes in some 
of the Argentinian capitals big sites (Plaza de Mayo, the pink government 
house) and some less visited sights, such as the painted houses in the Abasto 
neighbourhood and the former home of tango legend, Carlos Gardel. The tour 
takes public transport – buses and the Subte (metro) – so city newcomers also 
learn how to get around town.

New Orleans
Nola Tour Guy  <http://www.nolatourguy.com/> is David G Hedges, a licensed 
tour guide who felt frustrated with the traditional "cookie-cutter" approach to 
tourism in his adopted city and so decided to set up alone. With a historical 
leaning and plenty of humour, he offers three tours: the French Quarter, 
Cemetery and Garden District. Tours require areservation. 
<http://www.nolatourguy.com/book-a-tour/>

London
Bowl of Chalk <http://www.bowlofchalk.net/> (Cockney rhyming slang for walks) 
runs tours almost every weekend (check the site for details). Saturdays bring a 
morning option from Trafalgar Square to St Paul's, and an afternoon route from 
St Paul's to the Monument. On Sunday, tours stick to the guide's own stomping 
ground: east London.

Have you done a free tour? Or do you run one? Which ones do you rate and which 
approach works best? Do you like the option to determine the cost yourself, or 
do you prefer a set fee? Or are you a guide who opposes the 'free' approach? 
Tell us by adding a comment
 