
The Last Supper is Harrison Birtwistle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/may/14/contemporary-composers-guide-harrison-birtwistle>
’s intense and mysterious “dramatic tableau” — an opera, but more static and 
more stylised — with a libretto by the late Canadian poet Robin Blaser. It 
premiered in 2000 and was specificallya millennium piece 
<https://www.boosey.com/pages/opera/moredetails.asp?musicid=2670>: it deals 
with time, the weight we put on single moments (the striking of midnight, the 
Crucifixion), how we rework those moments in hindsight, how we replay old 
stories with horrible inevitability and re-enact rituals we would rather 
escape. Hearing the work in 2017, its depiction of historical amnesia and 
collective entrapment felt starkly relevant.

 This is not easy entertainment by anyone’s standards. Birtwistle himself has 
called it “a tough grub”, and though we all know the story, broadly speaking, 
the detailed implications are obscure. Time telescopes across two millennia but 
for two hours nothing much happens. The premise is that Ghost — Greek chorus, 
conscience of the audience, sung with superb conviction bySusan Bickley 
<http://intermusica.co.uk/artist/Susan-Bickley/news> — invites the disciples to 
reconvene for another Last Supper. The men trickle in, greet each other, chat 
about what they’ve been up to for the past 2,000 years. Judas turns up against 
the odds and the others shun him; I was deeply moved by Daniel Norman’s 
diffident and remorseful portrayal. Then Jesus arrives, a tremendously noble 
and resonant performance fromRoderick Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/16/roderick-williams-facing-the-music>
, and begins to play out Passover events.

 I’m not sure whether the BBC Scottish Symphony Orchestra’s concert staging 
eased or intensified the theatrical enigma. I appreciated the disciples’ 
everyman costumes (wellies, aprons) but missed real physicality from them: 
there was a meek shot at dancing, a tepid reaction to Judas’s arrival. The most 
striking visual moment was when they froze into the positions of Da Vinci’s 
muralThe Last Supper 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Last_Supper_(Leonardo_da_Vinci)#/media/File:%C3%9Altima_Cena_-_Da_Vinci_5.jpg>
, as though acknowledging the centuries of artistic responses to themselves, as 
though trapped by their own typecasting.
 Moving … Daniel Norman as Judas. Photograph: Alex Woodward/BBC 
 More problematic than lack of staging was balance: with the exception of 
Jeffrey Lloyd-Roberts’s boomingly ardent Thomas, all of the disciples’ text was 
drowned out by the orchestra. There were no surtitles, either, meaning Blaser’s 
very human touches of dialogue were lost. This shouldn’t be an issue when the 
performance is broadcast on BBCRadio 3 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006tnpy> on 28 January as the balance can be 
tweaked.

 What we got instead of words was grippingly vivid instrumental drama. 
Birtwistle’s ritualistic writing is marvellous, layer upon layer of skewed time 
and perspective underpinned by a grim, grand pace unfolding from the bottom of 
orchestra. The sound palette is dense and dark and strange with contrabass 
clarinet, tolling timpani and no violins, and Birtwistle fills the surface with 
sudden swooshes of dynamism and odd colours. A sombre accordion accompanies the 
recitatives; a hi-hat whispers a sleazy riff straight out of a noir flick.
Martyn Brabbins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/21/english-national-opera-appoints-martyn-brabbins-music-director>
 conducted with a superb knack for elasticity — the orchestra clinched the 
yo-yoyoing between sudden movement and sudden stasis, and the intensity never 
dropped. Perhaps most compelling of all were the crystalline Latin motets that 
punctuate the opera, delivered by the BBC Singers with poise and control — 
crucial salves in the fracas.
 