
An impromptu breakdance circle has emerged in the parking lot. The 
participants spin and contort and flip, then gesture at one another in mock 
challenge. Among the onlookers clapping and smiling is Lena Dunham from the HBO 
showGirls. It’s opening day at LocoL 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6c_oan9E-yo>.

In truth, the more interesting story about LocoL will be written a year from 
now. By then, the immense ambitions of this hybrid blend of restaurant and 
social movement will have had time to germinate and grow. In the meantime, 
there’s the online hype, a successful crowdsourcing campaign, the restaurant’s 
two high-profile founders, front-page newspaper articles, and a line of 
hundreds of curious patrons that stretches the length of a city block.

LocoL is a fast-food <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fast-food> 
restaurant. It’s almost possible to forget that, standing among the throngs of 
neighbourhood residents, chef chasers, bloggers, journalists and celebrities 
who have come out for the grand opening. More precisely, it’s a fast-food 
restaurant with a mission of being a healthy – or at least not unhealthy – 
alternative to existing options. This franchise, the first of its kind, is on a 
street corner in Watts, Los Angeles that one prominent food writer described to 
me as the place he would select were he asked to choose “the worst corner to 
open a restaurant in America”. It is noticeably one of only a couple of 
businesses servicing a large residential area, and it lies almost directly on 
the border between rival gang territories.

The two men masterminding this project are the chefs Roy Choi and Daniel 
Patterson. Both are thoughtful, wary veterans of the industry. They’ve both 
laboured in its trenches and ascended its peaks. Choi’s legacy is probably best 
defined by his fleet ofKogi taco trucks 
<https://www.nowness.com/story/riding-shotgun-with-roy-choi>, which roam the 
streets of southern California peddling kimchi quesadillas and Korean short rib 
tacos. Soon after launching in 2008, they set off an international mania for 
gourmet street food. Atop Patterson’s résumé are two Michelin stars and a spot 
on the World’s 50 Best Restaurants List for his elegant, artful San Francisco 
restaurant,Coi <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J444LFf5G_4>. He and Choi are 
famous for vastly different cuisines, operating on opposite sides of the 
country’s most populous state. But the pair discovered their joint purpose in 
Copenhagen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a827baac667862dae1c65a934c74233ae54d06%2F0_0_1000_791%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2a827baac667862dae1c65a934c74233ae54d06%2F0_0_1000_791%2F1000.jpg>
 LocoL menu 
In 2013, under a colourful circus tent with Patterson in the audience, Choi 
unleashed an impassioned call to arms at theMAD Symposium 
<https://vimeo.com/75204171> – an annual gathering of wide-eyed cooks, artists, 
farmers and activists organised by René Redzepi and the staff of his 
restaurant, Noma. Choi’s presentation focused on “food deserts”, places where 
politics and prejudice have deprived citizens of local grocery stores or 
markets and thus any access to fresh food or proper cooking. Places like the 
Los Angeles neighbourhood of Watts.

LocoL opened on 18 January, coinciding with the national holiday commemorating 
the birthday of American civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. King 
famously visited this neighbourhood 50 years ago, in the wake of the 1965 Watts 
Riots.


Part of what Choi and Patterson are doing in Watts is chipping away at those 
two bookend words: 1965 and riots. For the past half century, this 
neighbourhood has been defined by a six-day uprising that took place here, 
killing 34 and injuring more than a thousand. One measure of LocoL’s success 
might be if the name “Watts” can become as synonymous with their burgers as it 
is with this dark chapter in LA history.

While it was an act of police violence that ignited the riots, what fuelled it 
was a feeling of systemic isolation and lack of opportunity for Watts 
residents. Unfortunately, very little has improved in the intervening years. 
Economic hardship persists. Today,40% of Watts residents live in poverty 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/wattsriots/la-me-watts-riots-latinos-20150809-story.html>
. Like other economically depressed communities without access to fresh food, 
its citizens are at increased risk of obesity and its attendant ailments: heart 
disease, stroke, high-blood pressure, diabetes, cancer. But in the decades 
after 1965, the neighbourhood’s unresolved socioeconomic problems manifested 
most visibly in the form of gang violence, specifically between the city’s two 
main factions, the Bloods and the Crips.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F203c45e33ab0c318623382d79243421932f0772b%2F0_0_5760_3454%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F203c45e33ab0c318623382d79243421932f0772b%2F0_0_5760_3454%2F5760.jpg>
 Children eating at LocoL. Photograph: Audrey Ma 
A month before LocoL’s opening, I set all delicacy aside and put the question 
bluntly to Choi: is Watts a dangerous neighbourhood? A bad one?

“Who’s saying ‘dangerous’, or who’s saying ‘bad?’” he replied. “That’s the 
question, right? Is Watts Jordan Downs Project, Grape Street hood? Yes. But 
there are five-year-old kids right across the street. There are families. There 
are wonderful human beings all throughout. Are there bangers? Yeah, there are 
gangbangers here.”

He paused for a moment before continuing: “I’m gonna actually answer that 
directly: no, it’s not a bad neighbourhood. This is historic Watts. This is a 
beautiful neighbourhood.”

In 1992, former NFL superstar Jim Brown helped broker a vital peace treaty 
between Bloods and Crips in Watts. Brown is on hand again to cut the ribbon at 
LocoL’s opening. The moment he makes the snip, a recording of King delivering 
his “I Have a Dream” speech begins playing on the loudspeakers. At the end of 
the address, the DJ cross-fades into Kendrick Lamar’s jabbing, staccato anthem 
Alright.

I catch sight of Patterson, who puts his arm around me and says: “This is a 
surreal moment.”

The fried food joint that’s trying to tackle teenage obesity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/sep/20/fried-chicken-joint-trying-to-tackle-teenage-obesity-chicken-town-tottenham>
“Surreal” is a good description. Accompanying Patterson are his wife, 
Alexandra, and their two young children, along with the family’s two enormous, 
cheerful great Danes. Actor and director Jon Favreau makes an appearance (Choi 
was a culinary consultant on his movieChef 
<http://la.eater.com/2014/5/9/6226883/jon-favreau-on-how-roy-choi-shaped-chef>
). LocoL’s community ambassadors – respected members of the neighbourhood with 
deep knowledge of its politics and inner workings – play the roles of waiters, 
hosts, crowd controllers and managers with the energy of proud parents. When 
the breakdancing starts up, Choi rushes to tape a piece of cardboard to the 
asphalt to serve as a makeshift dance floor. A young girl jumps into the 
action, and Choi smiles broadly and says to no one in particular: “That’s my 
daughter.”

Christopher Storer is a filmmaker who has been working on a documentary about 
LocoL for the past six months, but by his own admission, he’s been powerless to 
resist the project’s electrifying spirit. Today he’s darting around capturing 
footage on a handheld camera, but mostly he seems to be soaking in the happy 
scene. “The food is actually the least important thing,” he says.

That may be true today, but LocoL’s principals know that it can’t subsist 
entirely on good vibes. Patterson and Choi chose specifically to start a 
for-profit restaurant rather than a grocery store or nonprofit organisation or 
community farm, because running restaurants is what they’re best at. Their 
oft-repeated mantra is that they want to take cooking out of the hands of 
corporations and put it back in the hands of chefs and cooks – cooks who they 
have hired almost entirely from the neighbourhood. So at the end of the day, 
LocoL’s success will depend upon it being a good restaurant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb643019e7f194f3b295667dcd51426e2c99d57fc%2F0_83_5760_3454%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb643019e7f194f3b295667dcd51426e2c99d57fc%2F0_83_5760_3454%2F5760.jpg>
 Child showing his tray of LocoL food. Photograph: Audrey Ma 
“I worry whether or not the community’s gonna love the food,” Choi says. 
“That’s the thing that keeps me up at night every night.”

Vaughn Glover, LocoL’s project manager, agrees. “We can have all the great 
relationships with nonprofits and organisations we want to,” he says. “But if 
this doesn’t function well as a restaurant, all that shit doesn’t matter.”

“If you’re not eating, move to the patio!” shouts an employee in a black LocoL 
T-shirt. He’s speaking to the herd of friends and family (and journalists) who 
are mingling aimlessly in the dining room. There’s not enough room for paying 
customers to eat.

The crowds remain outrageous throughout LocoL’s opening, so I return the next 
day for a thorough tasting of the food. My brother and I order the majority of 
the two dozen items on the lunch/dinner menu.

Fundamental, of course, is the burger (known here as a “cheeseburg” and priced 
at $4). The patty – a blend of mostly beef, grains and tofu, though the latter 
two do not detract from its meatiness – is nicely charred from a proper amount 
of time spent on the griddle. The bun comes from a recipe created byChad 
Robertson of San Francisco bakery, Tartine 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YZKj4-NjEn4>. It’s sweet with the lightly 
alcoholic tang of fermentation, which comes from the addition of koji, the same 
beneficial mould used to make miso, sake and soy sauce. The sandwiches are 
pressed under a weight, compacting them slightly and giving the bread surface a 
uniformly toasty crunch. It is a very good burger.

Also falling in the $4 sandwich category: a veggie cheeseburger topped with 
spicy greens, a piquant barbecue turkey sandwich and a fried chicken sandwich. 
Then there are “foldies”, which are a cross between tacos and quesadillas. 
Filled with beans and cheese or shredded meat, they’re flattened and griddled 
until the tortillas are crisp and the fillings threaten to ooze out. There are 
also “nugs” (fried nuggets), in both chicken and vegetarian varieties. Only the 
poultry-free versions are available on my visit, and they aren’t exactly 
crunchy, but they serve nicely as vehicles for the excellent mustardy dipping 
sauce.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe68789869a75f3124d3fae39d2ce15a539a68db7%2F0_0_5760_3454%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe68789869a75f3124d3fae39d2ce15a539a68db7%2F0_0_5760_3454%2F5760.jpg>
 LocoL cheeseburgers. Photograph: Audrey Ma 
“Yotchays” are sides. They cost $1 and include choices such as slow-simmered 
greens, beef gravy, flat bread and fluffy white rice. Rice is a welcome 
addition to a fast-food menu that suddenly strikes me as an obvious omission 
from other chains. Here at LocoL, it fills out a chaotic but satisfying bowl of 
beef chilli, crumbled soda crackers, cheese and hot sauce. And, in the most 
surprising dish I’ve ever eaten in a fast-food joint, it’s topped with a 
fragrant, chunky stew of vegetables and crushed tofu.

The food is all served hot and quickly. It’s nourishing and tastes decidedly 
like home cooking. You don’t get the sensation that calories and chemicals are 
being hidden insidiously behind sugar and salt, like you do with other fast 
food.

On the other hand, the food at LocoL does share an important characteristic 
with its classmates. Like a Big Mac or a Whopper or KFC fried chicken, each 
dish at LocoL tastes distinctive. For every item on the menu, there’s something 
you can latch onto and crave. There’s a bracing acidity to the stir-fried 
noodles. Something vaguely herbaceous is in the foldies. And you can sense the 
presence of fish sauce and lime in the “awesome sauce” that coats and brightens 
the cheeseburgs.

“Our cheeseburger and our veggie burger are really, really addictive,” says 
Choi. “That’s the biggest thing we were looking for: that addictive factor. The 
sauce is an emulsion of everything you want in a burger: pickle, mustard, mayo, 
ketchup. All of those feelings in one sauce, but it’s made from stewing down 
tomatoes, garlic, gochujang, onions, vinegar, all these things. It’s really, 
really good.”

I worry whether or not the community’s gonna love the food. That’s the thing 
that keeps me up at night
Roy Choi 
“One of the things about food in our country is that it’s been completely 
denatured,” says Patterson. “If you look at food from Mexico to Thailand, to 
China, to India, they cook with spices. They cook with deep, rich flavours, 
acidity, fermentation. None of that is in American cooking. We have meatloaf 
and gravy. We have burgers. We have food from which the soul has been removed.”

Standing in line outside of LocoL, I hear a passerby ask a customer behind me 
what kind of food they serve here. “Soul food,” she replies. It’s a quick, 
off-hand comment, but it’s also a fine distillation of the complex thinking 
that goes into the menu here. In a way, it also captures what fast-food 
restaurants do best: simple ideas that require a lot of behind-the-scenes 
juggling.

Consider the $1 cup of coffee. Mercifully, there is no soda at LocoL. (Soda 
being the arch-nemesis of good health 
<http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/sugary-drinks-fact-sheet/> and an 
especially sinister force in communities such as Watts.) There areaguas frescas 
– sweetened Mexican-style fruit juices – and there is water and there is 
coffee. The coffee here is balanced and aromatic; the beans are not so lightly 
roasted as to be acidic and not so dark that they taste bitter or burnt. It’s 
the kind of coffee you might expect to pay four times as much for at a twee 
shop in a trendier part of town. It was engineered by one of the big names of 
the third-wave coffee world,Tony Konecny  
<http://sprudge.com/fond-farewell-tonx-coffee-now-blue-bottle-at-home-62910.html>
, who founded the speciality-roast subscription service Tonx. In order to hit 
the $1 price point, he roasts surplus beans bought from contacts in the 
industry and roasts them during off-hours – nights and weekends – at a friendly 
facility.

“Our food is $1, $2 and $4. We’re making everything from scratch. We’re baking 
the bread. We’re not buying one frozen box,” says Choi. “In the restaurant 
business, we usually charge $14 to $24 for that type of food. Daniel and I are 
cooking that same $24 dish for $4.”

“We have the easiest, smoothest relationship of anyone I’ve ever worked with,” 
says Patterson of his working dynamic with Choi. “Broadly speaking, he does the 
branding, and he gave me the kitchen. But there’s plenty of crossover.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdde507af0660886b8872a7b86fc3f43a700c713%2F73_361_2962_4439%2F2962.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffdde507af0660886b8872a7b86fc3f43a700c713%2F73_361_2962_4439%2F2962.jpg>
 Roy Choi and Daniel Patterson of LocoL Photograph: Barry J. Holmes for 
Observer Food Monthly 
Patterson tells me a story about how “Noodleman” – a dish of wok-fried chewy 
Korean noodles tossed with fresh lettuce, lime, chilli and ginger – came to be. 
“Of course they had the white guy come up with the Asian noodle recipe,” he 
laughs. Choi hoped that Patterson could come up with something that evoked 
jajangmyeon – a quintessential Korean noodle dish. After looking it up online, 
Patterson started riffing.

“I had kind of a vague understanding and some sense of ingredients,” Patterson 
explains. “With that I just made what I thought tastes good. This is American 
food. It bubbles up through our own imagination and experience. It’s not gonna 
be for everyone but it’s gonna be for a lot of people.”

About three weeks before the opening of LocoL, Patterson resigned as chef at 
Coi, leaving his Michelin stars behind. “I knew that I needed to find another 
direction,” he explains. “I knew that I’d done everything I could possibly do 
there.”

I’ve known Patterson for five or six years, and he appears happier than I’ve 
ever seen him. Choi is fromLos Angeles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/los-angeles>. (His memoir, LA Son, paints 
a portrait of a man who identifies first as an Angeleno, then as a 
Korean-American and a chef.) Patterson is a relative outsider, but he’s quick 
to point out that being from a community is not a prerequisite for connecting 
to it: “Why is the default not caring? Why do you love your children? Why do 
you love your family? Why do I love the people here? They’re us. We’re all the 
same family.”

Before embarking on LocoL with Choi, Patterson had been engaged in similar 
projects in San Francisco, connecting underserved kids and adults to 
experiences with honest cooking and real ingredients. Upon hearing Choi speak 
in Copenhagen, he recognised a kindred soul, as well as the potential to make a 
larger impact through collaboration.

“I always wanted to feel like there was more good than bad in people. I’m a 
very hopeful person,” Patterson says. “This is the first time in my life, this 
community, that I saw there’s more good than bad in people.”

Back in the queue outside LocoL, the feeling seems mutual. One of the 
community ambassadors, a man nicknamed Nardo, is directing foot traffic and 
explaining the new business – a novel sight in this neighbourhood – to curious 
locals. Someone from the line recognises him and asks if he’s getting paid 
steady money for his job. “Yeah, I’m on the payroll,” Nardo replies. “It’s a 
blessing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64702279a41f8fa5341f7ca88736311df394a6c6%2F0_175_5760_3454%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Los%20Angeles%20fast%20food%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Flos-angeles-fast-food-revolution-locol-roy-cho-daniel-patterson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64702279a41f8fa5341f7ca88736311df394a6c6%2F0_175_5760_3454%2F5760.jpg>
 Ribbon cutting at LocoL 2. Photograph: Audrey Ma 
The longevity and scalability of the blessing depends on what comes next. Will 
LocoL continue to thrive? Will it bring new visitors to Watts and wash away 
some of the stains of 1965? Choi’s and Patterson’s business partner, Hanson Li, 
tells me that they plan to open between four and eight more LocoLs across
California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> – in LA, San 
Francisco and Oakland – by the end of the year. “People today are still eating 
McDonald’s and Burger King,” Li says. “We’re timely in terms of bringing new 
fast food to everyone.” I ask him whether or not the business model is 
predicated upon opening hundreds of restaurants across the country, and he 
explains that if each branch of LocoL does as well as a normal fast-food 
restaurant, they’ll be profitable. But will other communities embrace them in 
the same way?

The two chefs get defensive when questioned about the future. (“Let me just 
look into my crystal ball,” Patterson quips when I ask him about what’s next.) 
Understandably so. When you feel like what you’re doing is righteous and good, 
questions feel like opposition.

But as I’m eating, I can’t help but wonder. I realise I’m awash in the force 
of this place, too. I’m pulling for it to succeed. I think about the next steps 
and I want to know how they plan to approach them.

Then I remember my ice cream. Vanilla soft-serve topped with banana-brown 
butter, kumquat sauce and granola. Roy didn’t want it to melt while we ate, so 
he told us to come back for it when we finished our burgers. And just like 
that, it’s clear what will make LocoL succeed.

LocoL, 1950 East 103rd St, Los Angeles, California; welocol.com 
<http://www.welocol.com/#intro>
 