
It is the conceit of every generation to believe that its experience is 
unique. This is partly because it fails to understand the lessons of history 
and partly because it has no idea what the future holds. The year 2016, now 
finally at an end, underscored this basic human dilemma. It was a year in which 
long-gestating problems came to a head. With greater understanding of what had 
gone before, unexpected and terrible events, such as the barbaric climax to the 
war in Syria, the election of Donald Trump and Britain’s vote to leave the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, might not have been so 
shocking. At the same time, their full impact, which will begin to be felt in 
the new year just beginning, is fundamentally unknowable. Uncertainty is 2017’s 
watchword, inspiring a sense of trepidation and deep foreboding.

Yet take a step back and it is plain that this gloomy outlook is not the whole 
story, that it is too easy to get things out of perspective. Every day, today 
included, thousands of healthy babies will be born around the world to families 
who, in most cases, are more able to care for their children than were their 
own parents and their parents before them. Every week in 2016 seemed to bring 
news of medical discoveries that will potentially help fight diseases such as 
cancer and dementia.

In the hottest year on record, there were significant advances in 
environmental protection, including theParis climate change agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
, the170-country Kigali pact on cutting greenhouse gases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/15/kigali-deal-hfcs-climate-change>
 and the creation ofthe world’s largest marine park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
, in the Ross Sea in Antarctica.

Although the UN reports that the global total of refugees rose by 5 million 
people in 2016, many among the world’s record numbers of displaced, homeless 
and distressed found safe haven, were given asylum in third countries or were 
assisted by myriad agencies and charities. Many in need benefited from what the
Queen, in her Christmas message <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38431575>, called 
“ordinary people doing extraordinary things: volunteers, carers, community 
organisers and good neighbours”.

Every day saw acts of love and kindness, unreported and unremarked. Although 
the 2016 talk was mostly of tumult, terror and division, inColombia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/colombia> the world’s longest-running 
insurgency was brought to a peaceful, negotiated conclusion. In Cuba, the 
revolution came in from the cold even as its leader,Fidel Castro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/fidel-castro>, departed. In Burma, democrats 
took charge. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/01/aung-san-suu-kyi-leads-party-into-myanmar-parliament-to-claim-power>

The bigger picture emerging from 2016 is distorted, too, by some unsettling 
intellectual ideas. Chief among them is the suggestion that the era of 
globalisation, meaning ever-greater interaction and interdependency of peoples 
and nations, is drawing to a close. This argument proceeds in large part from a 
possible return to trade protectionism, hard borders and curbs on free movement 
of labour.

Another fashionable thesis concerned the advance of populist or nativist 
forces, however defined, by which exponents seemed to mean the uncomfortable 
political shifts resulting from the supposedly anti-democratic, illiberal rise 
of the economically “left behind”.

Yet both phenomena are open to more positive interpretations. Those on the 
left, in particular, argue that globalisation, while undoubtedly benefiting 
developing countries, has exacerbated the exploitative tendencies of 
multinational capitalism, increasing inequality and social disparities. A 
rebalancing is long overdue. At the same time, the idea that global 
interconnectivity can somehow be reversed in the age of ubiquitous social 
media, internet and mobile communication is fanciful.

Similarly, what one person might see as threatening populism could be 
another’s electrifying opportunity. For years, politicians and pollsters have 
bemoaned lack of public engagement born of alienation and disillusion. 
Logically, they should celebrate the more vigorous grassroots involvement 
recently seen in Britain and parts ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fobserver-view-on-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F989dcf5614703ddb6933910fca18177c1cf725e3%2F0_202_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Observer%20view%20on%20the%20prospects%20for%202017%20%7C%20Observer%20editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fobserver-view-on-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Observer%20view%20on%20the%20prospects%20for%202017%20%7C%20Observer%20editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fobserver-view-on-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F989dcf5614703ddb6933910fca18177c1cf725e3%2F0_202_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 ‘Theresa May’s government appears caught in a state of fearful paralysis.’ 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
How such forces are channelled and directed is one of 2017’s bigger 
uncertainties. In Britain, the stormy aftermath of June’s EU referendum has 
given way to uneasy stalemate. Theresa May’s government appears caught in a 
state of fearful paralysis, deeply unsure about how to proceed, even as its 
self-imposedMarch deadline for triggering Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/keir-starmer-calls-for-detailed-brexit-plan-after-mps-vote-to-trigger-article-50>
 approaches. With thesupreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/uk-supreme-court> due to deliver its verdict 
this month on parliament’s role, May continues to discourage rigorous public 
scrutiny of her negotiating strategy.

It is ever more embarrassingly clear that this is because, beset by 
conflicting advice, enormous bureaucratic complexities and cabinet divisions, 
she cannot decide what her strategy actually is. May’s stance is both 
undemocratic, as Labour’sJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> pointed out last week, and 
untenable in the longer run.A looming question is whether May will resort to a 
general election to bolster her faltering position 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/12/10/supreme-court-brexit-appeal-judges-heading-split-7-4-decision/>
.

Britain’s voters might not welcome such a move. Far from still being energised 
by last summer’s furious Brexit debate, they appear to have subsided into a 
grumpy, surly mood of resignation and suspicion. Remainers see every price 
rise, investment warning and European snub as grist to their “told you so” 
mill. Leavers view every suggestion of even the most minor compromise with 
Brussels as proof of imminent Brexit betrayal. There seems little doubt, 
following sterling’s devaluation (with worse to come in March) that the cost of 
living will rise sharply for most households during 2017.

There is little doubt also that this negative trend will be compounded by 
rising global oil prices. And there can be little confidence that, when her 
demand for separate single market access for Scotland is shunted aside, Nicola 
Sturgeon will resist the temptation to call another independence referendum. 
For the Scottish Nationalists, breaking up the United Kingdom is a natural 
consequence of breaking up with the EU 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/nicola-sturgeon-presents-her-brexit-proposals-for-scotland-1-4321728>
.

For Europe as a whole, 2017 promises to be a torrid year. As we have discussed 
here previously, it will be the turn of French voters to express their 
anti-establishment anger in presidential and parliamentary polls this spring. 
The alarming result could be the replacement of François Hollande by the Front 
National’s anti-EU, anti-immigrant Marine Le Pen. A similar regression is 
conceivable in the Netherlands in March, and even in Germany in September, where
Angela Merkel will seek a fourth term as chancellor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/angela-merkel-expected-stand-for-re-election-germany>
.

What all these contests have in common, if the centre cannot hold and 
progressive politicians fail to make their case, is the possible misdirection 
of eminently understandable, popular discontent with politics as usual into 
support for far-right, xenophobic and extreme nationalist forces. Successes for 
these groups could threaten the survival of a European Union already battered 
by Britain’s defection, eurozone stresses, mass migration and external threats. 
And any repeat of Islamist terrorist attacks similar to those in Berlin,Nice 
and Brussels will add to this existential strain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/europe-leadership-vulnerable-terrorism-merkel-hollande-renzi-berlin-truck-paris-attacks-brussels>
.

Terrorism aside, the biggest external threat to Europe is presented by 
Vladimir Putin. 2016 was a good year for Russia’s belligerent president. His 
intervention in Syria saved the barbaric regime ofBashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad> and, with the fall of 
Aleppo, turned the course of the war. Now Putin, with Turkey and Iran, his 
current allies of convenience, is posing as peacemaker to the exclusion of the 
US. Putin has been boosted by Trump’s election. Barack Obama’s attempt to 
impose a penalty for Russia’s cyber-meddling in the US polls may not outlive 
the 20 January inauguration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fobserver-view-on-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7253c66c4af0bad00825c6a0b0468e0e531c224%2F0_167_3871_2323%2F3871.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Observer%20view%20on%20the%20prospects%20for%202017%20%7C%20Observer%20editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fobserver-view-on-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Observer%20view%20on%20the%20prospects%20for%202017%20%7C%20Observer%20editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fobserver-view-on-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe7253c66c4af0bad00825c6a0b0468e0e531c224%2F0_167_3871_2323%2F3871.jpg>
 ‘The biggest external threat to Europe is presented by Vladimir Putin.’ 
Photograph: Mikhail Klimentyev/AP 
Instead, the new American president is expected to seek some kind of 
old-fashioned, great power accommodation with Moscow. That in turn would be bad 
news for Nato and, in particular, its eastern European members that only 
emerged from Russia’s cold war sphere of influence in the past 20 years. For 
the EU, facing aRussian military build-up along its Baltic’s frontiers, 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2016/07/russia-nato-trump-shirreff/492938/>
 Putin poses a growing problem in 2017.

Putin’s Syrian ceasefire efforts will not defuse acute tensions affecting the 
entire Middle East region. Two factors – the continuing fallout from the 2011 
Arab spring revolts and the decline in American leverage and engagement under 
Obama – will continue to have unpredictable consequences. The war in Yemen is 
very far from over. Much of Libya remains in a state of anarchy. Iran’s rivalry 
with Saudi Arabia and its Gulf allies is likely to intensify following Tehran’s 
Syrian success and, with it, the broader Sunni-Shia schism.

It is this religious fault line that sustains the foul jihadis of Islamic 
State, feeds lethal extremism and terrorism from Nigeria to Bangladesh and 
contributes to a destructive polarisation across the Muslim world. There is 
scant reason to believe the next 12 months will bring substantial improvement.

If 2017 is indeed the year of uncertainty, then the biggest, new contributory 
factor is Donald Trump. Rarely, if ever, in our lifetimes has the advent of an 
American president aroused such a widespread sense of foreboding. Trump’s 
extraordinary combination of ignorance, aggression and personal insecurity 
threatens the post-1945 system of law-based universal values and international 
institutions. He shows nothing but contempt for the UN. But where else, in this 
dangerous world, can international disputes be peacefully addressed, however 
imperfectly, or humanitarian crises managed? With his praise of torture and 
hostility to the media,Trump encourages human rights abusers and enemies of 
free speech everywhere 
<http://www.ontheissues.org/2016/Donald_Trump_Foreign_Policy.htm>.

With his loose talk about encouraging a nuclear arms race, Trump endangers 
global security and justifies the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, 
not least by the rogue regime in North Korea. With his climate change denial, 
noisily echoed by his cabinet and government agency nominees, Trump threatens a 
historic setback for the cause of environmental protection at the very moment 
when the polar ice is melting at record speeds. Trump’s thoughtless baiting of 
China, particularly over Taiwan, demonstrates what is fast becoming trademark 
behaviour: recklessness mixed with stupidity. Even the Taiwanese are alarmed at 
his antics. And while US concerns about China’s illegal military island 
building in the South China Sea are justified, tweeted insults aimed atBeijing 
are not the way to deal with the problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/beijing-grits-teeth-in-face-of-trumps-tweets>
.

Like the year 2017 itself, Trump’s presidency may not turn out to be as bad as 
feared. Practical considerations, wise advice and the limitations of US power 
may temper his worst instincts and wilder ideas. That is an outcome devoutly to 
be wished. But one international flashpoint deserves particular attention: the 
developing conflict between Israel and Iran. Reacting to last week’s Occupied 
Territories settlements row between Obama and Israel’s hawkish prime minister,
Benjamin Netanyahu <https://www.theguardian.com/world/binyamin-netanyahu>, 
Trump pledged unquestioning support to the latter.

At the risk of inflaming regional opinion, he has already indicated de facto 
recognition of Jerusalem as Israel’s undivided capital. His new ambassador is 
militantly pro-settler, regardless of the rights of the Palestinians. And Trump 
himself has vowed to tear up last year’s nuclear accord with Tehran, which 
Netanyahu believes fundamentally threatens Israel’s security.

Trump shows every sign of buying into the hard-right narrative, encouraged by 
Washington’s Sunni allies and Israeli hawks, that Iran, on the front foot in 
Iraq,Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and Yemen, freed from oil 
sanctions, and allegedly secretly seeking to acquire nuclear weapons, must be 
stopped at all costs. This is extremely dangerous thinking that should be 
firmly resisted by Britain and all the western democracies. Whatever 2017 
brings, the very last thing the world needs is another war in the Middle East.
 