
Prime ministers like to build big things. They like to wear high-visibility 
jackets and watch concrete being poured. They like to cut ribbons. And they 
like a legacy.

Theresa May is different from past prime ministers in many ways, but it seems 
she shares with her predecessors a penchant for big projects, even in the face 
of overwhelming evidence against them. In just a few months she has pushed a 
vote to renewTrident <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident>, given the 
go-ahead to Hinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/theresa-may-accused-backing-down-hinkley-point-c-deal>
 and pledged her government’s support for the expansion of Britain’s busiest 
airport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/heathrow-airport-expansion-gets-government-approval-gatwick>
.

Heathrow airport expansion gets government approval
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/heathrow-airport-expansion-gets-government-approval-gatwick>
Taken separately these decisions are big. Together they tell us about the kind 
of Britain this government is trying to build, literally as well as 
metaphorically: a country ill-equipped for the future and that won’t meet its 
own needs; a nation whose presence on the world stage will be defined by its 
ability to kill millions; a Britain failing to make the economic transition 
necessary to free itself from the worst effects of climate change. Communities 
that get the illusion of control, provided they make the decisions people in 
power want.

The choices we’re offered say just as much about the Westminster’s mindset as 
the final outcomes. Do we want Heathrow or Gatwick? Nuclear power or gas? 
Safety provided by nuclear weapons or the danger of losing them? We weren’t 
offered no new runways or a truly decentralised, community-owned energy system. 
The government didn’t ask whether we want the security of not transporting 
nuclear weapons across our country. And, without a coherent official opposition 
on these issues, genuine debate about these alternatives is dangerously 
narrowed.

It’s striking that support for these mega-projects hasn’t only come from the 
Conservatives <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> and their 
friends in big business. The Labour party and the trade unions are backing 
them, too. An old-school consensus has emerged which sees everyone from Unite 
to the CBI competing over who can shout loudest about the benefits of building 
big things. Never mind the better choices buried in the process. But the truth 
is we do not live in an economy with only binary options.

The government could have chosen not to support Heathrow – and instead 
followed the climate science to its logical conclusion and pledged action to 
tackle the surging demand for flying from the super rich. They know that70% of 
flights are taken by just 15% of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/20/frequent-flyer-tax-leisure-airfares>
 – and that a simple tax on frequent flights could eliminate the need for new 
runways – but such evidence gets in the way of their love for laying tarmac. 
They talk of giving people back control: well try telling that to the people of 
Harmondsworth in west London – whose homes are set to be the collateral from 
this environmentally disastrous plan.

All of the mega projects, it is the renewal of Trident that is potentially the 
most catastrophic

The plan to build a new nuclear power station at Hinkley Point is equally 
reckless. Bill payers will stump up billions for this colossal folly – and 
precious resources will be diverted away from building an energy system suited 
to this century.

But of all of the mega-projects, it is the renewal of Trident  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/18/mps-vote-in-favour-of-trident-renewal-nuclear-deterrent>
that is potentially the most catastrophic. The arguments against Trident are 
well-rehearsed. But the very fact that building a new generation of weapons of 
mass destruction is pitched by politicians as central to our nationhood should 
give us pause for thought. What makes Britain need nukes so desperately when 
almost all other countries on earth maintain their safety without them?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fcaroline-lucas-challenges-theresa-may-trident-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Green%20MP%20Caroline%20Lucas%20challenges%20Theresa%20May%20over%20Trident%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fcaroline-lucas-challenges-theresa-may-trident-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Green%20MP%20Caroline%20Lucas%20challenges%20Theresa%20May%20over%20Trident%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fcaroline-lucas-challenges-theresa-may-trident-video&media=>
Green MP Caroline Lucas challenges Theresa May over Trident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/jul/18/caroline-lucas-challenges-theresa-may-trident-video>
The Labour party’s position on Trident is particularly strange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/13/labour-continue-back-trident-shadow-defence-secretary-nia-griffith>
. It has stated that it is in favour of renewal – but the party has a leader 
who, quite rightly, says he would never fire the missiles if he became prime 
minister. Both positions have logic to them, but combined in one party and the 
end point is committing to building a nuclear weapons system based on the 
(flawed) theory of deterrence but with a cast-iron guarantee that the those 
submarines will do nothing more than float aimlessly around the ocean, in a 
constant state of readiness to do nothing. Perhaps one of the new vessels could 
be called HMS Pointless?

Of course, if we scrap Trident we need to guarantee the jobs and economic 
security of those working at Faslane, Aldermaston and elsewhere. A “defence 
diversification agency” would help to ensure a just transition for the people 
whose jobs are directly dependent onTrident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident>.

It’s not just alternatives to Trident that are desperately needed. Instead of 
Hinkley, let’s lead the world in energy conservation. Imagine, for example, 
that home insulation was central to the government’s infrastructure plans. A
nationwide scheme <http://www.energybillrevolution.org/whats-the-campaign/> to 
keep people warm, cut fuel bills and tackle carbon emissions would create more 
than 100,000 jobs across the UK.

Or imagine we redoubled our efforts to lead the world in renewables and energy 
storage technologies. That would create more jobs than nuclear weapons or power 
ever will. We know that green energy creates far more jobs per gigawatt and 
that every community in Britain can create its own power. Our energy system 
doesn’t have to be centralised, or owned by multinational firms and foreign 
governments. It can be built in Britain, located in every community and it can 
be beautiful.

Infrastructure isn’t just about concrete and hard economic growth. It’s about 
social connections, too. The qualitative growth that could come from a 
community learning new skills to manage and run renewable energy projects they 
own. The conversations over fences, in the post office and pub. It’s the ties 
that bind us – and the networks that make us a whole greater than the sum of 
our parts.

Indeed, I would argue that our biggest pieces of infrastructure aren’t 
bridges, or buildings – they’re the welfare state upon which we all rely, and 
our National Health Service. So when the government tells you it’s investing in 
infrastructure, and then ministers don hard hats at opening ceremonies, 
remember what they’re demolishing with one hand as they cut ribbons with the 
other.

My challenge to both the government and the official opposition is simple: 
take a step back and think carefully about the kind of Britain we want to 
build. We’re a small country, but we should be big in ambition. Let’s pause for 
a moment before we pour more tarmac for more planes to land on, build obscenely 
expensive power plants or forge our path in the wake of submarines carrying 
weapons of mass destruction.

This is a fork in the road – and we have a chance to build an economy that not 
only meets the challenges of the 21st century head-on but creates a better 
country in the process. Let’s not miss this opportunity.
 