
At the top of a steep, snowy slope on Hampstead Heath a few winters back, so 
the story goes, a disparate group of north London parents were expressing mild 
concern to one another about their unruly children, tobogganing down the ice 
together on assorted tea trays and sledges. “It’s an accident waiting to 
happen,” agreed one slim man in a grey beanie hat, looking round 
good-naturedly. In response the other parents started edging away, as of one 
mind, and the friendly banter froze in the frosty air. Yet there was nothing 
visibly wrong with this father. Far from it. In fact, he was near perfect. He 
was also, they had realised,David Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/david-beckham>.

For all the vast, enviable wealth revealed last week in the joint Beckham 
family bank account, each of its members – father, mother, three sons and a 
little daughter – are condemned to walk a strangely isolated path through the 
world. High levels of grooming, good looks and international fame ensure that 
David and Victoria, his wife of 17 years, and their children rarely pass among 
us without provoking, at most, a paparazzi frenzy and, at least, a moment of 
social awkwardness.

From Posh to classy: how Victoria Beckham won over fashion world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/20/posh-to-classy-how-victoria-beckham-won-over-fashion-world>
On Friday, Beckham père had another crack at normal seasonal fun. He gamely 
took his children along to sample the tinselly delights of Hyde Park’s annual 
Winter Wonderland fairground. Flanked by a bodyguard,their every move was 
snapped by photographers 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/doting-dad-david-beckham-gets-9427575>
. Some might think this a fair exchange for daily luxury and the security of 
knowing you and your family will always be able to afford the best of 
everything, but it does also mean that a celebrity couple once affectionately 
ridiculed for the ordinariness of their outlook now operate on a restrictive 
level of status previously reserved for heads of state. Their riches, estimated 
at more than £500m, actually make them better off than the Queen.

As a result, like a royal family, it has become difficult to relate to their 
lives or judge how genuine their public personas are. After all, when Romeo 
Beckham wants to try out tennis he gets to have a knockabout on court with Andy 
Murray, and when Harper Beckham, five, wants a new party dress she goes 
straight to the front row of a Paris catwalk.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcruz-beckham-to-release-christmas-single-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cruz%20Beckham%20releases%20Christmas%20single%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcruz-beckham-to-release-christmas-single-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cruz%20Beckham%20releases%20Christmas%20single%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcruz-beckham-to-release-christmas-single-video&media=>
Cruz Beckham releases Christmas single 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/video/2016/dec/07/cruz-beckham-to-release-christmas-single-video>
Last week attention focused on 11-year-old Cruz Beckham, who has just released 
acharity single 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/video/2016/dec/07/cruz-beckham-to-release-christmas-single-video>
 with an eye to the Christmas charts. Victoria’s Instagram followers have 
already been treated to glimpses of Cruz crooning. And fair enough, why not? 
She is a proud mother. But the ease with which this boy has been able to fulfil 
a dream of singing success has rankled with some. Piers Morgan was 
characteristically forthright, accusing the Beckhams of “pimping out” their 
son. “I don’t know how he managed to release a pop single. It’s sickening. Put 
him on a talent show if you wanna see how good he is,” he added.

Sales of the song, If Every Day Was Christmas, will raise money for Make Some 
Noise 
<http://www.makesomenoise.com/cruz-beckhams-debut-single-supports-make-noise/>, 
which aids families coping with disadvantage, and it is certainly true that 
Cruz’s approach to the project has been down-to-earth. The project, he 
guilelessly announced, combines “two of my favourite things, Christmas and 
singing”. So perhaps the only questionable element here is the wisdom of 
exposing a young lad to so much potential criticism, even on a charitable 
footing. David and Victoria pride themselves on their strict and unfussy 
approach to parenting, so those without malevolence should wish that Cruz was 
clued-up in advance about just how unsparingly his talents were likely to be 
critiqued.

The handling of wealth and privilege, and specifically of inheritance, is now 
a hot topic among super-rich families. American tech moguls Bill Gates and Mark 
Zuckerberg have set a high bar by granting much of their personal fortunes to 
good works and posterity, rather than their children. In Britain, 
multimillionaires Duncan Bannatyne and Simon Cowell have made similar 
indications, while financial service companies have new departments advising 
people with large fortunes how to bestow their cash legacies. The fiscally 
encumbered need only look at troubled dynasties such as the Rausings to remind 
them of the damage a giant bequest can do.

So far the younger Beckhams appear to be doing well. Not only do they look 
happy gadding about in designer schmutter, they also have gained work 
experience aplenty. Brooklyn, 17, trained with Arsenal’s youth academy and has 
become both aphotographer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jul/13/brooklyn-beckham-burberry-campaign-art-critics-verdict>
 and the face of the Pull & Bear brand; Romeo, 14, has worked with Burberry and 
also tried out football with the Gunners; and Cruz, as we know, is flexing his 
vocal cords; finally, Harper has her own fashion blog.

Sadly, for many of those pop culture fans who dutifully watch the Beckhams 
from the sidelines, it is all about the schadenfreude. There is a bleak public 
faith in the law that people who “have it all” must surely fall, just as Brad 
and Angelina’s fairytalecame down with a bump this September when their private 
jet landed on the tarmac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/23/brad-pitt-cleared-fbi-over-plane-incident-no-charges>
 that ill-fated day. The Beckhams, too, have been shaken by bouts of 
turbulence. A claim of illicit love sold to the media by David’s former 
assistant, Rebecca Loos, in 2004 took an effort to recover from, while 
Victoria’s health, weight and happiness were once a source of repeated 
speculation in celebrity magazines.

In truth, this family’s biggest asset is not money. To the extent the Beckhams 
inspire public goodwill, it is down to the hard work that the boy from 
Leytonstone and the girl from Harlow clearly put into shaping their lives. As 
such, they contrast gloriously with that other conspicuously wealthy clan who 
are about to move into the White House.

David, 41, has inspired works of art, films and musicals, and made huge 
amounts last year from fashion sponsorships. But he continues to work with 
Unicef and has invested in a plan to build a new soccer stadium in Miami.

Veteran sports writer Brian Oliver is a fan of Beckham’s elegance on the 
pitch, but he concedes that his football was never quite as good as his fame 
suggested; not up against contemporaries such as Zinedine Zidane and Ronaldhino.

“I wouldn’t knock him as an England player though,” says Oliver. “I won’t 
forget when John Motson told millions of BBC viewers ‘Beckham has virtually 
played Greece on his own,’ when he scored the last-minute free-kick that earned 
England a place in the 2002 World Cup finals.”

Despite plenty of triumphs with his various clubs, abiding memories of Beckham 
on the field are from England games, adds Oliver.

When it comes to Victoria, 42, perhaps the most remarkable achievement is that 
today it can take a moment to remember to call her Posh Spice. Manufactured 
with the rest of the Spice Girls in the 1990s, she rode a rocket to VIP land, 
regardless of a consensus that her singing was not up to much. This year she 
ducked involvement in another reunion project,GEM <http://spicegirlsgem.com/>, 
and she generally exhibits an aloof attitude to the whole girl power thing.

Instead, she is a genuinely respected force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/11/victoria-beckham-steers-a-clever-course-through-new-york-fashion-week>
 in the world of fashion. Observer Magazine deputy editor Alice Fisher has 
watched her design career flower. “The industry has always been fascinated by 
her, and from the debut collection she’s always had good reviews,” Fisher says. 
“The clothes may not be widely affordable, but a lot of women covet that style. 
In the early days there were rumours that other designers were involved, but 
that was a media thing.”

Working with a large creative team is not unusual, according to Fisher. “And 
she works really hard. When she opened her Dover Street store she personally 
showed various fashion editors around. That was an impressive level of effort. 
She was extraordinarily knowledgable about the design, the fixtures in the 
fitting room, everything.”

Intrigued, the renowned fashion writer Suzy Menkes pulled a random shirt off a 
rail and asked how much it cost. “Victoria didn’t know, but saw the funny side.”

A duo of few words – he perceived as shy, she as sulky – David and Victoria 
emit abundant star wattage: The Beckham Effect. As Oliver puts it: “England 
matches have been turgid for many years, but that was not the case when David 
played. He often lit up the game.”

No surprise, then, when he was chosen to swoosh down the Thames in a speedboat 
to hand the Olympic torch to Sir Steve Redgrave in 2012. A moment of true 
national pride.

THE BECKHAM FILE

The Beckham file

Moment of birth Twenty years ago in the Manchester United players’ lounge, 
when a lovestruck Victoria Adams gave David her phone number, scrawled on a 
plane ticket. She recalled: “Other football players stand at the bar drinking 
with their mates… David [is] standing aside with his family. And he has such a 
cute smile…”

Best of times The monarchs of pop and football celebrate their union on 
bling-tastic thrones at their wedding in 1999. Their joy is soon amplified by 
the birth of three sons: Brooklyn, Romeo and Cruz, and their daughter, Harper.

Worst of times PA Rebecca Loos’s claims about David’s infidelity in 2004 cut 
deep. Victoria is reported to have controlled the family “brand” image ever 
since, although rumours about the marriage are a constant feature of celebrity 
magazines.

He says “I’ve never seen myself as a celebrity, but I see it in a positive 
way, the fact that people are still interested in most parts of my life.”

She says “I want to make women feel like the best version of themselves. I 
want to empower women and share things I have learned over the years.”

They say ”Nothing against poor little Cruz Beckham, but I’ve got a lot of 
issues with what his parents are doing.” Piers Morgan.
 