
Across England and Wales 140,000 miles of tidy and scrappy, rough and smooth 
and muddy, open, wooded, exposed, sheltered, peaceful and exhilarating rights 
of way roll and ramble across some of the two nations’ finest landscapes. They 
meander from pub to hamlet and farm to school, or sometimes just from suburb to 
suburb by the scenic route. Now, over a little more than a year and helped by 
more than 3,000 citizen’s surveys,Ramblers (formerly the Ramblers’ Association) 
<http://www.ramblers.org.uk/bpwreport> has mapped the condition of enough of 
these sometimes ancient routes to conclude that more than half are in a good 
condition, treasured, enjoyed, and as well maintained as a vital part of the 
common interest should be.

But the picture is uneven. Where the landowner is the National Trust, the 
National Forest or a national park, the story is usually good – streams with 
stepping stones, fences with working gates. But as many as a tenth are in 
serious disrepair: unsignposted, overhung by inhospitable brambles and thick 
with threatening nettles. That is 14,000 miles of rambling that hovers between 
the difficult and the impassable. No surprise that these paths are often in 
areas where local councils, responsible for maintaining rights of way, have 
experienced the worst cuts. How obvious it must seem, when faced with the 
choice between closing a day centre or maintaining 100 miles of footpaths, to 
let the axe fall first on what seems inessential.

Yet, as the Ramblers point out, walking is probably the best single way of 
promoting both physical and mental health yet to be devised. If everyone walked 
for two and a half hours a week, fewer people would need doctors and the NHS 
could be nearly £2bn better off. It is something that almost everyone can do. 
No special equipment is needed – just paths there to walk on, safe, 
traffic-free and easy to reach. There is even a budget, just not the obvious 
one. Under the largely destructive Health and Social Care Act of 2012,
responsibility for public health 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/web/guest/publications/-/journal_content/56/10180/7954763/PUBLICATION>
 was devolved to local councils. There are some obligations they must fill, 
relating to the provision of access to such things as sexual health services 
and baby and child health measures. But there is scope for local interpretation 
too, to chose what form of public healthcare local people will get the most 
benefit from. Some things – stop-smoking and substance abuse programmes – are 
usually essential. But walking, along with facilities like green spaces and 
play areas, could be part of the programme too.

Unfortunately, the Treasury view does not encompass public health; if extra 
cash for the NHS has to be found, it is invariably the public health budget 
that is raided. So, after the last election, £200m was taken out mid-year. 
Earlier this year, it was announced that the budget, now at £3.38bn, would 
shrink again, by just short of 4% a year until 2020. The sub-budget for 
promoting physical activity,King’s Fund research found 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/blog/2016/08/local-government-public-health-budgets>
, has now been cut by nearly 15%.

MPs on the communities and local government committee have just launched an 
inquiry 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/communities-and-local-government-committee/inquiries/parliament-2015/public-parks-16-17/>
 into the state of parks in England. They are hearing bleak messages about play 
areas closed because councils can no longer afford to maintain them and about 
park wardens, who kept spaces safe, made redundant. To that toll can now be 
added thousands of miles of rights of way that, like parks and play areas, 
should be playing their part in keeping the NHS solvent by making us all 
healthier.
 