
It is an extraordinary feeling for America-watchers to contemplate a White 
House with an apparent blank sheet onforeign policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-foreign-policy-north-korea-syria-russia-china>
. In an already volatile world, not knowing where to place the United States 
increases the uncertainty.

The two most important pillars of the global system of nation states are 
security and economic order. The world is looking more unstable because this 
era of greater freedom, for both states and individuals, has generated a 
plethora of new actors and strong subjective differences over how they should 
interact. Identity politics and a reaction tounequal globalisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/liberal-internationalists-populists-globalisation>
, creates a forceful trend towards fragmentation. Competition at national and 
regional levels has bred conflict where governance is weakest, with the bitter 
consequences on view in Syria and elsewhere.

Great power conflict, on the other hand, would be a catastrophe at the global 
level. The UN has managed to instil a habit of nations talking through 
differences before resorting to force. History suggests that a century is as 
much as we can expect this practice to last, unless something unprecedented 
happens. We are getting close to danger in our 70-year-old system.

Does Trump have the courage, and the political capital, to bring Russia down 
to the level of the lapsed superpower?

Can a President Trump serve western interests here? Russia under President 
Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/vladimir-putin-big-problem-america-no-longer-the-enemy>
 will be his first and possibly his greatest test. Donald Trump’s apparent 
admiration for Putin might suggest naivety, but it will open the door to a 
discussion if circumstances and politics allow it. The risk in the short term 
is that Putin, who has no respect for western strategic decision-making, may 
exploit the American interregnum and challenge Nato over Ukraine or the 
Baltics. He is certainly going to continue his monstrous bombing campaign in 
Syria.

How carefully will Trump listen to his advisers on the options as he enters 
the presidency? Or how unthinkingly assertive will his instincts make him? The 
avoidance of escalation will come at a cost to the US, because Washington has 
refused since 1990 to regard Moscow as an equal player. Does Trump have the 
courage, and the political capital, to bring the superpower down to the level 
of the lapsed superpower and start a constructive conversation? I think there 
is a possibility there, so long as Trump carries a stick – the doubling up of 
sanctions – in his other hand and resists any Kremlin scheming to take 
advantage of his inexperience.

A Washington-Moscow interface will make China worry, and possibly react. 
Beijing too has exploited US hesitation, notably in the South China Sea. The 
Chinese have difficulty with the unfamiliar, and will be strongly on the 
defensive in the early days with the Trump administration. Chinese defence can 
involve aggression. They must be brought into any new Washington outreach – 
with Shinzo Abe’s Japan, struggling with reform, looking on anxiously. 
Experienced diplomacy will be needed in all of this, and so confidence in
Trump’s early appointments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
 will be crucial.

Trump’s references to Nato 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/22/donald-trump-criticised-for-objecting-to-cost-of-defending-nato-members>
, unfortunately, will have sapped the confidence of allies that America will be 
rock-steady in their interests. The Europeans have not earned American loyalty 
with their distaste for hard power and large defence budgets. Under Trump, this 
will come home to roost. As with the other great international institutions, 
Nato’s effectiveness as a political alliance was anyway fading with the passage 
of time, in part because the US presence as a power in Europe was always going 
to shrink once the cold war was won.

Europe is now just one of several global security theatres for the Americans, 
ranking no higher than the Asian one. Trump’s America will take decisions on 
Europe’s defence on the merits of the case at the time, not on any automatic 
“family” sentiment. We Europeans now have to be sure of bringing something to 
the American table to earn their partnership. This was always going to happen 
at some point: Trump’s election, the EU’s introspection and Brexit all bring 
the reckoning forward.

Neoliberalism: the deep story that lies beneath Donald Trump’s triumph | 
George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/neoliberalsim-donald-trump-george-monbiot>
As for the Middle East, will a Trump White House seek to refill the perceived 
Obama vacuum? Do we have an interventionist here? This is territory where 
angels fear to tread. Neither intervention, of the Iraq kind, nor 
non-intervention, of the Syrian kind, will fix the problems of the poor 
governance and dissatisfied peoples of this region. Time is needed, together 
with careful exploration of the sensible possibilities – dialogue, exhaustion 
with conflict, skilful international stakeholder management, the insistence of 
women on a decent life for their families. Putting theIran nuclear agreement  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/irans-nuclear-programme>at risk, choosing 
sides in regional rivalries, or insulting Muslims, would be a bad way to start. 
Placing the campaigner Trump and gradualist diplomacy in the same sentence 
looks odd. But we just do not know what this unusual personality is capable of, 
good or bad.

In the economic sphere, markets are holding their breath. What on earth does 
this all mean? Big trade deals look more remote, but the Atlantic and Pacific 
ones were anyway proving hard to deliver and a president Clinton might not have 
promoted them either. With Republicans in the lead in all branches of 
government, the US can be expected to act more aggressively in protection of 
American jobs and businesses, to the point of provoking retaliation from China, 
the EU and others, and damaging economic growth both at home and abroad. The
climate change agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
 will come under renewed threat.

Above all, the election of Donald J Trump has the feel of an epochal event, of 
a geopolitical disruption, of planet-wide regime change. It could be the 
clearest symptom yet of the disadvantage of democracy, that it enables the 
removal of governments the people dislike, but does not necessarily create the 
conditions for wiser ones to follow – a phenomenon not so different, after all, 
from the results of theArab spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/15/arab-spring-badly-wrong-five-years-on-people-power>
. Those states that have sheltered under a benign American umbrella had better 
start assessing their own self-sufficiency. There will be no free lunches 
coming out of Mr Trump’s America.
 