
Ansel Elgort, the preppy heartthrob currently starring in the The Fault in Our 
Stars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-fault-in-our-stars>, has signed up 
to play Van Cliburn, the precocious pianist who became swept into a cold war 
face-off during a piano competition.

Cliburn was awarded first prize in the inaugural Tchaikovsky International 
Piano Competition in 1958, but not before a political struggle erupted around 
his performance. The competition had been staged in part as a show of Russian 
cultural majesty, and so the sensational performance by the 23-year-old Texan, 
despite winning over crowds and judges, didn't square with that narrative. 
President Khrushchev personally intervened to allow the judges to reward 
Cliburn – somewhat quelling cold war tensions that would later flare up more 
dangerously.

America meanwhile jumped on the propaganda potential, with Time magazine 
dubbing him 'The Texan Who Conquered Russia', and New York lavishing him with a 
tickertape parade. It was a triumphant moment following an adolescence he 
described as a"living hell" 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/28/arts/music/van-cliburn-pianist-dies-at-78.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
, dominated by self-consciousness at his great height, though it would remain 
the highpoint of a career where he never quite matched up to his potential. The 
major relationship of his life ended sourly when his partner Thomas Zaremba 
filed a palimony suit against him.

Elgort, who is currently filming the sequel to dystopian sci-fi thriller 
Divergent with his Fault co-star Shailene Woodley, is a capable pianist 
already, having trained at the LaGuardia High School of the Performing Arts in 
New York. As a sideline to his acting career he also produces EDM tracks under 
the nameAnsølo <https://soundcloud.com/ansolo>, citing support from big DJs 
including Steve Angello and Danny Howard.

His rise has been swift, having only appeared in the Carrie remake prior to 
Divergent and Fault. His next completed role is in Men, Women and Children, the 
new film from Juno and Up In The Air director Jason Reitman which also stars 
Adam Sandler, Jennifer Garner and Emma Thompson.

• Ansel Elgort on his Fault in Our Stars breakthrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/12/ansel-elgort-the-fault-in-our-stars-interview-im-happy-to-be-a-role-model>
 