
Along desert highway 62, between the World Famous Crochet Museum 
<http://www.sharielf.com/museum.html> and the dirt car park of the Joshua Tree 
Saloon <http://www.thejoshuatreesaloon.com>, is the gorgeously retro Beauty 
Bubble Salon and Museum <https://www.facebook.com/BeautyBubbleSalonAndMuseum>. 
A full-time hair salon, it is packed to the rafters with vintage hair products 
and advertising, creatively displayed with real love and a cheeky sense of 
humour by the owner – stylist and “hairstorian”Jeff Hafler 
<https://www.infringe.com/beauty-bubble/>, who has been collecting everything 
hair-related for 25 years. The pastel-pink walls and shelves are filled with 
dryers, hoods, perm machines, lotion bottles, curlers, combs, wigs and 
packaging from every decade since 1900, as well as novelties and knick-knacks 
including a personal gift from Michael Jackson. The oldest item in the 
collection is the Summer Girl, an 1883 kerosene-heated curling iron oven.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fhairdressing-museum-jeff-hafler-travel-great-little-place-i-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cc1aa270082bd2849eea3c68332a2768240c70%2F0_496_2922_1961%2F2922.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Beauty%20Bubble%20Salon%20and%20Museum%2C%20Joshua%20Tree%2C%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fhairdressing-museum-jeff-hafler-travel-great-little-place-i-know%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Beauty%20Bubble%20Salon%20and%20Museum%2C%20Joshua%20Tree%2C%20California&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fhairdressing-museum-jeff-hafler-travel-great-little-place-i-know%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cc1aa270082bd2849eea3c68332a2768240c70%2F0_496_2922_1961%2F2922.jpg>
Many visitors to the museum end up returning another day for a haircut. Hafler 
can recreate most vintage hairstyles, and his stylists, Danielle and Emily, 
specialise in organic hair colour and modern colouring techniques. Another 
great reason to visit the area is that local artistsopen their studios  
<http://hwy62arttours.org> for two weekends from 15 October.
• The Beauty Bubble Salon and Museum, on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/BeautyBubbleSalonAndMuseum> and Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/beautybubblesalon/>, 61855 29 Palms Hwy, Joshua 
Tree, open Tuesday to Saturday, 10am-6pm
 