
Shostakovich <https://www.theguardian.com/music/dmitri-shostakovich>’s The Nose
, composed in his early 20s, is a fabulously exaggerated, cacophonous, insanely 
over-the-top satirical fantasy written by a young man wholly and exuberantly 
indulging in his role as enfant terrible. The story comes from Gogol, whose 
masterly output of short stories can be crudely divided into rural and urban. 
In his collection of Ukrainian tales,Evenings on a Farm near Dikanka, he used a 
romanticised background of village life to tell a series of vivid stories 
richly peopled with devils,rusalki (mermaids) and ghosts set against a 
marvellous gallery of village characters: grumpy elders, strutting peasant lads 
and simpering dark-eyed maidens. This colourful collection of stories would 
inspire several operas by Rimsky-Korsakov andTchaikovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pyotr-tchaikovsky>, and is a close cousin of 
the Jewish folktales from the shtetl that were lovingly recorded by Sholem 
Aleichem.

My hero: Dmitri Shostakovich by Julian Barnes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/30/my-hero-dmitri-shostakovich-by-julian-barnes>
Gogol’s “urban” works display a similar technique and characters but in a very 
different context: St Petersburg. The city was one of the early examples of the 
Russian weakness for the command economy, Tsar Peter’s equivalent of a 
“five-year plan”. Seeking an outlet to the west (via the Baltic) and a symbolic 
separation from the traditionalist stronghold of Moscow, he ordered a city 
built in a swamp beside the river Neva. Despite its buildings of unparalleled 
magnificence, St Petersburg always had the whiff of fakery about it, and when 
the freezing fog welled up from the Neva one might imagine that all these 
apparently solid palaces could in a moment slide into the mud and vanish. This 
was the city’s phantasmagorical underbelly, which Gogol chose to explore.

However, phantasmagoria was not the end but the means of his deftly 
constructed novellas. The goal was to satirise St Petersburg’s expanding 
nouveau riche society – an invented society to people its invented streets. As 
in most nouveau riche societies, people took themselves and their new positions 
very seriously. Titles and uniforms were all-important, and a vastly overblown 
bureaucracy exerted a malignant stranglehold based on rank and procedure. Gogol 
used the absurd to puncture this pomposity and pretension.

In his story “The Overcoat” he tells the tragic tale of the unspeakably poor 
and dull clerk Akaky Bashmachkin (kaka = shit, bashmak = shoe, so “shitty 
shoe”), who to his horror discovers that he needs a new overcoat. He scrapes 
and saves and fills his life with dreams of this garment, and when he finally 
achieves its purchase, it is a moment of redemptive ecstasy. A short while 
later he is robbed, the overcoat torn from his back, and he dies, heart-broken.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fwhiff-of-scandal-surrounding-shostakovichs-opera-nose%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5b4216e311a41708d0b7e3db55dc9658f0cd5a2%2F0_1026_4250_2550%2F4250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20whiff%20of%20scandal%20surrounding%20Shostakovich%E2%80%99s%20Nose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fwhiff-of-scandal-surrounding-shostakovichs-opera-nose%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20whiff%20of%20scandal%20surrounding%20Shostakovich%E2%80%99s%20Nose&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fwhiff-of-scandal-surrounding-shostakovichs-opera-nose%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5b4216e311a41708d0b7e3db55dc9658f0cd5a2%2F0_1026_4250_2550%2F4250.jpg>
 Iconoclastic … Dmitri Shostakovich. Photograph: Alamy 
So far, this is a realist picture of grinding urban poverty. Now, however, a 
mysterious corpse starts to haunt the banks of the Neva, tearing the coats off 
the backs of prosperous citizens. Finally, the “significant personage” who had 
treated Akaky with contempt when he came to seek redress for his robbery is 
himself robbed by this ghoul, and from that terrifying moment resolves to 
become a better man. The phantasmagorical brings about a moral dimension.

Elements from this story found their way into Shostakovich’s opera alongside 
Gogol’s “The Nose”, in which a “councillor” (a civil service rank) wakes up to 
discover that his nose has absconded. Suffering greatly from this literal loss 
of face, he is further horrified to discover that his nose is calmly walking 
the streets dressed in a uniform superior to his own, and is greeted on all 
sides with appropriate respect. In the end, a police inspector returns the nose 
to its owner, who is finally able to rejoin the promenading gentry on Nevsky 
Prospect, restored to his rightful status.

Between these seemingly thin parameters, there lies an ocean of excess, 
performed by a cast with more than 80 named roles. Translating this mayhem into 
English was great fun, and the style of the work avoids many of the technical 
problems associated with other opera libretti, such as formal rhyme schemes. 
Also, since the musical style is brutal and utilitarian rather than 
mellifluous, there is not the same problem about the sonority of the language 
as would be the case withEugene Onegin, for instance.

Everything is faster, slower, louder or, in the case of the screaming police 
inspector, higher than you'd think possible

It is of course unusual for the Royal Opera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> to perform in translation, but there 
is no doubt that immediacy of communication is valuable for a zany comedy of 
this kind. Even the surtitles are appropriate, as it was Shostakovich’s stints 
as a pianist accompanying silent films that gave him a taste for high-energy 
pranks.

He wrote The Nose from the unguarded standpoint of a young composer using his 
entire box of tricks at a time when the liberated Russian intelligentsia had 
free rein to experiment and revel in the avant garde. The first Stalinist 
crackdown was still around the corner. The result is almost a catalogue of all 
the devices and gestures that would become standard practice for mid-to‑late 
20th-century modernist iconoclasm. The orchestra is encouraged at one point to 
shout out remarks to the singers, there is an ensemble entirely consisting of 
percussion, a group of 11 policemen sing a lugubrious song about tobacco and 
then gang-rape a screaming pie seller, a sheikh passes by and comments on the 
fascinating case of the disappearing nose, and a cynical doctor advises the 
victim to have his nose preserved in formaldehyde and sold as a curiosity. 
Everything is faster, slower, longer, louder or, especially in the case of the 
screaming police inspector, higher than you might have thought possible. The 
music imitates farts, burps, the sound of a nose falling into a tin basin, as 
well as ecstatic voices in the Kazan Cathedral.

At the end of Gogol’s story, he invites speculation on the value to a national 
culture of telling such a tale. A note in the full score suggests such a 
discussion could take place towards the end of the opera. No text is provided, 
but it is all too easy to imagine some Hooray Henry harrumphing from the 
stalls: “One of the rare cases when the opera was even sillier than the 
production!”

• The Nose, with a new translation by David Pountney, is at the Royal Opera 
House, London WC2E, from 20 October.roh.org.uk <http://www.roh.org.uk/>
 