
Ever since US presidential candidates railed against free trade, and 
anti-immigrant parties made sweeping gains in Europe, the question has been 
asked:are we witnessing the demise of globalisation? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/does-trumps-election-spell-end-for-globalisation>
 A trend that has dominated economics and trade for decades appears to be 
coming to an end. As a percentage of global GDP, world exports, which have been 
on a slow steady decline in the past two years, have peaked.Fines on 
multinationals have reached record levels 
<https://www.ft.com/content/1c56c27c-b9f3-11e5-b151-8e15c9a029fb>. China’s 
breakneck industrialisation is probably over. Britain, a nation famous for 
building its empire on trade, will exit the world’s biggest free-trade area – 
Europe – by the end of this decade. Donald Trump, an opponent of free-trade 
deals all his public life, is about to become president of the United States. 
These signspoint to the slow death of the form of globalisation 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/deutsche-bank-on-the-end-of-an-economic-era-2016-9>
 that the rich world has invented, refined and patrolled since the end of the 
second world war. For many, the period from 1980 to 2008 marks the high-water 
mark of such policies – a period that came to an end with global financial 
crisis. There is a worry that these years resemble the previously most 
integrated period of world history: the Gilded Age between 1870 and 1914. This 
ended bloodily with the first world war.

However, history does not necessarily repeat itself. It is important to note 
that global prosperity is bigger than any one nation. Some of the reason for 
the flattening off in the globalising trend is mathematical: poorer economies 
are growing faster than richer ones, and they import less. As developing 
nations’ share of global GDP rises, the effect will be to shrink the ratio of 
trade to global income. Others could take China’s place as a driver of 
worldwide growth: India is probably the only country that has the potential to 
mount a transformation of similar scale and global consequence. Also a number 
of fast-growing nations could re-energise the pattern of global growth. The 
International Monetary Fund suggests that 6% annual growth in a dozen countries 
with acombined GDP of $4tn would add more to the global economy than the 
eurozone growing at full tilt 
<https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2015/09/28/04/53/sp052416a>.

Yet these feel like the wrong questions and answers. We need to settle whether 
globalisation in its current incarnation aids or relieves poverty in an 
equitable way. Given the worldwide revolts on the right and left of politics, 
the answer would seem to be that it doesn’t. Fairer arrangements will help poor 
nations get richer. Trade is not a zero-sum game: all should benefit from 
engaging in it. But the world that exists has not been designed this way. The 
thinking that has dominated recent decades comes from classical free-trade 
theory – which holds that although imports do cost jobs, exports will generate 
new ones and competition keeps prices low, so, over time, everyone gains. 
However, recent academic research tells a different story. Wheneconomists at 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
<http://news.mit.edu/2016/united-states-lost-millions-jobs-china-0309> looked 
at the impact of the trade relationship between the United States and China 
they found a heavy cost to American workers. When jobs vanish, the MIT paper 
found, the better-trained workers would bounce back, but many blue-collar 
workers did not. Losses in manufacturing are magnified by being geographically 
concentrated – and entire communities were punished. Little wonder perhaps that 
Mr Trump’s protectionist message has been central to the populist campaign that 
has made him the president-elect.

The trick is not to retreat behind walls. That would see a return to 
beggar-thy-neighbour policies and the threat of war. Policymakers must go back 
to watching the numbers that matter to left-behind communities: the trade 
deficit. International prices must be fairly set so exports are not 
artificially expensive and imports are not artificially cheap. Imports from 
nations where labour rights are trampled need addressing. These are concerns 
that sensible thinkers on the left have raised for years – most notably the 
Nobel prize-winner Joseph Stiglitz, who has long worried about the corporate 
capture of trade deals. Hiswarning 
<http://rooseveltinstitute.org/tricks-trade-deal-six-big-problems-trans-pacific-partnership/>
 that President Obama’s Trans-Pacific Partnership operated under rules that 
would harm the economy and US workerswas a call that went unheeded by Democrats 
until it was too late 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/07/09/politics/democrats-15-an-hour-minimum-wage-bernie-sanders-hillary-clinton/>
. Work must be done to resolve the tensions between democracy, the nation state 
and global economic integration. Trade deals need to show nations are open for 
business by putting people’s interests, not corporate interests, at their 
heart. We may be at a turning point in the nature of capitalism. That may not 
be such a bad thing.
 