
The government’s horrific start to the year is not only fully deserved, it is 
completely appropriate. TheCentrelink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> shemozzle and 
entitlements abuses are a wonderful amalgam of the absence of respect for those 
on welfare and the tin-eared political nous which characterises this government.

Let’s not pretend that Centrelink issuing faulty debt notices is just a case 
of IT gone wrong.

Faults where people are issued debt notices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/internal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 of $14,000 due to the system incorrectly duplicating employers, or because it 
hamfistedly averages annual income over 52 weeks are not really IT glitches, 
but rather are part of the policy design.

The Centrelink and expenses scandals reveal the rot at the heart of our 
democracy | Jason Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/13/the-centrelink-and-expenses-scandals-reveal-the-rot-at-the-heart-of-our-democracy>
Such faults are implicit in a data matching system designed notionally to 
catch fraud, but which is used instead to raise revenue by targeting 
over-payments that occurred due to honest mistakes.

Data matching is actually a rather sensible tool for governments to use. But 
there is a world of difference between using it to better discover cases of 
fraud, and to discover instances where, for example, a personwas overpaid $54 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/05/this-is-what-happened-when-centrelink-called-to-review-my-false-debt-accusation>
 four years ago because he received the dole for one day longer than he was 
supposed to.

The system is not designed to be so precise, and the government clearly knew 
this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/12/centrelink-human-oversight-slashed-after-cost-benefit-analysis>
before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/23/centrelink-officer-says-only-a-fraction-of-debts-in-welfare-crackdown-are-genuine>
 the mass of complaints began occurring late December and into this new year.

You can use data matching to precisely “catch” that $54 overpayment, but it 
requires human involvement – the paying of public servants to go into sharper 
detail than the obtuse data-matching system. But that can cost the government 
more in labour than is recovered when dealing with such small amounts.

If raising revenue is the only concern, the key is to make the system as cheap 
as possible, and thus you remove the “costly” humans and make it automated. But 
you would only do this if your desire for revenue outweighed your respect of 
the people who you know will receive erroneous (and dare one suggest, 
fraudulent) debt notices.

And we know the government has no respect for those on welfare.

And we know the government has no respect for those on welfare. 

Social services minister Christian Porter was so determined to have people 
believe that those on welfare are over-paid and lazy he spent last year putting 
outabsurd figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/sep/22/christian-porters-welfare-figures-are-designed-to-shock-pay-them-no-respect>
 that attempted to convince voters the welfare system was either being rorted 
or was too generous – such as whenhe suggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/30/governments-scare-tactic-about-the-welfare-system-treats-us-like-idiots>
 a single mum with four kids was better off on welfare than if she had a job.

So when you hear Porter argue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/03/minister-defends-centrelink-over-welfare-debt-compliance-system>
 that the automated system is “about as reasonable a process as you could 
possibly derive”, you need to understand that “reasonable” in his mind includes 
spouting nonsense designed to vilify some of the poorest in our society.

Little wonder that this fetid government happily signed off on this mail scam 
of a program – after all there’s revenue to be gained, in this case, $2.1bn 
over four years.

Human services minister Alan Tudge highlights the primacy of the system as a 
revenue gathering exercise when heclaimed this week it has recovered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/alan-tudge-says-centrelink-may-check-letters-received-before-debt-imposed>
 $300m since July, despite that figure only being the amount of debt 
“identified”.

Given the many instances of erroneously identified debts that have come to 
light in the past two weeks, questions surely need to be asked about how solid 
is the $2.1bn revenue figure.

Rather nicely, the Centrelink debt scam has also folded into the entitlements 
scandal, with Tudgesuggesting  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/mps-havent-sought-to-defraud-says-minister-as-travel-claims-scandal-widens>
that of the abuses of political entitlements there was no malevolent intent. He 
argued that “I don’t think, in relation to some of the examples that I have 
seen in recent times, that people have deliberately sought to defraud the 
system.”

It’s a pretty generous assessment from the man who last year told Channel 9’s 
A Current Affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/acoss-criticises-governments-appalling-jail-threats-to-welfare-recipients>
 of those who owed a Centrelink debt that “we’ll find you, we’ll track you down 
and you will have to repay those debts and you may end up in prison.”

So a minister claiming $13,000 in charter flights between capital cites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/mps-havent-sought-to-defraud-says-minister-as-travel-claims-scandal-widens>
 gets the benefit of the doubt, but welfare recipients are left to prove their 
innocence while being threatened with jail and forced to pay back the debt even 
whilethe amount is in dispute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/internal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system>
.

The entitlements scandal, which has seen health minister Sussan Ley resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/sussan-ley-quits-health-minister-turnbull-outlines-reform-expenses>
, is also fully deserved. The government had plenty of opportunity fix the 
current system which allows politicians to claim expenses for the flimsiest of 
reasons.

The government failed to act on the recommendations of a review 
<http://www.financeminister.gov.au/media-release/2016/03/23/independent-parliamentary-entitlements-system>
 into entitlements after the Brownyn Bishop “choppergate” scandal, despite it 
being one of the issues which annoyed voters the most.

A government with any understanding of the political mood of the electorate 
would have known ignoring the report would come back to bite them, and bite 
them hard. But given you have government ministers such as Steven Ciobo
suggesting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/people-expect-politicians-to-claim-expenses-for-sporting-events-says-steven-ciobo>
 voters “expect” politicians to claim travel entitlements to attend sporting 
events, understanding the political mood would not seem to be one of the 
government’s strengths.

That it took this scandal for the prime minister to announce he will implement 
the recommendations of the review and also introduce an independent authority 
suggests he is a leader very good at closing the door after the horse has 
bolted.

Sussan Ley quits as health minister as Turnbull outlines reform to expenses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/sussan-ley-quits-health-minister-turnbull-outlines-reform-expenses>
That the latest scandal also involves a minister using a Comcar to buy a 
$795,000 investment property only makes it more deserved given the Turnbull 
government has fought against any measures to water down negative gearing and 
attack housing affordability.

Having a minister claim entitlements while buying an investment property is 
probably the best example of an out of touch government as you could imagine. 
About the only better example would be a minister claiming entitlements to 
attend a polo event. But that would just be too much of a caricature to believe.

Oh hello, Julie Bishop 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-10/julie-bishop-charged-taxpayers-for-trip-to-polo/8173542>
.

There is however one silver lining for the government on this whole awful 
start to the year. Normally a government would be caught off guard by a having 
senior minister resign. Fortunately this governmenthas Arthur Sinodinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/19/arthur-sinodinos-stands-down-as-assistant-treasurer>
, who already has experience of standing aside from a ministerial role during 
the Independent Commission Against Corruption’s investigation into Australian 
Water Holdings , ready to step in and take over Ley’s role.

Experience matters at such times. 

 * This article was amended on 16 January 2017 to clarify Arthur Sinodinos did 
not face a corruption investigation. Sinodinos gave evidence in an Independent 
Commission Against Corruption investigation into Australian Water Holdings, of 
which he was deputy chairman and chairman before becoming a senator. There are 
no corruption findings against Sinodinos.  