
The final presidential debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/19/donald-trump-presidential-debate-election-result>
, thankfully the last set piece in a wretched campaign, revealed what is 
admirable and loathsome in American politics. Hillary Clinton displayed a 
razor-sharp intelligence and a quick wit. Her facility with facts trumped 
Donald Trump’s lack of them. Americans finally saw on Wednesday why Secretary 
Clinton had got rich from giving lectures after leaving office. Her fluency 
with words, which has earned her $22m in speaking fees, appeared to silence her 
opponent. Mr Trump, a boastful, thin-skinned billionaire who trades inracism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
 and misogyny, was left squawking on the sidelines of the debate. His jibes 
revealed a man out of his depth. His answer was to plunge down deeper. By 
disgracefully refusing to rule out calling this a rigged election he gave up a 
fight he had by then lost.

Americans should vote for Secretary Clinton as an able and proven politician. 
A Trump presidency would be bad for America and dangerous for the world, so a 
vote for Secretary Clinton is the most effective way of preventing it. Mr Trump 
has been exposed forquestionable tax arrangements 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/02/us/politics/donald-trump-taxes.html?_r=0>, 
outrageous business practices and irregularities at his charity. The 
billionaire is agrabber and kisser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 of women who he presumed gave consent because he was famous. There arenumerous 
allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/20/donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-tenth-woman-accuser>
 of sexual assault by Mr Trump. He has demonstrated that he has neither the 
conscience, training nor sense of history – and the desire to be judged well by 
it – to occupy the White House. Secretary Clinton possesses such attributes. 
She has a serious and sustained commitment on issues like education, healthcare 
and equality, and she has stood consistently for the rights of women, ethnic 
minorities, children and the disabled through her long career.

However, there are fewer reasons to vote for Secretary Clinton than one would 
have hoped. For more than two decades she has been part of a political 
establishment that shaped a dysfunctional country. She has been unable to 
escape being tarnished by the most damaging policies – notably aroundcriminal 
justice <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-36020717> – of her husband’s 
administration. There are well-founded concerns,highlighted by transcripts of 
her speeches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-wall-street-goldman-sachs-speeches>
, that she is too close to Wall Street to be an effective check on its excesses 
if elected.

The mood for change

Even so, as the first female president she would represent a symbolic 
transformative change in American politics. In some ways what Secretary Clinton 
has had to deal with are ingrained cultural attitudes about what success and 
leadership look like. These were exposed by thefinding that Mr Trump would win 
if only men voted 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/election-update-women-are-defeating-donald-trump/>
 and Secretary Clinton would win if only women voted. That most men favor 
Mr Trump over Secretary Clinton demonstrates at some level a more insidious 
sexism than the one Mr Trump peddles: that centred on the mind, not the body. 
It is a hostility – deeply embedded but rarely conceded – against seeing women 
as genuinely equal.

There is little doubt that the 2016 presidential campaign has been one of the 
most confrontational contests of the modern era. The mood for change has been 
more pervasive and volatile, and has been supercharged by Mr Trump, a braggart 
with tyrannical instincts. The backdrop to this election has been genuine and 
understandable public anger about economic insecurity, growing inequality and 
frustration with elites. Mr Trump on the right and Bernie Sanders on the left 
have reflected that mood in their very different ways. That is not going to 
disappear after 8 November. The election has also raised real questions about 
the crisis of American democracy. Mr Trump encouraged violence against 
opponents andthreatened to jail Secretary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/debate-donald-trump-threatens-to-jail-hillary-clinton>
 if he took office.

The civility that has marked out US democracy as ordered and restrained 
appears dead. The next president will have to resurrect it. The political 
topography of a polarized and resentful nation has been obscured by the 
preternatural equanimity of Barack Obama. Mr Trump has in some ways skilfully 
exploited these divisions. On social security he has moved to the left on the 
campaign trail, telling jobless Americans that he wouldnot touch their benefits 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/nextavenue/2016/08/08/social-security-where-clinton-and-trump-stand/#6dbc02aa4f40>
. Mr Trump also wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act, the landmark measure 
that increases health coverage for low-wage workers and benefitslarge numbers 
of immigrants and minorities 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/18/health/immigrants-the-poor-and-minorities-gain-sharply-under-health-act.html?_r=0>
. This contrasts with the real estate magnate’s offer to expand the US health 
programme for the elderly –Medicare 
<http://www.webmd.com/health-insurance/20161020/clinton-trump-tangle-on-preserving-medicare>
 – which benefits overwhelmingly older, whiter voters.

These dog whistles have been part of American politics for decades. But they 
come at a time when there is a sense that there are too many losers from 
economic growth in the country. Driving discontent in the US is a system that 
no longer defuses high levels of inequality with opportunities for all. 
The middle classesare poorer today than in 2000 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-09-13/u-s-poverty-rate-falls-to-post-recession-low-as-incomes-gain>
. Since the Great Recession the top1% of families in the US have captured 52% 
of the income growth 
<http://equitablegrowth.org/research-analysis/u-s-top-one-percent-of-income-earners-hit-new-high-in-2015-amid-strong-economic-growth/>
. There’s understandable anger that the wealthy were bailed out while ordinary 
Americans were hollowed out. Voters rage that, in the current incarnation of 
globalization, jobs that disappeared when the US decided to import rather than 
manufacture did not come back – they simply popped up elsewhere, usually in 
China.

The Sanders effect

Nowhere has this fury been more keenly felt than in the country’s former 
manufacturing heartlands, tapping into America’s long history of resistance to 
free trade and making protectionism a potent political force once again. The 
politician who has shaped the politics of the country and accounted for 
populist anger is Senator Sanders. The man from Vermont understood, earlier 
than most, that voters see the economy as rigged against them by a political 
system that has been corrupted by big money.His campaign was backed three to 
one by millennials in the Democratic primaries 
<https://www.brookings.edu/blog/fixgov/2016/06/03/the-democrats-generation-gap/>
. This month his favorability ratings in opinion pollsare only bettered by 
Michelle Obama 
<https://d25d2506sfb94s.cloudfront.net/cumulus_uploads/document/cx4orjzwhb/econTabReport.pdf>
.

Senator Sanders’ insurgent campaign has transformed Democratic politics – 
forcing Secretary Clinton to adopt, albeit sotto voce,key planks of his program 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-election-democrats-sanders-commentary-idUSKCN0Y90C9>
 such as a federal minimum wage of $15 an hour, tuition-free public college and 
opposition to the Trans-Pacific Partnership – President Obama’s big trade deal. 
Until this week, Secretary Clinton failed to outline enough of a bold reform 
program. Tellingly, she offered signs of one in the final televised debate, 
making unprompted promises to push immigration reforms, a key Sanders point, 
within the first 100 days of her presidency.

Although domestic politics has framed the campaign, Secretary Clinton’s 
election would be greeted with relief and optimism in most world capitals other 
than Moscow and Damascus. Despite herhawkish outlook 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2016/07/27/hillary-the-hawk-a-history-clinton-2016-military-intervention-libya-iraq-syria/>
, she will have no alternative but to recognize that the 21st century no longer 
always looks to the United States as an indispensable hegemon, whether benign 
or threatening. Secretary Clinton should focus on US soft, not hard, power – 
dealing with climate change and working out fairer global trade arrangements.

If Secretary Clinton is elected she must recognize the mood without pandering 
to its demons. She needs to bring the bold ambition about the role of 
government to this era that Theodore and Franklin Roosevelt each did in earlier 
times. She has the intelligence, the seriousness and the experience to do this. 
The US presidency is hugely powerful: 10% of all posts in federal government 
are allocated on the basis of political patronage. Secretary Clinton offers the 
best chance of ensuring those jobs go to competent people. Her choice of 
Treasury secretary in the aftermath of the banking crisis will be watched with 
special care, as will an olive branch appointment to Senator Sanders of the 
kind that president Obama made to her in 2008. She offers the greatest hope 
that the supreme court defends abortion rights and looks again at issues like 
campaign finance as well as background checks on gun owners. Yet America will 
soon find itself weakened at home and abroad if the new president is as badly 
served by congress as Mr Obama has been for most of his tenure.

There is a danger, if Mrs Clinton wins, that the Republicans will relapse into 
the Hillary-hatred that has marked them for a quarter century. The tragedy of 
this election is that, to become president, Secretary Clinton has had to talk 
more radically than she actually felt; to be an effective president she may be 
compelled to act more conservatively than she now says she wants to do.
 