
This was my first year running readers’ recipe swap, and each week has seen me 
fall for a different ingredient or novel dish to the point where “my new 
favourite thing” is a phrase I’ve uttered more times than I’ll admit to. But 
there have been some constants, likeBobby Ananta <https://bobbyananta.com/>, 
Anna Thomson,Fadime Tiskaya <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Fadime> and 
Rachel Kelly <http://marmadukescarlet.blogspot.co.uk/>, each of whom have made 
it into print more than 20 times.

Most remarkable of all, however, was ColonialCravings 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/ColonialCravings>, who was responsible 
for no fewer than eight recipes of the week, with three people doing the 
testing (Eve O’Sullivan <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/eve-o-sullivan>, 
Rosie Reynolds <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rosie-reynolds> and me). 
That, all of Cook concurs, is awesome work!

Cori Pim-Keirle (in a nice instance of parental prescience, it’s short for 
Coriander) grew up in a tiny place not far from Saltash in Cornwall, and she’s 
been cooking since she was little. “My mother is a really good cook,” she says. 
“She made a lot of pies, savoury and sweet, and I can remember sitting in the 
kitchen hoping for offcuts – she made amazing pastry. She made sure my brother 
and I knew how to cook for ourselves by the time we left home.”

Readers’ recipe swap: Raspberries | Rosie Reynolds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/04/readers-recipe-swap-raspberries-rosie-reynolds>
Colonial Cravings is the moniker and the name of the blog 
<http://colonialcravings.com/> Cori came up with when she moved to Baltimore 
with her husband and decided to document her culinary adventures in the US. 
Travelling is a constant inspiration: “I have a lot of cookbooks, but I never, 
ever follow a recipe. I make things up as I go along. I get ideas wherever I 
eat: I’m always analysing the ingredients on my plate, then going home to try 
to use the same flavours.”

Flavours and all-American recipes came back with her when they recently 
returned to the West Country: an industrial amount of Old Bay seasoning, proper 
biscuits, and Georgia cobbler. “I associate food with memories, so when we’re 
feeling a bit down and missing our lives there, we’ll make biscuits. We were 
there for three and a half years, and I find myself doing here the reverse of 
what I was doing there, when I was missing home and only wanted to make British 
things.”

Her signature dish combines baking with alcohol: two strengths I’d noticed in 
her weekly submissions. “More than a drink, alcohol is such a good ingredient 
for flavour,” she says. “Here the bourbon makes the pastry beautifully crisp 
and flaky. Baking is definitely my love. It’s the alchemy of it.”

Making this tart for the photo shoot this week was a thrill – I’ve never 
managed a tart this lush.

Bourbon and apricot tart

Serves 12
For the pastry
200g plain flour
20g cornflour
50g icing sugar
100g cold butter
1 egg, separated
25ml bourbon

For the filling
80g butter
100g sugar
80g ground almonds
50g plain flour
½ tsp baking powder
2 eggs
½ tsp almond extract
25ml bourbon
6-8 apricots, halved and pitted (canned will do, but dry them on kitchen paper)
Flaked almonds to decorate

 1 First make the pastry. Sift together the flour, cornflour and icing sugar, 
then rub in the butter – or use a food processor. Lightly beat the egg yolk 
(keep the white for later) with the bourbon, then add to the other ingredients 
and bring together to form a smooth dough. Wrap in clingfilm and refrigerate 
for 30 minutes.

2 Roll out the dough into a large disc, about 2-3mm thick. I like to do this 
between sheets of greaseproof paper so I don’t incorporate any extra flour, 
which can result in tough, chewy pastry. Grease a loose-bottomed tart tin and 
line it with the dough. Trim away any excess and keep this for decoration. 
Cover the pastry and rest it in the fridge for 20 minutes.

3 Preheat the oven to 190C/375F/gas mark 5. Cover the rested pastry with 
greaseproof paper and pile on baking beans or anything heavy and ovenproof. 
Bake the tart crust blind for 20 minutes, then for a further 10 minutes 
uncovered, until golden and crisp.

Set aside. If it looks as if the edges are getting a bit too brown just cover 
them with some baking parchment. Reduce the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark 4.

4 Now make the filling. Beat together the butter and sugar until they are 
light and fluffy. Mix in the ground almonds, flour and baking powder. Whisk 
together the eggs, almond extract and the bourbon and add this to the mix, so 
everything is well combined.

5 Pour the filling into the pastry case and smooth the top. Arrange the 
apricot halves on top, cut-side up, pressing them into the filling. Scatter a 
few flaked almonds over and add any pastry decoration you want. Brush with the 
egg white left over from making the pastry for a glazed finish. Bake for 35 
minutes. Enjoy hot or cold with cream.

Take part in our next theme, TOFU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/23/recipe-swap-share-your-tofu-recipes>
!

Upload: theguardian.com/witness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/23/recipe-swap-share-your-tofu-recipes>
;
email: recipes@theguardian.com <mailto:recipes@theguardian.com>; 
Instagram @guardian_cook <https://www.instagram.com/guardian_cook/> by noon on 
Wednesday 11 January.
Selected recipes will appear in Cook and online on 21 Jan.
 