
Scrolling through my online bank statements at Christmas, I was surprised to 
find I had not removed cash from an ATM for well over four months. Thanks to 
the ubiquity of electronic payment systems, it has become increasingly easy to 
glide around London to a chorus of approving bleeps.

As more shops and transport networks adapt to contactless card and 
touch-and-go mobile technology, many major cities around the world are in the 
process of relegating cash to second-class status. Some London shops and cafes 
are now, like the capital’s buses, simply refusing to handle notes or coins.

Could we see a whole city go cash-free? From Seoul 
<https://www.ft.com/content/bf5c929c-b78d-11e6-ba85-95d1533d9a62> to Bergamo 
<http://www.zdnet.com/article/cashless-payments-how-one-city-has-made-electronic-transactions-pay-off/>
, cities big and small are at the forefront of a global drive to go digital. 
Many of us are happy to tap cards or phones to hop on a bus, buy a coffee or 
pay for groceries, but it raises the prospect of a time we no longer carry any 
cash at all.

No spare change for the busker at the station, the person sleeping rough in 
need of a hot drink, the market trader, the donation box. Although even 
on-street charity fundraisers are nowbroaching the world of contactless payments
 
<http://metro.co.uk/2016/12/21/charity-fundraisers-now-have-contactless-machines-6337263/>
, what might the rise of the cashless city mean for street vendors, small 
merchants and the poorest inhabitants?

Some experts now fear a two-tier urban realm in which those on the lowest 
incomes become disconnected from mainstream commercial life by their dependence 
on traditional forms of currency.

“The beauty of cash is that it’s a direct and simple transaction between all 
kinds of different people, no matter how rich or poor,” explains financial 
writer Dominic Frisby. “If you begin to insist on cashlessness, it does put 
pressure on you to be banked and signed up to financial system, and many of the 
poorest are likely to remain outside of that system. So there is this real 
danger of exclusion.”

Ajay Banga, Mastercard’s CEO, has spoken about the growing global risk 
<http://www.pymnts.com/in-depth/2015/the-global-state-of-financial-inclusion/> 
of “creating islands, where the unbanked transact [only] with each other”.

 In India, the question of how the poorest might connect with the digitised 
world of the middle-class consumer is now of central importance. In November, 
the prime minister Narendra Modi announced theremoval of 500 and 1000 rupee 
notes 
<http://www.vox.com/world/2016/11/29/13763070/india-modi-cash-demonetization-protests>
 from circulation. Part of a wider attempt to jolt the nation into joining the 
cashless revolution, Modi’s government believes restricting currency and 
pushing the take-up of electronic payment will help tackle corruption and 
regulate India’s untaxed, “black” economy.
 ‘It has become increasingly easy to glide around London to a chorus of 
approving bleeps.’ Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
Saurabh Shukla, the Delhi-based editor in chief at NewsMobile Asia, says he 
has seen many small “mom and pop” store owners introduce card readers and learn 
how to use Paytm, a mobile payment platform, over the past two months.

“They realise a big change is here and they are trying to adjust to electronic 
payment,” he explains. “But they still want to convert back to cash at the end 
of the working day or the working week. It will be a gradual adjustment. We 
might not be able to create a completely cashless India, but we can aim to 
create a low cash economy.”

It’s senseless to try to make everyone go cashless. The government has lost 
sight of the plight of the common man
Aires Rodrigues 
Modi is encouraging state government to create “smart” cities by connecting 
their public services with the latest online technology. Officials are aiming 
to make the Chandigarh – famously designed by modernist architect Le Corbusier 
– India’sfirst cashless city 
<https://chandigarhmetro.com/cashless-city-chandigarh-india-first/> by 
insisting all bills are paid electronically at government offices. And the 
government of Goa is attempting toturn its capital Panjim cash-free 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/goa-bid-to-ditch-cash-traders-india-narendra-modi>
 by offering discounts in digitally bought services like train tickets, and by 
setting up classrooms to teach small traders e-payment technology.

Yet huge queues remain outside banks as many Indians continue to demand cash. 
Some of the poorest street vendors cannot afford card readers, and have 
struggled to operate Paytm payment transfers on their mobile phones.

Aires Rodrigues, a human rights lawyer in Goa, says traders in Panjim are 
suffering. Rickshaw drivers and fish market sellers have been left with no way 
of accepting payment from middle-class customers now inclined to do everything 
digitally. “It’s senseless to try to make everyone go cashless,” says 
Rodrigues. “The government seems to have lost sight of the plight of the common 
man.”

If India’s urbanites are being forced to undergo digital shock therapy, city 
dwellers in much of Europe have been moving steadily away from cash. Consumers 
like convenience. Governments like the idea of tax transparency. And retailers 
like cutting down on the costs of cash handling.
 People queue to withdraw cash at a bank in Lucknow, India, after prime 
minister Narendra Modi announced the elimination of the 500 and 1,000 rupee 
bills. Photograph: Pawan Kumar/Reuters 
According to a recent report 
<https://www.fbicgroup.com/sites/default/files/Mobile%20Payments%20Europe%20by%20Fung%20Global%20Retail%20Tech%20July%206%202016.pdf>
 by Fung Global Retail & Technology, nine of the top 15 “most digital-ready” 
countries are in Europe. It predicts Sweden could become the world’s first 
completely cashless society. Niklas Arvidsson at Stockholm’s KTH Royal 
Institute of Technology thinks it could happen by 2030.

Yet even Sweden has seen an enthusiasm gap emerge, mostly along demographic 
lines. Older people in the rural north, tending to be the least tech-savvy, 
resent the economic power of Stockholm and Gothenburg, now almost entirely 
cash-free urban zones. The National Pensioners Organisation is a key player in 
the“Cash Uprising” 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/10/10/imagining-a-cashless-world> 
coalition now campaigning to make sure older Swedes can still deposit and 
remove cash from banks.

Wealth, however, remains the key factor in determining who might be entirely 
left behind by the evolving digital economy. Some of the poorest people in 
Europe’s richest cities have found themselves pushed aside.

In Amsterdam, homeless people selling street magazine Z! 
<http://www.z-krant.nl/>, the Dutch equivalent of The Big Issue, now struggle 
to find customers still using cash. Z! trialled card payments by giving a dozen 
of the city’s vendors iZettle readers back in 2013, but the method was deemed 
too cumbersome.

“After a few weeks, our vendors said, ‘Look, this is too complicated’,” says 
editor Hans van Dalfsen. “It became too clunky and time-consuming for the 
vendor to juggle their magazines, the card reader and their own mobile phone 
connected to Bluetooth – all that stuff was needed to carry out the 
transaction.”

Van Dalfsen says he is now talking to a major telecoms company to try to find 
a simpler way for homeless vendors to accept payment using only their mobile 
phones, perhaps with help of unique QR code on their ID badge.
 The M-Pesa banking service in Kenya allows people without bank accounts to 
transfer funds using mobile phones. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
“Like Scandinavia, we are close to being cashless in Amsterdam,” he says. “I’m 
an optimist, but we really need bright people in the tech companies to come up 
with simple, convenient solutions that work for everyone. We cannot let people 
become cut off from the life of the city.”

Like many of the world’s poorest people, much of Amsterdam’s homeless 
population remain without a bank account. So even if they own a mobile phone, 
most fall back to cash.

Kenya may offer a guiding light here, having found a way to allow unbanked 
citizens access into the cashless society using cheap mobiles. Launched in 2007,
M-Pesa 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/economist-explains/2013/05/economist-explains-18>
 has become the world’s leading mobile money platform, allowing millions of 
users to transfer money to each other by sending text messages and store their 
funds digitally without opening a conventional bank account.

In Zimbabwe, last year’s cash liquidity crisis led to renewed distrust in the 
banks and helped mobile money platforms take off as an alternative way of doing 
business, first in the capital city Harare, then in rural areas. The country’s 
most popular text-based serviceEcoCash 
<http://www.techzim.co.zw/2016/07/ecocash-ecosystem-numbers-6m-subscribers-26k-agents-3k-billers/>
 now has more than six million users.


Related: Reach out, raise money or remove: how should cities deal with street 
begging? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/29/how-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness>

“There has been a huge explosion in cashless payments, down to the very 
poorest street traders using mobile money solutions,” says Nigel Gambanga, a 
Harare-based technology analyst. “Everyone has begun to realise, ‘If I don’t 
figure this out, I might not be in business tomorrow.’ People are adaptable.”

Dave Birch, director of innovation at UK firm Consult Hyperion, thinks it 
would be foolish to insist on clinging on to cash on behalf of the poor. “If 
you keep people trapped in a cash economy, you leave them to pay higher prices 
for everything, you leave them struggling to access credit, and more vulnerable 
to theft,” he says.

“We’re going to replace cash with electronic platforms,” Birch adds. “I don’t 
think poverty or being unbanked is necessarily a barrier, because everyone has 
a phone. Given the technology we have, we can develop new ways of moving 
digital cash around, even on the most basic of phones.”

The challenge for banks, regulators, tech innovators and officials keen to 
push forward “smart city” initiatives, is to make sure evolving platforms are 
accessible and keep everyone interconnected.

If we cannot find a common payment ecosystem, we may find ourselves wandering 
through divided cities, separated by the sound of bleeps and the shuffling of 
cold, hard cash.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 