
Addis Ababa has a surprise in store for those who haven’t visited in two 
years. Cutting through the heart of this booming city, where construction 
cranes are the most persistent feature of the skyline, is the Addis Ababa Light 
Rapid Transit (AALRT) network. It rears up suddenly at Meskel Square, which 
until 2013 gazed out onto an expanse of chaotic traffic. The traffic now 
bustles beneath the shadow of what is only the second metro ever built south of 
the Sahara.

On the back of the green and white trains that trundle up and down the line 
are not one, but two logos: the Ethiopian Railways Corporation, and, next to 
it, the logo of the giant state-ownedChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Railway Group (CREC).

How did China get involved in developing an African metropolis that westerners 
tend to associate with famine and death? And this is just one project among 
many across the continent. In 2014 alone, China signed more than £56bn in 
construction contracts acrossAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. 
Since the turn of the century, Chinese firms have built stadiums, highways, 
airports, schools, hospitals and, in Angola, an entire city that still stands 
empty. China has pumped hundreds of billions of dollars into African 
governments and infrastructure. In return, it has reaped hundreds of billions 
in commodities.

Why does it still take so long to drive across Africa? | Tunde Kehinde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/24/driving-africa-roads-infrastructure-ecommerce>
Few in Africa are certain that there is fair quid pro quo at play here. Is 
this the dawn of a new colonialism, they wonder, a new scramble for Africa in 
which the continent is once again left in tatters? Or is it the beginning of an 
era during which Africans shake off old colonial masters and look elsewhere for 
direct investment and aid?


The Light Railway goes some way to answering these questions. The project 
dates back to December 2011 when the idea for a 34.25km electrified light 
railwaysecured funds 
<http://hornaffairs.com/en/2013/03/11/corporation-discloses-addis-ababa-light-rail-project-detail/>
 from Exim Bank of China. Construction for the 39-station project began in 2013 
and the metro opened in September 2015, well ahead of schedule.

The line has cost $475m, 85% of which was loaned by Chinese policy banks or 
enterprises. The project was a collaboration between CREC and the Ethiopian 
Railways Corporation, the junior partner, while the Shenzen Metro Group and 
CREC will serve asoperations managers 
<http://www.economist.com/news/middle-east-and-africa/21665199-addis-ababa-has-opened-first-part-new-light-rail-system-sub-saharan-africa>
 for the next five years until a planned handover to the local rail authorities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-new-scramble-for-africa-how-china-became-the-partner-of-choice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51120853bdc07affc7435cd75c5be00574bbd49b%2F0_0_2000_1500%2Fmaster%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20new%20scramble%20for%20Africa%3A%20how%20China%20became%20the%20partner%20of%20choice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-new-scramble-for-africa-how-china-became-the-partner-of-choice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20new%20scramble%20for%20Africa%3A%20how%20China%20became%20the%20partner%20of%20choice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-new-scramble-for-africa-how-china-became-the-partner-of-choice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51120853bdc07affc7435cd75c5be00574bbd49b%2F0_0_2000_1500%2Fmaster%2F2000.jpg>
 Nova Cidade de Kilamba, a Chinese built city in Angola, acquired a reputation 
as a ghost town after it was largely unoccupied for several years. Photograph: 
Santa Martha 
The metro moves about 15,000 people per line per day and costs about six birr 
(10p) a ride. But describing it as an outright success would be a stretch. The 
construction often looks slapdash – a standard complaint about Chinese 
construction projects across the continent.

At St Estfanos station, an empty USAID wheat sack serves as a garbage bag. 
This serves as a neat analogy of the competing interests inEthiopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia>, and also of the different 
approaches. For the West, the country has always been a basket case, or 
alternatively, a bulwark against Islamist extremism. For the Chinese, it 
represents a vast, untapped market: a country of almost 100 million people, 90 
percent of whom are unbanked, primed to roar through the remainder of the 
century as a force in Africa, and beyond.

The beginning of a ‘win-win’ relationship? 

In 1971, during the Cultural Revolution, a young Chinese man called Gau 
“Victor” Hau had just finished a two-year stretch in an agricultural 
re-education camp. His first assignment from the Chinese Communist Party was in 
Tanzania as a translator on the most sizeable and important project ever 
undertaken by the Middle Kingdom on foreign soil.

Now Gau is a career railway adviser for the massive state owned entity, China 
Railway Construction Corporation Limited (CRCC). But in 1971 his ability to 
speak English was crucial to a huge railway project planned between Tanzania 
and Zambia. In the late 1960s, Chairman Mao and the Chinese Communist Party 
(CCP) had entered into an agreement with Tanzanian liberation hero Julius 
Nyerere and his Zambian contemporary Kenneth Kaunda. They would build a railway 
line from the Tanzanian port city of Dar es Salaam to Kapiri Mposhi, located in 
Zambia’s copper belt. For Kuanda, the railway was an existential necessity: 
surrounded by white supremacist regimes in Rhodesia and South Africa, there was 
no way for him to export his primary resource to the sea. Hence, the Uhuru 
(Kiswahili for “freedom”) Railway.

For the CCP, the project was no less vital. Prior to rapprochement with the 
Nixon administration in 1972, and during Mao’s lengthy enmity with the Soviet 
Union, China was subject to diplomatic purdah. To secure enough votes to become 
reinstated on the UN Security Council Beijing required allies, and hoped to 
find the necessary support in Africa. The Tanzania-Zambia Railway Authority 
(Tazara) line, to be paid for in full by the Chinese, was the beginning of what 
Beijing promised would be a “win-win relationship”, a kinship based on mutual 
need to fend off shared antagonisms.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-new-scramble-for-africa-how-china-became-the-partner-of-choice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ce523b43b337735f97e0d3c56e448c099e2e5fb%2F0_71_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20new%20scramble%20for%20Africa%3A%20how%20China%20became%20the%20partner%20of%20choice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-new-scramble-for-africa-how-china-became-the-partner-of-choice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20new%20scramble%20for%20Africa%3A%20how%20China%20became%20the%20partner%20of%20choice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fthe-new-scramble-for-africa-how-china-became-the-partner-of-choice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ce523b43b337735f97e0d3c56e448c099e2e5fb%2F0_71_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
 Tazara crossing bridge in Zambia. The line was paid for in full by the 
Chinese. Photograph: Richard Stupart 
But there was a second, perhaps even more pragmatic, reason to build the 
railway. “We have to rely on importing natural resources from other countries,” 
Gau said, seated behind a desk in his large Beijing office. “If China was to 
keep up sustainable development for many years, China has to secure a supply of 
natural resources and minerals to feed our industries.”


Tazara, with a $400m price tag, was blindingly expensive, especially for a 
country mired in poverty and still reeling from the chaos of Chairman Mao’s 
revolutionary exertions. Gau says the railway’s real cost was likely $1bn (at 
least $6bn in today’s money), with a further $1bn in maintenance over the 
years. It was an immensely difficult engineering challenge. The track cut 
through 1,860km of bush and mountain ranges, with more than 300 bridges, 22 
tunnels, 96 stations, and about 400,000 sq m of support structures. Almost 
50,000 Chinese engineers, translators, project managers and labourers were 
contracted to the project, with a further 100,000 Zambian and Tanzanians 
filling out the workforce. All of this was funded by China with an interest 
free loan, to be paid back over 30 years, with a 10-year grace period.

Four myths about slums: 'Don't assume people want to leave'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/28/four-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave>
Although the project was completed two years ahead of schedule in October 
1975, and jump-started a multilateral relationship between the People’s 
Republic and dozens of African countries, neither Tanzania nor Zambia would pay 
anything close to their share – this was less a “partnership” than a gift, Gau 
pointed out. And Tazara’s success, like that of the AALRT, ended up as a mixed 
bag. According to Gau, China did not train enough local people to maintain the 
tracks and the equipment, and the railway now operates at a loss, beset by 
delays and inefficiencies. Indeed, the line is little more than a sop to 
industrial development: TAZARA’s gaugesdon’t even match up with that of 
Tanzanian Railways Limited <http://tazarasite.com/?page_id=9>, meaning that it 
exists in its own infrastructural universe.

But if the project wasn’t a dazzling leap forward for east Africa’s economy, 
it was brilliant geopolitics. “At that time China was mainly concerned with the 
political significance of the railway,” says Gau. “Without Tazara, China would 
not be so easily rehabilitated with a UN seat.”

If Tazara represented the first and most significant attempt to forge a 
lasting south-south engagement, it remained for almost three decades an 
isolated and anomalous project, its lustre fading as soon as the inaugural trip 
had been undertaken.

This was mainly a result of China deciding to double down on development at 
home – the recovery from the Cultural Revolution precluded any further costly 
adventures abroad. But as the 1970s melted into the 1980s, and gave way to a 
resurgent 1990s under Deng Xiaoping’s mandate of “socialism with Chinese 
characteristics”, when “some would get rich first”, the single greatest push 
for growth in the country demanded strong international partnerships if it were 
to succeed.


In order to properly hit the diplomatic reset button, in October 2000 the 
Chinese hosted the first Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC). Four 
African heads of state made the trip to Beijing, at the invitation of the 
Chinese, who hoped to build an extensive and lasting multilateral partnership 
with the continent. By the time of the third FOCAC, six years later, 44 African 
leaders attended. Billions of dollars of development money was promised, and a 
new age had begun.


Chinese priorities change: from politics to minerals

Over the course of the commodities super-cycle, the boom market for natural 
resources such as oil, steel, gold, manganite and platinum, lasting roughly 
from the turn of the century to 2013, China and sub-Saharan Africa’s economies 
were effectively coupled: when graphed, they mirrored each other. China 
purchased raw materials to fuel development at home, while massive state-owned 
organisations entered the African market, alongside Chinese-made goods and half 
a million Chinese migrants.

Did this epochal encounter between 1.3 billion Chinese, and 1.1 billion 
Africans – nearly a third of the planet’s population – maintain any of the 
coherent strands of “win-win” friendship that ballasted the Tazara project? Was 
the relationship still guided from above by bureaucrats in Beijing’s Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs who knew exactly what they wanted, and could easily 
benchmark the outcomes?

Not at all. Since Tazara, the Sino-African phenomenon has become much more 
sophisticated and highly fragmented and is no longer stage-managed by 
governments. Nowhere is this better shown than by a project announced in 
Johannesburg in 2013. That year, the South African press began reporting on a 
vast £4.8bn real estate development in Modderfontein, north-east of the city, 
continually citing that fact that it would be financed and constructed by “the 
Chinese”.

The press was never clear on what was meant by “the Chinese”. The details were 
surprising: the Modderfontein New City endeavour was headed by Zendai Group, a 
Hong Kong-listed company run by an eccentric, goateed entrepreneur named Dai 
Zhikang. Most of the group’s more successful projects were undertaken in 
Shanghai. The plan was that the South African community, stretching over tens 
of thousands of hectares, would include “all the functions of a city, such as 
finance, trade, logistics, commerce, technology, education, health care and 
housing”. Modderfontein New City, the company’s website insisted, would become 
“the New York of Africa,” with twisty postmodern skyscrapers and gigantic 
retail outlets, all operating on a green grid.

Was this a nothing more than an old-school land grab, orchestrated by Beijing 
in a tidy neo-colonial manoeuvre? That was certainly the implication of the 
earliest news coverage. But on closer inspection, Modderfontein was just an 
ambitious real estate play that required big injections of private equity from 
South Africans. Zendai purchased an initial 1,600 hectares of land for about 
£57m, and put another £22m into infrastructure. The idea was to attract 
partnerships and other dealmakers, who would in turn attract others – a growth 
strategy based largely on the same real estate agent spin encountered anywhere 
in the world.

Why aren’t we designing cities that work for women, not just men?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/13/why-arent-we-designing-cities-that-work-for-women-not-just-men>
Setting aside the big numbers, the big ideas and the big anxiety, there was 
nothing sinister about Modderfontein New City. Indeed, three years after the 
initial purchase Dai seems to have lost interest in real estate, and has dived 
into the Chinese art market. His South African arm, Zendai Development SA, is 
trucking along with the project. Whether the New City becomes a reality is 
anyone’s guess.

This is the way of things in these latter days of the Sino-African encounter. 
Without question, the Chinese are major players, engaged in hundreds of 
projects across a continent that desperately needs infrastructure and 
development. But not all of these projects are government-driven: some are 
worth only a few thousand pounds, and are negotiated between Africans and 
Chinese migrants in distant desert communities in remote Chad or Niger.

Nonetheless, as American and British populists prepare to close their doors to 
the outside world, and as Western influence dims across the continent, China 
may well be the catalyst Africa has required to leap forward into the future. 
But with the pros come some serious, unanticipated cons.


Addis Ababa’s light railway, while it hasn’t quite made beaten up Lada taxis 
obsolete, has so thoroughly transformed the city that it counts as a work of 
urban alchemy. But the social cost may yet prove immense: as Addis expands and 
explodes, the city’s borders push into land belonging to the Oromo people, 
causing social ruptures and violence. Ethiopia is facing its own muted version 
of the Arab Spring.


The fall of the regime in Ethiopia seems unlikely, but 2016 has taught us the 
limits of unlikelihood. Would a new government be as amenable to the Chinese, 
who were themselves so amenable to the previous oppressors? These questions 
abound in Africa, as certain regimes teeter, others tumble, and still others 
harden into lengthy runs at the helm. If the Chinese were once hoping for a 
comprehensive, mandated south-south axis, they have ended up with something 
more and less than that: an economic, cultural and social encounter that is 
changing the world, one railway line at a time.


Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 