
From the deepest recesses of your parents’ drinks cabinet they come, the 
drinks that only see the light atChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. A parade of dusty, 
duty-free misfits, lining up to be sipped once and then packed away with the 
boxes of sticky dates for another year: Midori, Blue Curaçao, Advocaat. That 
pink stuff with the baffling Cyrillic-script label.

I have plenty of friends who would include various fortified wines among this 
selection of kitsch. Sherry, port, marsala and madeira may not be so 
eccentrically lurid in flavour and appearance, but they are once-a-year 
propositions for most people. A shame, since these are some of the finest and 
best value drinks in the world.

Still, if you are only going to buy one fortified wine a year, best make it a 
good one – and drink it by Twelfth Night. With the exception of madeira, whose 
unique production process means it will keep pretty much for ever, fortified 
wines won’t last for more than a few weeks. Stick them in a drinks cupboard 
and, like any other wine, they’ll become more like vinegar.

I find port is at its best a day or two after opening, when it has had time to 
breathe, ideally in a decanter. Among my favourites are the suavely nutty
Sandeman 20 Year Old Tawny Port(£29.99, Waitrose 
<http://www.waitrosecellar.com/all-wines/wine-type/port-sherry-madeira/port-wine/sandeman-20-year-old-tawny>
), Taylor’s perfumed Quinta de Vargellas Vintage Port 2002 (£30, Majestic 
<https://www.majestic.co.uk/Taylor-s-Quinta-de-Vargellas-zid16240>; Waitrose 
<http://www.waitrosecellar.com/fine-wine-offers/taylors-quinta-de-vargellas>), 
and the plushBerry Bros & Rudd LBV by Quinta do Noval 2011 (£16.95; bbr.com 
<http://www.bbr.com/products-39109-2011-berry-bros-and-rudd-late-bottled-vintage-port-by-quinta-do-noval>
).

On a tighter budget, Sainsbury’s Taste the Difference Special Reserve Port NV  
<http://www.sainsburys.co.uk/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/gb/groceries/sainsburys-special-reserve-port--taste-the-difference-75cl>
andTesco Finest Late Bottled Vintage Port 2011 (both £10) both have a level of 
sweet, dark kirsch and chocolate that you just don’t find in unfortified red 
wines at the same price.

Port’s place alongside the stilton may be unassailable, but sherry is more 
versatile, offering the aperitif (the zippy, salty green olives ofValdespino 
Inocente Fino NV; £13.95, Lea & Sandeman 
<https://www.leaandsandeman.co.uk/wine/INOCENTE-Fino-Valdespino-8459-00.html>) 
to the lingering post-meal sipper (the umami depths ofEmilio Hidalgo El 
Tresillo Armontillado Fino; £33, Bottle Apostle 
<http://bottleapostle.com/product/el-tresillo-amontillado-fino>; VinCognito 
<http://www.vincognito.co.uk/sweet-fortified/emilio-hidalgo-il-tresillo-amontillado-fino-nv-jerez>
).

For enjoying with, or in lieu of the Christmas pudding, Bodegas Toro Albalá 
Don PX Gran Reserva 1996 (from £17, The Wine Society 
<http://www.thewinesociety.com/shop/ProductDetail.aspx?pd=SH1012>; Oddbins 
<http://www.oddbins.com/fortified-wine>) from east of Jerez in Montilla, is a 
molasses-like marvel, while the vibrantBarbeito 10 Year Old Malvasia Madeira 
(from £32.95Berry Bros and Rudd 
<http://www.bbr.com/products-922626-malvasia-10-year-old-vinhos-barbeito>; 
Handford <http://www.handford.net/product/barbeito-boal-10-year-old-madeira-6/>
) is superb with mature hard cheeses. But perhaps the most Christmassy 
fortified concoction I’ve tasted this year isDomaine Jean Bourdy Galant des 
Abbesses (£39.95, Wine Sensations 
<http://www.winesensations.co.uk/collections/domaine-jean-bourdy/products/galant-des-abbesses?variant=11320666691>
). A mix of grape juice and Asian spices from the Jura in eastern France, it’s 
been boiled, blended with grape spirit and aged in barrels for a taste not 
unlike liquefied lebkuchen.

If fortified wines are at their best in a fireside setting, other drinks are 
just as capable of inducing the ruminative postprandial calm that is, for me at 
least, the purpose of Christmas. It can be prompted by a dark beer, such as the 
smokyMeantime London Porter (£2.29, 50cl, Marks & Spencer) 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/london-porter-case-of-20/p/p60004923>, or 
whisky, such as the smoke and sea of Islay’sLaphroaig 10 Year Old (£26.50, Asda 
<https://groceries.asda.com/product/malt-whisky/laphroaig-single-malt-scotch-whisky-10-years-old/18913>
); the honeyed graciousness of Speyside’sGlenrothes Select Reserve (£36.45, 
Whisky Exchange 
<https://www.thewhiskyexchange.com/p/2666/glenrothes-select-reserve>); or the 
easy-drinking fruitiness ofAkashi Japanese Blended Whisky (from £32, 50cl 
Waitrose <http://www.waitrose.com/shop/DisplayProductFlyout?productId=518992>; 
M&S 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/akashi-blended-japanese-whisky-single-bottle/p/p60093412>
;Oddbins <http://www.oddbins.com/akashi-blended-whisky>).

But there will be times over the next couple of weeks that call for a 
pick-me-up. A gin and tonic made from Jensen’s elegantBermondsey Dry Gin 
(£25.95,Whisky Exchange 
<https://www.thewhiskyexchange.com/p/7942/jensens-bermondsey-gin>), say. Or a 
lighter long drink that uses vermouth as a base. Italy’sRiserva Carlo Alberto 
Vermut Sec (£18.99, Drink Shop) 
<https://www.thedrinkshop.com/item/11688/riserva-carlo-alberto-vermut-sec-extra-dry>
 comes in a bottle that would be very much at home at the back of a vintage 
drinks cupboard. But its bittersweet Mediterranean herbiness works just as well 
over ice at a cafe table in Rome in high summer as it does before dinner on 
Christmas Day.

Six great Christmas drinks

Marco de Bartoli Vigna la Miccia Marsala Superiore Oro DOC 5 Anni, Sicily, 
Italy(£23.90 tannico.co.uk) 
<http://www.tannico.co.uk/marsala-superiore-oro-5-anni-doc-vigna-la-miccia-marco-de-bartoli.html>
Marco de Bartoli, the late master of Sicily’s great fortified wine style, may 
have passed the baton to his children, but the quality of the estate’s marsalas 
remains second to none. There’s elegance in its mix of dried and fresh fruit 
with hazelnuts and hints of toffee, and it has a sweet, fresh raciness that 
makes it so good with blue cheese.

Casa Mariol Vermut Blanco, Catalonia, Spain (£20, Bottle Apostle 
<http://www.bottleapostle.com/product/vermut-blanco>)
Gorgeously light, fragrant, herbal vermouth from Catalonia, a blend of dry 
white wine made from macabeo grapes with herbs, nuts and spices steeped in 
neutral grape spirit. Serve straight up with an olive, a slice of citrus or 
with a splash of salty, fizzy mineral water as a lighter, Christmas morning 
alternative to G&T.

Maynards 10 Year Old Tawny Port, Portugual (£9.99, Aldi 
<https://www.aldi.co.uk/p/48129/0>)
The Maynards range of ports are a real strength of the Aldi range, not least 
this classy blend of wines that have spent an average 10 years mellowing in 
barrel. A glorious mix of baking spice, sweet figs and dried fruit, and a 
genuine bargain when most tawny ports of this age and quality cost twice the 
price.

Siren Barrel-Aged Caribbean Chocolate Cake Stout (£6, 330ml, 8.5%, Oddbins 
<http://www.oddbins.com/>)
From Berkshire’s Siren, one of the best of Britain’s ever-expanding craft 
brewing scene, this is a superbly rich, complex and winter-warming brew that 
evolves in the glass, offering dried citrus peel and lemon zestiness as well as 
the titular darker flavours of cocoa and roasted coffee bean.

Diplomatico Rum Reserva Exclusiva (£40, Waitrose 
<http://www.waitrose.com/shop/DisplayProductFlyout?productId=518890>)
Dark rum provides the bass notes and punch in many of my favourite cocktails, 
but this superb example from Venezuela is really one for fireside solo sipping. 
Aged for 12 years in oak barrels, it has the texture of velvet and flavours of 
molasses, vanilla, and spicy Christmas cake.



 