
The recent electoral success of leftwing populist parties such as Syriza in 
Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/26/syriza-election-victory-whats-the-mood-in-greece>
 andPodemos in Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/31/podemos-spain-austerity-rally-madrid-syriza>
 has given a new impulse to the debate on populism in Europe. Until now, 
populism was almost exclusively linked to the radical right, leading to an 
incorrect conflation of populism and xenophobia. In its original form, populism 
is an ideology that considers society to be ultimately separated into two 
homogenous and antagonistic groups: “the pure people” and “the corrupt elite”, 
and argues that politics should be an expression of thevolonté générale 
(general will) <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General_will> of the people. 
Practically, populist politicians almost always combine it with other 
ideologies, such as nativism on the right and socialism on the left.

Greece bailout talks break down after Athens rejects 'unacceptable' eurozone 
demands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/16/greece-fails-rescue-package-eurozone-finance-ministers>
Up until a couple of years ago the consensus among European elites on the left 
and right was that populism was inherently bad. It was dismissed as a 
“pathology of democracy” or, as theAmerican historian Richard Hofstadter 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Hofstadter#Death> wrote in the 1960s, 
“the paranoid style of politics”. The rise of leftwing populist movements and 
parties has seen a shift in the public debate, particularly pushed by followers 
of Chantal Mouffe and the lateErnesto Laclau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/09/ernesto-laclau-intellectual-figurehead-syriza-podemos?CMP=share_btn_tw>
, who argue that populism actually constitutes the essence of democratic 
politics. In their view populism is good for democracy; it is liberalism that 
is the real problem. Simply stated, both are right and wrong. The relationship 
between populism and liberal democracy is complex and includes the good, the 
bad and the ugly.

The main good is that populism brings to the fore issues that large parts of 
the population care about, but that the political elites want to avoid 
discussing; think about immigration for the populist right or austerity for the 
populist left. Leaders from different parties can come together to keep issues 
that divide their respective electorates off the agenda – such as European 
integration and immigration.

In other cases they take it even a step further, excluding controversial areas 
from the democratic process altogether by putting independent, technocratic 
institutions in charge (such as the courts or central banks). In many cases 
political elites have worked hand in glove with cultural and economic elites, 
leaving virtually no space for democratic opposition. To paraphrase the Mexican 
political theoristBenjamin Arditi <http://unam.academia.edu/BenjaminArditi>, in 
those cases populism behaves like the drunken guest at a dinner party, who 
doesn’t respect the rules of public contestation but spells out the painful but 
real problems of society.

The main bad is that populism is a monist and moralist ideology, which denies 
the existence of divisions of interests and opinions within “the people” and 
rejects the legitimacy of political opponents. As the populists are thevox 
populi, ie the voice of all the people, anyone with a different view speaks for 
“special interests”, ie the elite. Given that the key distinction is between 
the pure people and the corrupt elite, any compromise would lead to the 
corruption of the people and is therefore rejected. This uncompromising stand 
leads to a polarised political culture, in which non-populists turn into 
anti-populists.

Why Ernesto Laclau is the intellectual figurehead for Syriza and Podemos | Dan 
Hancox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/09/ernesto-laclau-intellectual-figurehead-syriza-podemos>
Populism tends to get ugly when it gets into power. If it has to share power 
with non-populists the effects, positive or negative, tend to be small (think 
about the Schüssel governments with the populist, radical right FPO in 
Austria). Even when populists dominate the government, as is now the case in 
Greece, the negative aspects of populism often are limited, although not for a 
lack of trying. Populists like Silvio Berlusconi in Italy, theKaczyńskis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lech_Kaczy%C5%84ski> in Poland, or Vladimír Mečiar
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vladim%C3%ADr_Me%C4%8Diar> in Slovakia regularly 
tried to circumvent or undermine the power of countervailing forces, including 
independent judges and the political opposition. In most cases they were 
successfully opposed by other parts of the political structure – often with 
help from outside influences, most notably the European Union.

However, the current situation in Hungary and Venezuela shows us what populism 
can do when it takes full control of a country. Supported by impressive popular 
majorities in elections, populist leaders like Viktor Orbán and Hugo Chávez 
have introduced new constitutions that significantly undermine the checks and 
balances of liberal democracy. In addition, loyalists have been put at the head 
of non-majoritarian institutions, such as the courts and other oversight 
committees, often for periods that extend well beyond the legislative term. Any 
opposition is frustrated by a combination of legal and extra-legal pressures, 
from raids by tax agencies to the rejection of renewals of media licences.

In short, populism is an illiberal democratic response to undemocratic 
liberalism. It criticises the exclusion of important issues from the political 
agenda by the elites and calls for their repoliticisation. However, this comes 
at a price. Populism’s black and white views and uncompromising stand leads to 
a polarised society – for which, of course, both sides share responsibility – 
and its majoritarian extremism denies legitimacy to opponents’ views and 
weakens the rights of minorities. While leftwing populism is often less 
exclusionary than rightwing populism, the main difference between them is not 
whether they exclude, but whom they exclude, which is largely determined by 
their accompanying ideology (eg nationalism or socialism).
 