 The sheen came off a small part of New York's swinging singleton culture last 
week with the temporary closure of the Coffee Shop in Manhattan's Union Square.
It was just another coffee shop until Carrie Bradshaw and her three 
girlfriends dropped by to gossip over salads in the mood-defining television 
series, Sex and the City. But its status as a landmark for fans on the tourist 
trail was not enough to save it from health inspectors, who have just shut it 
down for a week.

The Coffee Shop belongs to a pantheon of cafes and restaurants which gained 
fame, or notoriety, through historical accident or because they caught the eye 
of a location scout. But not all have survived to tell the tale. We reveal the 
places that are famous for what happened there.

Sid's Cafe 
Holmfirth, West Yorkshire

Famous as: A central location for more than 30 years in Last of the Summer 
Wine, the longest-running British TV sitcom, adored for its whimsical old 
duffers searching for a second childhood. The antics of Compo, Clegg and Nora 
Batty are played out amid the green-checked tablecloths and curtains of this 
genuine Yorkshire cafe, shown above.

And now? Still functions as a going concern, only closing its doors for 
filming. Recently taken over by new management, but it still serves the 
telly-tourists who flock there.

Granita 
127 Upper Street, Islington, London

Famous as: The Islington restaurant where the fate of the country was sealed 
for the next 13 years. Here, on 31 May, 1994, Tony Blair finalised the 'deal' 
with Gordon Brown to decide who would stand for leader. The future Chancellor 
is said to have eaten nothing at the minimalist wooden tables, where guests 
were served scallops with salmoriglio for Â£14.50. The meeting was the subject 
of the Channel 4 drama The Deal.

And now? Granita closed in 2003 and is now a Tex-Mex eaterie called Desperados.

Bull & Finch 
84 Beacon Street, Boston

Famous as: The exterior of Cheers, the bar 'where everybody knows your name'. 
The bar was owned by an ex-baseball star and Lothario Sam Malone serving 
patrons including Frasier Crane, who featured in the spin-off, Frasier

And now? The bar shamelessly exploits its fame, attracting tourists en masse, 
and changed its name to 'Cheers on Beacon Hill'. Visitors who find it a pale 
imitation of the TV version can console themselves by buying tacky memorabilia 
or a Giant Norm Burger.

The Coffee Shop 
29 Union Square West, Manhattan, New York

Famous as: Star of TV rom-com Sex and the City, which followed the lives and 
loves of four high-flying, single, sexually active women. It was one of many 
calculatedly cool locales frequented by Miranda, Carrie, Charlotte and Samantha 
in the glossy, zeitgeisty drama that ran from 1998 to 2004, with episode titles 
such as "The Fuck Buddy".

And now? Made headlines last week after health inspectors closed it for 
several reasons, including inadequate refrigeration. The closure was the first 
in the bar/restaurant's 19 years. Often featured in guides as a place to visit 
for those wishing to trace the Manolo-clad steps of those sassy women.

Katz's Delicatessen 
205 East Houston Street, New York

Famous as: Scene of the most eye-wateringly 'real' fake orgasm in cinema 
history. In When Harry Met Sally the 1989 comedy which explores whether a man 
and woman can just be friends, Meg Ryan acts out an orgasm to prove to Billy 
Crystal that women can do it convincingly. Afterwards an older woman tells a 
waiter: 'I'll have what she's having.'

And now? The deli is still going strong, serving matzo ball soup and pastrami 
omelette. Tourists continue to flock and there is a helpful sign pointing to 
the famous table, which says: 'Where Harry met Sally. . . Hope you have what 
she had!'

Nicholson's Cafe 
6a Nicholson Street, Edinburgh

Famous as: Birthplace of schoolboy wizard Harry Potter. J...K Rowling wrote 
parts of the first novel, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, in this 
first-floor cafe while her baby slept. Fourteen years later, the books have 
sold more than 300 million copies.

And now? The cafe has been a Chinese restaurant since April 2003. The website 
of Buffet King invites diners to experience 'an exquisite window view of 
Edinburgh - the very same view which J...K Rowling enjoyed'. A commemorative 
plaque was recently installed outside.

Leon's Frozen Custard Drive-In 
3131 South 27th Street, Milwaukee

Famous as: Supposed inspiration for Arnold's Drive-In diner in Happy Days the 
nostalgic take on Fifties and Sixties America. It was one of two main sets used 
in the sitcom, originally aired between 1974 and 1984 and remembered for Arnold 
'The Fonz' Fonzarelli, played by Henry Winkler.

And now? Leon's has been a Milwaukee institution for 50 years. Its status in 
TV history doesn't seem to have distracted it from the important business of 
selling its custard and speciality sundaes.
 