
Monday was a big day for America. Not only did the country celebrate its 240th 
year of independence but Kellogg’slaunched 
<http://newsroom.kelloggcompany.com/2016-06-29-A-Cereal-State-Of-Mind-Kelloggs-Opens-First-Ever-Permanent-Cafe-In-NYC>
 an all-day cereal cafe in New York. It’s called – wait for it – Kellogg’s New 
York. It’s based in Times Square and a bowl of cereal will set you back $7.50. 
Yep, that’s right. $7.50. For cereal.

Ah, but you see, it’s not just cereal. Kellog’s has teamed up with a couple of 
culinary heavyweights –Christina Tosi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/christina-tosi>, founder of Momofuku Milk 
Bar, and Anthony Rudolf of famed New York RestaurantPer Se 
<http://www.thomaskeller.com/perseny> – to add a twist to the traditional 
cereal experience. One of the “milk-based creations” on offer, for example, is
Berry Me in Green Tea <http://kelloggsnyc.com/berry-me-in-green-tea/>; a 
combination of Kellogg’s Rice Krispies, strawberries and green tea powder. 
You’re basically paying 50 cents for cereal and $7 for a mediocre pun.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fkelloggs-cereal-cafe-hipster-breakfast-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe16c95929918b748029b6e4d902f81a76da493f5%2F0_183_4396_2638%2F4396.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20is%20ce-real%3A%20how%20Kellogg%E2%80%99s%20killed%20the%20hipster%20breakfast%20trend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fkelloggs-cereal-cafe-hipster-breakfast-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20is%20ce-real%3A%20how%20Kellogg%E2%80%99s%20killed%20the%20hipster%20breakfast%20trend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fkelloggs-cereal-cafe-hipster-breakfast-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe16c95929918b748029b6e4d902f81a76da493f5%2F0_183_4396_2638%2F4396.jpg>
 ‘Milk-based creations’ on display at Kellogg’s New York. Photograph: Brendan 
McDermid/Reuters 
Kellogg’s New York isn’t just an attempt at milking free PR from what is 
essentially an advertisement with a five-year lease. (Although, since the cafe 
has been covered by everyone from theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/01/nyregion/7-for-corn-flakes-cereal-gets-makeover-at-kelloggs-store-in-times-square.html?_r=0>
 toAl Arabiya 
<http://english.alarabiya.net/en/variety/2016/06/30/Kellogg-s-cereal-cafe-to-snap-crackle-and-pop-into-Times-Square.html>
 it has certainly delivered on that front.) Rather it is a reaction toa major 
sales decline 
<http://time.com/money/4249752/national-cereal-day-sales-trends-breakfast/>. 
Over the last decade cereal has lost its hallowed place at the breakfast table 
as healthier, more convenient, morning food options grow in popularity – 
particularly among younger generations. According to Mintel, nearly40% of 
millennials 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/02/23/this-is-the-height-of-laziness/>
 think cereal is inconvenient for breakfast because it requires too much 
cleanup. That whole washing a bowl in the morning thing? The struggle is 
ce-real. (Sorry.)

While millennials might not be breakfasting on cereal with as much gusto as 
previous generations, they’re not eschewing it altogether. According to 
Kellogg’s,one-third of cereal consumption 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/06/28/smallbusiness/kelloggs-nyc-cereal-cafe> 
happens outside breakfast hours. And cereal hasn’t just become a snack, it has 
become the ultimate hipster snack; representing a sort of prepackaged, 
nostalgia-laden ennui. The consummate expression of cereal as counterculture 
is, of course, the ironic cereal cafe; variations of which have beenpopping up 
in rapidly gentrifying areas around the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/27/shoreditch-cereal-cafe-targeted-by-anti-gentrification-protesters>
. The Kellogg’s-branded Times Square cafe marks the inevitable corporate 
appropriation, and thus probable culmination, of this trend.

Kellogg’s New York is also just the latest evolution of cereal’s shifting role 
in western culture. When cereal was first created, towards the end of the 19th 
century, it was promoted as part of a temperate Christian lifestyle. A bland 
diet was thought to keep both body and mind healthy, subduing sinful sexual 
urges. Dr John Harvey Kellogg who, alongside his brother Will, invented Corn 
Flakes, extolled cereal as a means tocurb masturbation 
<http://metro.co.uk/2015/08/05/kelloggs-cornflakes-were-invented-to-stop-people-masturbating-5328400/>
 – about which he had very severe views.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fkelloggs-cereal-cafe-hipster-breakfast-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd035b9317037e97c8811b8cde24ee201c28d001b%2F0_105_5222_3135%2F5222.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20is%20ce-real%3A%20how%20Kellogg%E2%80%99s%20killed%20the%20hipster%20breakfast%20trend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fkelloggs-cereal-cafe-hipster-breakfast-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20is%20ce-real%3A%20how%20Kellogg%E2%80%99s%20killed%20the%20hipster%20breakfast%20trend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fkelloggs-cereal-cafe-hipster-breakfast-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd035b9317037e97c8811b8cde24ee201c28d001b%2F0_105_5222_3135%2F5222.jpg>
 Guests receive their cereal order at Kellogg’s. Photograph: Brendan 
McDermid/Reuters 
But market forces soon tempered cereal’s puritanical bent. Cereal was a 
high-margin business with low barriers to entry. The Kelloggs brothers quickly 
found themselves in a crowded market, surrounded by competitors. Because the 
cereal category was so easily commoditized, advertising became essential. Over 
the next few decades, cereal manufacturers pioneered innovative marketing 
techniques through which they could insinuate their product into popular 
culture and the family breakfast table. In 1971, for example, Post Cereals 
introduced two bestselling cerealsFruity Pebbles and Cocoa Pebbles Cereal 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pebbles_cereal>, that were based on the 
Flintstones TV cartoon. These were among the first brands created entirely 
around a media property.

Cereal isn’t just something Gen-Xers and millennials ate as kids – it was 
ingrained in the whole experience of childhood

The 70s, 80s and 90s were the golden area of pop culture cereal tie-ins. There 
wasPac-Man cereal 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/briangalindo/25-cereals-from-the-80s-you-will-never-eat-again>
, Ghostbusters cereal, Cabbage Patch Kids cereal. Pretty much every TV show, 
game or movie had a cereal that went along with it or a toy that you could find 
at the bottom of the packet. When you understand the extent to which cereal 
threaded its marketing tentacles throughout popular culture, the nostalgic hold 
that it exerts within a certain privileged counterculture starts to make more 
sense. Cereal isn’t just something Gen Xers and older millennials ate as kids, 
it was ingrained in the whole experience of childhood; inextricably connected 
with Saturday-morning cartoons and family fun.

As kids of the 70s and 80s became adults, cereal became a sort of Peter Pan 
food for those who didn’t really want to grow up. Snacking on cereal became 
synonymous with a rejection of a certain sort of corporate, adult values. It 
was populist protest in its most facile form. A guy with long hair eating 
cereal for dinner became shorthand for “slacker” in many a 90s movie.
 Cabbage Patch cereal from the 1980s. Photograph: PR 
The 90s slacker, of course, was the forebear of the 2000s hipster. They were 
characterized by the same cynicism and rejection of ostentatious materialism. 
But while slackers were marked by a studied apathy, hipsters were driven by a 
serious case of early-onset nostalgia combined with a neurotic need for 
individual self-expression. Like riding a fixie or drinking out of a mason jar, 
eating cereal as a snack became self-conscious, considered performance. You can 
see this play out in the 2007 cereal-core classicFlakes 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0462295/> (now playing on Netflix), in which a 
struggling musician manages a cereal cafe and spends his days debating the 
ideal milk-to-flake ratio with his regulars.

I haven’t actually seen Flakes myself – I think only about five people in the 
world have. Two of those five are Alan and Gary Keery, a pair of bearded Irish 
identical twins. The film apparently inspired their decision to start London’s 
famousCereal Killer Cafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/27/shoreditch-cereal-cafe-targeted-by-anti-gentrification-protesters>
 in 2014. That a failed film starring Zooey Deschanel inspired an ironic 
business is maybe one of the most hipster things to ever have happened.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fkelloggs-cereal-cafe-hipster-breakfast-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2b5bd83ebf2cb781bc4842216eba2b270b8b558%2F0_0_4880_2930%2F4880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20struggle%20is%20ce-real%3A%20how%20Kellogg%E2%80%99s%20killed%20the%20hipster%20breakfast%20trend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fkelloggs-cereal-cafe-hipster-breakfast-trend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20struggle%20is%20ce-real%3A%20how%20Kellogg%E2%80%99s%20killed%20the%20hipster%20breakfast%20trend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fkelloggs-cereal-cafe-hipster-breakfast-trend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2b5bd83ebf2cb781bc4842216eba2b270b8b558%2F0_0_4880_2930%2F4880.jpg>
 Brothers Gary and Alan Keery founded the Cereal Killer Cafe in London. 
Photograph: Ray Tang/Rex 
The Cereal Killer Cafe opened in the Shoreditch neighborhood of London, where 
there were already tensions simmering about the effects of rapid gentrification 
on a historically poor area, in September 2015. The exorbitantly priced bowls 
of cereal (around $4.50 a bowl) were controversial, particularly after one of 
the brothers told a journalist he thought the prices were “cheap for the area 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2869969/Excruciating-encounter-hipster-twin-Cereal-Killer-cafe-challenged-selling-bowl-cornflakes-3-20-one-London-s-poorest-areas.html>
”.

Indeed the Cereal Killer Cafe has become a symbol of everything that is wrong 
with hipster-led gentrification

Indeed the Cereal Killer Cafe has become a symbol of everything that is wrong 
with hipster-led gentrification and was targeted in anti-capitalist riots last 
year. Nevertheless, the cereal cafe concept continued to grow in popularity, 
with version popping up around the world – fromParis 
<http://www.thelocal.fr/20160318/paris-hipster-cafes-take-inspiration-from-london>
 toAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/feb/20/australias-first-cereal-cafe-opens-in-melbourne>
. Last year New York got its first cereal bar when streetwear brand KITH opened 
upKITH Treats <http://www.kithtreats.com/> in its flagship store in Prospect 
Heights, Brooklyn.

While cereal cafes may have become a catalyst for gentrification the irony is 
that, with the advent of the Kellogg’s cafe, they have now themselves been 
entirely gentrified. This of course is a familiar cycle and the inevitable 
progress of all trends: a reaction to mainstream consumer culture becomes a 
counterculture which is gradually appropriated by corporations to become 
mainstream consumer culture. Indeed, I’m willing to bet that, in a corporate 
boardroom somewhere, a Wonder Bread executive is drawing up plans for New 
York’s first Artisanal Jam Toast Cafe. And if they’re not, well, you can berry 
me in green tea.
 