
Your business leader identified the acute lack of affordable housing as a 
serious issue doing great damage to the fabric of our society and requiring 
urgent action (“No more tinkering” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/britains-housing-crisis-must-be-tackled-now>
, (Business).

Finance and a dearth of building land were highlighted as key issues. With 
regard to funding, we should look at the Danish model, by setting up a 
government-backed corporation able to borrow market funds (currently at 
historically low rates) from savers keen to obtain any interest at all and 
pension funds, private or public, seeking long-term security, at modest 
interest rates.

A second new corporation would vet potential property buyers and their 
proposed dwellings, as building societies and banks do now, before recommending 
them to the first corporation for mortgages that could be for 25 years, or 
longer to allow for buying in more expensive areas .

However, affordable housing relies on the supply of available and cheaper 
building sites and, for most towns and cities, that means building on the 
outskirts, mainly on farmland, as in my city, Oxford, some of it in the green 
belt, some on sites of special scientific interest or of particular landscape 
value. Under my plan, farmers would be offered twice the current agricultural 
value by selling to local authorities and schemes would avoid SSSIs or scenic 
sites, but certainly include some green belt.

Green belts were proposed in 1948 to meet the then current need to prevent 
towns expanding into the countryside before brownfield sites were utilised. But 
21st-century needs are different and thousands of cheaper dwellings, close to 
centres of employment to minimise commuting, are urgently needed.

We should also be using scarce land resources better – three-, four- and 
five-storey dwellings and at higher densities to the hectare. We should revisit 
the 1950s and 1960s’Parker Morris standards  
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parker_Morris_Committee#Modified_1967_Space_Standards>
of space and quality, which would encourage the use of factory-built dwellings 
with much higher standards of construction and energy efficiency. They would be 
much faster to build, while creating thousands of skilled jobs (including 
apprenticeships) in areas that need such employment.

Only by such broad, radical thinking do we stand a chance of providing enough 
affordable housing, but is anyone in government listening?
Mike Gotch


Oxford

We grieve for the seaside towns hollowed out by second homes (“The new 
frontline of Cornish war on second homes” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/20/conrwall-war-on-second-homes-st-ives-cawsand>
, News). But they are not alone. In pretty well every university town, the 
ivory tower casts a shadow over the local community, where landlords buy up 
family homes for use as second homes for students (in even greater proportions 
than in Cornwall). The impacts are the reverse of seaside towns – overwhelmed 
in term time, deserted in the holidays.
Dr Richard Tyler 
National HMO Lobby
Leeds

Today, 1.2 million people are on housing waiting lists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/may/12/council-waiting-lists-shrinking-more-need-homes>
 in England and Wales and more than 6 million face tenure insecurity. The
situation in my home city of Bath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/26/affordable-house-prices-engulfs-southern-england-lloyds-bank>
 is a microcosm of what has been happening in the country. The buy-to-let 
sector has mushroomed, the crisis in social housing has become acute, families 
live on boats on the canal, homelessness and overcrowding have increased. Yet 
Bath is now a richer and more prosperous place than at any time in its history.

In 1945, Bath had been badly bombed 
<http://www.bath.co.uk/history/bath-through-the-ages-world-war-2> and many 
people, like my parents, were living in dingy rooms in decaying buildings. But, 
thanks to the determination of the governments of both Clement Attlee and 
Harold Macmillan, the city’s postwar housing crisis was eradicated. The 
difference between the Bath of today and the Bath of 1945 is that a sense of 
common national purpose and concern for those at the bottom seem to be going 
down the plughole.
Ivor Morgan
Lincoln
 