
At the end of January, unless something very strange happens, all four major 
powers in the world will be ruled by authoritarian figures.Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> in Russia, Xi Jinping in 
China, Narendra Modi in India and Donald Trump in the US.

What explains the rise of the strongman, or woman? Why is liberal democracy 
being tested in so many countries by rightwing demagogues who seem to care very 
little for the liberal part. Hungary and Poland can no longer be called liberal 
democracies. Forthcoming elections in France and the Netherlands will show 
whether an autocratic one-man party (Geert Wilders’s Freedom party), or an 
illiberal far-right party (Marine Le Pen’s Front National), will cause upsets 
in western Europe.

The claim that people have the governments they deserve has always struck me 
as a little unfair. Russians didn’t choose Stalin. Chairman Mao was never 
elected. Opposition against Putin never had much chance.

Nonetheless, the number of people craving a strongman may be larger than nice 
liberals, such as myself, like to admit. There might be a parallel to be drawn 
with the common desire for organised religion, which waxes and wanes but never 
disappears. Not that every form of religious faith is inherently authoritarian. 
But most religions offer safety in numbers, a sense of belonging, a dream of 
salvation, if not in this life, then in the next, and the patriarchal 
reassurance that our future is in the good hands of wise deities and their 
representatives on Earth.

Strongmen and populist leaders rely on charisma more than expertise and 
well-thought-out policies. In times of stress, when large numbers of people 
fear the future for whatever reason, such leaders offer the same kind of 
reassurance that religious authority does. Expertise becomes at best an 
irrelevance and at worst a dirty word.

Sometimes, typical strongmen harness traditional religion to their causes. 
Modi came to power in India riding a wave of Hindu chauvinism. When he is not 
riding horses without his shirt on, Putin presents himself as the champion of 
Russian orthodoxy doing battle with the decadence of a degenerate west. Xi’s 
references to Confucianism may be half-hearted, but he too claims the mantle of 
a traditional Chinese ruler purging his country of noxious influences from the 
barbarian world.

Misguided western policies – pushing the borders of Nato too far, too soon – 
might have contributed to the successful branding of Putin as a national 
saviour. And western intervention (Iraq), or possibly lack of intervention 
(Syria), has made a bloody mess of the Middle East, where dictators still 
thrive. The rise of China would have happened, whatever the western powers 
might have done.

Of all forms of modern autocracy, the Chinese is perhaps the most insidious, 
because unlike the Soviet Union, it is so successful, at least in a material 
sense. Even some provincial Chinese airports make JFK in New York City look 
like a relic of the developing world. Now that the US, under Trump, is likely 
to lose both the will and the credibility to protect its democratic allies, 
China’s domination, at least in Asia, will be unstoppable. To the Chinese, this 
is no more than a natural reversion to the old order, when peripheral people 
and barbarians needed to pay deference to the Middle Kingdom’s rulers.

Some dictators – Hitler, Mao – became the gods of their own cult as a 
substitute for traditional religions. They, too, loathed educated experts and 
critics, who were treated as infidels to be burned at the stake, as it were.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthemes-of-2016-across-continents-autocrats-take-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F101a32021ac65f8b7c0834824a990e40b6ee1235%2F0_285_5600_3360%2F5600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Themes%20of%202016%3A%20across%20continents%2C%20autocrats%20take%20control%20%7C%20Ian%20Buruma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthemes-of-2016-across-continents-autocrats-take-control%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Themes%20of%202016%3A%20across%20continents%2C%20autocrats%20take%20control%20%7C%20Ian%20Buruma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthemes-of-2016-across-continents-autocrats-take-control%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F101a32021ac65f8b7c0834824a990e40b6ee1235%2F0_285_5600_3360%2F5600.jpg>
 Shanghai, a symbol of China’s material success. Photograph: Alamy 
The decline of the western order has coincided with western democracies being 
managed by a variety of experts, or technocratic elites, who were less 
interested in projecting dreams of the future, let alone salvation, than in 
finding bureaucratic solutions to immediate problems. The European Union, it is 
true, rests on a postwar dream of peace and brotherhood, but it, too, is 
largely run by well-meaning bureaucrats who are failing to reassure anybody.

In a state of anxiety, many people no longer trust the experts. They want the 
comfort that only charismatic leadership can provide, the powerful father 
figure, the man of dreams, the anti-establishment utopian who promises 
greatness once again. On the right, such leaders usually promise to purge the 
infidels too, not just the elitists and annoying critics, who think they are 
better than us, but unpopular minorities who are not like us.

Religion plays a role here too. In his study of American democracy in the 19th 
century, Alexis de Tocqueville observed that political freedom could only work 
in tandem with Christian morality. But only as long as organised faith was kept 
separate from political authority.

This arrangement has worked for quite a long time. Organised religion provided 
an institutional source of solace, belonging, and hope, even – or especially – 
for the least privileged members of society. But this is now diminished. Hence, 
perhaps, the dangerous tendency to project the needs once catered to by 
religious faith on to secular leaders.

Religion still plays a more important part in most American lives than is 
common in Europe, to be sure. A US president still has to pretend to care about 
religion, even if he doesn’t really give a damn. And yet, even there, the rage 
against the elites, as arrogant, corrupt, and soulless (a common image of 
Hilary Clinton), has gathered such force than even religious people seek a kind 
of salvation in ecstatic mass rallies worshipping a shady business tycoon who 
has married three times, and “grabs pussy”. He may be a sinner, but he promises 
glorious things that no technocrat can offer. That so many people have fallen 
for it shows how deeply we have sunk.

Ian Buruma is professor of democracy and human rights at Bard College, New 
York. His books includeMurder in Amsterdam: The Death of Theo van Gogh and the 
Limits of Tolerance
 