
In 2009, in what future generations may see as the high-water mark of the 
ideology known as “techno-utopianism”, which may at some point be rebranded as 
“techno-delusionism”, Gordon Brownstepped on to the TED stage 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/gordon_brown/transcript?language=en#t-345000>. The 
Silicon Valley thinkfest had come to Britain and he was there to talk about 
politics, technology and what he called “the creation of a truly global 
society”.

He had a powerful message to deliver. “The power of our moral sense, allied to 
the power of communications,” he said, along with “our ability to organise 
internationally”, would enable us “to fundamentally change the world”. This was 
a politician telling a tech crowd what it wanted to hear and what he wanted to 
believe. What we all wanted to believe. Brown’s thesis was this: people are 
essentially good. We have feeling for our fellow man and technology would be 
the enabler of more goodness. It would harness the very best of us .

It’s not that Brown was particularly naive or deluded. We all believed it 
then, didn’t we? 2009 was the year ofIran’s “Facebook revolution” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2009_Iranian_presidential_election_protests> 
although it was sometimes called the “YouTube Revolution”, not to be confused 
with several later “Twitter revolutions”. He was talking about technologies 
created by the kind of liberal progressives who wore jeans and statement specs 
and were bold enough to give their companies jokey mission statements such as
“Don’t be evil” <http://time.com/4060575/alphabet-google-dont-be-evil/>.

There was another voice at that same TED conference, a young, then unknown, 
Belarusian academic – Evgeny Morozov. He had a different message. Authoritarian 
regimes, he said, can and did use technology for their purposes, too. 
Technology and freedom were not obliged to go together. And if you were born in 
Belarus, you’d smell the bullshit a mile off.

Cut to last week and the spectacle of the masters of the technoverse trooping 
into Donald Trump’s golden lift. Trump’s words at his “tech summit” were 
extensively reported, but you need towatch the C-Span video 
<https://www.c-span.org/video/?420133-1/presidentelect-donald-trump-holds-technology-summit>
 to see the introductions. “Chuck Robbins, Cisco. Excited to be here and want 
to help.” “Eric Schmidt, Alphabet and Google and completely agree with what’s 
been said.” “Jeff Bezos, Amazon, super-excited about the possibilities for 
innovations in this space.” “Larry Page, Alphabet and Google, the youngest 
company here. Really glad to be here.”

The most powerful companies on Earth are “super-excited” to be working or – as 
you might say, collaborating – with Trump. In Silicon Valley, companies talk 
about “pivoting”. But Silicon Valley isn’t pivoting. Its multibillion dollar 
corporations are doing what they’ve always done, what Trump has always done: 
making money. It’s we who are pivoting. We the people and our democratic 
systems and relationship to power.

This is what technology has done. Foreign policy, Gordon Brown noted, “can 
never be the same again”. That much is true. Because 2016 has taught us that 
technology has changed not just foreign policy forever, but politics forever, 
elections forever. Last week’s report by the CIA that the Russian governmentdid 
subvert the American election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 has proved that.

America’s use of the CIA to subvert foreign elections has come back to bite 
it. But it goes far, far beyond that. Democracy itself has been “disrupted”. 
The question is what happens next, whether we take it, in a prone position, 
craven and beholden to our new kings: Google and Facebook. Because how can a 
free and fair election ever be possible again when anyone’s emails can be 
stolen andleaked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/qa-russian-hackers-vladimir-putin-donald-trump-us-presidential-election>
, or taken down as evidence and used against them? “Give me six lines written 
by the hand of the most honest man,” said Cardinal Richlieu a long time before 
Hillary Clinton was born. “And I will find something in them which will hang 
him.”

There is no privacy, no security. That era is over. Hackers can and will find 
a way.The German election could be next 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-38288181>, its security chief warned 
last week. What about our own democratic process in this year’s referendum? 
Here’s what we know about what influenced it. What people saw and read online. 
How they may or not have been manipulated and controlled through lies and 
half-lies and not-quite truths: nothing.

We know that the Leave campaign employed the same London-based data research 
firm as the Trump campaign, Cambridge Analytica, where Steve Bannon, founder of 
Breitbart news and chief strategist toDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, is a board member. But we 
have no record of the vast amount of data it vacuumed up – the 5,000 data 
points it said it gathers on millions of people, things like what you ate for 
dinner and where your friends live. Nor do we know what it did with that data, 
the political messaging it showed people, the 50,000 variants of adverts 
Cambridge Analytica showed to 50,000 people during the Leave campaign. That’s 
gone. There’s no record. It wasn’t – couldn’t be – captured. It can’t be 
studied. We’ll never know.


According to Martin Moore, director of the Centre for the Study of Media, 
Communication and Power at King’s College, London, Cambridge Analytica found a 
way “of transgressing 150 years of legislation that we’ve developed to make 
elections fair and open”.

That’s gone, as are facts and universally agreed notions of truth. The 
Holocaust? It’s a matter of debate.Facebook’s fake news  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/facebook-fake-news-system-problems-fact-checking>
problem is just one facet of a vast ecosystem of false information. An 
ecosystem that resembles a living organism, that Jonathan Albright, assistant 
professor of communications at Elon University, North Caroline, says is growing 
vaster and stronger every day. Like cancer.

What we do next is down to us, of course. Last Monday, as Aleppo bled, the 
most read story on theGuardian’s website was a review of Apple’s new Macbook Pro
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/12/apple-macbook-pro-review-the-best-computer-you-shouldnt-buy>
. No one knows what happens next. Except perhaps this: we will have our devices 
with us when the darkness falls.

• This article was amended on 18 and 20 December 2016. A review of the Macbook 
Pro was the most viewed story on the Guardian website, rather than the top 
story. This article was further amended because Steve Bannon is a board member 
of Cambridge Analytica, not CEO as an earlier version said.
 