
In 2016, body politics went definitively mainstream. Transgender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/transgender> people, having previously 
been objects of niche curiosity and prurience at best from most of the media, 
became the subject of mid-morning current affairs debates, in-depth 
documentaries and sympathetic profiles. What does it mean to be trans? How 
should society change to give trans people necessary rights and protections?

These questions received urgent discussion, while other issues were more 
implied than addressed: how much is anyone able to control their own body, both 
in terms of what they choose to do with it and how it is perceived by other 
people? That problem of rights and responsibilities, and the tension between 
the individual and society, simmered away not only in the context of gender but 
also when it came to many other matters of sex and sexuality.

In January, the parliamentary women and equalities committee, under the 
leadership of Maria Miller, published its inquiry into transgender equality. 
Its key recommendation was that the UK should adopt the principle of 
self-definition when it comes to gender, meaning that legal sex would cease to 
be decided by physical sex and only alterable by medically and socially 
transitioning to some degree. Instead, the committee argued that individual 
identity should be the ultimate arbiter of whether one was male, female, 
neither, both or something in between.

The government took a pass on that in its July response, although it accepted 
several of the recommendations. Other legislatures weren’t so enthusiastic. 
Some were downright hostile, especially in the US. In March,North Carolina 
lawmakers passed an act that impinged on LGBT rights in multiple ways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/24/north-carolina-discrimination-law-lgbt-groups-pat-mccrory>
, but became notorious for its stipulation that individuals should only use the 
bathroom or changing room that matched the sex on their birth certificate. 
Bruce Springsteen and the NBA were among those who joined a boycott in 
response, cancelling events in the state; tech companies, including PayPal, 
pulled out of planned expansions in the region.

Such high-powered allies suggested that liberal attitudes were winning the 
culture war, even if lawmakers were supplying the backlash. The same seemed 
true for sexuality, as orientations beyond the straight found new acceptance – 
and a new vocabulary too, as identities such as “pansexual” (attracted to all 
genders) and “asexual” (without any particular sexual feels) gained currency.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Ftransgender-kellie-maloney-lgbt-sex-change&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407850972195%2Fnosuchthing-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fred%20McConnell%3A%20There's%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20'sex%20change'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Ftransgender-kellie-maloney-lgbt-sex-change>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fred%20McConnell%3A%20There%27s%20no%20such%20thing%20as%20a%20%27sex%20change%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F12%2Ftransgender-kellie-maloney-lgbt-sex-change&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F12%2F1407850972195%2Fnosuchthing-017.jpg>
‘There’s no such thing as a sex change’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/aug/12/transgender-kellie-maloney-lgbt-sex-change>
Not that long ago, the suggestion of homosexuality was regarded as toxic to a 
celebrity’s career. WhenLauren Jauregui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/03/being-bisexual-ruby-tandoh-comment-st-vincent-cara-delevingne>
 of US girl group Fifth Harmony came out as a “proud bisexual” in November, 
there was no question of damage control: she joins a line of comfortably public 
bisexual female stars, including modelCara Delevingne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/cara-delevingne> and Hunger Games actor 
Amandla Stenberg <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amandla-stenberg>.

Whether they would have been as warmly embraced if they’d declared themselves 
lesbians instead, however, was another matter. The abuse dealt to Labour MP 
Angela Eagle <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/angela-eagle> when she 
launched her leadership challenge in June often explicitly attacked her for 
being lesbian. And in November, a report from the famously liberal American 
town of Portland revealed that lesbian bars had all but ceased to exist – 
because it was impossible to declare an event “woman only” or “lesbian only” 
without entering the minefield of gender identity politics. Who, exactly, was 
being excluded from your definition of “woman”?

Trans inclusion failed to impinge in the same way on gay culture. The key 
issue for gay campaigners at the start of the year was a push for PreP 
(“pre-exposure prophylaxis”, a treatment that reduces the risk of contracting 
HIV) to be made widely available on the NHS for men who have sex with men. Did 
the benefit of preventing many HIV infections outweigh the cost of potentially 
encouraging barrier-free sex that would help to spread other STDs? In December, 
the NHS announced funding for a large clinical trial, to go ahead next year, 
that will help to settle the question of whether PreP’s harm-reduction benefits 
for the individual can be gained without the social costs.

Revelations about a small subculture of gay men engaging “chemsex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/22/addicted-to-chemsex-gay-drugs-film>
” – sex, often involving multiple partners, under the influence of drugs such 
as GHB or crystal meth – formed a bleak and worrying theme of 2016. With 
encounters that crossed over from consensual to coercive, the stories of those 
involved gave a glimpse of the conflict between free-for-all hedonism and 
individual safety. “Anything goes” turns dangerous fast when the ability to say 
no is taken out of the picture.

Poland saw a mass statement of “no” in the October Black Protest, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/women-to-go-on-strike-in-poland-abortion-law>
 when women boycotted work and school in response to the ruling Law and Justice 
party’s attempt to introduce legislation that would have expanded the already 
stringent law on abortion to ban terminations even in cases of rape, incest and 
risk to the pregnant woman’s life. Following the protest, the proposal was 
dropped.

Childline receives eight calls a day about gender identity issues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/13/childline-eight-calls-a-day-gender-identity-issues-children-nspcc-helpline-transgender>
But a woman’s right to choose hardly felt assured. Mass protests against 
Ireland’s Eighth Amendment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/25/abortion-ireland-law-change-eighth-amendment>
, which effectively bans abortion in almost all cases, have still not led to 
repeal. Meanwhile, the ascent of Donald Trump to the US presidency means that 
anti-abortion campaigners are anticipating the chance to step up from state 
level attacks on provision and finally overturn Roe v Wade. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/roe-v-wade>

In the UK, abortion rights were put on the frontline by a documentary in 
October, presented by the actorSally Phillips, whose eldest child has Down’s 
syndrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/01/do-we-really-want-a-world-without-downs-syndrome-ds-prenatal-test>
. In it, she questioned the right of women to have access to a new, more 
accurate and less invasive form of testing for chromosomal disorders, on the 
grounds that this would lead to the near-elimination of people with Down’s 
syndrome.

While legislators consider making gender identity an individual choice, in the 
UK a woman’s ability to decide whether or not she should be pregnant still 
requires the consent of two doctors.Maria Miller  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/maria-miller>is on record as supporting a 
reduction in the time limit for abortion from 24 weeks to just 20.

When it comes to body politics, some bodies seem to have a clearer path to 
self-determination than others. The battle lines of sex will go on being 
contested in the next year and beyond.
 