
The election of Donald Trump and the triumph of Brexit – the two political 
earthquakes of 2016 – resulted from thefailure of elites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/stephen-hawking-dangerous-time-planet-inequality>
 to grasp the discontent in democracies around the world. The populist revolt 
marked the rejection of a technocratic approach to politics incapable of 
understanding the resentments of voters who feel the economy and the culture 
have left them behind.

Some denounce populism as little more than a racist, xenophobic reaction 
against immigrants and multiculturalism. Others view it as a protest against 
the job losses brought about by global trade and new technologies. But to see 
only the bigotry inpopulist protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/birth-of-populism-donald-trump>
, or to view that protest only in economic terms, misses the fact that the 
upheavals of 2016 stemmed from the establishment’s inability to address – or 
even adequately recognise – genuine grievances.

Themes of 2016: the battle to decide one’s own identity
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/themes-of-2016-gender-identity>
The populism ascendant today is a rebellion against establishment parties 
generally, but centre-left parties have suffered the greatest casualties. This 
is mainly their own fault. In the US, theDemocratic party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/24/white-working-class-issues-free-trade-american-south>
 has embraced a technocratic liberalism more congenial to the professional 
classes than to the blue-collar and middle-class voters who once constituted 
its base. A similar predicament faces theLabour party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/panel-jeremy-corbyn-brand-leftwing-populism-yanis-varoufakis>
.

To win back support, progressive parties must see that the grievances are 
about social esteem, not just wages and jobs

Before they can hope to win back public support, progressive parties must 
rethink their mission and purpose. To do so, they should learn from the 
populist protest that has displaced them, not by emulating its xenophobia and 
strident nationalism, but by taking seriously the legitimate grievances with 
which these sentiments are entangled. And that means recognising that the 
grievances are about social esteem, not just wages and jobs.

Progressive parties need to grapple with four main issues.

• Income inequality 

The standard response is to call for greater equality of opportunity – 
retraining workers, improving access to higher education and combating 
discrimination. This is the meritocratic promise that those who work hard and 
play by the rules should be able to rise as far as their talents will take them.

Themes of 2016: technology puts millions of jobs in jeopardy | Ryan Avent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/themes-of-2016-digital-revolution-technology-employment>
But for many, this promise rings hollow. Even in the US, with its 
long-cherished dream of upward mobility, those born to poor parents tend to 
stay poor as adults. Of those born in the bottom fifth of the income scale, 43% 
will remain there and only 4% will make it to the top fifth.

Progressives should reconsider the assumption that social mobility is the 
answer to inequality. They should reckon directly withinequalities of wealth 
and power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/03/trump-supporters-us-elections>
, rather than rest content with efforts to help people ascend a ladder whose 
rungs are growing further and further apart.

• Meritocratic hubris

The problem runs deeper. The relentless emphasis on seeking a fair 
meritocracy, in which social positions reflect effort and talent, has a morally 
corrosive effect on the way we interpret our success (or lack thereof). The 
belief that the system rewards talent and hard work encourages the winners to 
regard their success as their own doing, a measure of their virtue – and to 
look down upon the less fortunate.

Those who lose out may complain that the system is rigged or be demoralised by 
the belief that they alone are responsible for their failure. When combined, 
these sentiments yield a volatile brew of anger and resentment, which Trump, 
though a billionaire, understands and exploits. Where Barack Obama and Hillary 
Clinton speak constantly of opportunity, Trump offers blunt talk of winners and 
losers. Democrats such as Obama and Clinton have difficulty understanding the 
hubris a meritocracy can generate and the harsh judgment it renders on those 
without a college degree. This is why one of the deepest divides in American 
politics today is between those with and without post-secondary education.

• The dignity of work

The loss of jobs to technology and outsourcing has coincided with a sense that 
society accords less respect to working-class occupations. As economic activity 
has shifted from making things to managing money, with hedge fund managers and 
Wall Street bankers receiving outsize rewards, the esteem accorded work in the 
traditional sense has become fragile and uncertain.

Themes of 2016: across continents, autocrats take control | Ian Buruma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/themes-of-2016-across-continents-autocrats-take-control>
New technology may further erode the dignity of work. Some Silicon Valley 
entrepreneurs anticipate a time when robots and artificial intelligence will 
render many of today’s jobs obsolete. To ease the way for such a future, they 
propose paying everyone a basic income. What was once conceived as a safety net 
for all citizens is now offered as a way to soften the transition to a world 
without work. Whether to welcome or resist such a world is a question that will 
be central to politics in the coming years. To think it through, political 
parties will have to grapple withthe meaning of work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/mark-carney-isolation-globalisation-bank-of-england>
 and its place in a good life.

• Patriotism and national community

Free-trade agreements and immigration are the most potent flashpoints of 
populist fury. On one level, these are economic issues. Opponents argue that 
they threaten local jobs and wages, while proponents maintain that they help 
the economy in the long run. But the passion evoked by these issues suggests 
that something more is at stake.

Workers who believe that their country cares about cheap goods and cheap 
labour more than it cares about its own people’s job prospects feel betrayed 
and they often express it in ugly ways: hatred of immigrants, nativist 
vilification of Muslims and other “outsiders” and demands to “take back our 
country”. Liberals reply by condemning the odious rhetoric and insisting on the 
virtues of mutual respect and multicultural understanding. But this principled 
response, though valid, fails to address some big questions implicit in the 
populist complaint. What is the moral significance, if any, of national 
borders? Do we owe more to our fellow citizens than we owe citizens of other 
countries? In a global age, should we cultivate national solidarity or aspire 
to a cosmopolitan ethic of universal human concern?

Themes of 2016: is democracy itself threatened by tech disruption? | Carole 
Cadwalladr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/18/themes-of-2016-hacking-free-and-fair-elections>
Establishment elites, especially in Europe and the US, are now confronting the 
consequences of their failure to address these questions. The populist revolt 
highlights the need to rejuvenate democratic public discourse, to address the 
big questions people care about, including moral and cultural issues.

Disentangling legitimate grievances from the intolerant aspects of populist 
protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/22/prince-charles-rising-intolerance-risks-repeat-of-horrors-of-the-past>
is no easy matter. But it is important to try. Creating a politics that can 
respond to these grievances is the most pressing political challenge of our 
time.

 © Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>, 2017

Michael J Sandel teaches political philosophy at Harvard University. His books 
include What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets and Justice: What’s 
the Right Thing to Do? His BBC programmeThe Global Philosopher 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b075ft6f> gathers participants from around the 
world to debate current issues
 