
Most months, and most weeks during winter, the openness the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> claims to practise yields an array of 
statistics showing how the service has performed against a range of targets. 
The figures usually tell a grim story.

The Observer view on the crisis in the NHS | Observer editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/observer-view-on-nhs-crisis>
Whether it’s ambulance response times to 999 calls, the number of patients 
waiting more than four hours in A&E or the number waiting longer than they 
should for urgent cancer care, NHS performance against such metrics is the 
worst it has ever been.

Jeremy Hunt prefers to trumpet the record numbers of patients being seen, a 
byproduct of our ageing and increasingly lifestyle-affected population. But few 
experts take that seriously as an indicator of the health of the health service.

Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> will make an 
important speech tomorrow on mental health, rightly drawing attention to an 
under-resourced area of enormous concern. But the headlines this weekend are 
all about a wider NHS crisis that seems to be spiralling dangerously out of 
control.

May will hope that the intense pressures that prompted the British Red Cross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/07/theresa-may-urged-to-get-grip-on-nhs-winter-crisis>
 to declare on Friday that the state of hospitals and ambulance services was a 
“humanitarian crisis” were simply the result of a backlog from the festive 
period. But the evidence suggests that is not the case; the overload of the 
system appears to be real and risks to patients rising. Accepting the realities 
of the ongoing and increasingly visible deterioration of the nation’s 
most-loved institution would involve significant political risk for the prime 
minister.

One recently retired NHS trust chief executive believes the deaths at 
Worcestershire Royal hospital in early January of two patients who had been 
waiting on trolleys for a bed could become a new “Jennifer’s ear”. Jennifer was 
a five-year-old who featured in a Labour Party broadcast during the 1992 
general election campaign, who had been waiting 11 months for an ear operation. 
Her plight came to symbolise the Tories’ alleged running down of the NHS.

Media coverage of corridors full of patients on trolleys, waiting to get a bed 
on a ward, also played a key part in the 1997 election, which Labour won by a 
landslide. David Cameron’s drive to detoxify the Conservative brand on health, 
ensuring the NHS was seen as safe in their hands, was conceived in the 
aftermath of those dark days for his party.

Theresa May urged to get a grip on NHS as winter sickness grows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/07/theresa-may-urged-to-get-grip-on-nhs-winter-crisis>
So the parallels being made between then and now by Dr Mark Holland, president 
of the Society for Acute Medicine, must be worrying for May and Hunt.

True, every winter brings examples of trolleys stacking up in corridors. Two 
years ago Stoke made headlines; now it’s Worcester’s turn. But the large number 
of hospitals declaring a red or black alert – their way of saying that they 
can’t cope, at least temporarily – is not normal. And the huge amount of 
ambulance crews’ time being wasted looking after patients because A&E staff are 
too busy to accept them is becoming an urgent problem.

Other serious issues include hospitals having to rush to create extra bed 
space in order to cope with unprecedented numbers of patients needing to be 
admitted. Above all, the increasingly long waits for treatment being 
experienced by more and more people indicate that quite a few hospitals are, as 
Holland puts it, back to the “chaos” of the 1990s.

The impression is of a service that is wilting, even cracking, under the 
strain. Dr Taj Hassan, president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine, 
which represents A&E doctors, talks of conditions creating “untold patient 
misery”.

Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> experts fear that both 
quality of care and patient safety are at risk amid a chaos made worse by 
chronic understaffing.

What is the government’s response? May and Hunt’s stock answers are the 
disputed “£10bn extra”, combined with “more staff than ever” and the assertion 
that “demand is no heavier than usual for the time of year”.

But if there are more Worcesters, because doctors, paramedics and hospital 
staff are too busy to give patients the time they need, or to respond to them 
quickly enough because they’re tending to others, those pat lines may quickly 
appear dangerously glib and inadequate.
 