
It’s that time of year when private schools turn up at the government’s door 
like a jilted former flame asking to be taken back one more time. Their promise 
of10,000 “free” places to low-income families, just so long as the government 
stumps up the first £5,500 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/09/private-schools-in-england-propose-10000-free-places>
, feels like the relationship equivalent of drunkenly rolling around on the 
lawn, promising it will be different this time. We have been here before. From 
1980 until 1997 the government paid for about 5,000 children a year to attend 
private schools. Labour scrapped it, using the money to reduce infant class 
sizes for all children rather than a few thousand.

Still, it’s a smart move by the private schools to offer these “free” places 
to low-income families. Theresa May seems unhappy with the sector, and has 
vowed to make them help state schools. This announcement is a way for the 
private schools to get on the front foot. It’s also not ungenerous. On the 
basis of the IndependentSchools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> 
Council’s proposal, the cost to the taxpayer would be £5,500 per child – 
roughly the amount state schools receive annually for a pupil. The total cost 
for taxpayers is £55m. But average private school fees are around £15,500 so 
funding would be subsidised by the schools at an estimated £80m a year. That’s 
a fair amount of cash for needy children.

So far, so Oliver-Twist-gets-saved-by-a-wealthy-bloke. There’s just one 
problem: there’s not a lot of evidence this is the best way to spend the money. 
Despite their swimming pools and small classes, private schools don’t seem to 
make children much brighter. In 2013 tests sat by 15-year-olds across the UK 
showedstate schools outperformed private schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2013/jul/04/education-private-transform-state-schools>
 by some way once the wealth and background of their pupils were taken into 
account. Evidence is also growing that children who go to state schoolsdo 
better at university compared to their private school counterparts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/05/top-state-school-pupils-get-better-degrees-than-those-from-private-schools>
.

And who, exactly, will benefit from the plan? Assisted places required 
children to pass ability tests. Hence, it wasn’t so much helping “poor 
children” so much as “bright children who happened to be poor”. If this is what 
the ISC is selling, it’s a pup. Bright children tend to do well wherever they 
are educated. Siphoning them off merely leaves the state sector without its 
easiest-to-teach pupils. There is, however, one way to save this policy. If the 
ISC wants to impress the government, it should follow India’s lead. In 2009 it 
passed a law requiring all private schools to take 25% of pupils from among the 
poorest families. And it has to be done at random. No ability tests, no 
catchments areas. Admission is by lottery. If private schools were willing to 
take a fixed proportion of low-income pupils, at random, they would be fairly 
sharing the burdens of the school system. Which is a lot better than shouting 
about what has been lost and might actually help use private school resources 
for those who truly need them.

Laura McInerney is editor of Schools Week
 