
BIG CUP, BIG DREAMS

It’s matchday six (part one) <https://www.theguardian.com/football/live> in 
Big Cup and so many questions still have to be answered. Take Manchester City’s 
hugely anticipated Battle of Britain clash with the Queen’s Celtic at the 
Etihad Stadium, where punters will arrive wondering whether Sergio Agüero is 
going to succumb to The Rage again and attempt a spot of amputation on Scott 
Brown’s legs, eager to discover whether W1lly Caballero will be dressed in full 
clown regalia and curious to find out whether Pep Guardiola chooses to give 
promising young buck The Fiver a run-out at some point.

Unfortunately for anyone gullible enough to purchase a ticket, it promises to 
be that sort of occasion in Manchester. City are already through and can’t 
finish higher than second in Group C, and the Queen’s Celtic are already out, 
so Brendan Rodgers has spent the afternoon shopping at the Arndale Centre. 
Rodgers has planned this perfectly. He’ll be keen to show Guardiola his new 
skinny jeans and cashmere jumper. If he’s lucky, he might even get to do that 
weird thing where he greets the opposing manager by clasping his face with both 
hands before going all boggle-eyed and gurning furiously, so keep an eye on the 
two dugouts and also watch out for Crazy Sergio, who’s been a bit weird ever 
since Guardiola put him on a diet of raw steak and pig’s blood, carrying a 
chainsaw on to the pitch.

Celtic reap reward of Moussa Dembélé’s rendezvous with Brendan Rodgers | David 
Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/06/celtic-moussa-dembele-brendan-rodgers-champions-league>
Otherwise, though, getting up for this one isn’t easy and there isn’t a great 
deal of intrigue elsewhere. Why, it’s almost as though Uefa’s flagship 
competition doesn’t quite live up to the hype, that it’s almost as predictable 
as Arsenal finishing second in their group. They looked set to seal top spot in 
Group Aa fortnight ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/arsenal-psg-champions-league-match-report>
, only for PSG’s predictable late equaliser to take it out of their hands. 
Don’t go away! Arsenal, who face Basel/Basle/Baaarl/Barzuhl, can still do it! 
But they’re reliant on PSG coming unstuck against Ludogorets at home. By the 
way, there’s a documentary about the Queen on ITV at 8pm.

But wait! All is not lost. Ignore the non-event that is Group D, where PSV 
Eindhoven and FC Rostov were shockingly left behind by Atlético Madrid and 
Bayern Munich, and head to Group B, where one point separates the top three 
sides. Benfica and Napoli, who meet in Lisbon, are both a point in front of 
Besiktas, who can nab a spot in the last 16 with victory away to already 
eliminated Dynamo Kyiv. That settles it. Uefa suits can give themselves a well 
deserved pat on the back. Who could possibly be ungrateful enough to complain 
about one group in four still offering genuine intrigue before the final round 
of matches? That’s a 25% success rate! Hats off, Uefa! You’ve done it again!

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join Jacob Steinberg from 7.45pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of Manchester City 
4-1 Queen’s Celtic and more, while Paul Doyle will be on hand for 
Basel/Basle/Baaarl/Barzuhl 1-2 Arsenal. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“I played for six years for Liverpool, it was the best time of my life. Last 
week we [Feyenoord]played against Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/manchester-united-feyenoord-europa-league-match-report>
. One thing happened during the game. Sixty thousand supporters shouted against 
me: ‘You scouse b@stard!’ Normally when your rivals shout at you it’s not the 
best thing that can happen to you, but actually it made me proud to be named a 
scouser – an adopted scouser – because for me scousers are good people; 
hard-working people, committed people and people who never give up” – Dirk Kuyt,
man of the people <https://twitter.com/AnfieldRd96/status/805839545870811142>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-fiver-manchester-city-queens-celtic-big-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80264b5688551f96b799f6f97f9e0c69790cadc4%2F0_196_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20There's%20a%20documentary%20about%20the%20Queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-fiver-manchester-city-queens-celtic-big-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20There%27s%20a%20documentary%20about%20the%20Queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-fiver-manchester-city-queens-celtic-big-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80264b5688551f96b799f6f97f9e0c69790cadc4%2F0_196_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 Pride, earlier. Photograph: Martin Rickett/PA 
FIVER LETTERS

“I’ve been writing a geeky Christmas gift guide and came across this gem 
<http://www.numskull.co.uk/products/avengers-bauble-christmas-tree-ornament-pack>
: ‘Assemble some of the mightiest Marvel characters on your Christmas tree with 
this official Marvel Avengers bauble pack … the perfect addition to any comic 
fan’s festive setup! 100% Tin.’ I made me wonder what percentage Tin The Fiver 
is? And if that percentage rises the closer it gets to a tea-timely deadline, 
as I’ve always had a sneaky suspicion much of its inspiration is beverage 
related” – Matt Chapman [do you really need to wonder, Matt? – Fiver Ed].

“Catching up with my old Fivers as some kind of punishment – I’m currently up 
to 28 June and the aftermath of Iceland v England at the Euros. Now the link to 
‘If pizza-shilling, penalty-missing Gareth Southgate is the answer,what exactly 
is the question 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fclick.mail.theguardian.com%2F%3Fqs%3D5faa23631a4b23927f8f02dbad270dd9ed5cf00c1addd9f000de751cd589c1b4&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNFFhKEwYmOGihuX8rZuAa0IID2UuA>
, ponders Daniel Taylor’ failed to answer the central question – can someone 
explain ‘why Southgate’ please? Also really looking forward to the new season – 
José Mourinho is surely a shoo-in for the title – if you look past Leicester 
that is” – Antony Melvin.

“With regards to referees not being able to unsee what they have seen 
(yesterday’s Fiver), it is well known in medical circles that electro shock 
therapy can cause memory loss. Maybe in the interest of all-important 
neutrality and fairness, we should electroshock every referee before every game 
to make sure their judgment of each player isn’t tainted by past actions. I can 
think of a few fans who would be more than happy to administer it (and let’s 
just hope they remember the rules)” – Dan Makeham.

“I think you’ll find that Jürgen Klinsmann did not introduce the dark art of 
diving to the Premier League (yesterday’s Fiver). Indeed, upon arrival he was 
told in no uncertain terms that it was not acceptable on these shores, hence 
sending himself up by diving after his debut goal v Sheffield Wednesday. He was 
a serial diver before his stint with Spurs, but not during it. You dangled the 
bait, and I have gleefully gobbled it up” – Richard Offord.

“Paul Cox (yesterday’s Fiver letters) writes that he is a ‘semi-retired 
American’. I didn’t realise that one could retire from one’s citizenship; an 
interesting concept. Perhaps he is only semi-retired because he is waiting to 
see how Mr Trump will perform. I write this from north of Paul’s natural 
border, where we are awaiting a hoard of fully-retired Americans” – Jim Helbig.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
prizeless letter o’the day is … Dan Makeham.


SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING

Join AC Jimbo and co for the latest thrilling instalment of (the 
award-winning) Football Weekly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2016/dec/05/liverpool-blow-it-against-bournemouth-football-weekly>
 podcast.

NEWS, BITS AND BOBS

The lawyer for Andy Woodward and Steve Walters has said there are prominent 
figures named by the abuse victims that“still work in senior echelons of 
football” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/football-sexual-abuse>. Ed 
Smethurst said: “There are certain names who do come up repeatedly. There are 
absolutely people in the game today who victims have spoken to me about.”

Chapecoense have officially been crowned winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/chapecoense-copa-sudamericana-champions>
 of the Copa Sudamericana.

England’s assistant manager Sammy Lee is now known as Sammy Lee. “I have great 
respect for Sammy,”honked Gareth Southgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/sammy-lee-has-left-role-england-football-assistant-manager>
. “I felt it was important for me to bring in my own support team and Sammy 
fully respected that.”

Arsène Wenger is hoping Alexis Sánchez cares more about “the way the club has 
values, the way the club has ambition, the way the club respects the players” 
than cold, hard cash. “Maybe I am a bit naive,”he reassured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/alexis-sanchez-arsenal-new-contract-money-arsene-wenger>
.

José Fonte quite likes Southampton, but it seems he’d prefer to live somewhere 
else. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/southampton-jose-fonte-leave-january>

And gong! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/05/guardian-football-supporters-federation>

RECOMMENDED LOOKING

Jürgen Klopp’s mulled wine, Adam Lallana’s jeans and an interpretation of 
Eddie Howe’s face all feature inDavid Squires’ weekly cartoon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/picture/2016/dec/06/david-squires-on-jurgen-klopp-and-bournemouth-4-3-liverpool>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-fiver-manchester-city-queens-celtic-big-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f08c4e99c3bb1342c2fb13f349cf9d2161ff64e%2F0_0_902_388%2F902.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20There's%20a%20documentary%20about%20the%20Queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-fiver-manchester-city-queens-celtic-big-cup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20There%27s%20a%20documentary%20about%20the%20Queen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-fiver-manchester-city-queens-celtic-big-cup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f08c4e99c3bb1342c2fb13f349cf9d2161ff64e%2F0_0_902_388%2F902.jpg>
 Here you go. Illustration: David Squires for the Guardian 
STILL WANT MORE?

Hearts have a new, exciting, young manager in Ian Cathro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/hearts-ian-cathro-newcastle-tynecastle>
, so Ewan Murray has sharpened his pen, pointed it towards Stephen Craigan, 
Jamie Fullarton, Kris Boyd, Malky Mackay and the Scottish FA, and scribbled 
1,211 excellent words which areyours for zero Scottish pounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/06/scottish-football-hearts-ian-cathro-sfa-malky-mackay>
.

As the Moussa Dembélé hype machine continues to whirl, David Hytner discusses  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/06/celtic-moussa-dembele-brendan-rodgers-champions-league>
the comparisons to Didier Drogba, Raúl, and Henrik Larsson.

David Conn and Nazia Parveen have written this excellent piece on Montagu and 
North Fenham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/montagu-and-north-fenham-boys-club>
, the family-run boys club at the heart of north-east football abuse scandal.

West Brom fans rejoice! A feature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/dec/06/tony-pulis-west-brom-stoke-city>
, on Tony Pulis, by Martin Laurence.

The countdown to January has begun, and the Rumour Mill couldn’t be more 
excited. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/06/football-transfer-rumour-mill-liverpool-roberto-firmino-arsenal>

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


LOOK HOW COLD THAT GARDEN LOOKS
 