
The Downing Street press office has given selected journalists “exclusive” 
interviews with our new prime minister. By one of those million-to-one 
coincidences that must make spin doctors believe a supernatural power watches 
over them, every journalist they graced with their favours interviewedTheresa 
May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> on bended knee.

“It must be hard for someone so reserved and modest to become one of the most 
public figures in the world,” gulped the reporter from theSunday Times, as her 
head ducked so low, onlookers must have feared whiplash injuries to the neck. 
“How do you steel yourself for making tough decisions?”

The Financial Times had no doubt she could take them 
<https://www.ft.com/content/2616fda2-bc06-11e6-8b45-b8b81dd5d080>. “The word 
‘queen’ attaches itself easily to Theresa May,” its reporter began, not least 
because the historical figure she identifies with is “Elizabeth I”.

Alas, Downing Street could not find a “window” for the Observer. The press 
office has offered us nothing. Not even a “brush by”. We must live with the 
snub, hard though it is to bear, and listen instead to those who know what they 
are talking about. If you do, you learn that the reasons for Theresa May’s 
success will be the reasons for her failure (and possibly Britain’s failure, 
too). It’s too Elizabethan, even for theFT, to talk of May possessing “tragic 
flaws”. She doesn’t have grand faults, just the standard coding errors you must 
expect if you install a Thames Valley Tory into your system of government.

Enjoy it while you can: the May-Johnson double act may not last long | Marina 
Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/09/theresa-may-boris-johnson-double-act-cabaret>
Readers who don’t know the rich river towns and villages between Windsor and 
Henley won’t grasp how invulnerable conservative values and conservative 
culture can feel in the heart of Tory England.

But it is easy for everyone to understand why so many warm to the 
self-confidence May’s life in Maidenhead has bred in her. Unlike the 
politicians of the Blair generation who announced their transatlantic tastes by 
saying how much they admired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2007/sep/02/uk.media> The West Wing or 
gangsta rap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/05/george-osborne-gangsta-rap-nwa-public-enemy>
, May has an unembarrassed taste for Kipling’sIf, The Great British Bake Off, 
James Bond andMasterChef. Like her supporters, she isn’t remotely edgy, and 
cannot see anything wrong with parochial and comfortable English life.

One minister who argued with May when she was home secretary was careful to 
emphasise that she wasn’t an ideologue in the usual sense. She did not try to 
insist on her righteousness, and never raised her voice or thumped the table. 
For all that, her absolute certainty did not waver for a second. “Never giving 
an inch scared off opponents,” he said. “Cameron and Osborne were frightened of 
her.” He admired her in a grudging way, but he left the Home Office thinking he 
had never seen a politician with so little imagination. May could not put 
herself in others’ shoes, or accept that an adversary had an interesting point.

The polls suggest the country likes her determination. And you only have to 
look at her treatment of others to see how much she enjoys it herself. She 
didn’t allow George Osborne to resign, but fired him, thenleaked details of his 
humiliation 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3688940/Humiliated-George-Osborne-leaves-Downing-Street-DOOR-booted-government-Theresa-May.html>
. Shemocked Boris Johnson 
<https://www.ft.com/content/4d1430b0-a161-11e6-86d5-4e36b35c3550> in public 
without stopping to worry that he was her foreign secretary. Even politicians 
who supported her leadership bid say she is friendless in parliament. There are 
no Mayites. There’s only May.

As with politics, so with the bureaucracy. When he worked for her at the home 
office, Nick Timothy, her special adviser, barged into a lift full of civil 
servants. He had to keep prodding the buttons before it would move. “Just like 
the civil service,” he announced to one and all. “You must hit it six times to 
get a result.”

Last week May warmed to his theme 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2016/12/theresa-may-i-get-so-frustrated-with-whitehall/>
. She was “frustrated” by civil servants, who tried to define what she meant 
when she promised to help “just about managing” families. I can see why voters 
appreciated that too. A PM willing to apply the smack of firm government to 
bureaucrats is welcome in a chaotic world where nothing seems to function.

What has become of conservatism? | Nick Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/27/what-has-become-of-conservatism-trump-farage-le-pen-brexit>
But before we get so carried away with adulation Downing Street invites us to 
interview her, consider why she did not want civil servants to define “just 
about managing” families. Precision would have shown that, for all her 
promises, her government did next to nothing to help them in the autumn 
statement.

If we had a quarter-way competent opposition, rather than the detritus of the 
far left, it would be shouting about how May had barely touched George 
Osborne’s benefit cuts to working families. It would be warning that Brexit, 
inflation and declines in productivity will, in the words of the Resolution 
Foundation, leavethe entire bottom third 
<http://www.resolutionfoundation.org/publications/bending-the-rules-autumn-statement-response/>
 of the income distribution poorer.

May’s breaking of her promises to struggling families is dwarfed by the vast 
project of extracting Britain from the European Union. When the negotiations 
begin, a hitherto credulous public will realise that her alleged virtues are 
real vices.

Rightwingers are living in a dream world. Parochial and insular, like May, as 
uninterested in foreign cultures as she is, as convinced that they can dismiss 
opposition as brutally as she does, they forget that other countries have their 
politics too. I have lost count of the number of times I have heard them play
variations on the theme 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14571296.Boris_Johnson__EU_tariffs_would_be__insane__if_UK_backs_Brexit/>
 of “German car manufacturers will never allow the EU to restrict their exports 
to Britain”.

Even now, with Britain heading to the brink, May is insisting that she and she 
alone can take the thousands of decisions Brexit will entail. Meanwhile the 
Financial Times is reporting that her government of Pollyannas believes Britain 
would be doing a kindness to the EU if we agreed to a transitional arrangement 
to soften the shock of Brexit.

No one as yet seems to realise that EU countries have a strategic interest in 
keeping the union together. They cannot give Britain generous terms because it 
would encourage others to leave. Politics trumps economics, in Europe as 
everywhere else. (If it did not, we would not have voted to leave.)

If we are not to be stuck with disastrous terms, we need a cosmopolitan 
leader, who has the imagination to see other points of view and the 
intelligence to make compromises. Instead we have Theresa May. She is not 
“reserved and modest” but obstinate and uncomprehending. Doubtless, all the 
Tories she has humiliated will turn on her when the realities of Brexit spin 
apart the competing interests of small towns and big businesses in the 
Conservative coalition.

Don’t feel sorry for her then. Feel sorry for your country, your neighbours 
and, in all likelihood, yourself.
 