
Brexit is pure poison, polluting everything it touches. The fundamental 
questions the country should be addressing – thecrisis in productivity growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/06/uk-productivity-back-at-pre-financial-crisis-level-office-for-national-statistics>
, the lack ofaffordable housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/02/home-ownership-in-england-at-lowest-level-in-30-years-as-housing-crisis-grows>
, the overwhelming strain onpublic services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/10/hospitals-on-brink-of-collapse-say-health-chiefs>
, ourdesperately weak export sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/uk-trade-deficit-widens-september-exports-fall-pound-drop>
 – are all sidelined. There is not the bandwith or capacity to address them 
against the gigantic question of how to weather the greatest shock to our 
economy and society since 1945.

Be in no doubt. Brexit transcends the 1974 oil shock or the 2008/9 financial 
crash in the probable scale, intensity and duration of its impact. Every aspect 
of our economy is going to be affected. Investment decisions are going to be 
abandoned or reduced.

Of course, there is a degree of uncertainty about how much of a shock it might 
be. Britain negotiating a custom-made deal that allows a well-managed 
transition to full participation of the single market would be less of a shock 
than a sharp, hard Brexit rupture, but it is not going to happen. Every time 
she hints at it,Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> 
gets beaten back by the powerful, Brexit faction that wants nothing less than 
rupture. She then retreats, judging that keeping her party together is more 
important than retaining some association with the EU. Unless and until it 
becomes obvious that hard Brexit is both avoidable and enormously 
self-damaging, there is no political coalition strong enough to resist it.

Last week, the Office for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/office-of-budget-responsibility-to-tear-up-forecasts-for-uk-growth>
, recognising that the Brexit faction makes the political weather, buckled and 
declared that its best guess was that Brexit would only be a short-lived 
mini-shock. It still earned brickbats aplenty from the new bovver boys in 
British politics, but the OBR pulled its punches. Its economic forecast of a 
small slowdown in growth, before it is fully resumed in two or three years’ 
time, is an optimistic outlier. Even so, the impact is severe. The intense 
squeeze on spending on public services has to continue to give any hope of 
balancing the budget – even if this aim has been necessarily deferred until 
early in the next decade. But the shortfall in tax revenues means there will, 
cumulatively, be another £58bn of public debt than there would otherwise have 
been.

Worse, the rise in inflation caused by the fall in the pound means that what 
peoples’ wages will buy – so-called real wages – are hardly going to rise at 
all in the years ahead. Indeed,the Institute for Fiscal Studies projects 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-38090977> no rise for another five years, 
so that real wages will be below 2008 levels for 13 years. TheResolution 
Foundation points out <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-38089190> that in 
every decade since the 1920s real wages have risen by 20%, slowing down in the 
2000s and now set to grow by only 1.6% in the 2010s. Both bodies declare that 
there has been no economic pain on this scale for the mass of wage earners for 
more than 70 years.

The impact will be hardest felt by the bottom 30% of the population, most 
reliant on the welfare system, but a welfare system scaling back support, 
freezing most benefits in cash terms. Public and social housing provision is 
stagnating. There has been no period like this in modern British economic 
history.

All the risks are that it could even be worse. The OBR thinks that inflation 
will peak at 2.6%; other forecasters think inflation could rise to 4% before it 
falls. That judgment matters: the higher inflation is, the more intense the 
squeeze on all forms of cash spending – wages, welfare payments and public 
spending – in real terms and the greater the depressive effect on the economy.

Then there is the judgment on private investment. The OBR sees it as falling a 
little. It’s hard to imagine what substantial investment can be justified next 
year or in the following years. Apart from a small real rise in government 
infrastructure spending, every notch on the dial is negative and all the risks 
on the downside.

Yet we have to endure Brexiters insisting that anyone who analyses the future 
in these terms is a Bremoaner, talking the economy down. There is a legitimate 
argument about how bad things could get – the OBR recognises that in the range 
of its forecasts – but to pretend all is well is delusional. Philip Hammond has 
done well to allow himself the capacity to spend compensating funds on 
infrastructure and science, but it is small beer against the severity of the 
underlying trends.

The open question is how this is going to play out politically. Negotiating 
with national governments, the European parliament and European commission 
simultaneously, across so many complex issues and with so little core agreement 
in government, is close to impossible. As the uncertainty mounts and the talks 
become ever more deadlocked, so the economy will suffer more – and the 
Brexiters will blame it all on Bremoaners and European governments for 
obstruction and standing in the way of the democratic will of the people. The 
parts of the country that will hurt most – the old industrial heartlands and 
left-behind communities – are those that voted Leave and they will be receptive 
to the message.

Meanwhile, little is being done or can be done to address the economy’s core 
weaknesses, which is the real source of their distress. The bitterness and 
distrust can only grow, fuelling an ever more destructive enmity between 
Leavers and Remainers. This is, without doubt, the greatest crisis through 
which I have lived in my adult life.

Theresa May knows she wants a long transition to a custom-made participation 
in the EU single market. In the absence of any opposition or leadership 
elsewhere, she has to start saying so – and start facing down the Brexiters. 
Otherwise, not just the economics, but the politics may start to be 
unmanageable.
 