
The annual Turner prize ceremony at Tate Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/dec/01/turner-prize-2014-duncan-campbell-wins>
 has, over time, lapsed from the status of a night tinged with nerve-racking 
glamour to that of a comforting pre-Christmas ritual. Nicholas Serota, director 
of the Tate, glides around the Duveen galleries dispensing goodwill like a 
benign end-of-term headmaster. Penelope Curtis, Tate Britain’s director and 
chair of the prize, advances in his wake like a crisply punctilious head girl.

This year’s party on Monday night, took the form of a seat dinner rather than 
a drinks-and-canapes bunfight. Confusingly, the food was none the less canapes, 
which one served oneself with toothpicks on to tiny plates. (Can I have been 
the only guest to have topped up with a bowl of pasta at home?)

What was mentioned only sotto voce was how badly received 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-30289659> this year’s shortlist 
had been. The BBC arts editor put the boot in on the Today programme (“quite a 
weak year”); the Times critic said the prize should have been “withheld, 
cancelled due to general indifference”; the Telegraph thought the whole thing 
should be handed over to the Art Fund to run.

For me it is a depressing sign of Britain’s uncertain relationship with 
contemporary art that a weak-ish shortlist should be accompanied by such 
apocalyptic demands. There have been some incredibly ropey years for Man Booker 
shortlists – but no one seriously suggests the game is up there.

Classical cough remedy

Tuesday evening at the Royal Festival Hall was billed as The Return to London 
of the Violin Legend Kyung-Wha Chung 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/kyung-wha-chung-the-return-t-82342>. 
The 66-year-old Korean emerged into glittering stardom on that stage in 1970 
performing the Mendelssohn concerto under André Previn. There followed an 
astonishing career that paused in her mid-30s when she had a family; ill health 
and injury also conspired to keep her from the stage, and this was the first 
time she had performed in London for 12 years 
<http://www.elbowmusic.org/#!The-return-of-Kyung-Wha-Chung/c1k6t/C95D0AAE-EB51-4941-8977-FBB257C3035E>
.

The hall was packed. Chung was clearly nervous. After the first movement of 
the opening piece, the gentle Mozart sonata K379, a fusillade of winter hacking 
broke out, so thunderous that she placed her fiddle under her arm to let it 
subside. And then – a little like the moment when Rafael Nadal is about to 
serve and the pin-drop tension is broken by an ill-considered shout from the 
crowd – came the high-pitched volley of a child’s cough.

Glaring balefully, Chung reprimanded the unfortunate family from the stage: 
they eventually removed themselves.

It was, perhaps, a touch charmless (though bringing a sick child to the 
concert was clearly ill-judged). Still, the episode seemed to lend an extra 
fury to her performance of Prokofiev’s first violin sonata. That woman is 
fierce.

A brutal truth



“You don’t, do you?” the Guardian’s foreign editor said when I confessed to 
liking brutal thrillers. Yes, I relax withJack Reacher novels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/04/personal-lee-child-review-novel-jack-reacher>
, Lee Child’s stories of a 6ft 5in former military policeman with hands the 
size of supermarket chickens. Reacher wanders America violently ridding it of 
bad guys while having liaisons with intriguing women, often employed in law 
enforcement. What’s not to like? (I guess it’s different if you spend your 
days, like the foreign editor, contemplating actual violence.)

It’s true that I’m also reading volume three of the astonishing My Struggle 
novels byKarl Ove Knausgaard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/07/karl-ove-knausgaard-my-struggle-hari-kunzru>
, the Norwegian Proust. I also haveKatie Mitchell’s The Director’s Craft 
<http://www.waterstones.com/waterstonesweb/products/katie+mitchell/the+director27s+craft/5845912/>
 and postmodern philosopherMario Perniola 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mario_Perniola>’s The Sex Appeal of the Inorganic 
awaiting my attention for professional purposes. So I don’t begrudge myself the 
comforting joys of genre fiction.
 