
It goes without saying that in a democracy, everyone is entitled to his or her 
own opinions. The trouble starts when people think they are also entitled to 
their own facts.


Away out west, on the hundreds of millions of acres of public lands that most 
Americans take for granted (if they are aware of them at all), the trouble is 
deep, widespread, and won’t soon go away. Last winter’s armed takeover and 
41-dayoccupation of Malheur national wildlife refuge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/oregon-militia-standoff> in south-eastern 
Oregon is a case in point. It was carried out by people who, if they hadn’t 
been white and dressed as cowboys, might have been called “terrorists” and 
treated as such. Their interpretation of the history of western lands and of 
the judicial basis for federal land ownership – or at least that of their 
leaders, since they weren’t exactly a band of intellectuals – was only loosely 
linked to reality.

At least some of them took inspiration from the notion that Jesus Christ wrote 
the constitution 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/30/opinion/the-war-for-the-west-rages-on.html> 
(which would be news to the deists, such as James Madison, who were its actual 
authors) and that it prohibits federal ownership of any land excepting 
administrative sites within the United States – a contention that more than two 
centuries of American jurisprudence hasemphatically repudiated 
<http://www.sltrib.com/opinion/3463803-155/op-ed-lands-transfer-to-states-it>.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fgreat-american-west-land-bundys-oregon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8162d60e1b262177a664306aedf4418c7ee2167%2F0_70_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20land%20is%20our%20land%3A%20is%20it%20the%20end%20of%20the%20line%20for%20the%20great%20American%20west%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fgreat-american-west-land-bundys-oregon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20land%20is%20our%20land%3A%20is%20it%20the%20end%20of%20the%20line%20for%20the%20great%20American%20west%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fgreat-american-west-land-bundys-oregon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc8162d60e1b262177a664306aedf4418c7ee2167%2F0_70_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Standing rocks (hardened volcanic tuff) and grasses at City of Rocks state 
park, near Silver City, New Mexico. Photograph: Alamy 
The troubling thing is that similar delusions infect pockets of unrest 
throughout the west, lending a kind of twisted legitimacy to efforts at both 
the state and national level to transfer western public lands to states and 
counties. To be sure, not all the proponents of this liquidation of America’s 
national patrimony subscribe to wing-nut doctrines; sometimes they just use 
them.

Greed can suffice to motivate those who lust for the real estate bonanzas and 
resource giveaways that would result if states gained title to, say, the 264m 
acres presently controlled by theBureau of Land Management 
<http://www.blm.gov/wo/st/en.html> (BLM). General combativeness and hostility 
toward government also play their roles, and the usual rightwing mega-donors,
including 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2016/02/11/3748602/koch-brothers-funding-bundy-agenda/>
 the Koch brothers, pump money into a bewildering array of agitator groups to 
help keep the fires of resentment burning.

The louder the drum chant of crazy “facts” gets, the more the Alice in 
Wonderland logic behind them threatens to seize the popular narrative about 
America’s public lands – how they came to be and what they represent. This, in 
turn, prepares the way for the betrayal of one of the nation’s deepest 
traditions and for the loss of yet more of its natural heritage.

Conversely, those who value American public lands have been laggard in 
articulating an updated vision for those open spaces appropriate to the 21st 
century and capable of expressing what the unsettled “fruited plains” and 
“purple mountain majesties” of the west still mean for our national experience 
and our capacity to meet the challenges of the future.

The malice at Malheur

The leaders of the Malheur occupation, Ammon and Ryan Bundy, are sons of 
Cliven Bundy, a Nevada rancher and public lands scofflaw who gained notoriety 
two years ago following astandoff with federal law enforcement officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/01/cliven-bundy-standoff-grazing-rights-nevada-ranch>
. Back in the 1990s, the elder Bundy had stopped paying grazing fees, claiming 
that the federal government had no authority to regulate the public lands where 
his cattle fed. In 2014, with Bundy $1.1m in arrears and his grazing permits 
transferred to the local county government, the Bureau of Land Management moved 
to round up and confiscate his 400 head of cattle.

A year after armed standoff, Cliven Bundy still star of his own Tea 
Party-tinged western
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/01/cliven-bundy-standoff-grazing-rights-nevada-ranch>
Via social media, Bundy appealed to militia and “patriot” groups for support, 
and hundreds of armed resistersrallied to his ranch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/13/nevada-bundy-cattle-ranch-armed-protesters>
 90 miles north of Las Vegas. When the ensuing showdownthreatened to become a 
bloodbath like the Waco siege 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/05/oregon-standoff-federal-agents-remember-waco>
 of 1993, the authorities withdrew.

The government’s retreat and its failure to arrest members of the Bundy family 
or their allies for acts of armed resistance set the stage for the Malheur 
takeover, but the roots of the incident go back to the Sagebrush Rebellion of 
the 1970s and 1980s and theWise Use Movement 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/10/opinion/sunday/the-ideological-roots-of-the-oregon-standoff.html>
 that succeeded it. The Sagebrush Rebellion was triggered by a national 
inventory of public lands to identify areas appropriate for designation as 
“wilderness” (under the National Wilderness Preservation System). Its advocates 
also protested at the enforcement of government protections for archaeological 
sites and endangered species. Wise Use groups echoed those complaints and 
essentially argued against anything the environmental movement was for, urging 
the amped-up exploitation of natural resources on western lands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fgreat-american-west-land-bundys-oregon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29c9446fc164d68517973c64ee7c9d6370008132%2F0_252_4256_2556%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20land%20is%20our%20land%3A%20is%20it%20the%20end%20of%20the%20line%20for%20the%20great%20American%20west%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fgreat-american-west-land-bundys-oregon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20land%20is%20our%20land%3A%20is%20it%20the%20end%20of%20the%20line%20for%20the%20great%20American%20west%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fgreat-american-west-land-bundys-oregon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29c9446fc164d68517973c64ee7c9d6370008132%2F0_252_4256_2556%2F4256.jpg>
 Occupier Duane Ehmer rides on horseback through the Malheur national wildlife 
refuge headquarters. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Ammon Bundy put his own rogue-Mormon spin on that message by claiming divine 
inspiration 
<http://www.eenews.net/special_reports/oregon_standoff/stories/1060030427> and 
sanction for his actions. Ostensibly, the Malheur occupation was intended to 
show support for nearby ranchers Dwight and Stephen Hammond, who faced jail 
terms for setting illegal range fires (and who immediatelydistanced themselves 
<http://www.eenews.net/special_reports/oregon_standoff/stories/1060030141> from 
the occupation). But Bundy didn’t stop there. Hecalled on 
<http://www.eenews.net/special_reports/oregon_standoff/stories/1060030078> 
“patriots all over the country” to join his cause and help “free up” federal 
land for ranching, mining and logging, pointedly adding: “We need you to bring 
your guns.”

Malheur was an odd place for white guys to make a stand in favor of 
“returning” federal land to its “rightful owners” – that is, themselves. The 
refuge was established in 1908 when Teddy Roosevelt declared a modest area of 
public domain to be a wildlife refuge. If anyone then occupied the land, it was 
members of the Burns Paiute tribe, not white settlers. In the 1930s, the refuge 
expanded when the governmentbought the bankrupt remnants 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/06/opinion/in-oregon-myth-mixes-with-anger.html>
 of a former cattle baron’s empire. At the time, Malheur was its own mini-Dust 
Bowl. The purchase, which enlarged protection for once-fabulous wetlands 
supporting thousands of migrating birds, was essentially a bailout.

The people who joined the Bundys in the Malheur occupation were a strange lot. 
Few had any relationship to ranching or actual cows, aside from sitting down to 
eat a hamburger. Some were ex-military; others claimed to be (but weren’t). 
Quite a few had links to Tea Party groups or to “patriot” organizations 
including theOath Keepers <https://www.oathkeepers.org/>, the Three Percenters 
<http://threepercentersclub.org/>, and an assortment of other militia outfits. 
Onedescribed himself 
<https://www.hcn.org/articles/malheur-occupation-oregon-ammon-bundy-public-lands-essay>
 as “an old hippie from San Francisco”, jazzed by the excitement of the 
occupation and uncaring about its purposes. He also happened to be a convicted 
murderer (second degree) – of his father.

Straight thinking was not a requirement for admission to the occupiers’ cause. 
The fellow who photogenically rode his horse around the refuge while displaying 
a large American flag, for example, turned out to be acutely concerned lest the 
federal government divest itself of public lands. He feared the loss of access 
to cherished places where he liked to ride his horse. Because of that, he 
joined an armed effort aimed at forcing the government to do exactly what he 
didn’t want. Go figure.

Following the shooting death of LaVoy Finicum, the Malheur occupier involved 
in asuicide-by-cop 
<http://www.eenews.net/special_reports/oregon_standoff/stories/1060033634> at a 
roadblock on 26 January 26, the occupation unraveled. At last count, the Bundy 
brothers and 24 others had been arrested and charged with alaundry list 
<http://www.flashalertnewswire.net/images/news/2016-02/3585/91645/Bundy_Indictment_unsealed.pdf>
 of crimes, including conspiracy to prevent federal employees from carrying out 
their duties and destruction of public property. All but one or two of them are 
still in jail.

Nor did the feds stop there. They finally nabbed Cliven Bundy at an airport 
after he attended a memorial service for Finicum, and alsocharged 
<https://www.hcn.org/articles/Bundy-bust-up-cliven-ammon-malheur-sagebrush-rebellion-payne-santilli>
 18 others in connection with the 2014 Nevada standoff. Some of the 18 were 
already in custody for their involvement at Malheur. Bundy’s illegal cattle, 
which the government unsuccessfully tried to confiscate in 2014,remain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/10/cliven-bundy-nevada-cattle-grazing-blm-standoff-gold-butte?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
 at large.

More mad cowboy disease in Utah

Despite the government’s thorough, if belated, crackdown, the hostility toward 
public lands on display at Malheur has hardly been contained. Such resentments 
are of a piece with the anger suffusing the presidential campaigns, although 
paradoxically enough Donald Trump hasspoken out 
<http://www.fieldandstream.com/articles/hunting/2016/01/qa-donald-trump-on-guns-hunting-and-conservation>
 in favor of retaining federal lands. (Ted Cruz, by contrast,campaigned 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2016/02/19/3751233/ted-cruz-public-lands-ad/> 
against Trump in Nevada by promising to “fight day and night to return full 
control of Nevada’s lands to its rightful owners, its citizens”. )

The darkest side of this “movement” is undoubtedly its well-documented 
association with armed militia groups and their persistent threat of violence. 
Gunmen from the Oath Keepers, for instance, obstructed federal officials from 
shutting down mines violating environmental regulations in both Oregon and 
Montana. According to theSouthern Poverty Law Center 
<https://www.splcenter.org/>, the current, rapid growth of militia groups is 
unprecedented andappears to have been spurred 
<http://www.mcclatchydc.com/news/nation-world/national/article53399805.html> by 
the 2014 standoff at the Bundy ranch. Notices for “meet-ups” among “patriots” 
to show support for the incarcerated Bundys and the “martyred” Finicum are 
abundant on social media.

A similar virus has infected several western state legislatures, including 
those of Montana, Oregon, Wyoming and Nevada. Representative Michele Fiore, who 
hovered at the fringes of the Malheur occupation, for instance, introduced a 
bill in the Nevada legislature to transfer federal lands there to state 
control, irrespective of federal wishes. Consideredpatently unconstitutional 
<http://www.reviewjournal.com/news/nevada-legislature/public-lands-takeover-bill-draws-bundy-crowd-doomed>
, it was quickly dismissed. A Nevada senate resolution calling on Washington DC 
to initiate action to transfer those lands received more serious consideration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fgreat-american-west-land-bundys-oregon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda46aa13adcaf30038d8946f3d03d79b35cae884%2F0_31_5997_3600%2F5997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20land%20is%20our%20land%3A%20is%20it%20the%20end%20of%20the%20line%20for%20the%20great%20American%20west%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fgreat-american-west-land-bundys-oregon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20land%20is%20our%20land%3A%20is%20it%20the%20end%20of%20the%20line%20for%20the%20great%20American%20west%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fgreat-american-west-land-bundys-oregon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda46aa13adcaf30038d8946f3d03d79b35cae884%2F0_31_5997_3600%2F5997.jpg>
 Bryce valley, Utah, is distinctive due to geological structures called 
hoodoos, formed by frost weathering and stream erosion of the river and lake 
bed sedimentary rocks. Photograph: Nick Jackson/Rex Shutterstock 
The game is being played more cagily in Utah. There, lawmakers approved 
legislation in March that authorized and partly funded the state’s attorney 
general tosue the federal government 
<http://www.eenews.net/greenwire/2016/03/11/stories/1060033874> for title to 
approximately 30m acres of Utah public lands. The suit would pursue strategies 
advanced via astudy <http://www.eenews.net/assets/2015/12/09/document_pm_01.pdf>
 produced by a New Orleans law firm outlining “legitimate legal theories” that, 
it contended, might lead to the wholesale transfer of lands to the state.

The expected cost of the litigation has been estimated at $14m and Utah has 
sought allies among other western states. So far, they’ve found no takers 
willing to join the suit, possibly because other attorney generals have 
concluded that the legal theories behind it arerubbish 
<http://www.co.harney.or.us/PDF_Files/County%20Court/public%20land%20issues/Federal%20Ownership%20of%20Public%20Lands.pdf>
.

Utah has also exported its anti-federalism to Capitol Hill. One of its 
congressmen, Rob Bishop, currently chairs the House natural resources committee 
and sympatheticallyheld hearings 
<http://naturalresources.house.gov/calendar/eventsingle.aspx?EventID=399943> in 
February on several bills, introduced by representatives from Alaska, Idaho and 
Utah, that would place federal lands under state control. Lisa Murkowski, a 
Republican from Alaska and chair of the energy and natural resources committee,
has promoted 
<http://www.grandviewoutdoors.com/bowhunting/selling-public-land-a-hunters-nightmare/>
 similar bills in the Senate.

Hanging on to ‘the solace of open spaces’

Lost among the headlines, soundbites and posturing is any serious discussion 
of America’s public lands and their purposes. Ammon Bundy was completely 
correct, early in the occupation of Malheur, when hesaid 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/ammon-bundy-speaks-occupied-oregon-refuge-important-people/story?id=36078727>
: “This refuge is rightfully owned by the people.” His problem was that his 
definition of “people” only included people like him. The Burns Paiute tribe, 
whose ancestral homeland includes Malheur and whosesacred sites 
<http://www.opb.org/news/series/burns-oregon-standoff-bundy-militia-news-updates/npr-native-american-tribe-says-oregon-armed-occupiers-are-desecrating-sacred-land/>
 are protected by federal law, certainly did not figure into his plans. The 
thousands of annual visitors to Malheur, who appreciate its 320 bird species 
and other wildlife, and the millions more who support the National Wildlife 
Refuge System, also seem not to be the “people” Bundy had in mind. The same 
might be said for anyone attracted to the idea of intact natural landscapes and 
functioning ecosystems.

The greatest vulnerability of America’s public lands is that the millions of 
their rightful owners scarcely know they exist. Ask the average New Yorker what 
the Bureau of Land Management is, and the odds are that you’ll get a confused 
stare. Even many people in the west, who live close to those public lands, have 
trouble differentiating the national parks from the national forests, though 
those two classes of land are administered for substantially different purposes 
by two different government departments, Interior and Agriculture. Yet most 
people agree that the wild open spaces of the nation’s grandest landscapes 
constitute a collective treasure.

In essence, they are our national commons, our shared resource, not just for 
material goods, like timber, clean water, and minerals, but for recreation and 
inspiration.Seventy percent 
<http://www.grandviewoutdoors.com/bowhunting/selling-public-land-a-hunters-nightmare/>
 of all hunters are said to use public lands, and the percentages of birders, 
campers, hikers, and other recreationists must be at least as high. Public 
lands also help buffer us against the uncertainties of the future. Only public 
lands, for instance, spread unbroken over great enough distances to offer the 
connectedness that many plants and animals will require to adapt, to the extent 
possible, to a warming climate. Moreover, as the struggle to wean the economy 
away from fossil fuels continues, only public lands, with their unified federal 
ownership, are susceptible to the kind of sweeping shift in national energy 
policy necessary to “keep it in the ground”.

For all these reasons, the future of the nation’s 640m acres of public lands 
deserves a more prominent place in our national discourse. The patterns of the 
past, emphasizing extractive, industrial uses of those lands, have long been in 
decline. Analternate path <http://www.towardanaturalforest.com/> focused on 
restoration and biodiversity conservation has instead steadily gained traction, 
and indeed, its priorities – which include making room for endangered species – 
have inspired many of the objections of the Malheur occupiers.

Two things are certain: when large acreages of public domain are transferred 
to the states, significant portions of them end up beingsold off 
<http://www.eenews.net/greenwire/2016/05/05/stories/1060036778> to private 
interests. That creates a new kind of inequality that, in the natural world, 
parallels this era’s growing economic gap between rich and poor. It is an 
inequality of access to big, wild lands and to the ineffable something that 
Wyoming writer Gretel Ehrlich called the “solace of open spaces” and 
Pulitzer-winning novelist Wallace Stegner termed “the native home of hope”.

Thanks to the great western commons, which the Bundys and their legislative 
champions would like to dismantle, all Americans still enjoy the freedom to 
roam on some of the most spectacular lands on the planet. That access and that 
connection have been part of the American experience from Plymouth Rock through 
the westward migration to the present day. It is part of what makes us 
Americans.

The Depression-era folksinger Woody Guthrie understood the issues attending 
the privatization of common land. He offered his opinion of them in the least 
sung verse of his most famous song:

“There was a big high wall there that tried to stop me

Sign was painted, said: “Private Property”

But on the back side it didn’t say nothing –

This land was made for you and me.”

This piece was first published on TomDispatch.com <http://www.tomdispatch.com/>
. William deBuys is the author of eight books, the most recent of which isThe 
Last Unicorn: A Search for One of Earth’s Rarest Creatures 
<http://www.amazon.com/dp/0316232866/ref=nosim/?tag=tomdispatch-20>. Follow 
TomDispatch onTwitter <https://twitter.com/TomDispatch>.
 