
Does the Battle of Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/06/battle-of-britain> still mean as 
much to kids who are 10 or 12 as it did to me when I was that age? The answer 
to a related question – does it mean as much to me as it did back then? – is a 
resounding yes.

So when I saw a plate featuring a Spitfire at one of the stalls on Golborne 
Road in west London – barely a stall, more like a car boot sale minus the cars 
– the morning’s grocery shopping was suddenly illuminated by the thrill of 
discovery. This was last June, the Friday before the Brexit vote. But that day, 
Golborne market, just off the more famous Portobello, was like a poster for the 
multicultural London beloved by visitors and residents alike.

On the plate, the Spitfire is coming in low over our green and pleasant land, 
watched by two boys clambering over a fence. This is an England that was in the 
process of disappearing before I was the age of these lads, but it is precisely 
the idea of England that I grew up with. It’s as perfect, in its way, as 
Golborne: an Arcadian England all the more idyllic for being under threat from 
the Luftwaffe.

I have reached the age where, like my dad before me, I am shocked by how 
expensive everything is. But when I asked the price of this limited-edition 
Royal Doulton plate it was just three quid, less than a cappuccino – our 
contemporary way of estimating the value of what Harold Wilson called the“pound 
in your pocket” 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/november/19/newsid_3208000/3208396.stm?first=17>
. It was so cheap that the guy running the stall didn’t have enough change. Not 
to worry, he said, pay me later.

When I paid him after lunch at the Moroccan soup place – where a bowl of 
lentils cost £2.50 – I was so tipsy with the accumulated effect of all the 
money I’d not spent that I splashed out on an extra plate commemorating another 
heroic component of our war effort and national identity: Lancasters on their 
way tobounce bombs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2003/may/06/artsfeatures> against the 
Möhne dam.

The plate came in a repurposed Cadbury Roses box, but with the original 
information sheet explaining that it was based on apainting by Michael Turner 
<http://www.militaryartcompany.com/military_art.php?ProdID=5264>. I’d never 
heard of him, but any painting of Second World War aircraft means more to me 
somehow than the finest crucifixion. The boys are clambering over a no entry 
sign. Is access restricted because this is the perimeter of an RAF base? Or 
because it is private land? The latter explanation gives the scene added art 
historical resonance. InWays of Seeing, John Berger took Gainsborough’s 
painting of Mr and Mrs Andrews in the splendour of their gardens and slapped a 
“Trespassers Keep Out” sign on the tree behind them.

Churchill said of the Battle of Britain that if the British empire lasted a 
thousand years this would be our finest hour. But the price of victory in the 
Second World War was to hasten the demise of the empire and usher in a Labour 
government and the setting up of the welfare state.

If the plate-painting brought to mind a defaced Gainsborough, it could itself 
beBanksified 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/28/what-should-banksy-do-next-ideas-for-street-artist>
 in a more contemporary way. How easily those kids could be changed into 
migrants, asylum seekers or refugees trying to clamber over our borders and 
take advantage of the very benefits for which we (the few) had paid so much, 
for so many (or some such)? Like that, the plate would be an advert for Brexit, 
for ensuring that our island fortress remained impregnable.

The migrants wanted to get in for all this but – surely this would be a 
question on any kind of citizenship quiz – would they be able to recognise the 
aircraft depicted on the plate? Well, the Poles would, because145 of their 
countrymen served as pilots in the Battle of Britain 
<http://www.iwm.org.uk/history/the-polish-pilots-who-flew-in-the-battle-of-britain>
. And quite a few more might have pointed out that theEuropean Union 
<https://europa.eu/european-union/about-eu/history/1945-1959_en> was one of the 
good things to have arisen from the deep ashes of the Second World War, a guard 
against such a thing happening again.

The following week, we voted for Brexit – not our finest hour – and then, in 
August, I did my own private Brexit and flew back to my home in America. If 
anything, eating breakfast off that plate in California – seeing the Spitfire 
emerge unscathed through an ack-ack of crumbs in the marmalade sunrise – was a 
bigger source of pleasure than it had been in London. It was a Rupert 
Brooke-type thing, knowing that there was some portion of a foreign dishwasher 
that was forever England.

Then one evening, as my wife loaded that dishwasher (usually my job in the 
domestic Dunkirk of ever-retreating masculinity) she noticed a message on the 
underside of the Spitfire plate: “Art object, precious metal pigments may be 
toxic. Do not use for eating or serving food.” I knew it was a commemorative 
plate but I didn’t think this meant it was to be used exclusively for 
decoration and display. Its dam busting twin was even more explicit: “Plate may 
poison food.”

Unfortunately, they don’t really go with the other art objects on our walls 
so, like rich collectors, we now keep these trophies out of sight in a 
cupboard. In practical terms, they’re worthless. They might still turn out to 
be good investments but I doubt it. For now, they’re stored away, toxic little 
parables in a box.

Geoff Dyer’s latest book, White Sands, is published by Canongate
 