
A newly composed piece of choral music created in honour of Jo Cox has been 
sung in public for the first time, being premiered at the annual Christmas 
concert by a choir of MPs, peers and parliamentary staff.This Light of Reason 
<http://www.nicholasoneill.com/ThisLightOfReason.pdf>, from a John Donne 
sermon, was composed byNicholas O’Neill <http://www.nicholasoneill.com/>, who 
has worked with theParliament Choir <http://www.parliamentchoir.org.uk/welcome> 
for more than a decade.

The choir sang the piece in public for the first time as part of its Christmas 
concert 
<http://www.parliamentchoir.org.uk/sites/parliamentchoir.org.uk/files/Parliamentary%20Choir%20Christmas%202016%20Flyer_DIGITAL.pdf>
 at the St John’s Smith Square church near parliament on Wednesday evening.

O’Neill told the Guardian he was approached by an MP in July, the month after 
Cox was murdered by a rightwing terrorist. The MP, a member of the choir, 
wanted to commission a piece of music anonymously in honour of Cox. “They 
initially asked for an elegy or a lament, something like that,” O’Neill. “I 
said I felt the piece should be more positive than that.”

The final piece is based around Donne’s words, beginning: “If thou canst take 
this light of reason, and light thee a little candle,” and concluding, “That 
light shall never go out, nor the works of darkness prevail upon thee.”

O’Neill said: “It begins with the sopranos, then it passes to the altos, and 
then to other voices as well. It’s the idea that it’s a little bit like a 
candle that’s passed from one person to another, and eventually it takes over 
the whole choir. There’s a bit towards the end when it’s almost extinguished, 
but then it comes out again.”


The composer sent the text to Cox’s widower, Brendan, for his approval, he 
said. “Quite a few pieces composers are asked to write are in memory of people, 
but what makes this one different in particular is that so many of the members 
of the choir knew and worked closely with Jo,” he explained.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthis-light-of-reason-choral-work-for-jo-cox-sung-in-westminster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbff61fd0e39f55c04dc913183acf93d927dca622%2F0_113_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20Light%20of%20Reason%3A%20choral%20work%20for%20Jo%20Cox%20sung%20in%20Westminster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthis-light-of-reason-choral-work-for-jo-cox-sung-in-westminster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20Light%20of%20Reason%3A%20choral%20work%20for%20Jo%20Cox%20sung%20in%20Westminster&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthis-light-of-reason-choral-work-for-jo-cox-sung-in-westminster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbff61fd0e39f55c04dc913183acf93d927dca622%2F0_113_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 The Parliament Choir, with the Royal Air Force Salon Orchestra, perform carols 
dedicated to Jo Cox at St John’s Smith Square in London on Wednesday. 
Photograph: Frantzesco Kangaris/for the Guardian 
Of the rehearsals, O’Neill said: “As we got more and more into it, and as I 
explained what the music represented, you could see that it was having a really 
strong emotional impact. I’ve seen people come away from it very emotional 
indeed.”


Jeremy Lefroy, a Conservative MP who sings in the choir, said he liked the new 
composition: “I like it. I sang it for the first time on Monday and I felt it’s 
a very appropriate text. I like Nicholas’s music anyway, and it’s a good piece 
of his music. I think hopefully that Jo’s family will appreciate it, and I 
think Jo would have appreciated it as well.”

Separately, some members of the Parliament Choir have joined a collection of 
rock musiciansto record a version the Rolling Stones’ song 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/13/jo-cox-charity-single-politicians-pop-stars-rolling-stones-kt-tunstall-david-gray>
 You Can’t Always Get What You Want as a charity Christmas single.


The choir, which will sing in Berlin next week, and is performing at the Royal 
Festival Hall in 2017, has become “extremely good” over its 15 years of 
existence, O’Neill said. “It started off as a pretty ragtag group of people 
coming for a sing on a Monday night,” he said. “But we treat them as any other 
choir. I think they enjoy those two hours a week when they’re away from 
parliamentary divisions.


“People always say that music crosses political and religious divisions, and 
social divides. We see it happening every week on a Monday night in parliament 
where people who have been entirely at loggerheads through the day come and sit 
next to each other and literally sing from the same hymn sheet.”


This Light of Reason

If thou canst take this light of reason, and light thee a little candle, 

If thou canst find thy Saviour in a manger in his humiliation, and bless God 
for that beginning,

If thou canst find him flying into Egypt, and accompany him in a persecution, 

If thou canst follow him into the garden, and gather up some of his precious 
blood and sweat,

If thou canst follow him to his scourging, and to his crucifying; 

If thou canst turn this little light inward and discern where thy corruptions 
are,

Thou shalt never envy the lustre and glory of the great lights of worldly men –

Yet shalt thou see that thou by thy light hast gathered pearl and amber, 

That that light shall never go out, nor the works of darkness prevail upon 
thee.
 