
'Do you guys want soup? It's very good – vegetable. I just finished making it 
..." It's not the first thing you expect to hear when meeting a cutting-edge 
collector of American contemporary art, but there's something maternal and 
unpretentious about Mera Rubell, co-director of the Rubell Family Collection.

I accept, partly to calm my nerves. I've just ridden here on a Vespa – a cool 
powder-blue one, no less – with Roam Rides, which offers art tours of Miami by 
Vespa.

There are numerous art galleries and museums in the city, and 2013 will see 
the opening of the Miami Art Museum (miamiartmuseum.org 
<http://www.miamiartmuseum.org/>), designed by Herzog and de Meuron (of Beijing 
Olympics fame). Next month it will host the 10th Art Basel Miami Beach (1-4 
December,artbasel.com <http://www.artbasel.com/>).

The Vespa tour is a brilliant way to explore the city's less obvious art 
scene. Our guide and instructor for the morning is Kit Sullivan, an amateur 
artist and graffiti fan who aims to show guests off-the-radar galleries and 
street art projects. The Rubell rarely appears on tourist maps, has very little 
marketing and attracts just 200 people a week, but it is a personal collection, 
where the owners often act as guides.

The building was once a holding facility for the Drug Enforcement 
Administration (storing tonnes of seized cocaine and cash). It's accessed by a 
huge, caged doorway. Kit points out bullet holes in the wall.

Mera and her husband Donald began their influential collection in the 1960s. 
It has now grown to almost 6,500 pieces, with 200 on loan across the world. "We 
were lucky, I guess," smiles Mera. "We had an eye for it. We bought pieces from 
Francesco Clemente, Keith Haring, and Jean-Michel Basquiat long before anyone 
had heard of them."

As we wander round the gallery I'm drawn to some privately commissioned 
Sterling Ruby canvases. With dark nods to American abstract expressionism, 
Russian constructivism, graffiti and tribal markings, they're powerful and 
overwhelming. It's hard to believe the beach is just minutes away.

Then we're on the road again. Riding on Miami's wide open roads is pleasurably 
sedate, and with the sun on my back I gain confidence and speed. Over the 
engine noise Kit shouts: "I'm going to take you somewhere we're really proud of 
in Miami. A few years ago, this area was in decline but wait until you see it. 
We've got something really cool going on."

Wynwood Walls, a once-derelict warehouse district, is being reborn as an arts 
neighbourhood. Vast grey walls are being transformed by international street 
artists including Shepard Fairey (the name behind those iconic2008 Obama images 
<http://obeygiant.com/headlines/obama>), Os Gemeos <http://osgemeos.com.br> 
from Brazil, Futura from New York andLady Aiko 
<https://www.ladyaiko.com/blog/?cat=25> of Japan. Musicians, painters, actors 
and poets are all setting up studios here.
 Graffiti art by Shepard Fairey at Wynwood Walls. Photograph: Sareda Dirir 
On each corner, a piece of street art is taking shape. The artists don't mind 
us taking photographs but many refuse to speak to visitors and cover their 
faces. Hawaiian-born Estria, a pioneer of street art and a respected social 
historian, is more approachable: "A lot of my friends were b-boys and I used to 
go watch them breakdancing. I kind of fell into it. With hip-hop arts, it's all 
connected." 

He's too modest to mention the Estria Foundation (estria.org 
<http://www.estria.org/>), set up with Jeremy LaTrasse, co-founder of Twitter. 
The organisation was conceived to effect "social change through art" by 
fundraising and art events.

As he paints, he talks me through some terminology. A "bomb" is an illegal 
work, "thrown up" fast, often at night. "Slashing" (when an artist "throws up" 
his tag over a legal piece) is one of the most disrespectful things that can 
happen in graffiti.

On the way back to the hotel I gawp at the stunning art deco facades of Ocean 
Drive, and am keen to learn more about the city's architecture. So I book a 
MiMo (Miami Modernist) tour with Charles J Kropke, an architectural historian 
who has written a book on MiMo (between overseeing 20 companies and his 
single-parent family of eight adopted kids).

We will be touring the classics of the future, not this time by Vespa, but 
like rap-stars – in a limousine with drinks cabinet, leather seats, tinted 
windows and mirrored ceilings.

Our first stop is the International Inn <http://www.innunderbay.com/> on the 
Miami Beach side of 79th Street Causeway. In the unrestored 1956 building, 
Charles leads us to a shimmering pool: "Just look at those blue opaque tiles. I 
can see this as an incredible boutique hotel – the way those doors all open on 
to the pool, that crisp, easy symmetry. It's so Miami."

The Formica counter is a little chipped, but I can picture a vacationing Don 
Draper in the vintage lounge chair, louchely raising a Martini glass through 
swirls of cigarette smoke.

Down the road is another off-beat jewel, the New Yorker 
<http://www.hotelnewyorkermiami.com/> hotel on Biscayne Boulevard, with pastel 
bath suites and vintage ceiling fans in every room. "The owners spent 18 months 
sourcing the original-font nameplates for the bedroom doors," says the 
receptionist.

We take in motels, garages, diners, ice-cream parlours. The tour is so new 
that one or two of the owners seem pleasantly surprised to see us.

The Biltmore Hotel <http://www.biltmorehotel.com> is not strictly MiMo, but we 
make an exception. The 1920s Spanish Revivalist resort with its Moorish tower 
and sweeping driveway oozes Miami glamour. The enormous, U-shaped pool was 
groundbreaking in its day and hosted beauty pageants and synchronised swimming 
displays. We learn that Johnny Weissmuller worked here as a lifeguard and had a 
penchant for streaking on the job.

There's one more building to see – the Pan Am terminal at Dinner Key, one of 
the earliest international seaplane airports and a reminder of the glamour of 
the golden years of aviation, portrayed in the new TV series Pan Am, which 
started on BBC2 this week. The clattering heels have long fallen silent but the 
magnificent winged clock stands as a timely reminder of one of Miami's 
brightest eras.

• The Rubell Family Collection's American Exuberance exhibition runs from 30 
November until July 2012 (rfc.museum). Street art scooter tours cost $75pp plus 
$50 for a two-person scooter (+1 888 760 7626,roamrides.com 
<http://www.roamrides.com>). Charles J Kropke's tailormade architecture tours 
from $65-$85pp (+1 305 774 9019,dragonflyexpeditions.com 
<http://dragonflyexpeditions.com>). KLM (klm.com <http://www.klm.com>) flies 
Heathrow-Miami from £401 return. The Morgan Mondrian (+1 305 514 1500,
mondrian-miami.com <http://www.mondrian-miami.com/en-us/#/home/>), on South 
Beach has doubles from $270. Doubles at the New Yorker (hotelnewyorkermiami.com 
<http://www.hotelnewyorkermiami.com/>) from $125 
 