
A sudden drop in temperature in Melbourne on Monday evening from peaks of 35C 
brought with it severe thunderstorms andtriggered a mass asthma event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/22/melbourne-hit-by-thunderstorm-and-asthma-spike-after-day-of-extreme-heat>
 that left hospitals struggling to treat 8,500 patients.

There is a small group of researchers around the world working to understand 
the phenomenon known as “thunderstorm asthma”, which although rare, can have 
devastating consequences.Climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/scienceofclimatechange>, they say, may be 
where part of the blame lies.


On Sunday 20 people remained in hospitals across Victoria, struggling with 
respiratory and related conditions, while four remained in critical condition. 
At leastsix people are known to have died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/27/thunderstorm-asthma-claims-fifth-life-in-melbourne-with-six-in-intensive-care>
 after their asthma was triggered during the thunderstorm, the health 
department confirmed over the weekend.

Thunderstorm asthma claims fifth life in Melbourne, with six in intensive care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/27/thunderstorm-asthma-claims-fifth-life-in-melbourne-with-six-in-intensive-care>
A major, state-wide investigation into the response of emergency services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/23/thunderstorm-asthma-deaths-to-be-investigated-by-health-authorities>
 to the event has been ordered.

Paramedics did the best they could to respond to an unprecedented 1,900 
emergency calls in five hours on the evening of 21 November but were unable to 
reach everyone in a reasonable time. Ambulances made constant trips to 
emergency departments that were already overwhelmed as hundreds of patients 
streamed in under their own steam.


The acting general secretary of Ambulance Employees Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/australia>, Danny Hill, says it would have 
been a traumatising night for paramedics.

“For anyone who worked that night, from staff on the ground to senior 
management, they regarded it as the busiest night they ever worked in their 
whole careers,” he says.

“Very few crews got fed. They worked 14 hours straight. Everyone worked 
together, worked hard, and stepped up. There was about 30 people who were so 
severely ill that they had to be taken straight into intensive care. So you’re 
talking an event equivalent to a bushfire where people are severely burned, or 
a terrorist attack where people are critically injured.

“That’s the level of chaos our crews dealt with on Monday night.”

Asthma patients can be some of the most difficult for paramedics to respond 
to. They deteriorate very quickly, and severe cases require more than the 
immediate treatment a paramedic can provide, including continuous days of 
intravenous drugs and ventilation. Many, Hill says, went into cardiac arrest.

Kathy Bowlen from St Vincent’s hospital says the emergency department there 
had considered opening a temporary emergency department in the foyer of the 
hospital to cope with the demand.

While not the first case of thunderstorm asthma in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne>, it was the most deadly 
and the severe. What researchers don’t know is why sometimes a combination of 
high pollen counts and thunderstorms leads to a mass asthma event, while other 
times, those two factors combined have little impact on people’s respiratory 
health at all. What other factors might be playing a part?

What is known is that grass pollen is usually too big to get into the lungs to 
cause asthma, and instead causes a reaction in the superficial respiratory 
systems of those with pollen sensitivity: a hay fever reaction such as a runny 
nose, sore throat and itchy eyes are more common.

But when a thunderstorm occurs, pollen which had settled during the day can be 
swept back into the air and the moisture in those winds combined with wind 
power causes the pollen to rupture into smaller pieces, between 0.5mm and 2.5mm 
in diameter. Those small fragments are then able to penetrate the superficial 
respiratory system and get into the lungs, triggering asthma and other serious 
respiratory responses.

Thunderstorm asthma: how seasonal weather can affect human health
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/24/melbourne-suffers-most-lethal-episode-of-thunderstorm-asthma>
Gennaro D’Amato is a professor of respiratory medicine in Italy and chairman 
of the World Allergy Organisation’s climate change, biodiversity and allergy 
committee. He is the world expert on thunderstorm asthma and one ofthe most 
published 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/cea.12709/abstract;jsessionid=F20CAFB122DBCC32ACC168B467D1DCD6.f04t02?systemMessage=Wiley+Online+Library+will+be+unavailable+on+Saturday+26th+November+2016+from+07%3A00-11%3A00+GMT+%2F+02%3A00-06%3A00+EST+%2F+15%3A00-19%3A00+SGT+for+essential+maintenance.++Apologies+for+the+inconvenience.>
 authors on the phenomenon in the scientific literature.

He has been monitoring thunderstorm asthma events throughout the world and 
says they have also been seen in London in Britain, Naples in Italy, and Wagga 
Wagga in New South Wales.

A sudden and extreme asthma outbreak that occurred in London in June 1994 
coincided with a heavy thunderstorm, D’Amato says. In the space of just 30 
hours, 640 patients with asthma or other airway diseases attended London 
hospitals, nearly 10 times the usual number. For 283 patients, the storm 
triggered their first known attack of asthma. And for every patient that did 
seek help, many more suffered at home.

“Fortunately, even though it can induce severe asthma, outbreaks associated 
with thunderstorms are neither frequent nor responsible for a high number of 
disease exacerbations,” D’Amato tells Guardian Australia.

“However, the mechanisms involved in the release of allergens from pollens 
during thunderstorm should be known so that patients can receive information 
about the risk of an asthma attack, including in those usually only affected by 
seasonal allergic rhinitis [hay fever].”

The frequency of thunderstorms has recently increased in some geographical 
areas, he says, particularly in temperate and subtropical climates. Research 
has shown that thunderstorms and their destructive winds are expected to become 
more severe as the climate changes.

D’Amato has found a number of characteristics common to all the asthma 
epidemics. Their occurrence is closely linked to thunderstorms, limited to late 
spring and summer when there are high levels of airborne pollen grains, and has 
an onset close to the arrival of the thunderstorm and to major rises in the 
concentration of pollen grains. People with hay fever and asthma and who stay 
indoors with windows closed during the thunderstorm are unaffected.

Those not undergoing asthma treatment are at major risk, his research has 
found. In theMelbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/melbourne> epidemic 
on Monday, between 20% and 40% of those affected had never had asthma before, 
and so would not have been undergoing treatment.

Associate Prof Paul Beggs, an environmental health scientist with Macquarie 
University in Sydney, is best known for his research on climate change and its 
impact on allergens such as pollen.

Some research has found that the potency of pollen grains had been increasing, 
he says. Anthropogenic climate change through the release of carbon dioxide 
into the atmosphere could be responsible for this growing pollen potency.

Between 20 and 40% of those affected had never had asthma before, and so would 
not have been undergoing treatment

“Plants use carbon dioxide in photosynthesis,” he says. “It’s like if you 
change your diet, there are changes in your body. So plants use carbon dioxide 
through photosynthesis, and if you change the concentration of carbon dioxide 
in the atmosphere then their growth conditions are changing.”

“A few smart scientists thought to put these highly allergenic plants into a 
glass house where we can control all the conditions, from the temperature to 
light, water and levels of carbon dioxide.”

What they found, he says, is increasing the amount of carbon dioxide leads to 
a whole range of changes in the plants, including more pollen and more potent 
pollen.

“All of these thing are happening in the background: climate change, 
increasing pollen potency, and they all mean a thunderstorm asthma episode is 
more likely than it was 20 years ago.”

Beggs is a researcher with the AusPollen Partnership 
<http://www.pollenforecast.com.au/index.php>, a multicentre cross-disciplinary 
team of investigators including eminent allergy physicians and scientists 
looking at pollen aerobiology and climatology. Their work is essential given 
Australia is the fourth worst country for allergic hay fever and asthma.

The principal investigator on that team, Associate Prof Janet Davies, says 
another factor researchers believe may trigger asthma is a sudden temperature 
change – which occurred in Melbourne on Monday as the temperature fell rapidly 
from 35C into the low 20s. But much more research and data is needed to 
understand the phenomenon, she says.

“The AusPollen Partnership is encouraging people to tell us about their 
symptoms and triggers, and free app downloads allow people to do this daily if 
they want to,” she says.

“That will help us understand regional patterns and, by integrating that data 
with geo-spacial data, will help us understand who is at greater risk and the 
threshold for triggering a higher risk.”

The difficulty for researchers is that pollen monitoring, though extensive in 
Melbourne, does not go back far enough to help them develop a clear picture of 
all the factors triggering thunderstorm asthma. This would allow them to issue 
alerts when they could see a perfect storm of risk factors about to collide.

But Associate Prof Ed Newbigin from the school of biosciences at the 
University of Melbourne says thunderstorm asthma is going to be “a hard thing 
to get a handle on” because of the lack of data.

“The big question is why sometimes high pollen counts combined with 
thunderstorms sometimes trigger these asthma events and sometimes don’t,” he 
says.

“We need to understand what other factors work together if we want to reduce 
thunderstorm asthma. Because in Melbourne, high pollen counts and thunderstorms 
often coincide. But most of the time when they do, nothing happens.”
 