
The story of Kathleen Ferrier’s life and untimely death at only 41 is 
well-known. Her extraordinary voice is regularly heard on the radio and on 
recordings that still sell in their thousands. There areawards 
<https://ferrierawards.org.uk/>, bursaries 
<http://www.kathleenferrier.org.uk/index.php/bursary> and a competition 
<https://ferrierawards.org.uk/competition-entry/> bearing her name. I got to 
know her music while I was a student at music college, and eager to know more, 
I turned to a book of herLetters and Diaries 
<https://boydellandbrewer.com/letters-and-diaries-of-kathleen-ferrier.html>. As 
soon as I read the first letter, I knew that an audience should meet this 
remarkable woman – one of our greatest ever contraltos – and hear her story, in 
her own words.

Unconventionally for the 1940s, Kathleen came to professional singing 
relatively late. Married at 23, she divorced her husband, a bank manager in 
Silloth, Cumbria, and moved to London in the middle of the second world war, 
unsure if she would be able to pay the rent. But she forged a career and, as a 
single woman, travelled the UK, Europe and the US, often alone and paying her 
own way. It is this brave, passionate woman that I wanted an audience to meet 
and, with director and writer Chris Baldwin, devised my one-woman play, 
Whattalife! using only Ferrier’s own words taken from her letters, diaries and 
verbatim accounts.

Ferrier’s witty and honest letters to her sister Winn, her father “Pop”, her 
close friends and her agent Mr Tillett reveal the flesh-and-blood woman behind 
her blossoming international career. Even her first surviving letter, written 
on 2 November 1940, catches vividly the drama of her life and the realities of 
wartime Britain. “We had ages to wait for the train eventually, so from sheer 
desperation we explored Tullie House and the reading room, and by chance saw 
that the Sadler’s Wells opera company were at Keswick that week, and what an 
opportunity! I have never seen a real, live opera, have you? So we brooded and 
we counted our petrol coupons and decided we’d risk it and coast down the hills 
and push John Tomas [her car] up the hills. Anything to see Marriage of Figaro.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fkathleen-ferrier-in-her-own-words-lucy-stevens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc836ff8f54734a7a0155e0edb8ddfe2ab9f3c0c%2F754_0_3744_3744%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tidemarks%2C%20turtles%20and%20touring%3A%20Kathleen%20Ferrier%20in%20her%20own%20words&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fkathleen-ferrier-in-her-own-words-lucy-stevens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tidemarks%2C%20turtles%20and%20touring%3A%20Kathleen%20Ferrier%20in%20her%20own%20words&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fmusicblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fkathleen-ferrier-in-her-own-words-lucy-stevens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc836ff8f54734a7a0155e0edb8ddfe2ab9f3c0c%2F754_0_3744_3744%2F3744.jpg>
 Lucy Stevens as Kathleen Ferrier in Whattalife! Photograph: Geoff Broadway 
Later, the letters catalogue the life of a busy, committed singer, struggling 
at times with the workload and the conditions of endless touring. I was 
constantly struck by her friendly, conversational tone and groundedness. Her 
letters are full of humour and idiosyncratic words and phrases – “pickled tink” 
and “Whattalife!”, and her stories are all garnished with a punchline.

Like Ferrier, I’m a contralto, and woven through the piece are short extracts 
from her repertoire, which follow the chronology of Kathleen’s professional 
journey from her debut as a soloist in Messiah to her final performance – in 
Orpheus at Convent Garden in 1953. I don’t try to mimic Ferrier – I use my own 
singing voice, but I do use her vowel sounds. My singing teacher, the late 
Gerald Wragg, head of opera at the Royal Welsh College, was sceptical that this 
could work. As a young man, he had seen Ferrier perform live and could not 
imagine someone playing her on stage. So I asked him to play on the piano from 
Elgar’s The Dream of Gerontius, while I spoke text from a draft of Whattalife! 
over it, singing only the last phrase. He had a tear rolling down his cheek 
when we finished. It was then I knew not only could I perform the piece but it 
was a powerful device for telling Kathleen’s story.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DypePP1ENcmw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DypePP1ENcmw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DypePP1ENcmw&media=>
Hear Kathleen Ferrier sing What Is Life and Art Thou Troubled 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ypePP1ENcmw>. 
The play follows life’s highs “… I’m fit as a flea … and haven’t had a 
cigarette since I left the boat – in fact I’m too bloody good to live (only I 
hope no one’s listening, ’cos I like it just the same!)” and lows: “So I’m 
unhappy at the moment and you would probably say it was good for my art – but 
if this is art, then I hate it – I hate music, I hate my own voice, I hate 
people and I hate America! There!! I’m sorry – it’s just tiredness … am going 
to have a bath and leave a tidemark just to get my money’s-worth …”.

Towards the end of her life, in 1952, she was forced to cancel major 
engagements due to ill health and took to gardening. One biographer, Maurice 
Leonard, tells the story that one day, as she gardened in Hampstead, in a surge 
of high spirits she burst into a thunderous rendition of Handel’s Like as the 
Lovelorn Turtle. This has been incorporated into the play, although we had to 
go to the British Library to find the music.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuOmBX2ZdIvw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuOmBX2ZdIvw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuOmBX2ZdIvw&media=>
Hear Kathleen Ferrier sing Like as the Lovelorn Turtle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uOmBX2ZdIvw>. 
Ferrier died in 1953. Her sister Winifred lived until 1995 and protected 
Kathleen’s legacy with great care. Maybe she was afraid that Kath’s humour and 
love of risky limericks might somehow undermine the power of her recordings. 
But for me it enhances them. Kathleen wasn’t trained for the stage and said she 
didn’t feel comfortable in opera, limiting her repertoire to Britten’s Rape of 
Lucretia and Gluck’s Orfeo. But she communicated from her heart and gave her 
audience a window into her strength, passion and vulnerability.

In Vienna, while recording Mahler’s Um Mitternacht with Bruno Walter, Kathleen 
collapsed with cancer-linked exhaustion, before the last take. She picked 
herself up and in the recording that followed we can hear the determination in 
her voice, every word of the text delivered with a depth that is almost 
overwhelming: “At midnight I fought the battle, of your passion, o humankind; I 
could not resolve it with my strength at midnight.”

• Kathleen Ferrier: Whattalife! is performed by Lucy Stevens and Elizabeth 
Marcus atMilton Court Concert Hall, London 
<http://www.kathleenferrierwhattalife.com/> on 30 September.
 