
Comic operas frequently end with the promise of a wedding; tragedies often 
explore what happens when the honeymoon is over. Operatic marriages aren’t 
always happy, and this week’s choice of uploads deals with rifts, breakdowns 
and domestic nightmares. All five operas, significantly perhaps, were first 
performed within a relatively short period – 1887 to 1925 – when the nature of 
marriage as an institution was under scrutiny right across the arts: think of 
the plays of Ibsen, Strindberg, Chekhov and Shaw, and the fiction of Henry 
James (rememberThe Golden Bowl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/26/100-best-novels-the-golden-bowl-henry-james>
), Proust and DH Lawrence.

Verdi: Otello 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do4UKtREV6SQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do4UKtREV6SQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Do4UKtREV6SQ&media=>
Otello is extraordinarily well served on YouTube. There are a considerable 
number of versions out there, many of them exceptionally fine: choosing one 
isn’t easy. The upload above is the famous RAI telecast from La Scala in 1976, 
whenCarlos Kleiber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/mar/08/carlos-kleiber-myth-revealed>
 conducted Plácido Domingo in a production byFranco Zeffirelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/may/04/theatre.artsfeatures>. This is 
probably the best, I think, of Domingo’s several extant performances, both 
video and audio, in the title role: there’s an impulsive sensuality here and a 
heady glamour that make him unforgettable. Kleiber’s interpretation, remarkable 
for its fire and detail, was considered by many to be the finest sinceToscanini 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gL49AbvSDrA>. Mirella Freni 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YF-C49K-BuI> is the ravishing Desdemona, Piero 
Cappuccilli <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U2J5LJM5TCM> the fine, if 
occasionally melodramatic Iago.

For another classic, albeit very different lineup, try Alberto Erede’s 1959 
Tokyo performance. Erede was no Kleiber, but the recording does allow us to 
hear and see the exceptional pairing ofMario del Monaco 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kgTPgl0U6hk>’s Otello with the great Tito Gobbi 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8S7jP-UeFXE>’s Iago: you can watch it here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TK5vng6V1aI>. And, for a radical theatrical 
rethink, tryWilly Decker’s 2006 Barcelona production 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OQmeoo0zmk8>, with José Cura 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NgHExHWJl9k> compelling in the title role and 
an outstanding Iago fromLado Ataneli 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a6jUdMYRLck>.

Puccini: Madama Butterfly
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdhGZMPMJuTg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdhGZMPMJuTg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdhGZMPMJuTg&media=>
Some persist in seeing Madama Butterfly 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/madama-butterfly?customid=781>
 as a Romantic work, when in fact it deals, often unsparingly, with a man who 
buys a teenage bride in catastrophic ignorance of the emotional consequences, 
all of it set against a background of US expansion and exploitation.Frédéric 
Mitterand <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fr%C3%A9d%C3%A9ric_Mitterrand>’s film 
of the opera, released in 1995, subtly reminds us of the underlying issues in 
its examination of the clash of early 20th century attitudes between a 
half-westernised Japan and a US that saw the world very much as its exotic 
playground. We’re conscious, at times of the almost symbiotic relationship 
between the two countries. Notice howJing Ma Fan <http://fanjingma.com/>’s 
Goro, who presides over the initial transaction, returns at the end to oversee 
Pinkerton’s adoption of his son by Butterfly: there’s a system in place on both 
sides, we realise, to deal with the offspring, wanted or otherwise, of such 
colonialist philandering. Mitterand gets fine, nicely understated performances 
from his two leads, American tenorRichard Troxell <http://richardtroxell.tv/> 
as Pinkerton and Chinese sopranoYing Huang <http://www.yinghuang.com/> as 
Butterfly. She really does look quite shockingly young at the start, and the 
growing attraction between them, of which neither is aware of the implications, 
is quite beautifully done. The subsequent spiral into tragedy is handled with 
admirable restraint, and is all the more powerful for its total lack of 
sentimentality.

Janáček: Katya Kabanova 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAxKBnaZN-Ts&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAxKBnaZN-Ts>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAxKBnaZN-Ts&media=>
Katya Kabanova 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/history/stories/synopsis.aspx?customid=16>’s 
tragedy is that she attempts to escape from a loveless arranged marriage 
through an affair with an attractive but weak man who ultimately is unable to 
save her. Janáček’s methodology, with its vocal lines based on speech patterns 
and its repetition of fragmentary rhythmic figurations, is usually seen as 
antithetical to Puccini’s lyricism. Yet Janáček also saw his opera as a 
response to Madame Butterfly, and when you listen to the entrance music for 
both heroines – Katya at 11:03, Butterfly at 15:17 on the previous upload – the 
similarities are unmistakable. The opera’s repressive atmosphere is 
well-maintained inFrançois Rochais <http://www.frochaix.ch/>’s 1988 Geneva 
production: note the particularly chilling end, in which Katya’s suicide is 
effectively overseen by the community that has dared to judge her.Ellen Shade 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ellen_Shade> is the agonised Katya, slowly losing 
her reason under pressure from her appalling mother-in-law, Kabanicha, played 
by the great Czech mezzoEva Randová <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GpDAilymlfg>
.Christian Thielemann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/jan/04/artsfeatures1>, a noted 
Janáček interpreter early in his career, is the conductor.

Bartók: Bluebeard’s Castle
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFSFFR9lSVJc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFSFFR9lSVJc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFSFFR9lSVJc&media=>
This is the great Michael Powell 
<http://www.screenonline.org.uk/people/id/447167/>’s film of Bartók 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/54394/Bela-Bartok>’s two-hander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2004/aug/28/classicalmusicandopera.stage>, 
made for German television in 1963, and something of a rarity. The project was 
the brainchild of the American bass-baritoneNorman Foster 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norman_Foster_%28bass%29>, who produced the film 
in addition to singing Bluebeard. Powell, whose career was at that point at a 
low ebb, was drafted in comparatively late in the day, it would seem, by the 
designer, and one of his regular collaborators,Hein Heckroth 
<http://www.powell-pressburger.org/Reviews/Hein/Hein01.html>.

As one might expect from the co-director, with Emeric Pressburger, of Black 
Narcissus <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=utlOWO4Lqug> (which Heckroth also 
designed) and the director ofPeeping Tom 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7GItFNbLVCs>, this drags us kicking and 
screaming into the dark side of the human psyche and doesn’t let go. It shows 
its age in places: there are echoes of contemporary horror films, while 
Heckroth’s designs swerve close in places toWieland Wagner 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wieland_Wagner>’s work of the same period. But 
where most stage productions leave the contents of the castle to the audience’s 
imagination, Powell takes us unsparingly into every nook and cranny, all the 
while reminding us that the building is ultimately the outward manifestation of 
Bluebeard’s tormented soul. The Uruguayan sopranoAna Raquel Satre 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ana_Raquel_Satre> is the very manipulative 
Judith: Powell’s sympathies lie with Bluebeard; Bartók himself is more 
even-handed. The Zagreb Symphony Orchestra is conducted by Milan Horvarth. The 
opera is sung in German. For a good performance in the original Hungarian,click 
here <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N5r1soNdUpo>.

Berg: Wozzeck
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuUkbjO8dkDI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuUkbjO8dkDI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuUkbjO8dkDI&media=>
Another film made for German TV, from 1970 this time, directed by Joachim Hess 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0381481/>, and using forces from the Hamburg 
Staatsoper under the Italian composer-conductorBruno Maderna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2013/nov/13/bruno-maderna-composer-conductor>
.Berg <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alban_Berg>’s study of a soldier driven to 
murder his common-law wife has been treated as an internalised psychodrama by 
many directors of late. It’s the realism and the political anger of this 
version that I like so much – the sense of a man being ground down by his 
fellow human beings, all of them unwitting members of a system that crushes and 
destroys. Hess’s use of muddy, wintry landscapes adds immeasurably to the 
sombre atmosphere of it all.Toni Blankenheim 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toni_Blankenheim>, one of the finest 
singer-actors of his time, is the befuddled, tragic Wozzeck, whileSena Jurinac 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sena_Jurinac>, a major Mozart 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PVTfeqUyKgA>-Strauss 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DIY6tyS64l0> soprano strikingly cast against 
type, is the sympathetic Marie, less overtly sluttish than most. Watch out for 
the youngHans Sotin <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9KKppEvc4ZM>, creepy and 
unnervingly genteel as the Doctor. Maderna’s conducting is admirably lean and 
sinewy.
 