
It is something of a commonplace to say that when we listen to music we are 
“taken out of ourselves,” or “transported into another world”, something which, 
in opera, is often taken literally. Music was associated with magic from its 
very beginnings. Add words and drama, and you have the power to summon up 
worlds that are not our own, but which can illuminate and enrich it in ways 
that can be startling. This week we look at phantasmagorias and fairytales – 
works that deal with the magical, the mythical and the fantastic, sometimes 
with profoundly unsettling results.

Handel: Alcina 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DueMAOcTiu74&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DueMAOcTiu74>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DueMAOcTiu74&media=>
Magic is associated with sexual desire in Alcina 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alcina>, Handel’s great examination of the nature 
of pleasure and transience. Its heroine, at once sorceress and seductress, uses 
her charms to create an erotic island paradise to which she lures men. Handel 
views her world as morally fallible, but also mourns the eventual passing of 
its beauty in music of devastating poignancy. The only upload, rather 
surprisingly, features the controversial modern-dress 1999 Stuttgart production 
by Jossi Weiler andSergio Morabito 
<http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sergio_Morabito>. It’s worth putting up with its 
occasional eccentricities. The narrative, which can sometimes seem confusing, 
is admirably clear, and the erotic complexities are nicely teased out. Images 
that suggest a sexual liberalism that pushes at the boundaries of gender are 
gradually replaced by something altogether more conservative and constricting.

There are fine performances from Catherine Naglestad 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=buX3sVenlVc> and Helene Schneidermann 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YUpn4bzHlrw> as Alcina and Bradamante, though 
the star of the show isAlice Coote <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jIByMYvjM9Y>
, on better form here than in arecent London performance of the same work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/oct/13/alcina-review-joyce-didonato-vocal-brilliance-lacks-poetry>
.Rolf Romei <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ix9oV5mWIYw>’s Oronte looks better 
than he sounds, but is utterly compelling.

Mozart: Die Zauberflöte 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbKzTig_3dzw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbKzTig_3dzw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbKzTig_3dzw&media=>
Die Zauberflöte 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/die-zauberflote?customid=837> 
is a thing of paradoxes. Opera’s ultimate fairytale-cum-adventure story, it was 
written as a piece of popular theatre in a form closer to pantomime than any 
other genre, though the deployment ofEnlightenment 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Age_of_Enlightenment> and masonic 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Freemasonry> imagery in the text adds layers of 
complexity to the narrative. The score itself is surely one of the greatest 
ever composed, and for centuries, the opera was widely perceived as one of the 
noblest utterances of the human spirit. More recently, however, there has been 
a growing acknowledgement that the piece is limited by value systems that are 
ultimately white and male, and despite its moral demands for “truth, even 
though it be a crime”, the opera is sexist andracist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/jul/09/classicalmusicandopera.comment>, 
issues which many recent productions have ducked by rewriting the text.

Jonathan Miller <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jonathan_Miller>’s 2000 Zurich 
Opera staging sticks withEmanuel Schickaneder 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emanuel_Schikaneder>’s original libretto and 
carefully considers the work in terms of the intellectual traditions, whether 
religious, rationalist or arcane, that were prevalent around the time of the 
premiere in 1791. SoMatti Salminen <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AV43HVl59c0>
’s Sarastro presides over a male-dominated commune ofRousseau 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/rousseau_jean_jacques.shtml>-ist 
philosophers, while the Queen of the Night (Elena Mosuc <http://www.mosuc.com/>
), frequently identified with the Catholic church, first appears on the arm of 
her confessor at the head of a religious procession. Volker Vogel’s Monostatos, 
meanwhile, is a disaffected black military man, dressed to look likeToussaint 
Louverture <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toussaint_Louverture> whose revolution 
on Haiti also took place in 1791. The great performances here come fromPiotr 
Beczala <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9-zXLKd76fk>’s beautifully sung Tamino 
andAnton Scharinger <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jKiJZ3SFEjg>’s very funny, 
Viennese-accented Papageno. Franz Welser-Möst conducts. As an alternative, try
Ingmar Bergman <http://ingmarbergman.se/en/content/start>’s 1975 
Swedish-language version, for many the greatest film of an opera ever made.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDGVO2hCi15w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDGVO2hCi15w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDGVO2hCi15w&media=>
Wagner: Der Ring des Nibelungen - Die Walküre
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1nuu9Rr1o9w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1nuu9Rr1o9w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1nuu9Rr1o9w&media=>
Surveying Wagner <https://www.theguardian.com/music/richard-wagner>’s Ring 
cycle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/oct/17/a-to-z-of-wagner-r-is-for-ring-cycle>
 on YouTube is a bit like trying to negotiate a minefield. There’s a lot of 
material out there, but things are bitty, with plenty of extracts, but few 
complete operas, and even fewer complete cycles with all four operas. The 
upload above is the Walküre from the 1991/92Daniel Barenboim 
<http://www.danielbarenboim.com/>/Harry Kupfer 
<http://www.wagneropera.net/RW-Performers/Harry-Kupfer-Bayreuth.htm> Bayreuth 
cycle, one of the finest of all productions of the work, and probably still 
unsurpassed in terms of what we possess on video. Kupfer’s direction is rooted 
in psychological and emotional detail, though he also uses the vast depth of the
Festspielhaus <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayreuth_Festspielhaus> stage to 
suggest a literal resonance of the narrative into infinity.

Watch Siegmund and Sieglinde’s terrified flight from Hunding from 2:00:27 
onwards to get a sense of the physicality, emotional directness and compassion 
that characterises the whole thing. Then settle in for the full four hours to 
seeJohn Tomlinson <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2-NjRPH9JPw>’s staggering 
Wotan (a really charismatic war god, for once),Poul Elming 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=T5oZH_wzEJo> and Nadine Secunde 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uJn1jp0q2Vo>’s anguished yet deeply sexual 
Siegmund and Sieglinde, andAnne Evans 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R3SGtJNm-pI>’s deeply touching Brünnhilde. In 
terms of music theatre, Wagner doesn’t get much better than this. You can watch 
Rheingold from the same cycle in two parts –here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1DnstP-aUtU> and here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tf1A2X8lI4E> – but at the time of writing, 
Siegfried and Götterdämmerung sadly aren’t available complete on YouTube. You 
can also watch the Götterdämmerung from Pierre Boulez andPatrice Chéreau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/apr/25/patrice-chereau-director-interview-theatre>
’s epoch-making post-industrialist 1979 cyclehere 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_ww4JHkloa8>; though, as with Kupfer’s cycle, 
we don’t at present have an upload of all four operas.

From the vast amount of historical material out there, have a look at some 
rare footage of Kirsten Flagstad, probably the greatest Wagner soprano of them 
all, asBrünnhilde <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_JcpNfCdbVA>. And here is 
Wieland Wagner rehearsing Leonie Rysanek and James King inDie Walküre 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ILGJSK-i65I>.

Humperdinck: Hänsel und Gretel 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1_CuIieKsAo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1_CuIieKsAo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1_CuIieKsAo&media=>
 Part I 
Hansel and Gretel <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hansel_and_Gretel> is arguably 
the greatest of all fairytale operas, and something of a seasonal family 
favourite since its first performance in Weimar on 23 December 1893. It casts 
its spell with great subtlety:Humperdinck 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Engelbert_Humperdinck> deploys Wagnerian 
methodology of considerable complexity to conjure up the sense of enchantment 
and threat that combine to create its impact. A number of recent stagings have 
treated it as closer to nightmare than fairytale, though this 2006Dresden 
Semperoper <https://www.semperoper.de/en/> by Katharina Thalbach 
<http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katharina_Thalbach> – better known in the UK as 
an actress rather than a director – negotiates a fine balance between social 
conscience and genuine wonder.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIsEmqbNTVPs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIsEmqbNTVPs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIsEmqbNTVPs&media=>
 Part II 
The grinding poverty in which Antigone Papoulkas’s Hansel and Anna Gabler 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gcveHkzw0D0>’s Gretel are brought up is 
forcefully done. But the enchanted forest is a place of genuine magic, in which 
Hansel and Gretel are kept company by Snow White and the Seven Dwarves and Red 
Riding Hood and her wolf. The greatIris Vermillion 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EpMdAH5yZ8Y> is among the most recent of divas 
to throw caution to the winds and play the Witch; initially glamorous, but be 
warned there’s an alarming transformation - a bit likeAnjelica Huston in The 
Witches <http://youtu.be/_1ddxJECccA?t=29s> when the slap comes off. The dashing
Michael Hofstetter <http://www.michaelhofstetter.com/biography.html> is in the 
pit.

Strauss: Die Frau Ohne Schatten 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCiD-Q6Irj90&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCiD-Q6Irj90>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCiD-Q6Irj90&media=>
This broadcast from Swedish television captures the remarkable occasion in 
1978 when the great dramatic soprano Birgit Nilsson returned to Stockholm to 
sing the Dyer’s Wife in a revival ofNikolaus Lehnhoff 
<http://mostlyopera.blogspot.co.uk/2011/03/nikolaus-lehnhoff.html>’s production 
ofDie Frau Ohne Schatten 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/die-frau-ohne-schatten?customid=780>
. The role, which Nilsson sang for the first time when the production was new 
in 1975, became her calling card in the later years of her career, and on this 
occasion vast numbers of people from all over Europe congregated at the opera 
house to queue for returns. She was tremendous form for her home crowd, acting 
beautifully and singing with that engulfing, oceanic sound that made her 
unique. But it’s by no means a one-woman show. There’s a fine Empress, 
admirably fragile and vulnerable, fromSiv Wennberg 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/die-frau-ohne-schatten?customid=780>
, and a superb Nurse from former Bayreuth Wagner mezzoBarbro Ericson 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eE-Y_g2MDXY>. Berislav Klobucar 
<http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berislav_Klobu%C4%8Dar> conducts. The opera 
itself was still something of an unknown quantity in the 1970s. Though Lehnhof 
does a big production number on it, he treats it very much as an oriental 
fable, with the narrative admirably clear, but ducking the opera’s awkward 
elision of essential humanity not only with altruism but with reproduction, 
which nowadays seems uncomfortable. The introductory and interval material is 
included; don’t fast-forward through it all, since some of it is in English, 
and Lehnhoff, in interview, is fascinating.
 