
Opera <https://www.theguardian.com/music/opera> is about many things. However 
it is, first and foremost, an extended analysis of the nature of love. It 
examines why we love, and what love signifies in erotic, emotional and 
spiritual terms, its comic triumphs and its tragedies and failures - and it 
shows what happens when love comes into conflict with the forces of political 
reaction and religious orthodoxy, and how it turns sour when subject to abuse 
or obsession. We’ll be looking at variations on this immense theme in coming 
weeks. But by way of a prelude, here are five of the most iconic operatic love 
stories ever written.

Gluck: Orphée et Eurydice 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvuFA5_Kq7Tg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvuFA5_Kq7Tg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvuFA5_Kq7Tg&media=>
 Robert Wilson’s 1999 Paris production, conducted by John Eliot Gardiner 
The Orpheus legend  <http:>deals both with a love that transcends the grave 
and a singer whose music has the power to tame the forces of hell. Early opera 
composers such asPeri <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W6r1W1Tu4DM>, Caccini 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zcM8aT_woCk> and, above all, Monteverdi 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f36ciyEcIpg>, took it as their starting point, 
though it’sGluck <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christoph_Willibald_Gluck>’s 
version that remains, perhaps, the most potent and familiar. It was written in 
1762 in Italian, as Orfeo ed Euridice, for a castrato Orpheus, then revised in 
French, in 1774, for a tenor, though we most frequently hear it now in an 
edition prepared byBerlioz <https://www.theguardian.com/music/hector-berlioz> 
for the mezzo sopranoPauline Viardot-Garcia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/feb/24/classicalmusicandopera> in 1859. 
This was the version used byJohn Eliot Gardiner 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Eliot_Gardiner> for Robert Wilson 
<http://www.robertwilson.com>’s 1999 Paris production, in which Madgalena Kožená
 <http://www.kozena.cz/> played Orpheus. Wilson’s stylised staging has some of 
the drastic simplicity of classical friezes, the androgynous costumes remind us 
that both love and music know no distinctions of gender or sexual orientation.

Wagner: Tristan und Isolde 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTJEA16cpO_8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTJEA16cpO_8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTJEA16cpO_8&media=>
 Wieland Wagner’s 1962 production, recorded here in 1967, conducted by Pierre 
Boulez 
In Tristan und Isolde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/friday_review/story/0,,381181,00.html> (1865), 
Wagner portrays love as a consuming passion that can find neither emotional nor 
sexual satisfaction on earth and can only be released in the voluntary 
extinction of the self in the metaphysical flux that pervades the universe. The 
score, using harmonic suspensions to suggest psychological states between 
arousal and climax, caused one of the biggest revolutions in musical history. 
Stick with the murky black and white footage above, for a rare opportunity to 
watchWieland Wagner <http://www.wagneroperas.com/indexwielandwagner.html>’s 
epoch-making production, first seen atBayreuth 
<http://www.wagneropera.net/Bayreuth/> in 1962, but recorded here during the 
Osaka festival in 1967. There are three legends on stage –Brigit Nilsson 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birgit_Nilsson> and Wolfgang Windgassen as the 
adulterous lovers, andHans Hotter <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7AAR-C5z3lg> 
as betrayed King Marke – andPierre Boulez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pierre-boulez> in the pit. It doesn’t get 
much better. For clearer visuals – though perhaps not quite so overwhelming an 
experience – try Jean-Pierre Ponnelle’s Bayreuth early 80s production conducted 
by Daniel Barenboim: you canwatch it here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IdjFBW-S3z0>.

Verdi: La Traviata 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYAGJexBqfTs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYAGJexBqfTs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYAGJexBqfTs&media=>
 Willy Decker’s 2005 Salzburg production, starring Anna Netrebko, Rolando 
Villazón and Thomas Hampson 
La Traviata 
<http://metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/la-traviata?customid=836> (1853) 
has become so familiar that we tend to forget thatVerdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/giuseppe-verdi>’s depiction of the open 
cohabitation between the courtesan Violetta and middle-class Alfredo caused 
outrage in its day. Willy Decker’s Salzburg production, updating the opera to 
the 1960s and rejecting theatrical naturalism in favour of a symbolic, 
intuitive approach, was not to everyone’s taste when it opened in 2005. But 
Decker is wonderfully perceptive in his understanding of how their affair 
brings the lovers into conflict not only with Alfredo’s bourgeois family, but 
also with Violetta’s demi-monde cronies. And vivid performances fromAnna 
Netrebko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2010/jun/17/anna-netrebko-interview-quotes>
 (Violetta),Rolando Villazón <http://www.rolandovillazon.com/> and Thomas 
Hampson <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/dec/07/artsfeatures> 
(Germont) make this production very powerful indeed.

Tchaikovsky: Eugene Onegin 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuTP9BAEBnT8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuTP9BAEBnT8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuTP9BAEBnT8&media=>
 Robert Carsen’s 2007 New York production, conducted by Valery Gergiev 
Apart from the single act of violence at its centre, Eugene Onegin 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eugene_Onegin_%28opera%29> is among the most 
emotionally realistic of operas – a muted study of the consequences of one 
man’s arbitrary rejection of the woman who could have been the love of his 
life. It works best when least subject to directorial interference.Robert Carsen
 <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/robert-carsen>’s 2007 New York production plays 
it straight, but carefully uses the vast space of theMetropolitan Opera House 
<http://www.metopera.org/>’s stage to suggest the emotional abysses that open 
up between the characters. HandsomeDmitri Hvorostovsky 
<http://hvorostovsky.com/> is the ideal Onegin opposite Renee Fleming’s 
beautifully sung Tatiana. Valery Gergiev is on fine form in the pit. Though 
recorded in New York, the upload comes from Russian TV: there’s there’s some 
introductory material; the opera starts at 13:30. A fine alternative isJoseph 
Keilberth <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Keilberth>’s 1962 performance, 
in German, with the greatFritz Wunderlich 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fritz_Wunderlich> as Lensky: you can watch it here
 <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pybzJtEKkZo>.


Puccini: La Bohème 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcSuL4u3bOpg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcSuL4u3bOpg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DcSuL4u3bOpg&media=>
 Zeffirelli’s 1967 made-for-television production, conducted by Herberg von 
Karajan. 
Like La Traviata, La Bohème 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/boheme?customid=772> has 
become so familiar that we can easily forget how provocative it should be. A 
study of the impact on love of grinding poverty, it also examines what happens 
when what starts as a casual pick-up opens an emotional floodgate that neither 
of Puccini’s lovers is able to control. Choosing a single staging isn’t easy – 
there are plenty out there on YouTube – but I’ve opted for a 1967 television 
production, made for Unitel in Germany, using La Scala forces, and directed by
Franco Zeffirelli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/may/04/theatre.artsfeatures>, one of 
the great exponents of Italian neo-realist theatre and cinema. Musically it’s 
an absolute knockout. Few have ever conducted the work better than Herbert von 
Karajan, and you probably won’t hear a better Mimi thanMirella Freni 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mirella_Freni> – for many, the greatest Puccini 
soprano of them all.
 