
Humour in opera is often ambivalent, bittersweet and troubling. Composers 
probe the psyches of their characters to reveal hidden conflicts beneath the 
laughter, and to examine the clashes of moral values that lurk beneath the 
surface veneer of artifice or farce, with results that can be profound and 
profoundly unsettling as well as funny. Here are five opera comedies in which 
nothing is quite as it seems.

Mozart: Così fan tutte 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8OUrafVroho&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8OUrafVroho>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8OUrafVroho&media=>
Richard Strauss thought Così fan tutte 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/cosi-fan-tutte?customid=774> 
the greatest opera ever composed. An ambivalent, marvellously open-ended work 
depicting an erotic game spiralling slowly out of control, it derives its 
impact partly from the psychological complexity of the score, and partly from 
the fact that Mozart and his librettist,Lorenzo da Ponte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/jan/07/classicalmusicandopera.mozart>, 
never explicitly tell us how the narrative resolves, hinting at levels of 
emotional damage perhaps beyond repair or resolution.Nicholas Hytner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/nicholas-hytner>’s Glyndebourne production 
carefully mines the resulting ambiguities, and shows real genius in suggesting 
that disguise enables Ferrando and Guglielmo – Topu Lehtipuu andLuca Pisaroni 
<http://www.lucapisaroni.com/>, both outstanding – to experience an unexpected 
sexual freedom, at once liberating and dangerous.Anke Vondung 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9InlNYC5_bQ> is a passionate Dorabella, Miah 
Persson the vulnerable Fiordiligi, Iván Fischer conducts. For a very different 
approach – modern, acerbic, controversial – try Claus Guth’s La Scala 
production conducted by Daniel Barenboim: you canwatch Act 1 here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=44W2QHgapfo> and Act 2 here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JHFy21-1O5A>.

Rossini: Il Barbiere di Siviglia 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoSjyDH4MJCc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoSjyDH4MJCc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoSjyDH4MJCc&media=>
The late, great Claudio Abbado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/claudio-abbado> was a superb Rossini 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/510222/Gioachino-Rossini> conductor, 
and you can hear him at his best inJean-Pierre Ponnelle 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean-Pierre_Ponnelle>’s 1972 TV production of the 
composer’s most popular opera, filmed by Unitel in Munich, though using forces 
from La Scala, Milan. The cast, one of the best ever assembled for the piece, 
is dominated byHermann Prey <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hermann_Prey>’s sexy, 
funny Figaro, while bel canto greatsTeresa Berganza 
<http://www.bruceduffie.com/Berganza.html> and Luigi Alva 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MUnDXmJaiko> play the lovers Rosina and 
Almaviva. Ponnelle’s approach is fairly traditional, but note his clever use of 
camera angles to reflect the stylisation in the score. He doesn’t shirk the 
opera’s moments of darkness, or its anticlericalism, either:Enzo Dara 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vBJ0hmY01RU>’s outstanding Bartolo can be as 
lethal as he is preposterous, whilePaolo Montarsolo 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paolo_Montarsolo> is the creepiest Basilio 
imaginable.

Smetana: The Bartered Bride 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnv1uDEg92-4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnv1uDEg92-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnv1uDEg92-4&media=>
The work that effectively put Czech music on the map, The Bartered Bride 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Bartered_Bride>, remains the finest of all 
operatic folk-comedies, although there’s a sting in its tail in its depiction 
of a world of arranged marriages and the literal buying and selling of lives. 
The upload above, a Czech TV production from 1981, is a bit lightweight – with 
its almost self-consciously pretty designs and big show numbers, it’s rather 
like a pre-Glasnost equivalent of an American musical, and you might find it 
camp in places. But musically, it knocks spots off the competition.Peter Dvorský
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Dvorsk%C3%BD> and the great Gabriela 
Beňačková <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gabriela_Be%C5%88a%C4%8Dkov%C3%A1> are 
breathtaking as Jeník and Mařenka. And no one plays this music better than the 
Czech Philharmonic under Zdeněk Košler 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zden%C4%9Bk_Ko%C5%A1ler>. Listen to the overture 
alone to be convinced.

Verdi: Falstaff 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF9ZU0CloETU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF9ZU0CloETU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DF9ZU0CloETU&media=>
Falstaff 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/falstaff?customid=778>, 
Verdi’s last opera, is essentially the work of an old man looking back on life 
and finding it, with all its setbacks, a colossal joke. But it also marks his 
farewell to one of the most remarkable of all careers writing for the stage, 
and its humour is offset with passages of great sadness and poignancy.Tito Gobbi
 <http://www.roh.org.uk/news/a-tribute-100-years-since-the-birth-of-tito-gobbi> 
was among the finest of all interpreters of the title role. Here he is at the 
Paris Opéra in 1970 in a performance recorded by French TV. A great 
singer-actor, Gobbi captures Falstaff’s self-deluded but warm-hearted vitality 
with wonderfully subtle glee. He directed the production himself, though it’s 
by no means a one-man show. Veteran mezzoFedora Barbieri 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W5ch7pwMJas> is a tremendous Mistress Quickly; 
the underratedAndréa Guiot <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AxODguUNiUc> is the 
delightfully witty Alice; andMatteo Manuguerra 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j_eptPjFQE0> almost steals the show as the most 
self-important, up-himself Ford imaginable. The upload is from a VHS original: 
be prepared for the occasional flicker.

Strauss: Der Rosenkavalier 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbXsTgUMveP0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbXsTgUMveP0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbXsTgUMveP0&media=>
 Part 1 Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCOZLJ1qoFSE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCOZLJ1qoFSE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCOZLJ1qoFSE&media=>
 Part 2 
Filmed at the Nationaltheater in Munich in 1979, this is one of the great 
performances ofDer Rosenkavalier 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/rosenkavalier?customid=789>, 
Richard Strauss’s “comedy for music,” in which he uses Wagnerian methodology in 
order to recreate the ambivalent world of his great idol, Mozart. It’s 
exceptionally conducted byCarlos Kleiber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/mar/08/carlos-kleiber-myth-revealed>
 with great emotional clarity and insight, and a total lack of the 
sentimentality that can easily creep into some interpretations. Brigitte 
Fassbaender, rarely bettered, is the naive, attractive Octavian oppositeLucia 
Popp <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ur-Is-04SxU>’s rapturous Sophie. Gwyneth 
Jones <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ncUBH7wO_fw>, who could be 
controversially variable, is at her best here as the Marschallin – a 
marvellously understated performance, beautifully acted. Otto Schenk’s period 
production piles on the Rococo detail, and is tender and barbed as well as 
funny. If, like me, you like Fassbaender as Octavian, try her extraordinary 
recording of Schubert’s Winterreise: you canlisten to it here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r32eS0CONs4>.

For another remarkable Rosenkavalier listen here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uDDHWIUjhhA> to Karl Böhm’s 1958 recording 
(audio only), with the wonderful Irmgard Seefried as Octavian.
 