
On 25 August 1830, a riot broke out during a performance of
Daniel-François Auber <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel_Auber>’s La Muette 
de Portici 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/aug/28/auber-la-muette-de-portici-review>
 in Brussels. The disturbance was carefully timed to start during the duetAmour 
sacré de la Patrie <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W1FiMPAPo8c>, and by the end 
of the performance, theBelgian revolution 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Belgian_Revolution>, ensuring the country’s 
eventual independence, had begun. Opera has brought people to the barricades, 
helped to overthrow monarchies and governments, and to end occupations and 
empires. Many of its composers believed, and still believe, in its ability to 
change the structures of society, and politicians in turn have believed in its 
potential for both ideological justification and propaganda. This week, our 
five operas take on the establishment, asking questions that are as relevant 
now as when they were written.


Mozart: Le Nozze di Figaro
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQGe4dLDM5A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQGe4dLDM5A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVQGe4dLDM5A&media=>
Le Nozze di Figaro 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/figaro?customid=834> is so 
closely bound up with the mood and thought of Europe on the eve of theFrench 
Revolution <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_Revolution> that Georg Solti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/sep/09/georg-solti-centenary-lady-valerie>
’s Paris performance, televised on July 14 (Bastille Day) 1980, seems in many 
ways the most appropriate choice for it. It features three of the greatest 
Mozart divas of of its day -Gundula Janowitz 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tfnPO0IPbNQ> as the Countess, Lucia Popp 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jSQqbJPoSbw> as Susanna and Frederica von Stade 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5EtJ6eXKlRc> as Cherubino - alongside José Van 
Dam <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IXWIExb1khA>’s spirited yet level-headed 
Figaro andGabriel Bacquier <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GAvw3ihQIKM>’s 
brutally unpleasant Count. The production, by the progressive Italian director
Giorgio Strehler <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Giorgio_Strehler>, plays it very 
straight, but with quiet anger and a painstaking attention to detail. For 
something radically different, tryClaus Guth’s 2006 Salzburg staging 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R3A7FZUcXDE>, in which the opera is re-invented 
as an internalised psychodrama that owes much to the films of Ingmar Bergman. 
It won’t be to everyone’s taste, but it’s wonderfully conducted by Nikolaus 
Harnoncourt, whileBo Skovhus <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gv94LpYC6dA> and 
Dorothea Röschmann <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=78s1UotLyp4> realise the 
Almavivas’ marital hell more vividly than any other singers I know.

Beethoven: Fidelio
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCcYodDn5Q-o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCcYodDn5Q-o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCcYodDn5Q-o&media=>
Jürgen Flimm <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J%C3%BCrgen_Flimm>’s 2004 Zurich 
Opera production ofFidelio 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/history/stories/synopsis.aspx?customid=124> 
sets Beethoven’s
only opera firmly during the Napoleonic wars 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Napoleonic_Wars>, which were roughly 
contemporaneous with the period (1805-1814) of its composition. In evoking the 
political convulsion that accompanied its genesis, Flimm emphasises that the 
opera is not only a demand for freedom and individual dignity, but is also a 
reminder of the lengths to which we must sometimes go in order to achieve them.
Camilla Nylund <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hX0F1oVjrLk> is the 
single-minded, self-controlled Leonore doggedly struggling to rescue Florestan 
(Jonas Kaufmann, in one of his greatest performances) fromAlfred Muff 
<http://www.musinfo.ch/index.php?content=maske_personen&pers_id=761&setLanguage=en>
’s sadistic, even Sadean Pizarro. Note how Rocco (László Polgár 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3koBo5czFiI>) and Jaquino (Christoph Strehl 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UYwoaZwFZVs>) are morally compromised by their 
collaboration, willing or otherwise, with Pizarro, while Marzelline (Elisabeth 
Rae Magnuson) is repeatedly in danger of becoming a casualty of Leonore’s quest.
Nikolaus Harnoncourt <http://www.nikolausharnoncourt.com/us/home>’s conducting, 
meanwhile, is idiosyncratic but awesome.


Verdi: Don Carlo
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlBqV4ZD2rX8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlBqV4ZD2rX8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlBqV4ZD2rX8&media=>
 Part I 
Verdi’s name was synonymous in his lifetime with both the ideology and 
realisation of Italian independence, and his output as a whole constitutes 
opera’s most extended analysis of the conflict between the rights of the 
individual and the forces of church and state that seek to control them. His 
immense adaptation ofSchiller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/apr/18/classicalmusicandopera.artsfeatures>
’sDon Carlos 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/don-carlo?customid=819>, 
comparatively unsuccessful in his lifetime, is now regarded my many as the most 
comprehensive statement of his political concerns, though nothing in Verdi’s 
humanism is such that he is able to extend to the tyrannical figure of Philip 
IV of Spain the same compassion he extends to his effective victims.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVvVwrGSHXEQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVvVwrGSHXEQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVvVwrGSHXEQ&media=>
 Part II 
The upload above is of the famous 1978 La Scala production, conducted at white 
heat byClaudio Abbado <https://www.theguardian.com/music/claudio-abbado>, with 
Plácido Domingo andMargaret Price <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgUpErgMNGI> 
sounding particularly glorious as Carlo and Elisabetta. The great Russian bass
Yevgeny Nesterenko <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ICEeea4Vqig> is the 
troubled, deeply affecting Philip, his compatriotElena Obraztsova 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NJX0b9ZChYk>, in one of her finest 
performances, the majestic Eboli. Giorgio Strehler’s production abandons his 
more familiar naturalistic approach (as in Figaro, above) in favour of a series 
of slow, symbolic processionals that suggest the lives of individuals and 
nations caught up in the relentless progress of history.


Mussorgsky: Boris Godunov
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTpkLq1dR48Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTpkLq1dR48Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTpkLq1dR48Q&media=>
Yevgeny Nesterenko in 1978, again, but this time at the Bolshoi Theatre 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bolshoi_Theatre> in Moscow, in a powerhouse 
performance asMussorgsky <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modest_Mussorgsky>’s 
Boris Godunov, the tsar who has murdered a child in order to obtain the throne, 
and whose mind and empire are both falling apart under the resulting 
psychological strain. He’s haunting and unforgettable - watch his death scene 
from 2:29:55 onwards if you don’t want to see the entire opera - as are
Vladislav Piavko <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a8mKvNMzCPg> and the Soviet 
Union’s star mezzoIrina Arkhipova <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wDZ6eE9lwB8> 
as the Pretender Dmitri and Marina. Rarely has the most insincere love duet in 
the entire repertoire - both characters are manipulators on the make - sounded 
so beautiful. The production has all the painstaking historicity of Soviet 
productions of the time, and every role is superbly taken - a reminder of what 
a great company the Bolshoi was in its heyday. Purists might object to the 
edition, which seems to mix bits of Rimsky-Korsakov’s version with Mussorgsky’s 
original, and has some cuts and re-orderings. Nesterenko, as far as I’m 
concerned makes it essential viewing: for a fuller text and a more modern take, 
with the opera updated to the 20th century, and the emphasis very firmly placed 
on the politics of revolution and regime change, tryHerbert Wernicke 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herbert_Wernicke>’s 1998 Salzburg production, 
conducted by Claudio Abbado: you canwatch it here 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u-rjZbWHQUg>.

Britten: Billy Budd
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA1lVBfqQyjs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA1lVBfqQyjs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA1lVBfqQyjs&media=>
The work of a gay man and a pacifist, Billy Budd is nowadays most commonly 
viewed as either a study in sexual repression or as an analysis of the 
metaphysics of evil. The narrative, however, deals with a miscarriage of 
justice in the British navy in the aftermath of the French Revolution, when 
fear of mutiny was at its height, and the opera inveighs angrily against a 
system that confuses law with genuine justice and fails to protect those it is 
ostensibly designed to help. The upload is a BBC production from 1966, made in 
the days when the Beeb regularly recorded operas in the TV studio. Directed by
Basil Coleman <http://www.brittenpears.org/page.php?pageid=819> and conducted, 
superbly, byCharles Mackerras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/charles-mackerras>, it features beautifully 
modulated performances fromPeter Glossop 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peter_Glossop> as Billy and Britten’s partner 
Peter Pears <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MFaH-Kb2HD0> as Vere. The real 
revelation, though, isMichael Langdon 
<http://opera.archive.netcopy.co.uk/article/december-1975/19/people-108-michael-langdon>
’s Claggart, tremendously sung and often quite disturbingly malign. Coleman 
makes a virtue out of having to confine the whole thing to a studio, and the 
shipboard atmosphere is very claustrophobic. The production was shot - as 
indeed the opera was written - at a time when sex between men was a criminal 
offence in this country. Most recent productions have made more of the gay 
subtext, though we still find it here in Langdon’s lingering gazes at Billy, 
and his hovering round his crew’s hammocks while they sleep.

Other fine interpreters of the title role include Peter Mattei 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rt6nWzcgj4k>, Bo Skovhus 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8fv3BXq6cGE> and Nathan Gunn 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VotMv-OxWfo>. For a different take on the 
story, watchPeter Ustinov’s film <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TV4Jg--exls> 
of theHerman Melville <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herman_Melville> story on 
which the opera was based: Ustinov himself plays Vere, opposite Robert Ryan’s 
Claggart, and Terence Stamp’s extraordinarily attractive Billy.
 