
The infinite variety of sexual experience, behaviour and attitudes has been a 
central preoccupation of opera composers since the genre’s beginnings. Music, 
with its patterns of excitement, tension, rhythm and climax is innately 
predisposed to erotic depiction and expression. Operatic psychology understood 
both the mechanics of desire and repression long beforeFreud 
<http://www.simplypsychology.org/Sigmund-Freud.html> and the psychoanalytic 
movement, and the moral and social responses to this most insistent of forces 
within our lives.

Monteverdi: l’Incoronazione di Poppea
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCtI_dX7JJa8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCtI_dX7JJa8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCtI_dX7JJa8&media=>
Conducted by René Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/sep/09/rene-jacobs-mozart-opera>, 
Michael Hampe’s production ofMonteverdi 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/390820/Claudio-Monteverdi>’s last 
extant opera was filmed at the 1993 Schwetzingen festival. Hampe is 
particularly good at examining the intersection between sex, politics and 
metaphysics.Nero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jan/20/classicalmusicandopera.music>’s 
Rome has overtones both of Renaissance Italy and a modern dictatorship, and the 
maps of the world, and later of the sky, on which – and in front of which – the 
drama is enacted, are a constant reminder that the opera plays itself out on a 
scale at once imperial and cosmic. Tremendous performances fromRichard Croft 
<http://imgartists.com/artist/richard_croft> as Nero and Patricia Schuman 
<http://www.patriciaschuman.com/patriciaschuman.com/Welcome.html> as Poppea 
capture both the physicality and the delirium of a passion that gradually 
becomes impervious to reason, and makes casualties of Kathleen Kuhlman’s proud 
Ottavia andJeffrey Gall <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XS5Hel_cpUw>’s hapless, 
handsome Ottone. The final, unforgettable, image says it all.

Mozart: Don Giovanni 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6Csn-YCwIo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6Csn-YCwIo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_6Csn-YCwIo&media=>
Each age, they say, reinvents Don Giovanni 
<http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/don-giovanni> in its image, 
an idea taken literally inRobert Carsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/may/16/filmandmusic1.filmandmusic177>’s 
2011 La Scala production, which opens withPeter Mattei 
<http://www.braathenmanagement.com/eng/artists/peter-mattei>’s Don prowling in 
front of an enormous mirror that reflects the auditorium back on itself, and 
goes on to use theatrical imagery and alienation effects to present a coolly 
erotic portrait of a moneyed society at once self-divided and hypocritical. 
Carsen is very good on the personal dramas of conflicted emotion the Don leaves 
in his wake, while Mattei admirably conveys the fixity of purpose of a man 
prepared to lose his soul rather than betray his sense of his own integrity. 
It’s finely conducted, in a big-boned way, byDaniel Barenboim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/daniel-barenboim>. For a more traditional 
staging – and a remarkable musical experience – tryWilhelm Furtwängler 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilhelm_Furtw%C3%A4ngler>’s 1954 Salzburg 
performance <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XPYjqz7nToY>.

And, for something completely different, seek out Kasper Holten 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/people/kasper-holten>’s film Juan based on the opera. It 
will alarm purists – Holten takes liberties with the score, but it’s a 
formidable piece of cinema, andChristopher Maltman 
<http://christophermaltman.moonfruit.com/> bares body and soul in an 
extraordinary central performance.The trailer is here 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5K-p_Lr9mUQ>: you need to get the DVD to see 
it complete.

Bizet: Carmen 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmXSIMV47NM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmXSIMV47NM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmXSIMV47NM&media=>
Carmen <http://www.metopera.org/metopera/season/synopsis/carmen> is, in some 
respects, Don Giovanni’s female counterpart. Both operas are about the 
emotional havoc wrought by a self-determining figure aware of their own 
amorality; and both central characters are prepared to pay what is perceived, 
in each opera’s world, as the ultimate price for their sexual integrity. Where 
Giovanni risks his soul, Carmen defiantly braves death at the hands of the 
obsessive psychopath she has rejected and to whom she now refuses ever to 
submit. A powerful operatic statement, Bizet’s opera has become so familiar 
that we all too easily tend to forget that its first audiences in 1875 found it 
baffling and brutal, even obscene. Choosing a single upload isn’t easy. I’ve 
opted forDavid McVicar <http://www.roh.org.uk/people/david-mcvicar>’s 2002 
Glyndebourne staging, partly because McVicar treats the opera as a piece of 
French naturalism (which is is), rather than a kind of Spanish travelogue; and 
partly becauseAnne Sofie von Otter <http://www.annesofievonotter.com/> is 
admirable in her characterisation of Carmen as a self-assured, independent 
woman. If you prefer the grand manner approach, then watch Franco Zeffirelli’s 
1978 Vienna staging, conducted like one possessed byCarlos Kleiber 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SaypJ4kmYCE>, though Elena Obraztsova’s 
matronly Carmen won’t be to everyone’s taste. For something altogether more 
avant-garde tryEmma Dante’s 2009 La Scala production 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9c7HjQ16mGc>, conducted by Daniel Barenboim: 
the downside is a tobacco factory that appears to be full of nuns: its great 
advantage isJonas Kaufmann <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jonas-kaufmann> 
as a compelling, iconic, leather-clad José.

Strauss: Salome 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnp74oaqxzGA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnp74oaqxzGA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dnp74oaqxzGA&media=>
Based on Oscar Wilde <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/oscar-wilde>, and 
arguably the most extreme of operas,Salome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/feb/19/classicalmusicandopera.dance> 
deals with a sexual awakening so traumatic it assumes necrophiliac 
implications, an experience its heroine repeatedly defines as love in a world 
so corrupt that no one else dare speak its name. A performance stands or falls 
on the title role, so it’s worth putting up with flickers, murky visuals, and a 
Japanese commentary and surtitles to hear and see rare footage of the great
Leonie Rysanek <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leonie_Rysanek> in action in Tokyo 
in 1980. Strauss imagined Salome as 15: Rysanek was in her 50s when this was 
filmed. But it’s all there, astonishingly acted, and sung with an engulfing 
sound that tears you in two. For other outstanding interpreters of the role 
watch extracts ofLjuba Welitsch <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Bnl1YMOqR_U>, 
Karita Mattila <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CJsvPOykcXI> and, most recently, 
Alex Penda <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wL3xwg1r7o4> (who, be warned, leaves 
little to the imagination). Here you can also watch 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KOcuAbdRMhI> the extraordinary 1923 Hollywood 
film of Wilde’s play, withAlla Nazimova 
<https://wfpp.cdrs.columbia.edu/pioneer/ccp-alla-nazimova/> as Salome, designed 
by her loverNatacha Rambova <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bcqnoJwpZtM>, who 
was alsoRudolf Valentino <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rudolph_Valentino>’s 
wife.

Berg: Lulu 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DodL90ARIZ1E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DodL90ARIZ1E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DodL90ARIZ1E&media=>
 Act I 
This 2010 Salzburg festival production of Berg’s Lulu 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lulu_%28opera%29> was the work of Vera Nemirowa 
<http://www.oper-frankfurt.de/en/page437.cfm>, the Bulgarian-born, German-based 
director, and one of the few women ever to have staged the piece. It’s an 
extraordinary interpretation, both thoughtful and in-your-face-explicit.
Patricia Petibon <http://www.patriciapetibon.com/en/>’s Lulu is at once the 
waif-like femme fatale who is all things to all straight men, and the angry, 
traumatised victim of the exploitative world in which she moves but is rarely 
able to control. A succession of powerhouse male singers –Pavol Breslik 
<http://www.pavolbreslik.com/>, Michael Volle 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/people/michael-volle>, Franz Grundheber 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aOwS8G8aYJk> and Thomas Johannes Mayer 
<http://www.thomasjmayer.com/www.thomasjmayer.com/Willkommen.html> – are the 
sensual yet disquieting predators and prey in her life.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8f1UUIca-DA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8f1UUIca-DA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8f1UUIca-DA&media=>
 Act II 
 Like Robert Carsen in his production of Don Giovanni, Nemirowa implicates the 
audience in the opera’s world, on this occasion by locating the Act III 
gambling house scene in the auditorium rather than on stage: look out for 
composerWolfgang Rihm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/sep/24/tom-service-guide-wolfgang-rihm>
 being accosted by cast members at one point! The Vienna Philharmonic is 
beautifully conducted by Marc Albrecht. It all makes for brave, provocative 
music theatre, but be warned that Nemirowa’s unflinching take on the final 
scene is very disturbing indeed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhATtFa2NEuw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhATtFa2NEuw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhATtFa2NEuw&media=>
 Act III  