
‘To all the little girls watching,” Hillary Clinton said in her November 
concession speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-full-concession-speech-video>
, and tweeted the phrase for emphasis, “never doubt that you are valuable and 
powerful and deserving of every chance and opportunity in the world.”

Perhaps the line was something recycled from the victory speech she’d hoped to 
make. Since, although no doubt inspirational – and duly liked over a million 
times – it was a fairly odd thing to say. The little girls, after all, had just 
seen an experienced and competent woman candidate defeated, incredibly, by a 
boastful thug with a proud history of sexual molestation, or, to use the 
president-elect’s phrase, pussy-grabbing. His rival, Mrs Clinton, had been 
redefined as a witch, bitch, ancient crone and “nasty woman”.

Indeed, if these same little girls had never particularly doubted their power 
and value before the US election, Trump’s victory was just the thing to show 
them that, like so many of the social and political advances that came under 
threat in 2016, progress towards sex equality can be reversed overnight. To 
paraphrase some of our leading UK rhetoricians: you lost, little girls, get 
over it.

Moreover, the little girls might reflect, after the election, that they cannot 
depend on other little girls to share their and Hillary Clinton’s ideas about 
value and dignity. Of course, British girls knew this already, thanks to 
contributions from women such as Andrea Leadsom, former Tory leadership 
candidate,who turned out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/09/tory-leadership-leadsom-may-children>
 to have so much more in common with Turkey’s President Erdoğan than roughly a 
fifth of her own sex. “Genuinely,” she told an interviewer, believing it would 
promote her chances, “I feel thatbeing a mum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/09/tory-leadership-leadsom-may-children>
 means you have a real stake in the future of our country, a tangible stake.” 
Looking at the timing, it’s not impossible Leadsom was inspired by Erdoğan’s 
comment, one presumably also taken to heart by Theresa May and Angela Merkel. 
“A woman who rejects motherhood,”he said in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/06/turkish-president-erdogan-childless-women-deficient-incomplete>
, “who refrains from being around the house, however successful her working 
life is, is deficient, is incomplete.” Not, to be fair to Leadsom, that the May 
administration has done much that is visible, to date, to model female 
solidarity to little girls. “Don’t bring that woman to Downing Street again,” 
May’s senior adviser, Fiona Hill,texted a male minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/11/theresa-may-trousers-row-angry-text-exchange-nicky-morgan>
 about Nicky Morgan, the mutinous Remainer. “That woman”? Add “bloody 
difficult” and you could be listening to Ken Clarke.

One of the more plausible explanations advanced for the extent of Trump’s 
female support is the internalising, then actual expression, by women seeking 
its protection, acceptance or promotion, of the culture of an overwhelmingly 
male establishment. Maybe there’s not so much to separate a female Trump 
supporter from our local Erdoğan sympathisers – or aWoman’s Hour judge who 
thinks that the comic creation Bridget Jones isone of the most influential women
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/dec/14/womans-hour-power-list-bridget-jones-margaret-thatcher-germaine-greer>
 of the last 70 years. Unless that exemplified a contributory reason for 
Hillary’s Clinton’s defeat: the delusion that, for feminism, voluntary 
redundancy is long overdue.

Whatever the causes, this colossal act of female self-harm should surely be 
lodged in the minds of all watching little girls as one of the events that 
established 2016 as one of worst, most retrograde, in women’s liberation 
history. That special place in hell that Madeleine Albright likes to talk about 
for women who don’t help each other? After 2016, they’re going to need an 
extension.

Space will have to be found for the Leadsom-minded, for benevolent defenders 
of burqas and sharia in the UK, for Amnesty’s allies of sex traffickers, for 
women who fat-shame others for aDaily Mail stipend, for all the US voters who 
surrendered hard-fought progress in female self-determination for leadership by 
two apprentice patriarchs, the pussy-grabber and Mike Pence.

Already in sight, if Roe v Wade is overturned, is the restriction of abortion, 
a method of controlling women that even the current pope chose to review. While 
Francis proposed forgiveness, Trump was tweeting that women – about one in 
three – who have abortions should be subject to “some form of punishment”. In a 
large section of the UK, of course, this is the law. Last year,a Northern 
Ireland woman <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-35962134>received 
a suspended sentence for taking abortion drugs.

While the victories in nearby territories, of the premiers May and Sturgeon, 
no doubt reassure watching little British girls about their own value, 
opportunities etc, these were accompanied by any number of deterrents, large 
and small.

From Muirfield’s golfers, to employers demanding that women staff wear high 
heels, to discrimination in universities, to near invisibility in the Brexit 
debate, to the police officer whose allusions to“ugly munter” women applicants 
did not lose him his job 
<https://www.wbnews.info/2016/11/is-she-an-ugly-munter-police-sergeant-who-said-job-applicants-would-only-be-successful-if-they-had-big-ts-is-found-guilty-of-misconduct/>
, to the 19th-century-style expectations, regarding women’s sexual restraint, 
which were allowed to feature in the retrial of Ched Evans, girls should 
certainly have learned, from 2016, to take nothing for granted.

Most striking, perhaps, where their instruction is concerned, was evidence of 
what to expect, should little girls, deliberately or not, ultimately find 
themselves conspicuous. As with Hillary’s tormenters, so, in this country, with 
Laura Kuenssberg and Charlotte Proudman, Jess Phillips, Gina Miller and Angela 
Eagle (who also got a brick through a window): prominent and disputatious women 
werepunished with onslaughts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/18/vile-online-abuse-against-women-mps-needs-to-be-challenged-now>
 of sexist abuse on social media. Thus targeted, in fact, was a woman who 
advised Nottinghamshire police to make theharassment of women a hate crime 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-nottinghamshire-36943676>. It reached the 
point, for 45 female Labour MPs, that they wrote to an – as it turned out – 
unresponsive Jeremy Corbyn, criticising his failure to curb the unceasing 
“intolerance and misogyny” emitted by his supporters.

Galloping valiantly to their rescue, however, came a new hammer of misogyny. 
Owen Smith was an obscure Corbyn challenger who discovered feminism immediately 
after elbowing out the infinitely more impressive Angela Eagle. Trust Owen, he 
said, his success in “pulling” his wife, Liz, to the envy of other lads, proved 
he was a winner, capable of, in party jargon, “smashing” Theresa May “back on 
her heels”. In comparison, some men thought, a briefly emotional Eagle had 
shown womanly weakness, just the kind of inadequate “mental and physical 
stamina” that Trump diagnosed in the briefly sick Clinton.

Not long after Trump’s victory, one of his UK supporters, a backbencher with 
an ardent interest in unequal uniform-wearing,was voted, by fellow Tories, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/anti-feminist-tory-mp-philip-davies-elected-to-equalities-committee>
 on to the Commons women and equalities committee. Although there is more to 
say about Philip Davies, and his mission to convince a parliament that is 29% 
female (49th in world rankings), that men’s views are underrepresented, all the 
little girls watching might want to consider instead the distinguished public 
servants who thought it would be the year’s crowning joke to elect him. Never 
doubt, even with a woman leader, the number of powerful men who still begrudge 
little girls every chance and opportunity in the world.
 