
'The place itself is so overwhelmingly bigger, greater, than anyone could hope 
to make it that it engenders a humility and reverence not frequently met with 
in Americans. There being nothing to improve on in the surroundings, the 
tendency is to set about improving oneself."

Henry Miller's words of wisdom on Big Sur are as true today as in 1957, I 
thought as I gazed out of the window at the towering redwoods surrounding 
Deetjen's Big Sur Inn. I'd come for a little quiet reflection in this 
Tolkien-esque hideaway and to hike the Big Sur wilderness trails, just reopened 
after last summer's devastating forest fires.

Miller came to visit in 1944 and stayed for 18 years. He was hypnotised by the 
majestic landscape, calling it "almost painful to behold". It inspired much of 
his work, including Big Sur And The Oranges Of Hieronymus Bosch in which he 
fretted that the simple joys of Big Sur would soon be lost to the 
"air-conditioned nightmare" of modern life.

He needn't have worried. It is much the same now as then. Admittedly, the 
summer does bring the occasional parade of RVs, but only 1,000 people live here 
permanently. Not many more than when American poet Walt Whitman opined about 
Big Sur in the late 1800s and, in the 1920s, Robinson Jeffers's verse 
introduced the romantic idea of its untamed spaces to his countrymen.

The razor-edge mountains, steep valleys and even steeper cliffs; the natural 
hot springs, waterfalls and deep swimming holes have inspired poets, writers, 
artists and thinkers for decades: Jack Kerouac, Hunter S Thompson and Ansel 
Adams; bohemians and beatniks. Later, the hippies put Big Sur in our 
consciousness - or unconsciousness - in quite another way. They searched for 
enlightenment at such centres of study and contemplation as the Esalen 
Institute. And, in the process, introduced America and the rest of the world to 
the practical therapies and holistic ideas of primal scream therapy, holotropic 
breathwork and the like.

Hollywood also swooned. Kim Novak, Orson Welles, Rita Hayworth, Steve McQueen, 
Dennis Hopper, Ali MacGraw have all sought its isolation, as has Brad Pitt - 
pre-Brangelina.

Big Sur is just five hours' drive north from Los Angeles and three south from 
San Francisco, but it's a world away from both. The coast is wild and rugged, 
and lined with sheer cliffs stretching 90 miles, almost uninterrupted, from 
Carmel-by-the-Sea in the north to San Simeon in the south. The shoreline is 
near impossible to reach.

Inland for 30 miles, the tight jigsaw of green-capped mountains are also 
impenetrable, save by mule and foot. And even that was not possible when the 
intrepid conquistadors sailed up the coast some 450 years ago. They stayed in 
their galleons and continued north. Two centuries later, the first Europeans 
set foot here, dubbing the wilderness, "el pais grande del sur" - the big 
country of the south.

Barring a few loggers and mountain men, it remained a fortress to solitude 
until Highway 1 was completed in 1937 and a small ribbon of the Big Sur 
coastline was opened up. Blasted out of the cliff face, the road is a 
configuration of zigzags, switchbacks, ascents and drops: the implacable Santa 
Lucia mountains of the Ventana Wilderness thousands of feet above and the 
raging Pacific Ocean hundreds of feet below. It is probably the most scenic 
drive in North America.

Inland, however, Big Sur remains a place of coyotes, rattlesnakes and mountain 
lions. In the 1930s, this was where Helmuth and Helen Deetjen made their home 
and built Deetjen's Big Sur Inn, a magical collection of cabins in a grove of 
redwoods in Castro Canyon, and where I would spend the next few nights in cosy 
contemplation.

Deetjen, a Norwegian emigr√©, had been drawn to Big Sur by his love of the 
works of Whitman and Jeffers. He believed Whitman's haunting Song Of The 
Redwood-Tree had called him to live among "these huge precipitous cliffs - this 
amplitude - these valleys grand" in the "flashing and golden pageant of 
California!"

And so in the canyon, Deetjen built first a redwood barn, now the restaurant 
and dining rooms, and then, as their home evolved into the coastline's original 
roadhouse, higgledy-piggledy wooden cabins strung out along Castro Creek.

Grandpa Deetjen, as Helmuth came to be known (even though he and Helen never 
had any children), added new additions in the style of the cabins of his native 
Norway. All were constructed with scavenged redwood planks. The vernacular is 
organic and simple: hand-hewn beams and rough-sawn siding. It is basic but 
comfortable: good mattresses, plenty of hot water and delicious food in the 
restaurant. Each cabin is unique. Doors, windows, shelves, stairs - nothing 
matches. Rooms have names, but no keys: Chateau Fiasco, Creek House, Faraway. 
Some are enveloped in wisteria, others a blaze of red maple foliage.

Looking out on to the creek from my room, Top Antique, which surveys much of 
the property, I came face to mid-trunk with a towering redwood. It must have 
been 300 years old. Below, the damp canyon was a carpet of lush mosses, 
five-fingered ferns and sorrel creating a natural soundproofing for the brook 
that rushed to the ocean. The air was scented with pine.

On my first night, as almost every night, I had supper in the restaurant, four 
rooms with a distinctly English farmhouse feel: white wooden walls, low 
ceilings, and full height windows, dim-lit lamps, shelves stacked with blue and 
white china, cabinets full of trinkets, and paintings of Big Sur and Helmuth 
Deetjen himself, sporting his signature pipe and beret.

The Deetjens restaurant is one of the few places you can venture to of an 
evening, and the best. There is no town of Big Sur, just a bakery/pizzeria, 
post office, general stores, gas stations and two posh resorts dotted in three 
sections along the highway.

None of these places were here when Jack Kerouac sought the solitude of Big 
Sur in 1960. In the end, the isolation and darkness almost gave him a nervous 
breakdown. In his autobiographical novel, Big Sur, his alter ego, Jack Duluoz, 
even hears the ocean telling him "Don't hang around here" as he tries to 
capture the voice of the Pacific in words.

Deetjen's, however, has always had a pull. Everyone from Joan Baez to the 
Beach Boys has been here. Even Garbo allegedly paid "Grandpa" private visits, 
as did his mentor Jeffers - the latter for stimulation of the mind.

When Deetjen died in 1972, he bequeathed the inn to a foundation set up for 
its preservation. It is now on the National Register of Historic Places, though 
it was nearly lost last year in the fires that swept through Big Sur, when 
200,000 acres burned after lightning strikes ignited the third-largest fire in 
California history. More than 20 homes were lost - as well as hectares of 
marijuana plants a few naughty locals were growing illicitly under the forest 
canopy. It has taken a year to reopen some of Big Sur's state parks and the 
trails, which had been blocked by hundreds of fallen trees or disappeared in 
mud slides that came with the winter rains. Thankfully, many of the trees, 
though burnt, have survived and the grasses regrown.

Over the next few days, I explored the fragile wilderness. I walked the 
10-mile Old Coast Road, the original coastal route, to the open-arched Bixby 
Bridge. Lush redwood forests and creeks gave way to chaparral and a vista south 
east of the 3,700ft Pico Blanco peak. Here, I watched peregrine falcons 
disappear in and out of banks of encroaching sea fog. I climbed Buzzard's Roost 
Trail through groves of bay and laurel, oak and redwoods, and sat and scanned 
the horizon for blue and humpback whales. I huffed and puffed my way up the 
Hidden Trail and Ridge Trail to the bluffs of Andrew Molera State Park to look 
down on the secret coves of the jagged Big Sur coastline, stretching for miles.

Perhaps my favourite hike, and one just reopened, was to Mount Manuel. It took 
five hours, walking through an old oak forest near the Big Sur river valley, 
patches of exposed chaparral and fire-scorched wooded gullies. When I reached 
the main ridge path, I was rewarded with vistas of the Big Sur river gorge 
below. Eventually, after much climbing, the Santa Lucia mountains came into 
view. At the summit, the 360-degree panorama surveyed the whole of Big Sur: the 
Ventana Wilderness, the notched coastline and the cliffs. Above me, a 
California condor glided on the powerful thermals rising from the sun-baked 
scrub.

After my walks, I relaxed under redwoods on the shaded lawn of the Henry 
Miller Memorial Library or in the Big Sur Spirit Garden - both a short drive 
north of Deetjen's. Emil White, Miller's great friend, donated his home to 
house the library. Miller actually lived on Partington Ridge - where he could 
usually be found parading around in a jockstrap. This cultural centre dedicated 
to him houses a reference library and bookshop. Foreign editions of his works - 
Tropique Du Capricorne, Le Monde Du Sexe - hang on pieces of string from the 
ceiling. At the Spirit Garden, an outdoor maze of exotic sculptures, cacti and 
giant twig "nests" filled with pillows, I climbed up into a nest and snoozed 
for hours as world music played.

At other times, I lay on the windswept sand of Pfeiffer beach with its sea 
stacks, natural arches and pounding surf; picked a path through brambles to the 
old pirates' haunt of Partington Cove to watch the sea otters and seals frolic 
in a forest of kelp and churning waves; or sat on a bench near the 
picture-postcard McWay Falls with its 80ft drop straight into the ocean.

Relaxation didn't come any easier, however, than the hot tubs at Esalen. The 
Institute, along with the Tassajara Zen Mountain Center and the New Camaldoli 
Hermitage, became the beating heart of Big Sur in the 60s, and remains so. 
Esalen, which opened in 1962, is the intellectual home of the Human Potential 
movement, a blend of psychological therapies and secularised spiritual 
practices, as well as Gestalt therapy.

Such thinkers as Arnold Toynbee, Aldous Huxley and Abraham Maslow would 
expound at this "gymnasium of the mind" to the likes of Bob Dylan, Jane Fonda, 
Hunter S Thompson and the odd Beatle. Much of its countercultural preaching and 
promotion of eastern philosophies is now assimilated into the mainstream, 
although, for many, Esalen will always conjure up the images of hedonism, free 
love and LSD trips that it became synonymous with in the late 60s. These days, 
the Institute is at pains to distance itself from such recreational activities. 
This is now a genteel place of work and self-improvement, but is still gently 
pushing the envelope with courses as diverse as the Islamic Jesus, Holistic 
Sexuality, Singing Gestalt and Dangerous Writing.

And the setting can't help but inspire the most jaded attendee: lush, 
manicured lawns are dotted with cypress trees and beds of wildflowers, all 
intersected by streams and edged by plunging cliffs.

Sadly, the Institute is shy about people arriving without booking a workshop 
or day retreat in advance. In the past, too many people have come to rubberneck 
and titter at nudity in hot tubs.

I had no such prejudices as, suspended halfway down a 500ft cliff, I floated 
and bobbed in warm spring waters. The outdoor tubs are part of the minimalist 
cathedral of glass barrel vaults and concrete construction that make up the 
bath and massage complex. Below me, Pacific waves hurled themselves at the 
cliffs. Above, Scorpio started emerging to fill the night sky. I began quietly 
reciting a few lines of Jeffers. It was pretentious, I know, but if I couldn't 
do it here, I couldn't do it anywhere. "Civilised, crying how to be human again 
... Lean on the silent rock until you feel its divinity ..."

Just as I was getting in the flow, out of the dark, wafting from a nearby tub, 
I heard some different advice being imparted: "If you don't want people looking 
at your nipples so much, you shouldn't have them pierced." So much for Jeffers, 
this was more Henry Miller territory. The old rogue, most of whose novels were 
banned at some point for being too sexually explicit, would have loved such 
chitchat. I can just imagine him plonking himself in the waters, possibly sans 
that old jockstrap, and uttering a few sarky lines from Big Sur And The Oranges 
Of Hieronymus Bosch: "Thus far, Big Sur has crept along with what's to hand. 
What is probably needed to put it on the map are: a brothel, a jail and a 
gold-plated electric chair. It would be wonderful to have a Jewish 
delicatessen, but that is probably asking too much all at once."

Fifty years on, all four are still absent. And visitors will find the essence 
of Big Sur much as Miller left it.

Way to go

Getting there

British Airways (ba.com <http://www.ba.com>) flies Heathrow-San Francisco from 
¬£398 rtn inc tax. Dollar Rent A Car (0800 252897,dollar.co.uk 
<http://www.dollar.co.uk>) from ¬£106 per week, inc cover and taxes.

Where to stay

Deetjen's Big Sur Inn (001 831 667 2377, deetjens.com <http://www.deetjens.com>
) rooms from ¬£50 per night.

Further information

Esalen Institute: esalen.org <http://www.esalen.org>. 

Henry Miller Memorial Library: henrymiller.org <http://www.henrymiller.org>.

Spirit Garden: bigsurspiritgarden.com <http://www.bigsurspiritgarden.com>. 
Tourist information:visitcalifornia.com <http://www.visitcalifornia.com>.
 