
The company which cut the weight of Toblerone bars by widening the gaps 
between the chocolate peaks is now slapping a 20% price rise on Cadbury’s 
Freddo bars.

The recommended retail price of the chocolate frogs, which weigh 18g (0.6oz), 
is scheduled to jump from 25p to 30p in the spring. The US food manufacturing 
giant Mondelēz, which ownsCadbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/cadburyschweppes>, said it was having to 
make selective price increases as a “last resort”. The firm made a better than 
expected profit of $548m (£448m) in its last three-month financial period.

Other Cadbury’s chocolate bars are also expected to rise in price, but 
Mondelēz declined to name the other affected brands or say if all prices would 
go up by 20%.

Mondelēz, which also makes Ritz crackers, Philadelphia cheese, Oreos and Milka 
chocolate, said price hikes were necessary. A spokeswoman said: “Increasing 
prices is always a last resort, but to ensure we can keep people’s favourite 
brands on shelf and look after the 4,500 people we employ in the UK, we are 
having to make some selective price increases across our range.”

Economists have warned that inflation will rise in the coming months as a 
result of the decline in the value of the pound. Food manufacturers are either 
increasing prices or shrinking pack sizes – dubbed “shrinkflation” – as they 
look to maintain profit margins as input costs increase.

Shrinkflation started during the last recession and in recent years chocolate 
lovers have been regularly targeted: Mars and Snickers bars have got smaller;
1kg tins of Quality Street and Roses have slimmed down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/sep/03/quality-street-chocolates-nestle-cadbury>
 to 820g; and six-packs of Cadbury’s Creme Eggs – also a Mondelēz brand – have 
been whittled down to five.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ftoblerone-maker-mondolez-hike-price-cadbury-bars-freddo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30cd41e050b5a5c9abd6b482dd5cc7dc3f4faae4%2F0_157_3200_1919%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Toblerone%20maker%20to%20hike%20price%20of%20Cadbury's%20Freddo%20bars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ftoblerone-maker-mondolez-hike-price-cadbury-bars-freddo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Toblerone%20maker%20to%20hike%20price%20of%20Cadbury%27s%20Freddo%20bars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Ftoblerone-maker-mondolez-hike-price-cadbury-bars-freddo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30cd41e050b5a5c9abd6b482dd5cc7dc3f4faae4%2F0_157_3200_1919%2F3200.jpg>
 Mind the gap: the new Toblerone bar comes with added space. Photograph: Darren 
Staples/Reuters 
Mondelēz, which bought Cadbury in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/dec/03/moving-cadbury-management-tax>
, was widely criticised last year when it opted to widen thegaps between 
Toblerone’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/toblerone-gets-more-gappy-but-its-fans-are-not-happy>
 chunky chocolate triangles rather than increase its price. Rival Mars has also 
shrunk itssharing bags of Maltesers by 15% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/lighter-way-to-enjoy-maltesers-mars-shrinks-sharing-bags-by-15>
 as it looks for ways to offset rising production costs.

Mondelēz said rising commodity costs and recent foreign exchange pressures 
meant its food products were becoming more expensive to make. The pound has 
fallen sharply against the dollar since thevote for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/uk-firms-brace-for-further-brexit-price-rises-surveys-show>
 last summer. The company highlighted the price of cocoa, which it imports into 
the UK, had risen over 50% since 2013.

Earlier this week, Premier Foods, which makes Oxo cubes, Mr Kipling cakes, 
Bisto gravy and Homepride flour,said it was in talks with supermarkets over 
pushing up prices by about 5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/prices-oxo-bisto-mr-kipling-pound-brexit-premier-foods>
. In the autumnTesco had a public spat with Unilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/tescos-chief-warns-global-brands-weak-pound-marmitegate>
 over plans for price rises of up to 10% on brands such as Marmite.

A spokeswoman for Mondelēz said: “We have, and continue, to carry these 
increased costs within our business as much as possible, because our priority 
is to keep our brands as affordable as we can.” She added: “Importantly it is 
the retailer who ultimately sets the price on the shelf.”
 