
Olympic medalist Tom Daley <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tomdaley> has 
announced his engagement to the film-maker Dustin Lance Black after two years 
of dating.

The diver, 21, who revealed he was dating a man via YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/02/tom-daley-in-relationship-with-man>
 in 2013, registered his engagement to the Academy Award-winning screenwriter 
Black, 41, with a notice in the Times newspaper.

The announcement in the births, marriages and deaths section read: “The 
engagement is announced between Tom, son of Robert and Debra Daley of Plymouth, 
and Lance, son of Jeff Bisch of Philadelphia and Anne Bisch of Lake Providence.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Ftom-daley-announces-engagement-to-filmmaker-dustin-lance-black%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe49e3e156bca10249bdfcc72b2960c6f24f04fa2%2F0_0_2514_1509%2F2514.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Daley%20announces%20engagement%20to%20film-maker%20Dustin%20Lance%20Black&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Ftom-daley-announces-engagement-to-filmmaker-dustin-lance-black%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Daley%20announces%20engagement%20to%20film-maker%20Dustin%20Lance%20Black&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Foct%2F01%2Ftom-daley-announces-engagement-to-filmmaker-dustin-lance-black%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe49e3e156bca10249bdfcc72b2960c6f24f04fa2%2F0_0_2514_1509%2F2514.jpg>
 The engagement announcement of Tom Daley and Lance Black. Photograph: The Times
Daley won two gold medals for England at the 2010 Commonwealth Games and a 
bronze for Britain at the 2012 Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/11/tom-daley-olympic-diving-bronze>.

Black, 41, is an American director, producer and LGBT rights activist who won 
an Oscar for Milk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/22/milk-film-review-gus-van-sant-sean-penn>
, the 2008 film based on the life of the gay rights activist and politician 
Harvey Milk.

According to the Times website, the engagement announcement would have cost 
about £200.

Tom Daley: 'I always knew I was attracted to guys'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/18/tom-daley-i-always-knew-i-was-attracted-to-guys-olympic-2012-diver>
Daley revealed his relationship in his YouTube video, but did not name Black. 
He said: “In spring this year, my life changed massively when I met someone, 
and they make me feel so happy, so safe and everything just feels great. That 
someone is a guy.

“It did take me by surprise a little bit. It was always in the back of my head 
that something like that could happen. But it wasn’t until spring this year 
that something just clicked. It felt right and I thought ‘OK’. And my whole 
world changed there and then.”

Daley said he was still interested in girls at the time, but last year 
announced that he was gay. In an interview in the same year, he said he thought 
his revelation was not newsworthy. Daley said: “I think we live in a society 
that is far more accepting than it was five or 10 years ago, but we’ve still 
got a way to go before people no longer assume you’re in a heterosexual 
relationship.

“Family is something that has always been really important to me and yes, at 
some point I would love to marry and have kids.”
 