
Tom Watson has clarified his comments that any Labour members who were present 
at the anti-war protest in Walthamstowshould be removed from the party. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/04/tom-watson-intimidating-anti-war-protest-labour-vicar-walthamstow>

The deputy leader made his original statement on Friday after Labour MPs 
including Stella Creasy, whose office was targeted in last week’s 
demonstration, Diana Johnson and Liz Kendall,hit out at abuse and threats  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/02/labour-mps-deselection-threats-syria-vote-stella-creasy-diana-johnson>
of deselection over their vote on airstrikes in Syria.

Appearing on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Friday, Watson said he had seen 
TV images of the protest in Creasy’s constituency, adding: “I can only say: if 
there wereLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party members on 
that demonstration, intimidating staff members of an MP like that, then I think 
they should be removed from the party.”


Bullying, dissent and the need for Labour party unity | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/07/bullying-dissent-and-the-need-for-labour-party-unity>
His remarks were met with a backlash from protesters who claimed he was trying 
to intimidate them into silence. It later transpired that reports that 
demonstrators had rallied outside Creasy’s housewere untrue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2015/dec/04/stella-creasy-crushes-story-about-protest-outside-her-house>
.

On Sunday, Watson wrote on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/tom.watson.uk/posts/1033777576644239>: “I want to 
clarify comments I made on Friday about demonstrators who gathered outside the 
constituency office of my fellow Labour MP Stella Creasy last week to protest 
against extending airstrikes to Syria. There was some confusion about the 
events surrounding that demonstration. It was falsely reported on social media 
that some protesters marched on Stella’s home, but Stella subsequently made 
clear there is no evidence that happened.

“Stella expressed concern about the harassment her staff members were 
subjected to, writing on social media that she missed parts of the 
parliamentary debate on airstrikes because she felt she needed to leave the 
chamber to check they were OK. But it is also now clear that her staff weren’t 
in her constituency office when the march took place.

“When I spoke out about MPs and their staff being intimidated, I wrongly 
believed that they were inside the building at the time. That was just an 
honest mistake I corrected as soon as I realised I’d made it. To be clear, it 
is not my view that Labour party members who attended that peaceful 
demonstration should be kicked out of the party. Everyone has the right to 
express their views freely and peacefully.”


Tom Watson is trying to intimidate us, say anti-war protesters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/04/tom-watson-intimidating-anti-war-protest-labour-vicar-walthamstow>
Watson added, however, that he remained concerned about reports of 
intimidation against MPs and the people they employ, including Creasy’s staff. 
“As our leader,Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, has made clear, Labour 
party members need to treat each other respectfully. The party should examine 
cases where those standards of behaviour aren’t met and take appropriate action 
if necessary. But party members who demonstrated outside Stella’s office need 
to know that I support their right to do so,” he said.



Watson’s comments came as Corbyn launched a strong defence of the Stop the War 
Coalition, describing them as “a vital democratic campaign”. The Labour leader
rejected a call by the former shadow education secretary Tristram Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/06/corbyn-stop-the-war-fundraiser>
 to pull out of a Christmas fundraising event in light of its decision to 
picket the party’s headquarters last week, and the “ugly comments” it made 
about the shadow foreign secretary, Hilary Benn.

There was anger when the coalition organised a demonstration before the Oldham 
West and Royton byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/04/jeremy-corbyn-labour-critics-warned-oldham-win-strengthened-leadership>
, forcing Labour to postpone a phone-bank campaign.

 * This headline and subheading on this article were amended on Monday 7 
December 2015, to correct an earlier version that misrepresented Tom Watson’s 
position.  