
The Orwells, Mallrats (La La La)

Part of a wave of brat-pop garage punk coming up in Chicago. Mallrats 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iNZpBOme8GI&feature=youtu.be> captures the 
teenage boredom of wasting your days at one of the countless, carbon-copy malls 
in Chicago's endless, identical suburbs.

Local H, Another February

Two men, a lot of noise. Local H nail the grumbling, miserable feeling of 
another February <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UxsqX824kxw&feature=youtu.be> 
in Chicago, when the dark, bitter, biting, unforgiving winter is at its worst 
and there's seemingly no end in sight. This song is as close as you can get to 
winter in Chicago without the actual stinging wind shooting frozen snow into 
your eye, while you walk to the "L" train stops.

Rise Against, Like the Angel

I used to do a local music show for an alternative rock station in Chicago and 
remember getting unknown punk act Rise Against's Revolutions Per Minute album 
in our show's mailbox;Like the Angel 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w0bUgbbOp5w&feature=youtu.be> was the first 
song we chose to play on the air from the record. Not long after, Rise Against 
went on to become an international powerhouse outfit. This song will always 
remind me of the group's Chicago come-up, before they belonged to the world.

Krewella, One Minute

Krewella's blowing up on the festival scene these days, but One Minute 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DC8SbBB-bgA&feature=youtu.be> comes from the 
group's blog-darling beginnings. The track is undeniably infectious: a showcase 
of the trio's standout power-pop sensibilities.

Fall Out Boy, The (Shipped) Gold Standard

While it's easy to point to a song like Chicago Is So Two Years Ago as an 
obvious choice for this band's hometown anthem,The (Shipped) Gold Standard 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UUtIlq3KxAU&feature=youtu.be> also references 
the Windy City – specifically the planted palm trees along Chicago's North 
Avenue Beach in the summertime. An insider nod from one-time suburban pop-punk 
underdogs.

The Hood Internet (Featuring BBU & Annie Hart), Won't F--- Us Over

The Hood Internet has been elevating the art of the mashup for almost seven 
years now, bringing legitimacy and excitement to a song style that too often 
slips into disappointing novelty. With 2012's FEAT full length, the group made 
the leap into original productions, bringing along socio-conscious (and 
now-defunct) Chicago hip hop outfit BBU along for hypnotic oddball trackWon't 
F--- Us Over <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dxcH16NNkfA&feature=youtu.be>.

Supreme Cuts (Youngster Gone Off That), Sherm

Spacey, tribal and hypnotic, Chicago's Supreme Cuts demonstrate what they do 
best onSherm <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1ENqOd9vRwE>. Like many Chicago 
music power duos before them (refer back to Local H), Mike Perry and Austin 
Keultjes create a world of sound between the two of them, taking their audience 
places with their laptop productions.

Flosstradamus, Rollup

Trap stars Flosstradamus got their start as local party DJs in Chicago, 
holding down an increasingly popular residency in the city's Lakeview 
neighbourhood years back. These days, Floss is a global sensation, 
inspiring rabid fandom with their productions online and festival sets. The 
group's rise has also put a lot of eyes and ears on Chicago's rap and 
electronic scenes over the years – so check outRollup 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5PH4T8adDew&feature=youtu.be>.

Kanye West, Hold My Liquor

Kanye may claim Chicago on songs like the unreleased Home and its commercial 
reworking Homecoming. His collaborations with the current wave of hometown 
talent like King Louie and Chief Keef (featured here onLiquor 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wXLRgDUtuqg&feature=youtu.be>) help maintain 
his connection to the city that's been dubbed "Chiraq" in recent years, as a 
result of the tragic wave of deadly violence that grips Chicago's summers.

The Smashing Pumpkins, Tonight, Tonight

Tonight, Tonight <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NOG3eus4ZSo> is a 
quintessential Chicago anthem. Billy Corgan infamously immortalises "the city 
by the Lake" in easily one of the best songs in The Smashing Pumpkins' entire 
catalogue.

Jaime Black, founder and host of Chicago's longest-running music-focused 
podcast,Dynasty Podcasts <http://dynastypodcasts.com/>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>, selects his soundtrack to the city
 