
Candlelight Lounge

Tremé was once a thriving musical neighbourhood. The strip of North Robertson 
Street had seven jumping live music bars. Things have changed, following the 
hurricane, the ensuing gentrification, and theeponymous television show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/jan/01/new-orleans-treme-television>. 
Joe's Cozy Corner is now a twee little residence, and the Petroleum Lounge has 
become theTreme Coffee House <http://nolalovescoffee.com/treme-coffeehouse/>, 
where tourists gather to ride Segways through the neighbourhood and a 
chalkboard hawks the Treme Panini. All that remains is the Candlelight Lounge: 
a modest cinder-block structure. A row of chairs marks the stage. The owners 
keep odd hours but they are consistently open on Wednesdays for theTreme Brass 
Band <https://www.facebook.com/TremeBrassBand>. This eight-to-10-piece ensemble 
performs acoustically, apart from a microphone for the singer. The bar serves 
beer and simple mixed drinks, and it's one of the last places in town you can 
buy a "set up", which is a half-pint of liquor, a can of soda, a bowl of ice, 
and a few plastic cups.
• 925 North Robertson Street, +1 504 525 4748, facebook.com/Candlelight-Lounge 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Candlelight-Lounge/271591036227339?rf=123234411061089>
. Open daily from 11am-till late. Check with venue for listings information

The Spotted Cat Music Club
 Photograph: Cyrus Mccrimmon/Denver Post/Getty Images 
The sophistication of the music and the quality of the musicianship are set 
against a gritty bare-bones interior with a cash-only bar where you certainly 
will not get a martini. Everything is served in plastic cups. To the delight of 
some and the horror of others, you can still smoke. The crowd ranges from 
European tourists to bachelorette parties, to whichever film stars are in town 
for work. There are a few chairs at the bar but the room quickly becomes 
standing room only as the dancefloor is overtaken by swing fanatics. The finest 
names of the new jazz talent,Sophie Lee Lowry <http://sophieleemusic.com/>, 
Meschiya Lake <http://www.meschiyalake.com/> and Aurora Nealand 
<http://auroranealand.com/>, all have regular gigs here. It's the only bar in 
town with an upright piano in the ladies' bathroom.
• 623 Frenchmen Street, +1 504 943 3887, spottedcatmusicclub.com 
<http://www.spottedcatmusicclub.com/>. Check venue website for event details

The Three Muses

The titular Muses are music, fancy beverages and world-class tapas. This is a 
more sophisticated joint than the Spotted Cat. You can get a cocktail with 
exotic ingredients. You can pay for it with a credit card, and it will be 
served in a glass. No smoking. Chef Dan Estes' work is on par with that of the 
great local chefs who come to eat here on their nights off. The tiny stage 
features jazz and Americana. With the exception of Friday and Saturday 
late-night shows, it's a quiet place where you can appreciate the nuances of 
the music and hear the words. The tables fill quickly. There can be a bit of a 
wait, so a good move would be to go there first, put your name on the list, and 
stroll the street while you wait for your table to come up.
• 536 Frenchmen Street, +1 504 252 4801, thethreemuses.com 
<http://www.thethreemuses.com/>. Open Mon, Wed-Sun 5pm-till late. Check venue 
website for event details

Snug Harbor Jazz Bistro
 Photograph: Alamy 
Snug Harbor, the oldest club on the now-booming Frenchmen Street, is still the 
premier spot to hear jazz in New Orleans. This is Jazz with a capital "J" – the 
old masters, not the fresh-outta-music-school tattooed hobos, who are, in fact, 
quite good and may graduate to play here one day.Delfeayo Marsalis 
<http://delfeayomarsalis.com/> or Jason Marsalis <http://jasonmarsalis.com/> 
and Wynton's drummer Herlin Riley are among the A-list local and national jazz 
greats seen nightly. They have a real stage with a real piano and a real sound 
system. There's also a real cover charge, and the audience is expected to, and 
really does, shut up and listen to the music.
• 626 Frenchmen Street , +1 504 949 0696, snugjazz.com 
<http://www.snugjazz.com/site/>. Check venue website for event details

Buffa's Bar and Restaurant

With Frenchmen Street being the hot new thing, it's not a question of if, but 
when, it gets too crowded for you. At that point, it's time to head a few 
blocks away to Buffa's Bar on the edge of the French Quarter. With its oval 
windows and neon signs, the front bar remains true to its architectural 
intention: a classic dive bar. In the back, there's a slightly raised stage and 
a floor of tables. Pianist Tom McDermott accompanies Meschiya Lake and Aurora 
Nealand in a more intimate duet setting. OriginalDr John 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/dr-john> sidemen Jerry Jumonville and 
Freddie Staehle have a happy hour show on Friday.
• 1001 Esplanade Avenue, +1 504 949 0038, buffasbar.com 
<http://www.buffasbar.com/>. Bar open daily, 24/7. Check venue website for 
event details

Siberia

If the Tremé neighbourhood has been eclipsed by Frenchmen Street, the 
consensus in the New Orleans music community is that the strip of clubs on St 
Claude Avenue is the start of the next big thing. Proof that there are vibrant 
scenes beyond funk, jazz and brass, Siberia hosts artists ranging from New 
Orleans homegrown sludge metal groupEyeHateGod <http://eyehategod.ee/> to 
pre-eminent singer-songwriterAlex McMurray <http://www.alexmcmurray.com/>. 
Upcoming shows include a fundraiser to bring Sissy Bounce RapperKatey Red 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o8ZeYslcGNg>'s entourage to Austin's SXSW music 
conference, and a bill of four unknown punk bands. Siberia has a rock club 
sound system that delivers rock and rap shows at proper volume: ear-splitting.
• 2227 St Claude Avenue, +1 504 265 8855, siberianola.com 
<http://siberianola.com/>. Open daily from 4pm. Check venue website for event 
details

BJ's Lounge
 Photograph: Christopher Dobens/ flickr 
<http://www.flickr.com/photos/29014455@N03/6548018213/> 
BJ's Lounge in the Bywater is a true dive bar, where smoking is still 
permitted. Bywater has become BoBo (bourgeois bohemian) in recent years, but 
the construction workers and barflies who haven't been driven out by the new 
neighbours still gather here for drinks after work. The excellent jukebox skews 
towards classic soul, funk and blues. Guitar Lightning andLittle Freddie King 
<http://www.littlefreddieking.com/> play the occasional show here on weekends. 
Monday night is held down byKing James and the Special Men 
<http://specialmennola.com/>. While there is no shortage of scholars playing 
jazz and funk, bands that keep the flame of Fats Domino's classic New Orleans 
rhythm and blues going are few, and King James is among the best. This Monday 
night jam is becoming renowned.
• 4301 Burgundy, +1 504 945 9256, no website

Maple Leaf Bar
 Walter "Wolfman" Jackson at the Maple Leaf bar. Photograph: Lee Celano/Reuters
Celebrating its 40th anniversary, the Maple Leaf is the granddaddy of Uptown 
clubs. While proprietor Hank Staples has kept the pressed tin walls and 
ceilings that give the bar its bit-of-a-dump vibe, he has invested in the 
infrastructure, so the club has adequate air conditioning, a wooden dancefloor, 
and a top-notch sound system. TheRebirth Brass Band 
<http://www.rebirthbrassband.com/>'s regular Tuesday night show is an 
institution. On the weekends, look for New Orleans' best offerings in funk 
music, fromJohnny Sketch and the Dirty Notes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2AlV40P_bK8> to Ivan Neville's Dumpstafunk 
<http://www.dumpstaphunk.com/>.
• 8316 Oak Street, +1 504 866 9359, mapleleafbar.com 
<http://www.mapleleafbar.com/>. Open daily from 3pm-till late. Check venue 
website for event details

Mother-in-Law Lounge
 Photograph: Alamy 
Self-proclaimed "Emperor of the Universe" Ernie K-Doe 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ernie_K-Doe> named this hole in the wall in the 
shadows of the I-10 overpass after his 1960 hit song. You can't miss it.Paul Deo
 <http://pauldeo.com/gallery/murals>'s murals on the exterior are amazing. 
Ernie K-Doe was survived by his wife Antoinette, who kept the club open until 
she died in 2009. It was reopened in January by trumpet player and local hero
Kermit Ruffins <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DdW2G3hZorY>. In the early 90s, 
Ruffins quit the Rebirth Brass Band because he didn't like the gruelling 
touring schedule. As befits a great entertainer who doesn't like to travel, 
Ruffins has hosted a series of weekly gigs (Thursdays at Vaughn's, Tuesdays at 
Bullet's) that became nights of legend. After a brief stint as owner of 
Kermit's Tremé Speakeasy, Ruffins has shuttered that joint and is now 
proprietor of the Mother-in-Law.
• 1500 North Claiborne Avenue, +1 504 947 1078, no website

Ooh Pooh Pah Doo Bar
 Jessie Hilla. Photograph: Michael Ochs Archives 
The club is named after Jessie Hill's 1960's R&B hit single 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yHUWFLVa-ug> and is close to the Mother In Law 
– apparently there is a new club district afoot: nightspots named after songs 
produced byAllen Toussaint <http://allentoussaint.com/>. On Orleans Avenue, 
this club would not have been recommended a few years prior because the 
Iberville Projects (council estates) were across the street. The projects have 
been torn down and, taking a historical long view, the undeveloped space across 
the street was the location of the legendary red-light district Storyville. 
That is a bit more romantic and touristy. Those exercising due caution arriving 
at and exiting the club will be treated to an authentic night of down-home 
blues or jazz in one of New Orleans' last authentic juke joints. The low 
ceilings, the leather couches and the friendly clientele give this club a 
living-room atmosphere.
• 1931 Orleans Avenue, +1 501 435 3384, facebook.com/oohpoopahdoobar 
<https://www.facebook.com/oohpoopahdoobar?rf=214530972062603>. Open Mon-Thurs, 
and Sun 10am-midnight, Fri-Sat 10am-2am

Davis Rogan <http://davisrogan.com/index.php> is a musician and New Orleans 
music blogger on whom the character of Davis McAlary in the HBO show Treme was 
loosely based.

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 