
The Walrus and the Carpenter

Seattle is nearly surrounded by water, and there's no better place to sample 
the region's wealth of seafood than the Walrus, as locals call it. Bright and 
buzzing, with a zinc bar, wire baskets filled with oysters on ice, and a 
salvaged chandelier that looks like it was harvested from a coral reef, 
chef-owner Renée Erickson's seafood-centric restaurant has quickly become an 
institution. I like to start with a half-dozen oysters – if the Effingham, a 
briny variety from Vancouver Island, is in season, that's my pick – before 
moving on to smoked trout with lentils, walnuts, pickled onions, and creme 
fraiche, Lopez Island spot prawns, or even hand-chopped steak tartare.
• 4743 Ballard Avenue NW (in the Kolstrand Building), +1 206 395 9227, 
thewalrusbar.com <http://thewalrusbar.com/>. Mains $8-$12. Open daily 4pm till 
late

Sitka & Spruce

Whenever I'm asked what Seattle's food scene looks like today, I point to 
Sitka & Spruce. Chef-owner Matt Dillon may draw inspiration from across Europe 
and the Middle East, but he showcases local ingredients like no one else in 
town. Tucked into the corner of Melrose Market, between a butcher shop and a 
florist, his open, inviting kitchen turns out flavours that are sophisticated 
but never fussy, simple but deeply satisfying. The menu changes daily, but if 
it includes creamed escarole and sorrel with an egg on top, Yakima chickpea 
puree with housemade harissa, or the buckwheat canelé with roasted stone fruit, 
you're in for a treat.
• 1531 Melrose Avenue East (in the Melrose Building), +1 206 324 0662, 
sitkaandspruce.com <http://www.sitkaandspruce.com/Home-menu.html>. Mains 
$8.50-$18. Open Mon-Fri 11.30am-2pm (lunch), Tues-Thurs 5.30-10pm, Fri-Sat 
5.30-11pm, Sun 4.30-9pm (dinner), Sat 10am-2pm, Sun 10am-3pm (brunch)

The Wandering Goose

Seattle is nowhere near the American south, but the buttermilk biscuits, layer 
cakes, and collard greens at the Wandering Goose are as good as they come. 
Originally hailing from North Carolina, chef-owner Heather Earnhardt was a 
local legend for her baking even before she opened this small, cheerful cafe in 
the Capitol Hill neighbourhood. The towering biscuit sandwiches are hard to 
resist, but I rarely stray from the veggie plate, with its pimento macaroni and 
cheese, vinegary collards, tiny Sea Island peas, and flaky biscuit. And try as 
I might, I can never leave without a slice of one of Earnhardt's giant cakes in 
my bag.
• 403 15th Avenue East, +1 206 323 9938, thewanderinggoose.com 
<http://www.thewanderinggoose.com/>. Mains $11-$13. Open daily 7am-4pm, Friday 
dinner at 7pm

Green Leaf

A hole-in-the-wall in the International District, Green Leaf doesn't look like 
much from the outside – or on the inside, for that matter – but it's never 
wanting for customers, especially at lunchtime. That's because it serves the 
best Vietnamese food around. Start with a crunchy, sweet-hot green papaya salad 
before diving into a (swimming pool-sized) bowl of vermicelli with grilled 
pork, which comes topped with fried shallots, pickled daikon and carrot, and
nuoc cham (dipping sauce).
• 418 8th Avenue South, +1 206 340 1388, greenleaftaste.com 
<http://greenleaftaste.com/#!/home/>. Mains $8.25-$12.85. Open daily 11am-10pm

Ma'Ono Fried Chicken and Whisky

The name says it all. Ma'Ono is the new incarnation of what was once the 
fine-dining restaurant Spring Hill, whose casual Monday-night fried-chicken 
dinners became so popular that chef-owner Mark Fuller reshaped his entire 
establishment to serve the dish seven nights a week. West Seattle is a trek 
from downtown but it's worth it for this chicken, with its burnished, crisp 
skin and accompanying kimchi, rice, and dipping sauces. Fuller also mines his 
Hawaiian heritage to make etherealmanapua (steamed pork buns) and 
hangover-curingsaimin, a Hawaiian version of ramen, with pork belly and toasted 
seaweed. But whatever you do, don't skip the burger, despite the $19 price tag: 
a spectacularly juicy beef patty topped with bacon, special sauce, and – I love 
this detail – crisp, shredded iceberg lettuce.
• 4437 California Avenue SW, +1 206 935 1075, maono.springhillnorthwest.com 
<http://maono.springhillnorthwest.com/>. Mains $12-$21. Open daily 5pm-10pm, 
Sat and Sun brunch 10am-2pm

Spinasse

Chef Jason Stratton has made a name for himself in the rustic, glowy kitchen 
of Spinasse, cooking food of the Piedmont region of northern Italy. Sit at the 
marble-topped counter, order a glass of barbaresco and thetajarin (impossibly 
thin egg noodles) with ragu, and watch the plaid-shirted cooks at the stove. 
The menu changes frequently, but when in season, don't miss the salad of 
chicories with marinated rabbit, or the pork cooked slowly in milk until it 
falls apart and the milk turns into a loose, savoury caramel.
• 1531 14th Avenue, +1 206 251 7673, spinasse.com <http://www.spinasse.com/>. 
Mains $12-$34. Sun-Thurs 5pm-10pm, Fri-Sat 5pm-11pm

Hot Cakes

If you've got room for dessert following dinner at the Walrus, head down the 
street to Hot Cakes, a bakery-meets-bar that will likely have a line out the 
door, even on a weeknight. Though it is best known for its molten chocolate 
cakes in tinyMason jars <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mason_jar>, the real 
winner is the milkshakes, which can be had with or without booze. I go for the 
no-nonsense dark chocolate flavour – thick, creamy, and not too sweet – though 
the Drunken Sailor shake, with peanut butter, caramel, and whiskey, has been 
known to sway me. And the salted peanut butter cookie, spiked with milk 
chocolate chunks, more than does the job.
• 5427 Ballard Avenue NW, +1 206 420 3431, getyourhotcakes.com 
<http://www.getyourhotcakes.com/>. Cakes and shakes from $7 each. Open Mon 
6pm-10pm, Tues-Thurs 11am-10pm, Fri -Sat 11am-11pm, Sun 11am-10pm

Poppy

You wouldn't expect to see a lush herb garden on a bustling corner in Capitol 
Hill, but that's exactly what you'll find behind Poppy. The freshest flavours 
of the north-west shine in chef-owner Jerry Traunfeld's menu, which takes its 
inspiration from athali, an Indian metal platter with small, fitted with small 
bowls of vegetables. Poppy's thalis come in seven- or 10-item versions and 
change frequently: one night, black cod with carrot sauce might be on offer, 
with a nettle, lovage, and mushroom soup and a fennel, orange, and wild ginger 
pickle. If you have a sweet tooth, close the night with a nutter-butter square, 
a dreamy confection made for the dessert thali but also available separately, 
if you know who to ask.
• 622 Broadway East, +1 206 324 1108, poppyseattle.com 
<http://poppyseattle.com/>. Thalis from $24. Open Sun-Thurs 5.30pm-10pm, 
Fri-Sat 5.30pm-11pm

Paseo Paseo

Paseo Paseo makes the world's messiest sandwiches, but they're good enough 
that you won't mind the dry-cleaning bill. The most popular is the Caribbean 
Roast, a toasted baguette spread with aioli and filled with tender slow-roasted 
pork shoulder, pickled jalapenos, and big, juicy loops of caramelised onion. 
The Paseo Press, which adds sweet banana peppers, ham, and cheese, is a close 
second. If it's a nice day and you're at the Ballard location – a pink shack 
facing Puget Sound – walk down the street toGolden Gardens Park 
<http://www.seattle.gov/parks/park_detail.asp?ID=243> and have a picnic on the 
beach.
• 6226 Seaview Avenue NW, +1 206 789 3100, paseoseattle.com 
<http://paseoseattle.com/>. Open Tues-Sat 11am-9pm. Also at 4225 Fremont Avenue 
N, +1 206 545 7440, Tues-Fri 11am-9pm, Sat 11am-8pm. Sandwiches $6-$8.95, cash 
only

Analog Coffee

Seattle has a coffee shop on nearly every corner, but few make coffee as well 
as Analog. Hidden on a quiet residential street in otherwise-very-urban Capitol 
Hill, you could easily walk right past this spare neighbourhood cafe with a 
hand-lettered sign on the sidewalk. Inside, the friendly baristas bring 
exacting standards to their work, using locally roastedHerkimer Coffee 
<http://herkimercoffee.com/> beans and Fresh Breeze milk from Lynden, 
Washington. I've never had a better macchiato. Empty seats are hard to come by, 
but if you can snag one, grab a comic book from the table by the door, and sit 
for a while.
• 235 Summit Ave East, +1 206 678 7443, analogcoffee.com 
<http://analogcoffee.com/>. Open Mon-Sun 7am-6pm

Molly Wizenberg is a food writer and restaurateur from Seattle. She has 
published two recipe books and writes atorangette.blogspot.co.uk 
<http://orangette.blogspot.co.uk/>. She and her husband own the Seattle 
restaurantDelancey <http://www.delanceyseattle.com/> and the next-door bar, 

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 