
Olympic national park

If you only have time to visit one park in Washington, make it Olympic. 
Located out on the Olympic Peninsula in the north-west corner of the state, 
this massive wilderness offers everything from tide pools to mossy rain forests 
to glacier-capped mountains.

Jutting out into the Pacific and separated from the mainland by the Puget 
Sound and the Straight of Juan de Fuca, the Olympic Peninsula receives more 
rainfall than any other place in the US except Hawaii. High in the 
2,000-metre-plus Olympic mountains, much of that precipitation falls in the 
form of snow, which feeds more than 250 glaciers, making this the most 
glaciated US terrain outside Alaska. The extensive ice fields flow into a 
number of major rivers, which wind their way down through temperate rain 
forests to the Pacific.

Visitors can see the highlights by following the Bogachiel river from its 
Pacific outlet at La Push inland to the Hoh rainforest. The next day, circle 
around to the northeast and head up in elevation to Hurricane Ridge, which has 
a breathtaking view over the Olympic mountain range. Those with extra time will 
want to soak in the Sol Duc hot springs and take a scenic stroll to Marymere 
Falls.Lodging is available at Lake Crescent and Sol Duc 
<http://www.olympicnationalparks.com/accommodations/sol-duc-hot-springs-resort.aspx>
 and numerous campgrounds are scattered throughout the park.

Top tip: The Hall of Mosses trail in Hoh is a short, one-mile loop through old 
growth rainforest. The only greenery more impressive than the massive trees are 
the prodigious mosses and lichens hanging from every branch. Keep an eye out 
for trophy elk, which grow to massive sizes here.

• Park website <http://www.nps.gov/olym/index.htm>

North Cascades national park
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412008158299%2F8c6a0fc2-9455-4460-9c27-ce86c0281267-2060x1375.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412008158299%2F8c6a0fc2-9455-4460-9c27-ce86c0281267-2060x1375.jpeg>
 Redoubt Whatcom Traverse in North Cascades national park. Photograph: 
Cultura/REX 
Home to grizzly bears, grey wolves, lynx and wolverines, the North Cascades 
park offers a true wilderness experience, despite being only a three hour drive 
from Seattle.

Except for scenic highway 20, which runs east to west through the park, North 
Cascades is crossed by few roads – but is bisected by the US-Canada border. The 
lack of easy access attracts backpackers and mountaineers to the North and 
South Picket ranges, Mount Triumph and Mount Redoubt, peaks world-renowned for 
their challenging terrain. You don’t have to be a mountaineer to enjoy the 
North Cascades, however; many one-day trails leave from highway 20. The famous 
Pacific Crest trail crosses the east section of the park on its way from Mexico 
to Canada. The Ross Lake national recreation area, located in the north unit, 
also offers boating and fishing, while rafters and kayakers can find white 
water on the Skagit and Stehekin rivers.

Top Tip: As many as 10,000 years before the fur trade brought the first white 
men to the North Cascades, Native Americans were using the Cascade Pass as a 
route through the mountains. Today it’s accessed from the west by a four-mile 
trail at the end of the Cascade River Road.

• Park website <http://www.nps.gov/noca/index.htm>

Mount Rainier national park
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412008380411%2F775007f3-c45a-4bbb-9ad8-e7a10dd686be-2060x1146.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412008380411%2F775007f3-c45a-4bbb-9ad8-e7a10dd686be-2060x1146.jpeg>
 Mount Rainier seen from Seattle, 54 miles away. Photograph: Jason 
Redmond/Reuters 
On clear days, the roof of Washington – the 4,392-metre Mount Rainier – is 
visible to the southeast from Seattle, 54 miles away. But the Evergreen State 
is not known for its clear days; rain and fog are persistent here year round. 
Still, if you’re lucky enough to catch even a glimpse of the mountain, you’ll 
likely want to get a closer look at its snowy summit.

The best views of Rainier are from the Sunrise Lodge in the north-east section 
of the park. Here you can drive up to an elevation of just under 2,000m. To get 
even closer you’ll need an ice axe, crampons and mountaineering experience. 
Each year, around 11,000 people attempt to climb Rainier, with a success rate 
of about 50%. Most expeditions last two days and require an elevation gain over 
2,700m. Even experienced climbers are encouraged to climb with a guide; since 
the late 1800s around 100 people have died on Rainier from rockfall, 
avalanches, falls and hypothermia. Bring binoculars and watch the ants ascend 
the mountain from the comfort and safety of the lodge.

Top tip: The 93-mile Wonderland Trail circumnavigates Mount Rainier, giving 
backpackers the best possible look at the mountain from all sides. Hiking the 
entire trail takes about two weeks, but there are many options for shorter 
trips and day hikes.

• Park website <http://www.nps.gov/mora/index.htm> 
Mount Rainer climbing guide <https://www.rmiguides.com/mt-rainier/>, Alpine 
Ascents International <https://www.alpineascents.com/rainier.asp>

Discovery Park
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412009591432%2F14788427697_7cbc88c4e8_o-1020x698.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412009591432%2F14788427697_7cbc88c4e8_o-1020x698.jpeg>
 West Point lighthouse in Discovery Park.Photograph: Paul VanDerWerf/flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/pavdw/14788427697/> 
This urban park, on the Puget Sound waterfront, is Seattle’s largest green 
space. Despite being at the edge of a major metropolitan city, on the grounds 
of a former Army post, Discovery Park is famous for its wild residents. The
Seattle Audubon Society <http://www.seattleaudubon.org/sas/> has compiled a 
checklist of 270 bird species and large mammals: coyotes, black bears and 
cougars have been spotted within the 534-acre park. Seals and sea lions are 
also frequent visitors and the park protects more than two miles of tide 
pool-rich shoreline.

Discovery Park is also home to the Daybreak Star Cultural Center 
<http://www.unitedindians.com/daybreak.html>, a hub for Native American 
cultural gatherings in the Pacific Northwest. The 20-acre site offers 
workshops, powwows, social services and an art gallery and repository for 
traditional art. Several dozen tribes are native to Washington and the Seattle 
area and this centre is an important resource for education and cultural 
outreach.

Top tip: One of the most popular treks is the Discovery Park Loop Trail, which 
was designated a National Recreation Trail in 1975. This 2.8-mile path connects 
to an additional nine miles of hiking trails.

• Park website <http://www.seattle.gov/parks/environment/discovery.htm>

Cape Disappointment state park
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412009730243%2F6b388589-2d70-44cd-abd5-064caae5c292-2060x1438.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412009730243%2F6b388589-2d70-44cd-abd5-064caae5c292-2060x1438.jpeg>
 Cape Disappointment lighthouse. Photograph: Design Pics Inc/REX 
Don’t let the name mislead you, there’s nothing disappointing about this state 
park on the very south-west tip of the Washington coast. The name was coined in 
1788 when an English ship searching for the outlet of the (then unnamed) 
Columbia river, which passes just south of the Cape, missed the passage over 
the river’s sand bar and was forced to turn back, leaving the Columbia 
unexplored until 1792.

The park also marks the end of the journey made by Lewis and Clark in 1805, 
the first American expedition to cross what is now the western US, from St 
Louis, Missouri, to the Pacific. The park’sLewis and the Clark Interpretive 
Center <http://www.parks.wa.gov/187/Lewis-Clark-Interpretive-Center> tells the 
story of their journey.

Lighthouse enthusiasts will also delight in the North Head and Cape 
Disappointment lighthouses. The latter, built in 1856, is the oldest 
functioning lighthouse on the west coast.

If history isn’t your thing, the park also offers plenty of coastal scenery, 
including eight miles of hiking trails to secluded coves. A large campground 
caters to both RVs and tents, and 14 beachside yurts and three cabins are also 
available for rental.

Top tip: Between December and March, Pacific grey whales migrate past the Cape 
from their Arctic feeding grounds to their breeding grounds off Mexico. The 
higher ground around the Lewis and Clark Interpretive Center and North Head 
lighthouse offer the best viewing.

• Park website <http://www.parks.wa.gov/486/Cape-Disappointment>

Flaming Geyser state park

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412010183118%2F25a0057e-fd9c-4ea2-a7ad-3edfaaa0eab8-2060x1379.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412010183118%2F25a0057e-fd9c-4ea2-a7ad-3edfaaa0eab8-2060x1379.jpeg>
 The flaming geyser at Flaming Geyser state park. Photograph: Alamy 
This name is also a bit misleading. There was once a dramatically flaming 
geyser here – an eruption of gas and seawater about eight metres tall that 
sprung from a test well dug by miners in the early 1900s. The methane gas that 
sparked that flaming eruption is still present, but now it feeds a flame only a 
few inches high that is safely contained in a rock rimmed basin. Nearby, the 
gas also bubbles up through a mud hole to create Bubbling Geyser. Both geysers 
can be seen on a short walk from the picnic area along Cristy Creek.

The geysers are definitely worth a look, but the real draw of this park is the 
Green river, three miles of which flow through the park. Depending on the water 
level, which varies with rainfall and snowmelt, the Green is popular with 
rafters and kayakers when high and with canoeists and tubers when low.

Top tip: From October to December, fishermen descend on the river in hope of 
catchinga giant wild Chinook, the largest type of Pacific salmon 
<http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/pr/species/fish/chinooksalmon.htm>, which are then 
migrating upstream to their spawning grounds. This is a popular time at the 
park for both fishermen and salmon watchers, who can learn more about the 
fish’s curious life cycle on the park’s Salmon Interpretive Trail.

• Park website <http://www.parks.wa.gov/504/Flaming-Geyser>

Mount Saint Helens national monument
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412010353894%2F2d439243-1aa5-4582-a5f5-5a9a4f23d91f-2060x1381.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412010353894%2F2d439243-1aa5-4582-a5f5-5a9a4f23d91f-2060x1381.jpeg>
 Photograph: Colin Brynn/Getty Images/Robert Harding World Imagery 
On May 18, 1980, Mount St Helens exploded, killing 57 people and incinerating 
over 200 homes and hundreds of miles of roads in the deadliest and most 
destructive volcanic eruption in US history. Over 30 years later, the scars 
from the eruption are still visible on the mountain – which lost over 450 
metres of elevation in the blast – and across the surrounding countryside.

Visiting Mount St Helens is a lesson in the rejuvenating power of nature. The 
national monument was created in 1982 so that the area surrounding the volcano 
could be allowed to recover naturally from the blast. Ongoing scientific 
monitoring of the area’s forests, rivers and streams are revealing a speedy 
return to health and increased biodiversity of both plants and animals.

The best views of the volcano are had from the Windy Ridge viewpoint and the 
Johnston Ridge observatory. Ambitious hikers can climb to the top of the 
volcano and look down into the summit caldera, which still shows signs of 
volcanic activity. The 28-mile Loowit trail encircles Mount St Helens, giving 
backpackers a 360-degree view of the mountain and the impressive blast recovery 
zone.

Top tip: After you’ve seen the volcano, go underground into Ape Cave, a 
network of subterranean lava tubes. A 2.6-mile trail links two of the biggest, 
most accessible lava tubes, the lower and upper tubes. Be sure to take a 
powerful flashlight, extra batteries and layers: the temperature in the caves 
stays at 5C to 6C year round.

• Park website <http://www.fs.usda.gov/mountsthelens>, Loowit trail 
<http://www.wta.org/go-hiking/hikes/loowit>

Sacajawea state park
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412010550701%2F3e3b9a9a-8695-4633-a6bb-1d0eb5fc4a4d-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412010550701%2F3e3b9a9a-8695-4633-a6bb-1d0eb5fc4a4d-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
When Lewis and Clark and their company of men made their way by foot and canoe 
from Missouri to the Pacific, they were accompanied by a Lemhi Shoshone woman 
named Sacajawea. Sacajawea’s native survival skills were a huge asset to the 
expedition and she’s often given a share of the credit for its success.

Sacajawea state park celebrates her role in the legendary journey. It is at 
the confluence of the Snake and Columbia rivers in Pasco, on the site of a camp 
used by the expedition for two days in October 1805. Today, there is one 
campground within the park, but it’s only accessible by boat.

The Interpretive Center tells the Lewis and Clark story through Sacajawea’s 
eyes. There are also thousands of native artefacts on display, including bone 
and stone tools dating back 12,000 years.

Top tip: The park lies along the Northwest Discovery Water Trail 
<http://www.ndwt.org/ndwt/index.asp>, a 367-mile long recreational boating 
route stretching from the Clearwater river in Idaho to the Bonneville dam in 
the Columbia river gorge between Oregon and Washington. Most boaters canoe or 
kayak the route, though motorboats and sailboats can be used in some sections.

• Park website <http://www.parks.wa.gov/575/Sacajawea>, Sacajawea Interpretive 
Center <http://www.parks.wa.gov/250/Sacajawea-Interpretive-Center>

San Juan Islands national monument 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412010679616%2Fb81d6d92-260f-4d31-a726-f1d54011757c-2060x1372.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412010679616%2Fb81d6d92-260f-4d31-a726-f1d54011757c-2060x1372.jpeg>
 An orca in San Juan Islands. Photograph: Alamy 
Created in 2013 to protect this unique pocket of marine biodiversity in the 
northern Puget Sound, this is one of the newest parks in Washington. Over 400 
islands make up the San Juans; some are blanketed with lush rainforest while 
others are barren spires of rock. The varied habitats support a diversity of 
wildlife, including back-tailed deer, mink, river otters and many species of 
birds.

The stars of the San Juans, however, are the orcas: three pods of killer 
whales frequent the waters surrounding the islands from mid-April to October, 
when they hunt the healthy population of seals. One pod often stays in the area 
year round and transient pods and lone whales can also be seen year round. 
Grey, minke and humpback whales as well as dolphins also visit the islands. 
Several companies offer whale-watching boat tours, or you can try your luck at 
spotting spouts from a clifftop vantage point at Lime Kiln Point state park. 
Fishing, crabbing, and kayaking between the islands is also popular.

Top tip: To get a bird’s-eye view of the San Juan islands, hike up Mount 
Constitution in Moran state park on Orcas Island. This 6½-mile round trip hike 
is well worth the effort: on clear days you’ll be able to see the whole San 
Juan archipelago, as well as east to the Mount Baker volcano in the Cascade 
range.

• Park website <http://www.sanjuanislandsnca.org/>, whale and wildlife watching
 <http://www.visitsanjuans.com/what-to-do/san-juan-islands-whale-watching>, 
hiking trails <http://www.wta.org/go-hiking/hikes/mount-constitution>

Sun Lakes-Dry Falls state park

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412010838221%2Fbdda86fe-86d5-4bed-ab78-882dddd4e284-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Washington%20state%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F30%2F-sp-top-10-national-state-parks-washington-state%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F29%2F1412010838221%2Fbdda86fe-86d5-4bed-ab78-882dddd4e284-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Around 15,000 years ago, towards the end of the last Ice Age, a series of 
massive floods swept across Washington, set off by the breaking of ice dams on 
proglacial Lake Missoula in what is now western Montana. These floods, among 
the largest to ever occur on Earth, left scars on the landscape that can still 
be seen today. One of the most dramatic scars is preserved at Sun Lakes-Dry 
Falls State Park: a 120-metre-high, 3½-mile-long cliff that was once a 
waterfall four times the size of Niagara, thought to be one of the largest in 
geologic history and the site is designated a National Natural Landmark.

The former waterfall is now dry as a bone but water is still present in the 
Sun Lakes, a haven for fishing, swimming and boating in this otherwise arid 
desert landscape. Camping is very popular in the park, which offers over 150 
campsites for RV’s and tents. There are also boat rentals in the summer.

The best views of Dry Falls are had from the Vista House Overlook and the Dry 
Falls visitor centre features displays about the geology and natural history of 
the area.

Top tip: During the great floods, Umatilla Rock would have been an island in 
the midst of raging waters. The five-mile round trip trek to the rock offers 
outstanding views of Dry Falls and the Grand Coulee below the former falls.

• Park website <http://www.parks.wa.gov/298/Sun-Lakes-Dry-Falls>, hiking trails
 <http://www.wta.org/go-hiking/hikes/umatilla-rock-monument-coulee>

Mary Caperton Morton is a freelance writer and photographer who makes her home 
on the back roads of North America, living and working out of a tiny 
solar-powered Teardrop trailer. Follow her travels attheblondecoyote.com 
<http://theblondecoyote.com/>
 