
Ocean Beach

San Francisco's longest beach is also its most reliable surf spot. When the 
swells are right, hundreds of surfers in black wet suits bob offshore, waiting 
for their wave. Whether you're a surfer or not (the cold water and challenging 
break are not for beginners), this 3.5-mile stretch of sand and shore is one of 
the best places to spend a sunny afternoon. Locals come here to skimboard, fly 
kites, bike and skate along the esplanade, and stroll on the dunes. Warm up 
afterwards at the nearbyOuterlands <http://outerlandssf.com/> restaurant with a 
cup of Sightglass coffee and a grilled cheese sandwich on a fresh-baked levain 
loaf. Or soak up the endless summer vibes indoors atMollusk Surf Shop 
<http://mollusksurfshop.com/>, the anchor of the Outer Sunset's arts and surf 
scene.
• Point Lobos Avenue, Great Highway, parksconservancy.org 
<http://www.parksconservancy.org/visit/park-sites/ocean-beach.html>

The Wave Organ
 Photograph: Ed Kashi/VII/Corbis 
At the end of the jetty that encloses the Marina District's small boat harbour 
sits the Wave Organ. Part rock garden, part sound sculpture, the 2,700sq-ft 
installation features PVC and concrete pipes that capture the sea's 
otherworldly rumbles, groans, and whistles as waves slap against, and push 
into, the underwater openings. Designed by artist Peter Richards in 
collaboration with stonemason George Gonzales and the Exploratorium, the 
organ's 25 pipes curve out like periscopes between corniced granite and marble 
slabs salvaged from the remnants of a Gold Rush-era cemetery. Sit in the 
partially enclosed "stereo booth" and listen as sounds echo from all three 
sides of the alcove; visit at high tide for the best sonic experience.
• 83 Marina Green Drive, exploratorium.edu/visit/wave-organ 
<https://www.exploratorium.edu/visit/wave-organ>. Exploratorium open Tues-Sun 
10am-5pm, plus Thur 6pm-10pm for 18+. Adults $25 (£15), 4-17 and seniors $19, 
after dark $15. Admission to Wave Organ free

Land's End
 Photograph: Alamy 
In a city full of spectacular views, this coastal park offers some of the most 
varied vistas. Along the water, explore the ruins of the Sutro Baths, a 
Victorian bathhouse that burned down in 1966. Wander through the adjacent 
tunnel and watch as waves crash against the rocks below the cave's mouth. Then 
head up the stairs for a hike along the untamed headlands. Here, cypress groves 
open up to craggy bluffs with 30-mile views of the Golden Gate bridge and the 
Marin Headlands on the other side of the Bay. Keep an eye out for wildlife: 
more than 250 species of birds roost here, including Brandt's cormorants, brown 
pelicans, and red-winged blackbirds. If you're lucky, you might spot sea lions, 
dolphins, migrating grey whales, or a brave surfer in the water below.
• Land's End Lookout, 680 Point Lobos, nps.gov 
<http://www.nps.gov/goga/planyourvisit/landsend.htm>

Billy Goat Hill Rope Swing
 Photograph: Golden Gate Express/flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/58775291@N04/5550616541/> 
Fly out over the city on a 10-metre rope swing. Hung from a lone eucalyptus 
tree atop a steep and rugged slope in Glen Park, the neighbourhood swing 
provides a breathtaking view of the skyline at night: from the sheer adrenaline 
rush of the ground dropping away and the beauty of the twinkling Bay bridge, 
illuminated byLeo Villareal's Bay Lights sculpture 
<http://thebaylights.org/artist/>. The ride is almost as exciting during the 
day when you can see all the way to the East Bay's Mount Diablo and watch 
American kestrels glide overhead. Climb to the park via Harry Street: a 
destination in its own right, the secluded street is a set of about 230 mostly 
wooden stair steps, canopied by banana trees, leafy vines, and palm fronds.
• 300 Beacon Street. Open daily, admission free

Angel Island state park
 Photograph: Alamy 
People have been rowing and sailing to Angel Island for at least 3,000 years. 
Join the tide and take a Blue & Gold Fleet ferry from San Francisco, or rent a 
kayak from Sea Trek in Sausalito and paddle the three-mile journey yourself. 
Once on the island – the largest of the Bay's 48 – explore the wildlife and 
human history by foot or bike. Thirteen miles of trails go through shady 
forests of coast live oak, bay laurel, and hazelnut trees. For a 360-degree 
panorama, hike to the top of Mount Livermore, the island's 240-metre-high peak. 
Down below, visit Camp Reynolds, a defensive battery built by the US army 
during the civil war, or the Immigration Station, which processed hundreds of 
thousands of people between 1910 and 1940. You can also pitch a tent and stay 
the night at one of the island's bayside campgrounds.
• Angel Island, parks.ca.gov <http://www.parks.ca.gov/?page_id=468>. Open 
daily, fee included in ferry tickets. Blue & Gold Fleet, Pier 41, +1 415 705 
8200,blueandgoldfleet.com <http://www.blueandgoldfleet.com/>. Ferry tickets $17 
adults, $9.50 kids 5-12 years, under 5s free, $9.50 seniors 65+. Check website 
for schedule. Sea Trek, Schoonmaker Point, Sausalito (near the Bay Model), +1 
415 332 8494,seatrek.com <http://www.seatrek.com/>. Open daily 9am-5pm, Angel 
Island crossing trip $85. Campsites around the island can be reserved at 
Reserve America, +1 518 885 3639,reserveamerica.com 
<http://www.reserveamerica.com/>. Camping fee $30

Golden Gate park
 Photograph: Alamy 
San Francisco's largest outdoor attraction is really several weeks' worth of 
activities packed into one massive expanse of gardens, playgrounds and museums. 
The many smaller sites within the park include the peacefulJapanese Tea Garden 
<http://japaneseteagardensf.com/> with its five acres of bamboo stands, cherry 
trees and koi ponds;Stow Lake <http://www.stowlakeboathouse.com/>, a reservoir, 
perfect for paddle boating (row boats $20 per hour); the 18-hole disc (Frisbee) 
golf course, and the Bison Paddock, where a small herd of buffalo roam. On 
Sundays and some Saturdays, John F Kennedy Drive is closed to cars, allowing 
freewheeling rollerskaters and cyclists to rule the road. At thede Young 
<https://deyoung.famsf.org/>, a fine arts museum in the park, watch the sky 
change colour in James Turrell's Skyspace, a dome-shaped installation in the 
sculpture garden.
• golden-gate-park.com <http://www.golden-gate-park.com/>. Open daily, 
admission free. Check website for individual park and museum admission fees and 
hours

Andy Goldsworthy's Art in The Presidio
 Photograph: Marcio Jose Sanchez/AP 
Known for his site-specific organic sculptures, Andrew Goldsworthy's three 
installations in the Presidio utilise the area's felled eucalyptus and Monterey 
cypress trees. A former military base located on the San Francisco peninsula's 
northern tip, the park encompasses the cosy Baker Beach and rugged Marshall's 
Beach, as well as the forest that the army planted in the late 19th and early 
20th centuries. In 2008, the artist built the "Spire" from 38 cypress trunks, 
which he layered into a steeple shape. He returned three years later to create 
"Wood Line". Made from eucalyptus branches, the work weaves snakelike beneath 
the surrounding grove. In "Tree Fall," his final piece for the park, eucalyptus 
branches coated in cracked clay extend across the clay-covered ceiling of a 
former munitions storeroom.
• Spire, Bay Area Ridge Trail near the Arguello Gate, open daily; Wood Line, 
near Lovers' Lane, open daily; Tree Fall, Anza Avenue, Building 95,presidio.gov 
<http://www.presidio.gov/Pages/default.aspx>. Open Sat-Sun 10am-4pm with 
additional weekday hours by appointment, admission free

Fort Funston
 Photograph: Kerrick James/Alamy 
Steady coastal winds and 60 metre-high bluffs make this park one of the top 
hang-gliding launch points in the US (try Big Air Hang Gliding 
<http://sanfranciscohanggliding.com/>). For a bird's-eye view of the Bay, sign 
up for a course at one of the nearby shops, or perch on the viewing deck and 
watch others soar. Locals come here to run their dogs, ride horses fromMar 
Vista Stables <http://www.marvistastable.com/>, and walk on the trails that run 
from the cliffs to the wide beach and the peninsula's largest remaining dune 
field. In the summer, the dunes bloom with bush lupine's purple flowers, yellow 
sand-verbena and coast paintbrush's red-tipped petals. Watch for cottontail 
rabbits hopping through the brush and bottlenose dolphins surfacing in the 
water just past the breakers.
• Fort Funston Road, +1 415 561 4323, parksconservancy.org 
<http://www.parksconservancy.org/visit/park-sites/fort-funston.html>

Sigmund Stern Recreation Grove 
 The Family Crest play at Stern Recreational Ground. Photograph: Matthew 
Washburn/Family Cat/flickr <http://bit.ly/1g6YMZj> 
Every summer Sunday, thousands of San Franciscans spread out on picnic 
blankets and listen to live music at Stern Grove, home to the country's oldest 
free summer performing arts festival. A ring of tall eucalyptus and fir trees 
creates a natural sound and wind barrier and gives the amphitheatre an intimate 
feel despite the large crowds. TheSan Francisco Symphony 
<https://www.sfsymphony.org/> (which played the Grove's inaugural concert in 
1932) is often among the seasonal lineup. Year round, people head to the park 
for lawn bowling, croquet, and tennis.
• Sloat Boulevard, +1 415 242 5200, sfrecpark.org 
<http://sfrecpark.org/destination/sigmund-stern-recreation-grove/>. Check 
website for event details

Seward Street Slides 
 Photograph: Braden Kowitz/flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/43251297@N00/2217638863/> 
Take full advantage of San Francisco's sloping terrain and zip downhill on the 
curved Seward Street Slides. They might feel like mere child's play but the 
slides are a testament to neighbourhood activism. After years of protests in 
the late 60s and early 70s, the community saved a patch of green from being 
turned into an apartment complex, and the Seward Street Minipark was born. The 
dual concrete slides were designed by then 14-year-old Kim Clark, who won a 
Design the Park competition. Bring some cardboard or grab one of the discarded 
scraps at the bottom and prepare to catch some air on your way back down.
• Intersection of Seward and Douglass Streets. Open Tues-Sun 10am-5pm, 
admission free

April Kilcrease is based in Oakland, California. She is a travel writer and 
editor

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 