
Death Valley national park

It sounds like a place to avoid, but don't let the ominous name scare you 
away. Most of the year, this vast and rugged expanse of east Californian desert 
is brutally hot, but visit in winter or early spring (though even in the dead 
of winter, midday temperatures can hit 30C) and you'll find a surprisingly 
beautiful and vibrant place. First-time visitors are often awestruck by the 
desert's vivid colours. For thousands of years, the people of the Timbisha 
tribe thrived here, migrating seasonally between the valley floor and more 
fertile mountains. The name Death Valley was bestowed in 1849 by a band of lost 
California-bound gold rushers, one of whom did actually die while trying to 
cross it. The legend doesn't seem to deter runners of theBadwater Ultramarathon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/sep/06/dragons-back-race-wales-ultramarathons>
, a 135-mile race across the vast valley held in mid-July. 

The park has nine campsites <http://www.nps.gov/deva/planyourvisit/camping.htm>
 and several air-conditioned lodges, including the historicFurnace Creek Inn 
<http://www.furnacecreekresort.com/lodging/the-inn-at-furnace-creek/> (doubles 
from $365)and thePanamint Springs resort <http://www.panamintsprings.com/> 
(doubles from $79, quadruples $94). 

Top tip: One of the best places to experience Death Valley in all its 
multicoloured glory is Zabriskie Point, at sunrise or sunset. This easily 
accessible viewing point is only a short walk from a large parking area. 
• Death Valley links history 
<http://www.nps.gov/deva/historyculture/people.htm>, lodging 
<http://www.nps.gov/deva/planyourvisit/lodging.htm>, Badwater Ultramarathon 
<http://www.badwater.com/> 

Yosemite national park
 Yosemite Great Falls, California, the tallest falls in USA. Photograph: 
www.alamy.com 
With its stunning glacier-sculpted geology, abundant wildlife and world-class 
recreational opportunities, Yosemite, 200 miles east of San Francisco, is one 
of the crown jewels of America's national park system. Yosemite's granite 
wonderland was carved by massive glaciers around three million years ago, when 
ice covered all but the highest peaks in the Sierra Nevada. 

Today, Yosemite valley is known for fantastic hiking, rafting, fishing and 
wildlife watching, not to mention being a mecca for big-wall rock climbing. A 
year-round destination, Yosemite is resplendent but often crowded in the 
summer; winter transforms the park into a quiet snowy paradise. Many park roads 
and trails are closed or inaccessible from mid-November until late spring, but 
Yosemite valley stays open year-round for snowshoeing, cross-country and 
backcountry skiing.

Yosemite is best explored over at least several days. Overnight accommodation 
ranges fromwilderness camping 
<http://www.nps.gov/yose/planyourvisit/wildpermits.htm> to cabins to the 
luxuriousAhwahnee Hotel 
<http://www.yosemitepark.com/ahwahnee-accommodations.aspx>, with doubles from 
$360 a night.

Top tips Yosemite's towering granite walls are too tall to be seen through a 
car windshield; this park is best experienced on foot. The one-mile Glacier 
Point and 1½-mile Tuolumne Meadow trails offer short but spectacular strolls, 
or tackle the more strenuous 7.2-mile walk to the top of Yosemite Falls. The 
harrowing 14-mile hike up Half Dome requires clinging to cables bolted into the 
rock face, as well as luck in the much-coveted permit lottery. 
• Yosemite links reservations <http://www.yosemitepark.com/>, walking 
<http://www.yosemitehikes.com/>, how to apply for a Half Dome permit 
<http://www.nps.gov/yose/planyourvisit/hdpermits.htm>

Point Reyes national seashore
 Point Reyes beach. Photograph: Alamy 
California is known for its beautiful beaches, but those preferring seals and 
solitude to bikini babes and boardwalks should head to Point Reyes national 
seashore, 37 miles north of San Francisco. Protected in 1962 to save the area 
from residential development, the peninsula is one of California's few wild 
beaches. The 180-square-mile park is nearly cut off from the mainland by 
Tomales Bay, an elongated body of water that sits in the rift zone created by 
the San Andreas fault. 

Headlands and sea cliffs provide a sanctuary for wildlife, including raptors 
and nesting sea birds. A large herd of tule elk – a subspecies that once roamed 
throughout California – grazes in the northern highlands of the peninsula. 
Point Reyes is popular year-round, but especially from late December to 
mid-March, when as many as 20,000 grey whales migrate past the peninsula from 
their Alaskan feeding grounds to their breeding grounds off Baja California, in 
the longest migration undertaken by any mammal. 

Point Reyes is only an hour north of San Francisco (as long as traffic is 
moving at a reasonable clip over the Golden Gate bridge), and the park offers 
backcountry and boat-in camping. Permits and a willingness to rough it are 
required; no car or RV camping is available. Hiking trails abound: short ones 
(less than a mile) include the Earthquake trail, which straddles the San 
Andreas fault, and the Kule Loklo trail, which takes in a restored coastal 
Miwok Native American village. Those with more time and energy can set off on 
the US's longest hike, the 6,800-mile American Discovery Trail, from Point 
Reyes all the way east to the Atlantic Ocean. 

Top tips The only indoor lodging in the park is at the Point Reyes Youth Hostel
 <http://norcalhostels.org/reyes>, which offers dorm beds ($25) and private 
rooms (from $82, sleep up to five) to travellers of all ages. Reservations 
highly recommended. 
• Point Reyes links campsites 
<http://www.nps.gov/pore/planyourvisit/camping.htm>, whale watching 
<http://www.nps.gov/pore/naturescience/gray_whales.htm>, hiking 
<http://www.nps.gov/pore/planyourvisit/hiking.htm>

Joshua Tree national park
 Photograph: Alamy 
The park was named after the otherworldly trees that dot the landscape – 
actually an unusually tall species of yucca – but the real stars here are the 
rock formations: jumbled piles of outsize boulders that glitter with crystals 
in the southern Californian sun. Rock climbers come from all over the world to 
scale these boulders, but you don't have to be a pro to have a blast scrambling 
around this pink granite jungle gym. 

The other stars of Joshua Tree are the stars themselves: with no humidity and 
skies devoid of light pollution, the Milky Way is overwhelmingly vivid. For an 
out-of-this-world experience, try scheduling your trip during a meteor shower, 
such as the Orionids in October, the Leonids in November, or the Geminids in 
December. Summers in the Mojave Desert are sweltering, but the weather in early 
spring, late fall and winter is usually delightful.

There are nine campsites scattered through the park. Only two – Black Rock and 
Cottonwood – provide running water, and none offers an RV hookup. The park is 
125 miles east of Los Angeles, near the desert oases of Twenty-nine Palms and 
Palm Springs, which offer air-conditioned accommodations ranging from cheap 
dives to upscale hotels. 

Top tips Keep an eye out for bighorned sheep on the 7.2-mile round trip trail 
to the Lost Palms Oasis, a strenuous but rewarding hike that follows an ancient 
Native American footpath to a cool oasis hidden deep in a boulder canyon.
• Joshua Tree links trails <http://www.nps.gov/jotr/planyourvisit/htrails.htm>,
camping <http://www.nps.gov/jotr/planyourvisit/camping.htm>, climbing and routes
 <http://www.mountainproject.com/v/joshua-tree-national-park/105720495>; 
climbing guides: joshuatreerockclimbing.com 
<http://www.joshuatreerockclimbing.com/>, cliffhangerguides.com 
<http://www.cliffhangerguides.com/>, joshuatreeguides.com 
<http://joshuatreeguides.com/> 

Lassen Volcanic national park
 Photograph: Alamy 
Yellowstone national park in Wyoming is world-famous for volcanic features 
such as geysers, fumaroles and mud springs, but  northern California boasts its 
very own version: Lassen Volcanic national park, 50 miles east of Redding. 

The park is capped by 10,462-foot Lassen Peak, the world's largest volcanic 
dome. Lassen's 1915 blast makes it one of only two volcanoes to have erupted in 
the continental US in the 20th century (the other being Washington's Mount 
Saint Helens in 1980). After the eruption, which laid waste to vast swaths of 
surrounding land, Lassen Volcanic national park was created to preserve the 
devastated areas for future observation and study. Visiting the area now, 
nearly 100 years later, is a dramatic lesson in the Earth's own healing powers; 
it still bears vast scars of hardened lava, but between the rocks, the flora 
and fauna are flourishing.

In the summer, Lassen offers over 150 miles of hiking trails to a wide range 
of volcanic features such as Sulphur Works and Bumpass Hell, the park's largest 
hydrothermal feature. Despite all the underground heat, Lassen is also known 
for receiving epic snowfalls – sometimes 900 inches in one season! – that turn 
the park into a winter wonderland popular with snowshoers, cross-country and 
backcountry skiers. Lassen has eight seasonal campsites and rustic cabins are 
available at Manzanita Lake from May to October. 

TOP TIP Sign up for a photography, geology or birding workshop through the 
non-profit Lassen Association's Field Seminar Program at Lassen national park. 
• Lassen links hiking 
<http://www.nps.gov/lavo/planyourvisit/hiking_lassen_park.htm>, camping and 
cabins <http://www.lassenrecreation.com/where_to_stay/index.php>, Lassen 
Association <http://www.lassenassociation.org/>

Sequoia and Kings Canyon national parks
 Photograph: Alamy 
California has a lot of parks but you can cross two off your list at once by 
visiting Sequoia and Kings Canyon, just south-east of Yosemite. They are two 
distinct parks, but are co-managed and share a border and an entrance fee ($5 a 
head). Both offer lodges and campsites, but keep in mind that only a very small 
fraction of these remote and rugged parks are accessible by road. To really see 
them, you'll need to take a hike. 

Sequoia is home to the largest tree in the world, by volume. Redwoods are 
taller, but giant sequoias win for sheer mass: the General Sherman's trunk has 
a volume of 1,487 cubic metres and is estimated to weigh over 2,000 tonnes. 
Sequoia also boasts 4,421m Mount Whitney, the high point of the John Muir 
Trail, which runs through Sequoia and Kings Canyon on its way up to Yosemite. 

Kings Canyon national park protects the headwaters of the south and middle 
forks of the Kings river and the south fork of the San Joaquin river, two of 
the most picturesque and pristine rivers in California. The south fork section 
of Kings river – known as Kings Canyon, one of the deepest in the country, 
dropping down more than 2,500m – was carved out of solid granite by glaciers 
during the last ice age.  

TOP TIP The Giant Forest in Sequoia national park is home to five of the 10 
largest trees in the world, including the General Sherman. Pay your respects to 
these 3,500-year old sentinels along the 40 miles of trails that weave through 
the grove. 
• Sequoia and Kings Canyon links hiking 
<http://www.nps.gov/seki/planyourvisit/dayhikes.htm>,  camping 
<http://www.nps.gov/seki/planyourvisit/camping.htm>, lodging 
<http://www.sequoia-kingscanyon.com/>, John Muir Trail 
<http://johnmuirtrail.org/>

Pinnacles national park
 Photograph: David Muench/Corbis 
Until recently, these dramatic cliffs 40 miles southeast of Salinas were known 
as Pinnacles National Monument, but in January 2013 they became the nation's 
newest national park. The massive spires and sheer canyons are actually the 
remains of an ancient volcano that was split in two by the San Andreas Fault 
and hauled 150 miles from its original location. The spectacular walls attract 
rock climbers as well as bats, falcons and one of the rarest birds in the 
world: the California condor . A type of vulture and the largest bird in North 
America, it became extinct in the wild in 1987 due to poaching, poisoning and 
habitat destruction. Captive breeding programmes have helped reintroduce dozens 
of the big black birds into parks in Arizona, Utah and California. At the last 
count, in 2012, this park was home to 32 wild condors. 

Pinnacles has one campsite on the east side of the park, which is more 
developed than the western entrance. Roads run from the east and the west, but 
don't connect in the middle, which helps keep the heart of Pinnacles wild. 

TOP TIP Don't miss Pinnacle's unique talus caves, Bear Gulch in the east and 
Balconies Cave in the west. They formed when steep, narrow canyons filled with 
boulders, leaving passages between the rocks. The caves are home to colonies of 
Towson's big-eared bats and may be closed during pupping season or after rains 
due to high water. 
• Pinnacles links  condors recovery programme 
<http://www.nps.gov/pinn/naturescience/condors.htm>, climbing 
<http://www.pinnacles.org/>, camping 
<http://www.nps.gov/pinn/planyourvisit/camp.htm>, caves 
<http://www.nps.gov/pinn/planyourvisit/cavestatus.htm>

Devils Postpile national monument
 Basalt columns at Mammoth Lake, Devil's Postpile national monument. 
Photograph: Alamy 
The Devils Postpile, near Mammoth Lakes on the east side of Yosemite, looks as 
if it might have been created by some satanic sculptor, but really it's just 
one of the world's best examples of columnar basalt, a similar geological 
feature to the Giants Causeway in Northern Ireland. The Postpile's 18m columns 
were created when a mass of basaltic lava cooled at a relatively uniform rate. 
As the lava cooled and contracted, it split along joints into columns, most of 
which are pentagonal or hexagonal, with a few three, four, and seven-sided 
columns scattered throughout. 

The half-mile walk from the campsite to the base of the Postpile is easy and 
the hike to the top takes only about 15 minutes of moderate uphill hiking. The 
John Muir and Pacific Crest Trails also pass through, and many through-hikers 
use the park as a place to rest and refuel before continuing to Canada or 
Mexico. 

TOP TIP Definitely plan to put the extra effort into climbing to the top of 
the Postpile. The hike is only moderately difficult and is the best way to see 
the polygons end-on. 
• Devils Postpile links camping 
<http://www.nps.gov/depo/planyourvisit/camping.htm>, geology 
<http://www.nps.gov/depo/naturescience/geology.htm>, Pacific Crest Trail 
<http://www.pcta.org/>

King Range national conservation area 
 Photograph: Mary Caperton Morton 
Look at a map of California and you'll see that Highways 1 and 101 run along 
the entire coast, except for a 65-mile slice between Eureka and Rockport known 
as the Lost Coast. This section, protected by the King Range national 
conservation area, is the longest stretch of wild beach in California. 

Since there are no roads into the Lost Coast, you have to walk to see it. A 
potholed gravel road runs to a campsite at the mouth of the Mattole river and 
from there you can wander south down the coast for 25 miles before you come to 
the next road, at Shelter Cove. The hike is mostly flat, but walking on sand 
with a pack is tiring and you'll need tide charts to help navigate past the 
towering headlands. Bear canisters are required for all food, not just because 
of the bears, but also the seagulls, which will rob you of every last crumb. 

TOP TIP The six-and-a-half-mile round trip trek from the Mattole river 
campsite to the elegant ruins of the Punta Gorda Lighthouse, built in 1912 and 
decommissioned in 1951, might be one of the most beautiful beach walks in the 
world. This area is also popular with surfers, though you'll definitely need a 
wetsuit in these rough, cold waters.
• Lost Coast links hiking trails 
<http://www.blm.gov/ca/st/en/fo/arcata/kingrange/krncatrails.html>, bear safety 
and canister regulations 
<http://www.blm.gov/ca/st/en/fo/arcata/kingrange/bears.html>, history of the 
Punta Gorda lighthouse 
<http://www.rudyalicelighthouse.net/CalLts/PntaGrda/PntaGrda.htm> 

Redwood national and state parks 
 Photograph: Alamy 
If you've been to Sequoia, you've already seen the largest trees in the world, 
but the Redwood national and state parks in northern California boast the 
tallest trees, including 115.7m Hyperion, the world's tallest living tree. The 
exact location of Hyperion is a closely guarded secret, but standing at the 
base of any one of these giants is a truly humbling experience. 

Giant redwoods once covered more than 5,000 square miles of coastal 
California, but as much as 96% of all old-growth redwoods were logged between 
1850 and 1920, a staggering statistic that becomes even more tragic when you 
learn that redwoods are practically immortal and can live for thousands of 
years. Today, nearly half all remaining redwoods are found in these adjoining 
national and state parks. 

Four developed campsites 
<http://www.nps.gov/redw/planyourvisit/campgrounds.htm> are scattered through 
the parks, but no indoor accommodation is available inside the park boundaries. 
Quaint lodgings can be found in the nearby small towns of Klamath, Requa and 
Orrick, with larger hotels in Crescent City, Arcata and Eureka. 

TOP TIP Put a crick in your neck on the easy walking trails through the 
Ladybird Johnson Grove trail and Tall Trees Grove trail in the southern portion 
of Redwood national park. 
• Redwood links camping <http://www.nps.gov/redw/planyourvisit/campgrounds.htm>
,the search for the tallest tree <http://richardpreston.net/books/wt.html>, 
Redwood canopy tours: northcoastadventurecenters.com 
<http://www.northcoastadventurecenters.com/tours-expeditions/redwood-canopy-tours>
 andredwoods.info <http://www.redwoods.info/showrecord.asp?id=4228>

Mary Caperton Morton <http://theblondecoyote.com/> is a freelance writer and 
photographer who makes her home on the back roads of North America, living and 
working out of a tiny solar-powered Teardrop trailer
 