
Percy Priest Lake

Nashville's best-known reservoir has a captive local audience during the 
sticky days of Southern summers but it's also a hotspot for stand-up 
paddleboarding (SUP) year round. Started bytravel journalist Margaret Littman 
<http://www.littmanwrites.com/> – who is on track to paddle all 50 states in 
America – the Nashville Paddle Company was the first company locally to offer 
rentals that capitalise on the SUP craze. Aside from scenic paddles, private 
lessons and group classes on Percy Priest, Nashville Paddle Company organises 
outings to Old Hickory Lake and Cumberland or Stones rivers, as well. If you're 
already a seasoned paddler, you can rent equipment for a full day ($75) or as 
long as a week ($300) and explore Nashville's great outdoors at your leisure.
• nashvillepaddle.com <http://www.nashvillepaddle.com/>. Open daily by 
appointment, $35 for a 90-minute group lesson, $80 for a 90-minute private 
lesson

Percy Warner Park
 Photograph: Alamy 
Nashville locals will tell you that Percy Warner – part of the 2,684 acres of 
forest and field that make up Warner Parks – is the place to be on the Friday 
night of every full moon, when musicians of all styles convene for the musical 
feast that is the Full Moon Pickin' Party. Put on by Friends of Warner Parks, 
the jam-fest features a rotating cast of characters on stage, but all budding 
musicians are encouraged to bring their stringed instruments and strum along. 
This is an event perfect for the whole family.
• 2500 Old Hickory Boulevard, +1 615 370 8053, friendsofwarnerparks.com 
<http://www.friendsofwarnerparks.com/pickingparty.html>. Admission $15 adults 
in advance or $20 on site, $10 for kids (aged 7 to 15), $5 for pickers with an 
approved bluegrass instrument; price includes water, soft drinks and up to four 
beers

Cheekwood Botanical Gardens
 Photograph: Alamy 
Among the behemoth homes of Belle Meade, Nashville's lush botanical garden is 
55 acres of well-manicured lawn that surrounds itsMuseum of Art 
<http://www.cheekwood.org/Art.aspx>, a 30,000-square-foot Georgian-style 
mansion housing a permanent collection of American and British works. But it's 
the installations – such as the 100,000 tulips each spring, intricate 
treehouses you can climb in the fall, and model trains in the winter – that 
really put this local treasure on the map. While outdoor exhibits rotate 
seasonally, theCarell Woodland Sculpture Trail 
<http://www.cheekwood.org/Gardens/Carell_Woodland_Sculpture_Trail.aspx> can be 
enjoyed anytime.
• 1200 Forrest Park Drive, +1 615 356 8000, cheekwood.org 
<http://www.cheekwood.org/>. Open Tues-Sun 9am-5pm, every Friday from May to 
Oct 9am-10pm; adults $14, seniors $12, student with valid ID $10, kids (aged 3 
to 17) $7, $3 per car

Public Square Park
 Photograph: Isaiah Trickey/FilmMagic 
If you're a regular viewer of the TV drama Nashville 
<http://abc.go.com/shows/nashville>, you've likely seen its fictitious mayor 
Teddy Conrad stroll across Public Square Park on occasion. Aside from being the 
front lawn of the actual mayor's office, the park plays host to the summer 
concert series Live on the Green: a Thursday night concert series that runs 
weekly from early August to mid-September, putting a mix of local legends such 
asMoon Taxi <http://ridethemoontaxi.com/> and big names such as Matt Nathanson 
<http://mattnathanson.com/> on the stage. The venue is also the home to several 
smaller events throughout the year such as the Nashville Cherry Blossom 
festival each April and theKings of Leon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kingsofleon>'s new culinary feast, Music 
City Eats <http://www.musiccityeats.com/>, in September.
• 3rd Avenue North and Union Street, liveonthegreen.net 
<http://www.liveonthegreen.net/>. Thursday nights in August and September, 
admission free

Radnor Lake
 Photograph: Johnny Johnson/AlaskaStock/Corbis 
Tucked away in the far reaches of town, Radnor Lake is not your average park: 
it's a woodsy retreat with no running, biking, pets or food allowed. Rather, 
people go here to spend quiet time with mother nature. The wide, unpaved trails 
are perfect for a peaceful stroll and some wildlife spotting - turkeys and deer 
are commonplace, as is the occasional river otter, beaver, mink, muskrat, 
bobcat or coyote. And keep your eyes peeled in summer as you may even see a 
rare bald eagle.
• 1132 Otter Creek Road, radnorlake.org <http://radnorlake.org/>, +1 615 251 
1471. Visitor Center open daily from 8.30am-midday and 1pm-4pm; park closes at 
dark

Dyer Observatory
 Dyer Observatory, Nashville 
Vanderbilt University's Dyer Observatory has been operational since 1953, is 
listed on the National Register of Historic Places and can be found at the 
fringe ofRadnor Lake state park 
<http://tnstateparks.com/parks/about/radnor-lake>. With a strong focus on 
community education, the observatory hosts events throughout the year, such as 
open houses, science camps for kids, teacher workshops and telescope viewing 
nights; visitors can also stop by during the week for self-guided tours of the 
Star Chamber. But celestial bodies through the lens aren't the only stars you 
might see at Dyer; for six shows each summer, the widely famed Bluebird Café – 
where musicians including Garth Brooks andTaylor Swift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/taylor-swift> launched their careers – 
brings "Bluebird on the Mountain 
<http://dyer.vanderbilt.edu/entertainment/concerts/>" concerts to the 
observatory.
• 1000 Oman Drive, Brentwood, +1 615 373 4897, dyer.vanderbilt.edu 
<http://dyer.vanderbilt.edu/>. Open Tues-Fri 8am-5pm by appointment, single 
show passes are available one month prior to the show for $120 each

Centennial Park
 A production of A Midsummer Night's Dream in Centennial Park, Nashville. 
Photograph: Jeff Frazier 
The biggest public park inside Nashville's city limits is where many of the 
city's tastiest food trucks congregate, fitness addicts hit the pavement of the 
interweaving trails, families meander in the greenways, and tourists gawk at 
the replica of the Parthenon. But in summer, it's also the stage forShakespeare 
in the Park <http://nashvilleshakes.org/shakespeareinthepark.htm>, which 
highlights a different play from the bard each season. Food and drinks are 
available and there is pre-show entertainment starting at 6.30pm.
• 2500 West End Avenue, +1 615-862-8400, nashvilleshakes.org 
<http://www.nashvilleshakes.org/>. Shows Thurs-Sun in August and September at 
7.30pm, admission free but $10 suggested donation

Pinewood Social
 Photograph: Alamy 
The most talked-about restaurant and "social experience" to debut in 2013, 
Pinewood has an eatery serving three meals a day, a coffee shop, workstations, 
karaoke room and six bowling lanes, and will introduce an outdoor "playground" 
in the late spring of 2014. On the riverfront, the space will boast a swimming 
pool with Airstream bar, bocce ball, ping-pong and more. It's very much a 
"see-and-be-scene" spot that attracts celebrities and Nashville's glitterati. 
Get there early and nab your cabana (first come, first served) before they're 
gone for the day.
• 33 Peabody Street, +1 615 751 8111, pinewoodsocial.com 
<http://pinewoodsocial.com/>. Restaurant open Mon-Fri 7am-1am, Sat-Sun 9am-1am

Woods Amphitheater

Ten miles north of downtown Nashville, in Whites Creek, rests country music 
legendBarbara Mandrel <http://www.barbara-mandrell.com/>'s former home, the 
sprawling Fontanel Mansion. The old estate's outdoor concert space, which has a 
capacity of 4,500 people, has gigs all summer and draws mainstream groups such 
asSigur Rós <http://www.sigur-ros.co.uk/>, as well as folksy rock acts such as 
Old Crowe Medicine Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/nov/18/old-crow-medicine-carry-review>, 
Alabama Shakes <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alabama-shakes> and the Black 
Crowes <http://www.blackcrowes.com/>. There's the Cafe Fontanella on the 
grounds should you require a pre-show drink – or bring your own drinks, as 
tailgating is very much allowed. If you don't feel like driving back into the 
fray of Nashville after the show, check into one of the six suites at the 
just-opened Inn at Fontanel – they're not a cheap option though.
• 4225 Whites Creek Pike, +1 615 724 1531, 
woodsamphitheater.fontanelmansion.com 
<http://woodsamphitheater.fontanelmansion.com/>. Prices for shows vary but 
parking is free. Accommodation: doubles from $399 at theInn at Fontanel 
<http://fontanelmansion.com/the-inn-at-fontanel/>

Shelby Street pedestrian bridge
 Photograph: Alamy 
Linking downtown and east Nashville, this truss bridge 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truss_bridge> across the Cumberland river gets 
heavy foot traffic and is a Music City icon; it's also one of the main routes 
to get to theTennessee Titans <http://www.titansonline.com/> football stadium, 
LP Field, as well as Cumberland park, a favourite spot with families for its 
kid-friendly attractions. On the list of National Register of Historic Places, 
the Shelby Street bridge was completed in 1909 and was originally open to 
automobiles but underwent a $15m renovation in the 90s when it was deemed 
unsafe. It reopened in 2003 as a pedestrian bridge and now sees a good number 
of cyclists, runners and scenic strollers.
• nashvilledowntown.com/go/shelby-street-pedestrian-bridg 
<http://www.nashvilledowntown.com/go/shelby-street-pedestrian-bridge>e

Kristin Luna is a travel writer and photographer. She blogs at 
camelsandchocolate.com <http://www.camelsandchocolate.com/>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 