
Utah is a place for all seasons, except summer. From June through August, 
Utah's famous canyon country is hot and crowded, but visit in the autumn, 
winter or spring and you'll find pockets of desert solitude among the sunny 
yellow cottonwoods, snow-covered red rocks and colourful spring wildflowers.

Zion national park 

In a state that has more parks than it does major cities, Zion 
<http://www.nps.gov/zion/index.htm> stands above the rest as Utah's first 
national park and its most visited. The valley floor can get crowded with 
people, but private cars are restricted in favour of free shuttles, which helps 
quiet the chaos.

Only a fraction of the park can be seen from the road. This is a place for 
explorers: more than 100 miles of trails lead from the valley into the narrow 
river canyons to the north and up the towering red and tan walls of Navajo 
sandstone to the east and west. Aparadise for canyoneers 
<http://www.canyoneeringusa.com/utah/zion/> and rock climbers 
<http://www.zionrockguides.com/>, Zion boasts rock formations spanning more 
than 150 million years of geologic history.

The park has three developed campgrounds and offers backcountry camping 
permits to backpackers. Or you can stay at theZion Lodge 
<http://www.zionlodge.com> (reservations recommended) or in nearby Springdale 
and around St George.

Top tip The hike up Angels Landing is not for the faint of heart, but it's 
worth every vertiginous step. The trail follows a set of chains up a narrow 
ridge of sandstone to a spectacular summit that looks straight down through the 
heart of Zion. This route is best attempted in the spring or fall, when it's 
likely to be free of summer hoards, or winter snow and ice.

Canyonlands national park 
 Green River Overlook, Canyonlands national park. Photograph: Mark C 
Stevens/Getty Images/Flickr RF 
The south-west desert is known for out-of-this-world landscapes – some places 
look like the moon, others like Mars – but Utah'sCanyonlands  
<http://www.nps.gov/cany/index.htm>is an otherworldly place like no other. Here 
countless canyons, buttes and mesas are carved into a topography so intricate 
that you find yourself wandering through places with names such as the Maze, 
the Needles and Island in the Sky.

Canyonlands is Utah's largest park. You could spend a lifetime exploring the 
land between the Colorado and the Green rivers and still not reach all the way 
into the park's red depths. Tour companies based inMoab 
<http://www.discovermoab.com/canyonlandsnationalpark.htm> offer Jeep tours, 
hiking, rafting, kayaking, rock climbing, canyoneering, mountain biking, BASE 
jumping, skydiving, hang gliding, extreme rope swings ... you name it, 
Canyonlands has it.

No matter what kind of adventure you tackle, be sure to stay overnight and 
catch sunset, the stars and sunrise over the vast maze of red rocks. The park 
has two developed campgrounds and free dispersed camping can be found nearby. 
For hotels and hostels, stay in Moab or Blanding.

Top tip Visit a geologic mystery at Upheaval Dome. This massive, almost 
perfectly round rock formation is either an impact crater from a meteor or an 
uplifted, eroded salt dome. Either way, it's a fantastic place for a hike in 
the Island in the Sky district of Canyonlands.

Capitol Reef national park 
 The Castle, Capitol Reef national park. Photograph: Christian Heinrich/Getty 
Images/Imagebroker RF 
Capitol Reef <http://www.capitolreef.org/index.html> is a narrow park, less 
than 20 miles wide, but over 100 miles long, which protects the Waterpocket 
Fold, an awesome S-shaped warp in the Earth's crust that was created over 65 
million years ago by the same forces that built the Rocky Mountains. It's the 
longest exposed "monocline" in the world, but you don't have to be a geologist 
to appreciateCapitol Reef <http://www.nps.gov/care/index.htm>'s amazing rocks.

The park is named after its series of domes and cliffs, eroded into white 
Navajo sandstone, which somewhat resemble the US Capitol building in Washington 
DC. The reef part of the name is a throwback to pioneer days, when settlers 
were forced to detour all the way around the Waterpocket Fold, which remains 
all but impassible even today.

A few four-wheel drive roads run into the park, but this place is best seen on 
foot. Start at the visitor centre (open year-round) and head either north to 
Cathedral Valley or south into the Waterpocket Fold area. The park has a 
campground and rooms can be found in nearby Torrey and along highway 12, 
towards Boulder.

Top tip The Upper Muley Twist Canyon 
<http://www.nps.gov/care/planyourvisit/uppermuley.htm> cuts lengthwise along 
the tilted spine of the Waterpocket Fold, making for a rugged but stunning 
15-mile overnight loop hike. Free backcountry camping permits are available in 
the visitor centre.

Dead Horse Point state park 
 Sunset at Dead Horse Point. Photograph: Matthew Crowley Photography/Getty 
Images/Flickr RF 
Most people flock to the Moab area to visit Arches national park, but this 
morbidly named gem of a state park is much quieter and possibly even more 
scenic. Located south and west of Arches,Dead Horse Point <> is a narrow 
2,000-ft high promontory that overlooks the northern reaches of Canyonlands 
national park.

Back in the 19th century, cowboys used the point as a natural corral, where 
they could herd mustangs out to the tip and build a fence across the bottleneck 
of the point. Then they could pick and choose the best horses from the bunch 
and let the others go. As the story goes, on one occasion the cowboys forgot to 
open the gate and the remaining horses all died of thirst out on the point, 
within view of the Colorado river below but trapped by precipitous cliffs.

Tents and motorhomes are allowed at the Dead Horse Point campground and 
dispersed sites can be found outside the park. Hotel rooms and hostel beds can 
be found 30 miles away in Moab.

Top tip You can drive all the way out to the edge of Dead Horse Point, but why 
drive when the walk is among the most spectacular in the south-west? The 
three-mile Rim Trail starts at the visitor centre and skirts the edge of the 
point, overlooking the meandering Colorado river, Canyonlands, La Sal mountains 
and, on a clear day, most of south-east Utah.

Kodachrome Basin state park 
 Kodachrome Basin. Photograph: Michael Busselle/Getty Images 
With a name like Kodachrome, you know this is a place that begs to be 
photographed. Named by the members of a National Geographic expedition in 1949,
Kodachrome Basin 
<http://www.stateparks.utah.gov/park/kodachrome-basin-state-park>looks a bit 
what Yellowstone national park might look like if all its thermal water 
features dried up. Here, ancient hot springs and geysers have solidified into 
an array of beautiful and bizarre rock features called sand pipes.

Located just east of the more famous (and often overcrowded) Bryce Canyon, 
Kodachrome offers a quieter alternative. Due to its remote location and low 
light pollution, the night sky here is known for being one of the best in the 
west and the area's high elevation often means cooler temperatures here than 
elsewhere in Utah, making this park a good choice for summer trips.

Top tip Just down the road from Kodachrome Basin is the Grosvenor Arch, an 
unusual double arch high up on a colourful canyon wall that serves as a 
symbolic gateway to Grand Staircase Escalante national monument (see below).

Natural Bridges national monument
 White Canyon, Natural Bridges national monument. Photograph: Pritz 
Pritz/Getty Images/F1online RM 
In geologic terms, the difference between an arch and a natural bridge is 
water. The former is carved by wind and ice, while the latter is sculpted by a 
waterway. Three of the most spectacular examples of natural bridges can be 
found in south-east Utah, just west of Blanding atNatural Bridges 
<http://www.nps.gov/nabr/index.htm> national monument.

Here, three majestic bridges, named Kachina, Owachomo and Sipapu, span the 
White and Anderson canyons. Sipapu, a Hopi name that celebrates the traditional 
portal through which the First People emerged into the present world, is the 
largest of the three and one of the longest natural bridges in the world. 
Evidence for at least two collapsed bridges are found within the park.

All three spans can be viewed from overlooks, with trails 
<http://www.utahtrails.com/Backcountry%20pages/Bridges.html> leading down to 
each bridge. The trail to Owachomo is an easy half-mile round trip, while the 
climb down to Sipapu is considerably steeper and negotiates stairs and three 
ladders. Camping is available inside the park.

Top tip All three bridges can be linked by a 8½-mile loop that runs through 
the bottom of the White and Armstrong canyons, making for a nice all-day trek.

Edge of the Cedars state park 
 Ruins of an Anasazi pueblo Cedars state park, Utah Photograph: Alamy 
Utah has a long, colourful history of human habitation, as evidenced by ruins, 
petroglyphs and relics left behind by the Ancestral Puebloan, Hopi, Ute and 
Navajo people. Edge of the Cedars state park in Blanding has a museum featuring 
the an impressive archaeological repository, plus the ruins of a Puebloan 
village.

The name Edge of the Cedars come from the park's location between the densely 
forested Manti-La Sal national forest and the treeless desert to the east, a 
prime habitat for early human settlement. The Bears Ears area, situated around 
two rounded humps of rock shaped like a bear's ears, inspires many mysteries 
and local legends.

Blanding is also home to the Blanding Dinosaur Museum 
<http://dinosaur-museum.org>, which features rotating exhibits on Utah's rich 
Mesozoic history, including fossilised eggs and baby dinosaurs. As the largest 
town in south-east Utah, Blanding makes for a good base for exploring the 
region.

Top tip Be sure to check the Edge of the Cedars museum website  
<http://www.stateparks.utah.gov/park/edge-of-the-cedars-state-park-museum> for 
lectures, festivals and other events.

Goblin Valley state park
 Goblin Valley. Photograph: Dibrova/Getty Images/Flickr RF 
In a state rife with geologic oddities, Goblin Valley state park 
<http://www.stateparks.utah.gov/park/goblin-valley-state-park>, near Hanksville 
<http://www.hanksville.com>, sets a high bar for bizarre rock formations. Here 
thousands of mushroom-shaped hoodoos sit clustered in a secluded valley on the 
edge of the spectacular San Rafael Swell. The strangely shaped rocks are eroded 
out of entrada sandstone, a reddish rock that dates to the time of the 
dinosaurs and underlies much of south-east Utah.

Goblin Valley boasts a campground with hot showers, a rarity in this dry 
desert state. Campsites tend to fill up fast on weekends, so reservations are 
recommended. Campground full? Stay outside the park at one of many free 
campsites, along the swell.

Top tip Three marked hiking trails wind through Goblin Valley, but this is a 
place for wandering. Keep your bearings – the visitor centre is easy to spot 
from any vantage – and let yourself get lost between the hoodoos.

Goosenecks state park and Valley of the Gods
 Goosenecks state park. Photograph: Panoramic Images/Getty Images/Panoramic 
Images 
South-east Utah is canyon country, with the Green, Colorado and San Juan 
rivers cutting sinuous and spectacular routes down through red, white and 
orange bedrock.Goosenecks 
<http://www.stateparks.utah.gov/park/goosenecks-state-park> state park, near 
Mexican Hat, boasts one of the best overlooks showcasing the power of rivers 
over rock. Here the entrenched curves of the San Juan river nearly double back 
on themselves, exposing millions of layers of geologic history.

To the east lies the Valley of the Gods 
<http://www.utah.com/monumentvalley/ValleyOfTheGods.htm>, a pocket of 
spectacular scenery featuring mesas and buttes reminiscent of the more famous 
Monument Valley, to the south. A 17-mile road, bumpy but passable to most 
vehicles when dry, loops through the area, between highways 261 and 163.

As far as state parks go, Goosenecks is pretty primitive, but the scenery 
makes up for the lack of amenities, including no running water. More developed 
accommodation can be found in the nearby towns of Bluff and Blanding.

Top tip: Seeking solitude? Park at the main overlook at Goosenecks and hike 
south and west along the old, increasingly rutted road for about a mile out to 
the tip of the mesa.

Flaming Gorge national recreation area
 Cart Creek Bridge at Flaming Gorge. Photograph: Jodi Jacobson/Getty Images 
In the sweltering summer months, head to the Flaming Gorge 
<http://www.utah.com/nationalsites/flaming_gorge.htm>, north of Vernal, on the 
Wyoming border. Here the Flaming Gorge dam holds back the Green river, creating 
a massive cool, blue reservoir surrounded by towering red walls. Fishing, 
boating, swimming and water sports are popular year-round, and five marinas 
rent kayaks, canoes and rafts.

The Flaming Gorge is also know for its endless backpacking options. Treks 
ranging from easy overnights to multi-week adventures can be found in the 
nearby Uinta mountains, Ashley and Wasatch-Cache national forests, including 
13,528-ft Kings Peak, the highest mountain in Utah.

Camping opportunities abound, ranging from all-inclusive RV resorts to rustic 
cabins and remote tent sites. Hotel rooms and other accommodations can be found 
in Vernal, home to theUtah Field House of Natural History 
<http://stateparks.utah.gov/park/utah-field-house-of-natural-history-state-park-museum>
 and close toDinosaur National Monument <http://www.nps.gov/dino/index.htm>, 
another gem for dinosaur-lovers.

Top tip The waters of the Flaming Gorge <http://www.fishflaminggorge.com/> 
reservoir are famous for growing massive trophy trout, some as big as 13kg! Tie 
a fly on yourself orbook a local guide 
<http://www.flaminggorgeresort.com/FishingReport>.



Mary Caperton Morton <http://theblondecoyote.com/> is a freelance writer and 
photographer who makes her home on the back roads of North America, living and 
working out of a tiny solar-powered camper
 