
The Field Effect <http://thefieldeffectmusic.com/>, Ogunquit ME 


"So let's go, anywhere but home/I don't know these roads, my dear/But I don't 
really care," offers the Field Effect's convincing Doug Orey in this 
high-octane love song. The Boston quartet's 2013 debut LP Cartography is a 
guitar-rock joyride that crosses a state line at every musical bridge.

Little Daylight <http://littledaylightsounds.tumblr.com/>, Restart 


Little Daylight's bustling brand of synthpop hits sonic overdrive in Restart. 
Where Glitter and Gold is a bumper-to-bumper, electronic pop pulsator, the 
revved-up Restart is perfect for open roads.

Black Light Dinner Party <http://www.blacklightdinnerparty.com/>, I Was Right


Born in Boston but raised in Brooklyn, BLDP create songs to absorb while 
gazing at city skylines. From this quartet of electronic producers, I Was Right 
is an update on new wave with a modern flair for dramatics.

Magic Man <http://magicmanmusic.com/>, Paris


If BLDP write songs for approaching city limits, Magic Man craft tunes to get 
away from them. The Providence ensemble just signed a deal with Columbia and 
white-hot New York boutique imprint Neon Gold. A potential next big thing, 
Magic Man create soulful synthpop for those in the know.

Lower Dens <http://lowerdens.com/>, Brains


Blending indie rock with electronics, Lower Dens is the brainchild of 
songwriter Jana Hunter. They embody a warm mental state of music, and Brains is 
easy to get lost in while the highway rolls forward with seemingly no end.

Potty Mouth <http://pottymouthgirls.tumblr.com/>, The Spins 


Boston may hold down the global rep of Massachusetts, but it's the western end 
of the state that's churning out brilliant, sludgy guitar-rock. The Spins, off 
debut LP Hell Bent, is brash-but-polished punk'n'roll with gravitational garage 
rock pull.

Screaming Females <http://screamingfemales.com/>, It All Means Nothing 


Off the Ugly LP, It All Means Nothing is the band at their noisy, guitar-rock 
best. SF are almost good enough to forgive New Jersey for anything that happens 
on its shore.

Bent Shapes <http://bentshapes.tumblr.com/>, Panel Of Experts 


Whipsmart jangle-pop out of Boston, the trio formerly known as Girlfriends 
released debut LP Feels Weird this summer and it's as much a showcase for Ben 
Potrykus's lyrical bite ("New England's dreaming…") as it is the band's hooky 
garage-pop tunes.

Coke Weed <http://cokeweed.com/>, Sunseekers


There is indeed scenic salvation along the East Coast, and it starts at the 
very top in the land called Maine. Coke Weed, from Bar Harbor, take 
sun-splashed indie-psych from a Lower 48 high point and raise the stakes 
for southern California from 3,000 miles away.

Kurt Vile <http://kurtvile.com/> Wakin' on a Pretty Day 

Vile's hazy, lo-fi Walking on a Pretty Day is the sound of a long journey 
coming to its end. And, at 10 minutes long, it's pretty much a journey on its 
own.

Michael Marotta is the editor and founder of Boston-based online music magazine
Vanyaland <http://vanyaland.com/>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 