
Crater Lake national park

Today, Crater Lake national park in western Oregon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/oregon> is known for having one of the 
deepest, clearest lakes in the world, but 7,700 years ago, the landscape 
stunned witnesses for a different reason: the eruption of the Mount Mazama 
volcano, which created Crater Lake, is thought to be one of the greatest 
geologic catastrophes ever witnessed by humans. After it erupted, Mount Mazama 
collapsed, leaving behind a crater more than 1,200 metres deep – and 8km north 
to south and 10km east to west – that eventually filled with rain and snowmelt.

Along the crest of a line of volcanoes known as the Oregon Cascades, Crater 
Lake is a winter sports playground. Summer visitors should plan to 
circumnavigate the lake on the 53km loop road, which skirts the edge of the 
crater – or hike down to the water on the 3.5km Cleetwood Cove trail. 
Accommodation is available at the Crater Lake Lodge or at two campsites 
(reservations recommended). Backcountry camping is also allowed along the
Pacific Crest trail <http://www.pcta.org/>, which runs through the park on its 
way from Mexico to Canada.

Top tip: To see how clear Crater Lake’s water really is, take a boat tour to 
Wizard Island. With a maximum depth of 596 metres, Crater Lake the deepest lake 
in the US and the ninth deepest in the world.
• More information: nps.gov/crla <http://www.nps.gov/crla/index.htm>, 
craterlakelodges.com <http://www.craterlakelodges.com/>, 
volcanoes.usgs.gov/volcanoes/crater_lake 
<http://volcanoes.usgs.gov/volcanoes/crater_lake/>

Valley of the Rogue River state park 
<http://www.oregonstateparks.org/index.cfm?do=parkPage.dsp_parkPage&parkId=76>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405426495033%2F56f3f53a-c6af-4b7e-9fda-1c02e76bb071-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405426495033%2F56f3f53a-c6af-4b7e-9fda-1c02e76bb071-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Bob Stefko/Getty Images 
Oregon’s Rogue river, in the south-west corner of the state, is well-named: 
this rushing river is famous for its rugged scenery, wild rapids and epic 
salmon runs. Visitors can explore the Rogue by raft – the 35-mile stretch 
downstream from Grants Pass is one of the top whitewater runs in the country – 
or on foot along theRogue River national recreation trail 
<http://www.blm.gov/or/resources/recreation/rogue/rogue-trail.php>, which runs 
parallel to the river for more than 80 miles. Fishing for chinook and coho 
salmon, steelhead and rainbow trout is legendary on the Rogue and a number of 
dams have been dynamited in recent years to restore fish migration pathways.

People have lived along the Rogue river for at least 8,500 years but its most 
famous denizen is probably the authorZane Grey 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zane_Grey>, who wrote more than 90 books about 
the western frontier. In 1926, Grey bought a miner’s cabin at Winkle Bar, where 
he wrote his novel Rogue River Feud and a collection of stories, Tales of Fresh 
Water Fishing.His cabin still stands today and is open to the public 
<http://www.rimcountrymuseums.com/zane_grey_cabin.htm> (adults $5, under-12s 
free).

Top tip: Get the full Rogue experience in one swoop with a 
rafting-supported-backpacking trip, offered by several area outfitters: rafts 
transport camping gear downstream and offer tired hikers a chance to float down 
the river. If you’re not into roughing it, a number of lodges offer 
accommodation along the way, including theBlack Bar Lodge 
<http://blackbarlodge.com/>, Marial Lodge (+1 541 474 2057, no website) and 
Paradise Lodge <http://www.paradise-lodge.com/>. 
• More information: wildrogue.com <http://www.wildrogue.com/>, 
oregonstateparks.org 
<http://www.oregonstateparks.org/index.cfm?do=parkPage.dsp_parkPage&parkId=29>

Marys Peak scenic botanical area
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405426400400%2F10441768804_25361c9449_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405426400400%2F10441768804_25361c9449_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Photograph: Forest Service Northern Region/flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/fsnorthernregion/10441768804/> 
Oregon was once home to millions of huge trees but decades of logging have 
felled many of its most spectacular giants. A few pockets of old-growth woods 
remain, however, including this gem, near Corvallis. Named for a Native 
American legend, Marys Peak is home to one of the last pockets of pure, 
old-growth noble fir, along with some magnificent Douglas firs.

At 4,097ft, the summit of Marys Peak is the highest point in the Oregon Coast 
Range <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oregon_Coast_Range>. From the summit, 
accessed via the Summit trail or a paved forest service road, visitors can 
marvel at the line of Cascade volcanoes to the east, the lush, green Willamette 
valley below and the Pacific Ocean to the west, making this one of the best 
places for views in the state. Not even the somewhat unsightly weather station 
on the summit can detract from this. Camping is available below the crest at the
Marys Peak campground 
<http://www.fs.usda.gov/recarea/siuslaw/recarea/?recid=42317>.

Top tip: For maximum scenery, take the East Ridge trail to the Meadow Edge 
trail and then the Summit trail, which winds through a forest of huge, 
old-growth trees, and open fields carpeted with tall grass, wildflowers and 
clover. More than 200 species of flowers have been identified at Marys Peak.
• More information: oregon.sierraclub.org 
<http://oregon.sierraclub.org/groups/marys_peak/outings/plants.asp>, 
npsoregon.org (PDF) 
<http://www.npsoregon.org/kalmiopsis/kalmiopsis19/4maryspeak.pdf>

Ecola state park 
<http://www.oregonstateparks.org/index.cfm?do=parkPage.dsp_parkPage&parkId=136>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405426868590%2F9733ccf3-b948-48e6-9edd-e4b8ebefa1a3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405426868590%2F9733ccf3-b948-48e6-9edd-e4b8ebefa1a3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Trail running in Ecola state park. Photograph: Alamy 
All 363 miles of Oregon’s coast is open to the public, with beach access from 
the Washington state line all the way south to California. Ambitious beach 
walkers can hike the entire way on theOregon Coast trail 
<http://www.oregon.gov/oprd/parks/Pages/oct_main.aspx>, which runs up and over 
headlands and around inlets for 425 miles. Dozens of state parks and recreation 
areas line the coast, featuring tide pools, seal rookeries, sea stacks and 
lighthouses.

One of the highlights of the coastal park system is Ecola state park, just 
north of the town of Cannon Beach. The nine-mile section of coast wraps around 
Tillamook Head, a forested promontory that offers incredible views up and down 
the coast. A number of rocky sea stacks decorate the beaches here, including 
Haystack Rock, which has long served as a landmark for travellers and sailors. 
Offshore, Ecola’s waves are popular with surfers. No camping is available here 
but sites can be found nearby atOswald west state park 
<http://www.oregonstateparks.org/index.cfm?do=parkPage.dsp_parkPage&parkId=139> 
to the south and inland atSaddle Mountain state natural area 
<http://www.oregonstateparks.org/index.cfm?do=parkPage.dsp_parkPage&parkId=140>.

Top tip: The six-mile Tillamook Head trail runs from Cannon Beach to Seaside, 
following in the footsteps ofCaptain Meriwether Lewis and his close friend 
William Clark <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lewis_and_Clark_Expedition>, who 
reached the Pacific Ocean near here after a gruelling 18-month expedition from 
St Louis, Missouri.
• More information: cannon-beach.net 
<http://www.cannon-beach.net/recreation/cbecola.html>, 
nps.gov/lewi/planyourvisit/ecola.htm 
<http://www.nps.gov/lewi/planyourvisit/ecola.htm>

Oregon Dunes national recreation area
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427112119%2Ff9526153-633c-4520-8dc6-4eff2fa2ca87-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427112119%2Ff9526153-633c-4520-8dc6-4eff2fa2ca87-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Clint Farlinger/Alamy 
Most of Oregon’s coast is beautifully rugged and rocky, but this 40-mile 
section of beach between the Coos and Siuslaw rivers is home to the largest 
expanse of coastal sand dunes in North America. Here, windswept dunes tower up 
to 150 metres above sea level, making for excellent hiking, whale watching, 
horse riding and off-road driving. Camping is available in a number of 
established campsites, as well as in primitive sites along the Siltcoos river. 
More sites can be found inJessie M Honeyman state park 
<http://www.oregonstateparks.org/index.cfm?do=parkPage.dsp_parkPage&parkId=95> 
to the north andUmpqua Lighthouse state park 
<http://www.oregonstateparks.org/index.cfm?do=parkPage.dsp_parkPage&parkId=83> 
to the south; reservations recommended.

Oregon Dunes does a great job of keeping the quieter foot-traffic-only areas 
separate from the motorised off-highway vehicle areas. If you’re into the 
off-highway vibe, the largest off-road area stretches betweenSpinreel campground
 
<http://www.fs.usda.gov/wps/portal/fsinternet/!ut/p/c4/04_SB8K8xLLM9MSSzPy8xBz9CP0os3gDfxMDT8MwRydLA1cj72BTJw8jAwjQL8h2VAQAzHJMsQ!!?ss=110612&ttype=recarea&recid=42653&actid=43&navtype=BROWSEBYSUBJECT&position=BROWSEBYSUBJECT&navid=110000000000000&pnavid=&cid=null&pname=Oregon+Dunes+National+Recreation+Area+-+Spinreel+Campground>
 and Horsfall Road.Dune buggy rentals <http://oregondunebugrentals.com/> are 
available from several outfitters in North Bend.

Top tip: The Umpqua dunes are the highest dunes in the park and the area is 
closed to motorised traffic, making this section ideal for whale watching. Each 
year, more than 18,000 grey whales migrate past the Oregon coast on their 
journey between Baja California and Alaska, moving south in December and 
January and north, with their calves, between March and June.
• More information: fs.usda.gov 
<http://www.fs.usda.gov/recarea/siuslaw/recreation/recarea/?recid=42465>, 
oregonsadventurecoast.com 
<http://www.oregonsadventurecoast.com/trip-ideas/guide-to-the-oregon-dunes-national-recreation-area/>

Smith Rock state park 
<http://www.oregonstateparks.org/index.cfm?do=parkPage.dsp_parkPage&parkId=36>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427290999%2F1347c7ea-7480-44a6-ac0f-e0ba0adf01ed-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427290999%2F1347c7ea-7480-44a6-ac0f-e0ba0adf01ed-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Smith Rock with Crooked River. Photograph: Alamy 
Oregon is famous for being green, but the red, yellow and orange hues of Smith 
Rock state park, near Terrebonne, serve as a colourful gateway to the state’s 
arid and beautiful eastern desert. Smith Rock is famous among rock climbers as 
the birthplace of modern sport climbing, where climbers follow bolted routes up 
challenging rock faces. Smith Rock has some of the hardest sport routes in the 
world, including thefirst 5.14 grade climb 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grade_%28climbing%29> ever completed in the US. 
Even if you’re not a world-class rock climber, Smith Rock has hundreds of 
routes, many suitable for beginners; several reputable guiding companies are 
based in the area. Visitors who prefer to stay close to the ground can explore 
miles of hiking and mountain biking trails and the scenic Crooked river has 
excellent fishing. Primitive walk-in camping is available in the park, 
first-come, first-served, as well as at the national forestSkull Hollow 
campground 
<http://www.fs.usda.gov/wps/portal/fsinternet/!ut/p/c5/04_SB8K8xLLM9MSSzPy8xBz9CP0os3gDfxMDT8MwRydLA1cj72BTSw8jAwgAykeaxcN4jhYG_h4eYX5hPgYwefy6w0H24dcPNgEHcDTQ9_PIz03VL8iNMMgycVQEAIzTHkw!/dl3/d3/L2dJQSEvUUt3QS9ZQnZ3LzZfME80MEkxVkFCOTBFMktTNUJIMjAwMDAwMDA!/?ss=110601&ttype=recarea&recid=39154&actid=29&navtype=BROWSEBYSUBJECT&position=BROWSEBYSUBJECT&navid=110130000000000&pnavid=110000000000000&cid=FSE_003705&pname=Central+Oregon+-+Skull+Hollow+Campground>
, just five miles down the road.

Top tip: Don’t let the name scare you away, the Misery Ridge 3.8-mile loop 
hike is a treat, with views of Smith Rock, the Crooked river canyon and the 
entire Cascade peaks to the west, including Mount Hood, Mount Jefferson and the 
Three Sisters.
• Climbing guides: smithrock.com <http://www.smithrock.com/>, 
smithrockclimbingguides.com <http://www.smithrockclimbingguides.com/>

John Day Fossil Beds national monument
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427587291%2Fa9b396fb-1304-488c-9f1d-168e20b7ef44-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427587291%2Fa9b396fb-1304-488c-9f1d-168e20b7ef44-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Marc Adamus/Aurora Photos/Corbis 
The brightly hued hills of John Day are spectacular, but it is what lies 
beneath the surface that makes this desert region of eastern Oregon famous. 
Hidden beneath the rolling red landscape is one of the world’s richest fossil 
deposits from the Cenozoic era, also know as the Age of Mammals. Around 30m 
years ago, rhinos, camels, giant ground sloths and saber-toothed cats roamed a 
lush grassland before being buried by a series of volcanic eruptions, which 
preserved their bones in colourful layers of tuff. The monument is divided into 
three separate parks: the Sheep Rock, Painted Hills and Clarno units. Visitors 
are advised to start at the Sheep Rock unit, which lies north-west of Dayville. 
Here you can visit the park’s main facilities and tour the fossil museum at the
Thomas Condon Paleontology Center 
<http://www.nps.gov/joda/photosmultimedia/Thomas-Condon-Paleontology-Center.htm>
. No camping is available within the park, but there are plenty of sites in the 
nearbyOchoco national forest 
<http://www.fs.usda.gov/recmain/centraloregon/recreation>.

Top tip: To experience the best of John Day’s scenery and geology, hike the 
Blue Basin Overlook trail, combined with the shorter, adjoining Island in Time 
trail. Both paths begin four miles west of the museum on Highway 19. The 
three-mile loop overlooks the blue-tinged fossil-rich outcrop where many of 
John Day’s fossils have been found.
• More information: nps.gov/joda <http://www.nps.gov/joda/index.htm>

Steens Mountain co-operative management and protection area
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427746479%2F11573996006_a15102ba44_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427746479%2F11573996006_a15102ba44_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Photograph: Bureau of Land Management/flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/blmoregon/11573996006/> 
If you’re looking to get away from it all, head to the Steens in south-east 
Oregon. Here, wild horses roam a rugged landscape carved by retreating glaciers 
at the end of the last ice age. The closest town of any size is Burns, 
population 2,806, where you should stock up on petrol, food and water before 
heading south into the wilderness on the 66-mile Steens Mountain Backcountry 
Byway. Open between late May and September, the first half of this loop road is 
gravel, accessible to most cars. Past the Big Indian Gorge overlook, however, 
the road becomes rougher and a high-clearance, four-wheel-drive vehicle may be 
needed, even during dry summer months. The road provides access to three 
campsites and scenic views of the region’s glacially carved U-shaped Kiger, Big 
Indian, Wildhorse and Little Blitzen gorges. The oddly named Donner und Blitzen 
river is home to trophy red band trout.

Top tip: The Steens are famous among wild horse enthusiasts, who travel to the 
region to catch a glimpse of a rare Kiger mustang, hardy horses directly 
descended from Spanish stock brought to North America in the 17th century. For 
your best shot at seeing a Kiger, visit the Kiger Wild Horse Viewing Area, 
three miles east of the town of Diamond.
• More information: onda.org/where-we-work/steens 
<https://onda.org/where-we-work/steens>, blm.gov/or/districts/burns 
<http://www.blm.gov/or/districts/burns/recreation/steens-mtn.php>, 
blm.gov/or/districts/burns/wildhorse 
<http://www.blm.gov/or/districts/burns/wildhorse/kiger.php>

Hells Canyon national recreation area 
<http://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/wallowa-whitman/recreation/?cid=stelprdb5238987>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427857132%2F4abfdb98-52af-43d5-ab35-c5f8b5b19207-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427857132%2F4abfdb98-52af-43d5-ab35-c5f8b5b19207-2060x1236.jpeg>
 White-water rafting, Hell's Canyon. Photograph: Phil Schofield/Getty Images 
With a name like Hells Canyon, carved by the Snake River, this area in far 
north-eastern Oregon sounds like a place to avoid, but recreation opportunities 
abound: white-water rafting, boating, fishing, swimming and more than 900 miles 
of hiking trails make Hells Canyon downright heavenly. Hells Canyon is the 
deepest river canyon in the US, deeper even than Arizona’s Grand Canyon, 
measuring more than a mile and half from river bed to mountain top in some 
places. The 90m-high Hells Canyon dam, built in 1967, is the largest privately 
owned hydroelectric power complex in the country. Primitive camping is 
available throughout the recreation area and cabins are available for rent in 
the adjoining Wallowa-Whitman national forest.

Top tip: Hells Canyon’s white water goes up to class IV and V, so river guides 
are recommended for rafting trips. Savvy outfitters will also point out the 
canyon’s petroglyphs, abandoned mines, shipwrecks and homesteads, signs of the 
area’s long history of human occupation. One of the most comprehensive 
archaeological sites is atBuffalo Eddy 
<http://www.nps.gov/nepe/historyculture/buffalo-eddy.htm>, decorated with more 
than 200 petroglyphs left behind by the Nez Perce people.
• More information: fs.usda.gov 
<http://www.fs.usda.gov/detail/wallowa-whitman/recreation/?cid=stelprdb5238987>,
visitlcvalley.com <http://www.visitlcvalley.com/>

Columbia River Gorge national scenic area
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427936025%2F91283cec-7093-4aca-8f98-9f14910c8bc2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20Oregon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftop-10-national-parks-state-parks-oregon-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F7%2F15%2F1405427936025%2F91283cec-7093-4aca-8f98-9f14910c8bc2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Multnomah Falls in the Columbia River Gorge Scenic Area. Photograph: Alamy 
Washington and Oregon are often lumped together as the Pacific Northwest but 
the two sister states are separated by this imposing gorge. Carved out over 
millions of years by the Columbia river on its way to the Pacific Ocean, the 
gorge was scoured down to its current 1,200m depth by a catastrophic flood at 
the end of the last ice age.

The 80-mile-long Columbia River Gorge is a waterfall lover’s paradise, with 77 
falls on the Oregon side, including 186-metre-high Multnomah Falls, the 
second-highest waterfall in North America, just 30 miles east of Portland. 
Camping opportunities are plentiful along the gorge and in Mount Hood national 
forest to the south. Hundreds of miles of hiking and mountain biking trails 
line the gorge – with adventurous paths plunging over the edge, into the 
depths. If you can get down to the mighty Columbia river, you’ll find a 
kayaking, rafting, fishing, windsurfing, kiteboarding wonderland.

Top tip: The 13-mile Eagle Creek trail isn’t for the faint of heart as it 
sometimes skirts the edge of sheer cliffs, but the rewards are well worth the 
scares: at Punchbowl Falls, water spills 30 metres down into a blue-green 
grotto, and at Tunnel Falls the trail passes through a tunnel behind a 
spectacular sheet of falling water.
• More information: fs.usda.gov/crgnsa <http://www.fs.usda.gov/crgnsa>, 
oregon.com/attractions/multnomah_falls 
<http://www.oregon.com/attractions/multnomah_falls>, 
fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb5397049.pdf 
<http://www.fs.usda.gov/Internet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stelprdb5397049.pdf>

Mary Caperton Morton <http://theblondecoyote.com/> is a freelance writer and 
photographer who makes her home on the back roads of North America, living and 
working out of a tiny solar-powered Teardrop camper
 