
Acadia national park, Maine

Acadia was decreed the first national park in the eastern US, in 1919, and 
retains its elemental charm, with rugged granite cliffs, teeming tide pools and 
wild islands dotting the north Atlantic. Sections of the park are off-limits to 
cars and a network of horse-drawn carriage trails are still in use. It covers 
about half ofMount Desert Island 
<http://www.visitmaine.com/things-to-do/outdoors-adventure/parks-recreation-areas/mount-desert-island/>
, a rocky prominence of land divided into two lobes by the Somes Sound, and 
nearby smaller islands. Parts of the park appear untouched by people, while 
others have been developed for centuries: the island was first settled in 1609 
by the French and during the Gilded Age, the country’s wealthiest families 
built vacation mansions in and around Bar Harbor, a pretty town that is the 
heartbeat of Acadia. To see one of the park’s more primitive places, take a 
ferry from Stonington to Isle au Haut. With a lighthouse, a campground and over 
10 miles of hiking and biking trails, this rocky island is the perfect Maine 
coast getaway.

Top tip Acadia’s Cadillac Mountain is the highest point on the east coast – at 
466 metres – and the first place in the US to see the sun rise. You can hike up 
Cadillac along a moderate four-mile trail or drive to the summit, from April to 
December – weather permitting.
• nps.gov/acad <http://www.nps.gov/acad/index.htm>

Baxter state park, Maine
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432307232976%2F1b37fbbd-187c-48fd-967c-973b5ca7cddc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432307232976%2F1b37fbbd-187c-48fd-967c-973b5ca7cddc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Hiker descending Mount Katahdin. Photograph: Getty Images/Lonely Planet Images 
Baxter state park in northern Maine is home to Mount Katahdin 
<http://www.summitpost.org/katahdin/150219>, an impressive 1,600-metre peak 
that marks the northern end of the Appalachian Trail. Hikers attempting the 
entire trail between Maine and Georgia will either begin or end their journey 
on the summit of Katahdin, making this park a prime place for witnessing and 
sharing personal trials and triumphs of the 2,180-mile footpath. Hiking to the 
summit of Katahdin is not for the faint of heart. The trail is steep and rocky 
and includes a section nicknamed the “knife edge” that is only a metre wide 
with sheer cliffs on both sides. Baxter also offers over 200 miles of hiking 
trails for all abilities. Camping is allowed in the park: in tents, cabins, 
bunkhouses and lean-tos. Reservations are recommended.

Top tip Baxter is a great place to be a trail angel: these are good samaritans 
who help peoplehiking the Appalachian Trail <http://www.appalachiantrail.org/> 
by giving them food, water or a ride into town for supplies. Whether you set up 
an elaborate victory barbecue or simply hand out a few extra candy bars along 
the way, there’s no easier way to make a stranger’s day than by feeding a 
hungry hiker.
• baxterstateparkauthority.com <http://www.baxterstateparkauthority.com/>

Mount Washington state park, New Hampshire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432307492344%2F045225d0-c5c1-419f-828b-dd5cd9d1a086-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432307492344%2F045225d0-c5c1-419f-828b-dd5cd9d1a086-2060x1236.jpeg>
 View of Mountain Washington from the summit of Mountain Adams. Photograph: 
Alamy 
At 1,917 metres, Mount Washington is the highest peak in the eastern US, and 
is home to a weather research station called the Mount Washington Observatory; 
fitting since the summit is notorious for having some of the world’s worst 
weather, including a world-record wind speed of 231 miles an hour (a record 
held from 1934 to 2010). The summit and observatory can be reached on foot, and 
by car and cog-train, with the road to the top usually open from mid-May to 
mid-October, weather permitting. A number of trails, including the Appalachian 
Trail, run up and around Mount Washington, withbackcountry huts available for 
overnight stays <http://www.outdoors.org/lodging/huts/>. Modelled after similar 
shelters in the Alps, the largest of the eight huts can host up to 90 people. 
Bunk reservations are recommended; most huts include dinner and breakfast in 
the price.

Top tip The Presidential Traverse runs for 23 miles over the summits of Mount 
Washington, Mount Jefferson, Mount Adams and Mount Madison. The hike demands 
good weather and hiking experience, as it’s remote and often exposed, but step 
for careful step, it’s one of the most scenic trails in the country.
• nhstateparks.org 
<http://www.nhstateparks.org/explore/state-parks/mount-washington-state-park.aspx>

Rye Harbor state park, New Hampshire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432307591525%2Fa8a5cb98-d5af-4d6c-84ce-0bf7f17121fc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432307591525%2Fa8a5cb98-d5af-4d6c-84ce-0bf7f17121fc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Eliot Elisofon/The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images 
Surfing in New Hampshire may sound far-fetched, but the small state does have 
18 miles of coastline, including several prime surf spots. One of the best 
sites for catching the swells is Rye Beach, just south of Portsmouth. Depending 
on the weather and waves, Rye’s waters can play host to an assortment of surf 
styles, and abilities – ranging from long-boarding and short-boarding to stand 
up paddle-boarding. Several local surf shops in Rye and Portsmouth offer 
rentals and lessons. Non-surfers will enjoy Rye’s sandy beaches, calm swimming 
areas, volleyball nets and bocce ball courts. On the south side of the park, a 
rocky section of coast is dotted with tide pools, while the north side has a 
pebble beach, sand dunes and a freshwater marsh. No camping is available at 
Rye, but Recreational Vehicle (RV) and tent sites can be found atHampton Beach 
state park 
<http://www.nhstateparks.org/explore/state-parks/hampton-beach-state-park.aspx> 
to the south, as well at as several private campgrounds along the coast.

Top tip The Seacoast Science Center, in Rye, offers an educational, hands-on 
marine coast experience, with museum displays, touch tanks and regular family 
events, such as concerts and sea-to-table fundraising dinners. Open daily from 
March to October with limited hours in the winter.
• nhstateparks.org 
<http://www.nhstateparks.org/explore/state-parks/rye-harbor-state-park.aspx>

Burton Island state park, Vermont

Sometimes called the sixth Great Lake, Lake Champlain drains most of Vermont’s 
Green Mountains, as well as New York’s Adirondack Mountains to the west. 
Stretching south from the Canadian border and forming the Vermont-New York 
state border, Champlain’s deep open waters, secluded bays and numerous islands 
offer a variety of boating opportunities. One of the best places to experience 
Champlain’s waters is Burton Island state park, near Saint Albans. No cars are 
allowed on the 253-acre island: it is reachable by boat, either in a canoe or 
the 10-minute long passenger ferry ride that runs fromKamp Kill Kare state park 
<http://www.vtstateparks.com/htm/killkare.htm> on the mainland. Several miles 
of well-signed scenic trails help you visualise and understand the island’s 
history: it was covered by glaciers, then became a peninsula, was inhabited by 
Native Americans, became a farm and is now a state park.

Top tip If you want to stay overnight on Burton Island, plan ahead. The 
campground offers 26 lean-to shelters and 17 tent sites but reservations are 
recommended and can be made up to 11 months in advance. The park also rents row 
boats, canoes and kayaks. Keep an eye out for “Champ”, Lake Champlain’s 
mythical version of the Loch Ness monster.
• vtstateparks.com <http://www.vtstateparks.com/htm/burton.htm>

Smugglers’ Notch state park, Vermont
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432308125788%2Fa098f633-1f2d-45d8-9094-740580c306db-2060x1333.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432308125788%2Fa098f633-1f2d-45d8-9094-740580c306db-2060x1333.jpeg>
 Photograph: Glenn Van Der Knijff/Getty Images/Lonely Planet Images 
For centuries this narrow, cave-riddled pass through the Green Mountains in 
northern Vermont was used as a smugglers’ route to and from Canada. In the 
early 1800s, an embargo act forbidding trade with Canada presented a severe 
hardship for northern Vermonters, since Montreal was closer than other markets 
in the US. Many local people continued illegal trade, herding cattle and 
transporting goods across the border. Later, the Notch served as an important 
link on the Underground Railroad, providing safe passage for escaped slaves to 
Canada. And during prohibition, liquour was smuggled from Canada over the 
improved road, first built to accommodate cars in 1922. Today, the scenic state 
highway 108 runs through Smugglers’ Notch. The road is closed to cars in the 
winter, when the area attracts snowmobilers and skiers. During the summer, 
there are 20 tent sites and 14 lean-to shelters, as well as caving 
opportunities and hiking trails. A section of the Long Trail, which runs for 
272 miles north-south through Vermont, passes through the park on its way north 
to Mount Mansfield, the highest point in the state.

Top tip Near the Stowe and Smugglers’ Notch ski resorts, Smugglers’ Notch 
state park also offers another form of winter recreation: ice climbing. Those 
willing to ski or snowshoe a few miles up route 108 in the winter will find 
spectacular ice formations, which can be ascended using ice axes and crampons. 
Each January, the park hosts theSmuggs Ice Bash <http://www.smuggsicebash.com/>
, an ice-climbing festival.
• vtstateparks.com <http://www.vtstateparks.com/htm/smugglers.htm>

Walden Pond state reserve, Massachusetts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432308287005%2F25dfd381-a61c-4488-87e2-64880d160d9c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432308287005%2F25dfd381-a61c-4488-87e2-64880d160d9c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The beach area of Walden Pond. Photograph: Gail Oski/AP 
The way Henry David Thoreau wrote about his two years of simple living at 
Walden Pond <https://www.walden.org/>, in east-central Massachusetts, made him 
sound like a hermit at a remote outpost far from civilisation. In reality, his 
cabin was only a short walk from the town of Concord and less than 20 miles 
from Boston. Today, a replica of Thoreau’s cabin sits in the state reserve – 
the original, occupied by Thoreau in 1865-66, is long gone. There is a green 
space around the pond itself, and it is a popular canoeing, kayaking and 
swimming spot in summer. The pond, which is over 30 metres deep, is actually a 
kettle hole, a deep depression left behind when a chunk of ice was dropped by a 
retreating glacier around 15,000 years ago. As the chunk of ice melted, it 
created Walden Pond. No streams flow in or out, rather it gains water from 
underground aquifers on the east side and loses water to the aquifer along the 
west side.

Top tip Thoreau was a great believer in taking long, slow, daily walks. Follow 
in his footsteps along the two-mile Pond Path, which runs around the kettle 
hole and past the cabin site, now marked by a large pile of rocks in a grove of 
oak trees on the north shore.
• mass.gov 
<http://www.mass.gov/eea/agencies/dcr/massparks/region-north/walden-pond-state-reservation.html>

Cape Cod national seashore, Massachusetts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432308404558%2Ffd5a57f5-a969-436a-831d-66c1294e939f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432308404558%2Ffd5a57f5-a969-436a-831d-66c1294e939f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Old Harbor Life Saving Museum, Cape Cod. Photograph: PR 
Jutting out into the Atlantic like a raised fist is Cape Cod’s narrow spit of 
sand, much of which is protected within the bounds of Cape Cod national 
seashore. In the winter, the Cape can be downright ghostly, occupied by a 
handful of hardy year-round residents. In the summer, it comes alive with 
visitors descending on the beaches, towns and islands – but despite its 
popularity, moments of solitude can be found within the dunes and cranberry 
bogs. During the Cape’s heyday, hundreds of ships came and went on a daily 
basis from Provincetown, Welfleet and other port towns. But not all vessels 
made their way home safely: dangerous and constantly moving shoals just 
offshore have claimed thousands of boats. The stretch of coast between Chatham 
to Provincetown has been nicknamed the Graveyard because of the more than 3,000 
shipwrecks. This legacy is preserved at Cape Cod national seashore in 18 dune 
shacks, which once served as warming huts for the coastguard patrols. Some 
shacks are now private getaways, while others are part ofan artist residency 
programme 
<http://www.nps.gov/caco/learn/historyculture/residency-programs-dune-shacks-of-the-peaked-hill-bars-historic-district.htm>
 that provides short- and long-term housing for painters, poets and 
photographers

Top tip Cape Cod’s reputation for sinking ships led to the erection of nearly 
two dozen lighthouses, starting in 1857. The oldest and tallest isthe Highland 
Light <http://www.highlandlighthouse.org/>, one of the few remaining working 
lighthouses on Cape Cod. Guided tours are available near North Truro.
• nps.gov/caco <http://www.nps.gov/caco/index.htm>

Goddard Memorial state park, Rhode Island
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432308632145%2F8687843718_9cd3c083d5_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432308632145%2F8687843718_9cd3c083d5_o-2060x1236.jpeg>
Photograph: Joe Bar/flickr 
<https://www.flickr.com/photos/jbar_photos/8687843718/> 
Rhode Island is the smallest state in the union and the second most-populous 
per square mile, but it still has its fair share of green spaces. Goddard 
Memorial on Greenwich Cove and Greenwich Bay in Warwick, is one of RI’s most 
popular spots for hiking, horseback riding, picnicking, golfing, swimming and 
canoeing. Just south of the capital of Providence, Goddard is an urban park 
that preserves a sprawling estate once owned by civil war veteran Robert 
Goddard. The park offers spacious lawns, fields and forests, including an 
arboretum that has exotic species of trees from all over the world. There is 
also a nine-hole golf course, equestrian competition facilities and a 
performing arts centre. No camping is available.

Top tip One of the best ways to experience the park is on horseback. Nearly 20 
miles of bridle trails wind through it.C and L Stables 
<http://www.candlstables.info/> in Goddard offers guided trail and beach rides, 
as well as pony parties, private lessons and summer riding camps.
• riparks.com <http://www.riparks.com/Locations/LocationGoddard.html>

Connecticut Valley Railroad state park, Connecticut
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432308692284%2F7be71e1c-0af4-44b3-8d30-cef821b89fc3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20national%20and%20state%20parks%20in%20New%20England%2C%20USA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftop-10-national-state-parks-new-england-usa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F22%2F1432308692284%2F7be71e1c-0af4-44b3-8d30-cef821b89fc3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Essex Steam Train & Riverboat Rail Road Locomotive. Photograph: Alamy 
Once upon a time, steam locomotive was the most efficient and stylish form of 
transportation in New England. At Connecticut Valley Railroad state park, in 
Essex, visitors can still revel in the joy of 19th-century railroading. The 
Valley Railroad Company leases the linear state park from the state and offers 
an original railroad station from 1872, steam locomotives and vintage train 
cars. TheEssex Steam Train and Riverboat 
<http://essexsteamtrain.com/the-train-boat/> excursion begins with a 12-mile 
steam train ride along the scenic Connecticut river. Passengers disembark the 
train and board the Becky Thatcher riverboat for a float to the historic East 
Haddam swing bridge. The train returns passengers to the Essex Depot about 3½ 
hours later. The railyard at the Essex Depot is an attraction in itself, 
featuring vintage and historic trains and train cars.

Top tip Enjoy a taste of train travel aboard the Essex Clipper Dinner Train, a 
2½-hour ride featuring a seasonal four-course meal prepared onboard and served 
in a restored 1920s Pullman dining car.
• ct.gov <http://www.ct.gov/deep/cwp/view.asp?a=2716&q=433674&deepNav_GID=1650>
 