
Tottenham Hotspur continue to tick off the lesser assignments, although they 
cannot have expected to meet quite such compliant opposition as they did here. A
second away win by this margin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/southampton-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 in four days could not have been more convenient preparation for Chelsea’s 
visit to White Hart Lane on Wednesday and any suggestion that they might take 
their eye off the ball against opponents with previous for inconveniencing 
bigger names was quickly rendered unnecessary by the sheer paucity of Watford’s 
offering.

It is hard to imagine that a home side will play this inadequately during the 
rest of 2017. Injuries had played havoc with Walter Mazzarri’s plans, but that 
does not completely excuse the sluggishness and basic errors that peppered the 
performance of a relatively experienced starting XI. Tottenham were merciless 
in response and seized upon the home side’s repeat offences, the snatched 
clearance from Younès Kaboul that teed up Dele Alli to score a third goal – and 
end any lingering doubts over the outcome – four minutes before half-time 
providing a faithful snapshot of the afternoon’s events.

None of that is to detract from the encouragement Tottenham, whose four-game 
winning run gives the impression of a team easing into gear after a patchy 
autumn, will take from a match they controlled entirely. Alli, recapturing last 
season’s levels of effervescence, was a delight to watch and Mauricio 
Pochettino will have been equally happy that he could rest his midfielder for 
the last third of the game. Harry Kane looked as sharp as at any time this 
season and then there was the performance of Kieran Trippier, who has been a 
forgotten man due to the excellence of Kyle Walker but took advantage of his 
team-mate’s suspension to lay on both of Kane’s goals. He remains one of the 
division’s most technically gifted right-backs and this was a reminder that 
Spurs possess important depth in what, for them, is a vital area of the pitch.

Trippier had already created a chance for Danny Rose when, spotting Kane’s 
angled run in the inside-right channel, he met it with a clever pass round the 
defence. Kane beat Heurelho Gomes confidently and from then on it was a 
question of how many Tottenham would score.

Six minutes later it seemed anyone’s guess. Trippier’s next trick was a 
wonderful, half-volleyed cross from the right flank that bypassed the home 
centre-backs for Kane to jab home emphatically.Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> players were not without 
reproach, Kane showing far more hunger than the two he beat to the ball, but 
the delivery had been virtually unplayable.

It was a perceptive, first-time switch across field from Alli that supplied 
Trippier with the time and space to centre. That was entirely characteristic of 
the midfielder’s performance, which could have been crowned by a spectacular 
goal when a 25-yard shot rapped the bar seconds before Kane opened the scoring, 
but was still rewarded soon enough. Alli was deft, alert, brain and feet 
operating yards ahead of anybody in a yellow shirt. Craig Cathcart might have 
prevented him from seizing on to Kaboul’s mistake, but this was a day when 
50-50 contests had only one winner and his finish was unerring.

There was a similar outcome when, found with half of the penalty area at his 
disposal from Kane’s cross 58 seconds into the second half, Alli was faced with 
Gomes a second time. The result was the same and had the option been available, 
both sides would surely have wound things up there and then.

Watford’s supporters had booed after the third goal but saw the rest of the 
game out as quietly as their team. Much as Kaboul’s scrambled injury-time 
consolation was insignificant, it was a jolt to the senses inasmuch as they had 
never threatened anything of the sort. “We were growing during the season and 
then out of nowhere we miss five very important members of the team,” said the 
Watford manager. “If you took that number from any other team in thePremier 
League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> they would also be 
in big difficulty.”

Mazzarri had said before the game that he needed “a priest” to rid Watford 
from a litany of problems that had included early injuries to Daryl Janmaat and 
Valon Behrami in the Boxing Daydraw with Crystal Palace. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/26/watford-crystal-palace-premier-league-match-report>
 Nobody with access to a higher power appeared to have listened; Watford were 
forced into a reshuffle when Camilo Zúñiga suffered an ankle injury in the 
warm-up and that set the tone for their afternoon. Zúñiga’s replacement, Odion 
Ighalo, went on to underline the sense that the form with which he began 2016 
was very much against the norm.

The task for Tottenham is to make sure that this level of performance becomes 
a regular occurrence against better opposition. “It was nearly a perfect game,” 
Pochettino said, and more of the same against the leaders on Wednesday would 
give the next 51 weeks a tough act to follow in improving on this first one.

Watford v Tottenham Hotspur: Premier League – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/01/watford-v-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-live>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwatford-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f630b779408d6093678665e2cfa5a5e79b9138%2F0_58_4740_2844%2F4740.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tottenham%E2%80%99s%20Harry%20Kane%20and%20Dele%20Alli%20provide%20double%20trouble%20for%20Watford&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwatford-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tottenham%E2%80%99s%20Harry%20Kane%20and%20Dele%20Alli%20provide%20double%20trouble%20for%20Watford&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwatford-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f630b779408d6093678665e2cfa5a5e79b9138%2F0_58_4740_2844%2F4740.jpg>
 Watford fans endure the weather and their side’s performance against Tottenham 
Hotspur. Photograph: Eddie Keogh/Reuters  