
The most damaging part for Chelsea, suffering their first league defeat since 
losing against Arsenal at the end of September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, has nothing to do with it stopping them establishing a record in the Premier 
League era of 14 successive wins in a single season. It would have been a nice 
one to chalk up, but a team with their ambitions will be far more distressed 
about what it means for the league table and the confidence it might give 
Tottenham Hotspur, seven points back, to think they can still play a 
considerable part in the title race.

Dele Alli’s goals certainly ought to encourage Spurs on a night when their 
supporters endured opposition songs poking fun that they “won the league in 
black and white”, referring to the fact that the last time the team from White 
Hart Lane finished as champions was back in 1961. Alli scored one at the end of 
the first half and another early in the second period. Both were headers and 
the England international has managed two goals in each of his past three games.

Tottenham deliver statement of intent but derby revenge still tastes sweet | 
David Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/04/mauricio-pochettino-dele-alli-tottenham-chelsea>
Alli is in the best scoring form of his life and his latest brace was the most 
important of the lot given its impact on the top four and the braking effect it 
had on the league leaders, arriving here with their chests puffed out after 13 
wins in a row.

It still counts as a remarkable feat even if that will be little consolation 
as they reflect on a sapping night against one of the teams they find it 
particularly difficult to lose to. Chelsea have tended to have easily the 
better of these encounters: this was their fifth defeat out of 50Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> meetings. Yet Spurs, lest 
it be forgotten, were high on confidence on the back of their own productive 
run of form.

They have now won five successive league fixtures. Their prize is to go third 
and push Arsenal down to fifth, and Mauricio Pochettino can reflect on a hugely 
satisfying evening’s work bearing in mind his switch to a 3-4-2-1 formation, 
deliberately set up to nullify Chelsea’s wing-back system.

From Chelsea’s perspective, perhaps the most disappointing aspect of the 
performance was that as soon as Alli scored his second, nine minutes after the 
break, the home team were rarely endangered. Until that point, nobody could 
doubt Chelsea’s effort or that, at 1-0 down, this was a side that seemed 
mortally offended by the idea of losing.

After that, however, there was not a great deal of personality from the team 
in blue and the home supporters could bask in one of those nights, under the 
floodlights, when it felt like a tremendous pity White Hart Lane, as we know 
it, is being lost to the bulldozers.

Tottenham Hotspur 2-0 Chelsea: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-v-chelsea-premier-league-live>
It was strangely meek from Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> given there was still time to 
save themselves and it was out of character, too, given there were other parts 
of the match when it was clear to see the competitive qualities that had helped 
them reach the league’s summit.

At one point in the first half Diego Costa seemed to forget he was supposed to 
be irritating the opposition defenders and turned on Pedro for not being on the 
same wavelength to receive a pass inside the penalty area. The two players were 
still chuntering away at one another the next time play stopped. It never looks 
good when two team-mates are arguing on the pitch but those were the moments 
when we could be absolutely certain how much this contest mattered to Chelsea.

Arsenal’s record lives on – how Arsène Wenger’s boys of 2002 made history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/arsenal-2002-record-premier-league-arsene-wenger>
Equally, Costa did not do an awful lot in the last 35 minutes when his team 
really needed some extra inspiration and after an encouraging start to the 
second half their performance was perhaps epitomised by the moment, at 1-0, 
when Eden Hazard had a headed opportunity to equaliser. Hazard, for all his 
gifts, is not a natural in those positions but this was a particularly 
tentative effort, almost as if he was frightened of getting bashed in the 
process.

It was a spiky, absorbing contest, simmering with occasional tensions and 
passing reminders about the sporting enmity and lingering bad feeling from that 
wild and infamous encounterat Stamford Bridge last May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/chelsea-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
. Alli will dominate the headlines but Victor Wanyama was the outstanding 
performer. Harry Kane found it difficult to get away from Gary Cahill but Alli 
now has seven goals in his past four games.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ftottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb781b1154dc6a932ce5532b030e95a1a34b5575%2F0_52_3651_2190%2F3651.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tottenham%E2%80%99s%20Dele%20Alli%20scores%20two%20to%20end%20Chelsea%E2%80%99s%20winning%20run%20short%20of%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ftottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tottenham%E2%80%99s%20Dele%20Alli%20scores%20two%20to%20end%20Chelsea%E2%80%99s%20winning%20run%20short%20of%20record&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Ftottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb781b1154dc6a932ce5532b030e95a1a34b5575%2F0_52_3651_2190%2F3651.jpg>
 Dele Alli heads Tottenham into the lead on the stroke of half-time. 
Photograph: Tottenham Hotspur FC via Getty Images 
The strange thing about the latest two was their similarity. On both occasions 
it was the same three players linking up – first Kyle Walker, then Christian 
Eriksen and, finally, Alli. Walker’s determination to push forward had brought 
defenders towards him. Eriksen was in a better position to clip the ball into 
the penalty area and when Walker turned a short pass back the Dane picked out 
Alli with the right‑sided delivery. To complete the sense of deja vu, Alli had 
found space in between César Azpilicueta and Victor Moses on both occasions, 
scoring with two precise headers.

Chelsea might reflect the game could have taken an entirely different course 
if Hazard had done better with the chance that came his way, four minutes in, 
but that was their only clear opportunity of the opening half and, apart from a 
brief flurry early on, there was not a great deal else to trouble Hugo Lloris 
after the break.

Spurs were seldom threatened once Alli’s second header went in and they will 
miss these loud, triumphant nights when this stadium changes forever.
 