
Tottenham Hotspur are unlikely to return with a new offer for Wilfried Zaha in 
the transfer window after the Crystal Palace winger joined up with the Ivory 
Coast squad for theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>.

Zaha scored his fourth Premier League goal of the season against Swansea City 
in the 2-1 defeat at Selhurst Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/03/crystal-palace-swansea-city-premier-league-match-report>
 on Tuesday, meaning he has already matched his previous highest tally from 
2014-15. The 24-year-old has also six assists, ranking him inside the top 10 
players in the division, but is now set to miss up to six weeks of Palace’s 
campaign having flown to Abu Dhabi on Wednesday to meet his new international 
team-mates.

Transfer window January 2017: all the latest moves and news – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Ivory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast>, the holders, 
are once again one of the favourites for the tournament, which begins on 14 
January in Gabon, and their progress to the latter stages could mean he does 
not return to domestic action until the second week of February.

It is understood that potential length of absence has dissuaded Tottenham from 
launching a new approach for the former Manchester United player, although 
Mauricio Pochettino remains an admirer of Zaha having seen two bids rejected 
last summer. Palace had already indicated their unwillingness to allow their 
prize asset to leave Selhurst Park in January and are thought to value the 
player in excess of £40m, given that he has another three and a half years 
remaining on his contract.

Zaha had been due to meet up with the Ivory Coast squad earlier in the week 
but was given special dispensation to play against Swansea after negotiations 
with Palace. International clearance complications had threatened his 
involvement in Sunday’s friendly against Sweden but he is now expected to make 
his debut for the country of his birth, having won two caps for England in 
friendles.

There was encouraging news for Sam Allardyce, Palace’s new manager, after it 
was confirmed the club’s £32m striker Christian Benteke suffered only minor 
damage to a shoulder ligament. He was withdrawn at half-time against Swansea 
after a clash with Lukasz Fabianski but Palace’s chairman, Steve Parish, said 
the 26-year-old’s injury “isn’t as bad as we first feared”. Loïc Rémy is 
expected to play some part in Saturday’s FA Cup tie at Bolton, having yet to 
make his debut since signing on loan from Chelsea.
 