
Tottenham Hotspur could hardly look sharper going into Wednesday’s high-stakes 
duelagainst Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-match-preview>
 but they know the match represents a mighty test of their finishing skills and 
they must pass it if they are to retain hope of ending this season as champions.

Tottenham Hotspur v Chelsea: match preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-match-preview>
Several times in this campaign Mauricio Pochettino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mauricio-pochettino> has deplored his 
team’s lack of ruthlessness but during the season of goodwill his players 
summoned the callousness he demanded, scoring eight goals in two away matches 
after Christmas on top of the five in the two games before. Spurs’ most 
dangerous attackers, Harry Kane and Dele Alli, are in their best form.

Now Tottenham must show they have the sangfroid to be merciless against the 
meanest defence in the Premier League. They cannot afford to be as forgiving as 
they were at Stamford Bridge in November, when they had Chelsea on the ropes 
several times but failed to land enough punches to knock them down and were
beaten 2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/chelsea-tottenham-premier-league-match-report>
. A similar result would leave Pochettino’s men 13 points behind Antonio 
Conte’s side, whereas victory would keep them within striking distance.

“If we review the game from November, we deserved more,” Pochettino said. “We 
dominated and we created more chances than them but you always need to be more 
clinical. In the last few games we have scored a lot, so it will be a great 
game. We are excited.”

The excitement is widespread. All the other title chasers yearn for more 
evidence the leaders are stoppable and no one craves an end to Chelsea’s 
winning run more than Tottenham fans, even though curtailing itat 13 matches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/31/chelsea-stoke-city-premier-league-match-report>
 would leave Arsenal as the holders of the record for consecutive Premier 
League victories. It was Chelsea who quashed Spurs’ lingering title hopes last 
season by fighting back in a tempestuous battle to gaina 2-2 draw at Stamford 
Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/chelsea-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
. And the 2-1 victory for Conte’s side at the same venue this season put paid 
to Tottenham’s unbeaten start. For Tottenham fans, revenge is a dish best 
served white-hot.

The atmosphere on Wednesday will enhance the spectacle but make it all the 
harder for players to keep their heads. That is why Pochettino, without trying 
to dilute the appeal of a derby, is urging his players, publicly at least, not 
to get caught up in talk of revenge.

“Always Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> and Arsenal are 
our enemies and it is true for our fans it is a very special game but, as we 
are professionals, the most important thing is to think about three points,” he 
said. “It is in our head to win the game and close the gap but not for revenge 
for last season. That chapter is closed. If we need to blame someone [for last 
season], we need to blame ourselves – we are the guilty ones that did not 
achieve the Premier League.”

Which brings us back to their inconsistent finishing – and their jitters. At 
crucial times last season Spurs’ sureness in front of goal abandoned them, much 
as their nerve did at Old Trafford three weeks ago. That servile1-0 defeat by 
Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/11/manchester-united-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 is another reason why Tottenham need to beat Chelsea before belief will grow 
that their recent run could really turn into a title charge.

In addition to the form of Kane and Alli, who between them have scored eight 
goals in their past three matches and were taken off long before the end of 
Sunday’s win at Watford in an effort to keep them at peak sharpness for 
Wednesday, there are other encouraging pointers for Spurs. Toby Alderweireld 
was commandingat Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/watford-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 on his return from a two-week layoff and Danny Rose is in storming form. Both 
of those defenders missed the match at Stamford Bridge in November and their 
availability should make Spurs stronger. Pochettino almost has a full-strength 
squad from which to choose, with only Érik Lamela injured.

Mauricio Pochettino reckons everyone else wants Spurs to beat Chelsea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/mauricio-pochettino-spurs-chelsea-premier-league-white-hart-lane>
The Spurs manager also has interesting tactical options. At Watford, as 
against Arsenal earlier in the season, he deployed a back three and his team 
were again solid enough to suggest they may not be destabilised if Pochettino 
chooses to move closer to the shape that has worked so well for Chelsea over 
the past three months. Amid doubts about the fitness of Chelsea’s Marcos 
Alonso, Rose and Kyle Walker could establish wing-back supremacy for Spurs.

That is only one of many intriguing prospects in a battle laden with 
significance and high-class match-ups. Tottenham showed in November they have 
the vibrancy to overwhelm the leaders but they must demonstrate that even when 
push comes to shove they also have the coolness to turn pressure into goals.

If they do that they could offer their fans a treat in the same vein as the 
5-3 victory they enjoyed on New Year’s Day 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/01/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, Pochettino’s only win over Chelsea since taking charge of Spurs. A formidable 
test looms for both teams and, if Tottenham pass it, the title race will become 
tighter for six sides.
 