
Mauricio Pochettino has been at Tottenham Hotspur for only two and a half 
seasons but, already, he has plenty of history with Chelsea – and it goes 
deeper than the nownotorious 2-2 draw at Stamford Bridge at the end of last 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/chelsea-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
, when his team lost a lead, their heads and any chance of the title.

Pochettino can reflect on the 5-3 home win over them in his first season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/01/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
, which was one of the first indications that his side could play in the manner 
that he demanded while there would be the 2-0 Capital One Cup final defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/mar/01/chelsea-tottenham-capital-one-cup-final-match-report>
 a couple of months later.

Tottenham’s Dele Alli brings an end to Chelsea’s 13-match winning run
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
Earlier this season, there was the 2-1 defeat at Stamford Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/26/chelsea-tottenham-premier-league-match-report>
, which Pochettino has continued to lament, although he does believe that it 
represented a turning point for this team. Afterthe Champions League exit in 
Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/monaco-tottenham-hotspur-champions-league-group-e-match-report>
 a matter of days earlier, Pochettino detected the signs of his players getting 
their groove back.

Every meeting with the team from the west of the capital has seemed loaded 
with significance and this one was no different. Never mind thatChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> were after the record for 
consecutive top-flight league wins. It was Tottenham for whom this was arguably 
the bigger game. Put it this way. Which team could most afford to lose? It was 
not Spurs.

Pochettino wanted to see a statement of intent from his players, rather than 
the completion of any revenge mission for the Battle of the Bridge and, thanks 
to the kid who cannot stop scoring, he got one.

Dele Alli’s goals were similar productions. They were created by the guile and 
delivery of Christian Eriksen and Alli finished each of them with his head. 
Moreover, on each occasion he ghosted in between César Azpilicueta and Victor 
Moses.

The 20-year-old has now scored seven times in his past four appearances for a 
tally of 11 in all competitions for the club season – which is one more than he 
finished with last term. The home support are fond of reminding everybody how 
they have got Alli. He strutted his stuff as though he owned White Hart Lane 
and there was a moment he will cherish when he was substituted on 86 minutes in 
the form of a rousing standing ovation. He even got a sporting handshake from 
David Luiz, the Chelsea defender.

Pochettino had stuck with the three-at-the-back strategy that he had used in 
the 4-1 win at Watford on New Year’s Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/watford-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 and the idea behind the 3-4-2-1 formation was to provide the platform for the 
full-backs, Kyle Walker and Danny Rose, to press high up the field, which they 
did to good effect. But it was also noticeable how much license Alli was given 
to roam in his role off the striker, Harry Kane.

Tottenham Hotspur 2-0 Chelsea: Premier League – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-v-chelsea-premier-league-live>
Jan Vertonghen had been guilty of playing Eden Hazard onside in the early 
running for a big chance that the Chelsea winger lashed wide but Pochettino’s 
defence came to contain the threat of their opponents with relative comfort. 
And, further forward, Alli’s quest for the little spaces in the decisive areas 
would make the difference. Gareth Southgate, the England manager, looked on 
approvingly from the stands.

Tottenham jump to third in the table and, in the process, they have squeezed 
Arsenal out of the top four. Pochettino has now won four of the five games in 
which he has started with three at the back – the other one wasthe creditable 
draw at Arsenal in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/arsenal-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
 – and it is getting to the point where it would be a surprise if he did not 
persist with the approach, much as Antonio Conte has done with his 3-4-3 at 
Chelsea.

Pochettino certainly has the personnel at his disposal, with Eric Dier’s 
adaptability on the right of the defensive three once again worthy of note and 
Victor Wanyama a towering presence in defensive midfield. Walker and Rose, 
meanwhile, continue to be influential. They won the battle of the wing-backs, 
pushing Moses and Marcos Alonso back.

What was striking was how Tottenham saw the game out after Alli’s second goal, 
when there were still 36 minutes to go. Pochettino and Conte had talked about 
how the Battle of the Bridge was behind them – a “closed chapter” to quote the 
former – but, with the Chelsea fans referencing it repeatedly in their chants, 
it felt as though there was plenty of carry over.

Rose, a central figure last May, was involved in a series of flashpoints, 
crunching in on his opponents and getting a bit back, as well, while in the 
first half there was the feeling of simmering tension. In other words, it was 
difficult to blot out the recent past.

The key detail of the 2-2 draw was how Tottenham had thrown away their 2-0 
advantage in the final half hour or so but, on this occasion, their maturity 
was pronounced – and that was of great comfort to Pochettino. The closing 
stages were notable for how few scares there were in front of Hugo Lloris’s 
goal.

The evening became a celebration for the home support, and they told 
Pochettino at the end how they thought he was magic. His team are once again 
playing as they did in their better moments last season and it is remarkable 
how they are coming into form at around the same time. With Alli in this kind 
of touch, the optimism feels tangible.
 