
The verdict is in and the government is guilty. In a landmark ruling, the high 
court has ruled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/high-court-rules-uk-government-plans-to-tackle-air-pollution-are-illegal>
 that the plans to cut fatal air pollution are not only inadequate, but also 
illegal. To anyone who has seenthese plans 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/air-quality-plan-for-nitrogen-dioxide-no2-in-uk-2015>
, the verdict is not surprising.

“If there was a toxin in our water system that we knew was killing thousands 
of people every year, the government would be coordinating Cobra meetings every 
day,” Matthew Pennycook, the Labour MP for Greenwich and chair of parliament’s 
cross-party group on air pollution, said after this morning’s ruling. But when 
it comes to the fatal toxins in our air, the government has not been 
coordinating any emergency meetings. It has been moving at a snail’s pace.

Air pollution is a known killer. The UK has been in breach of legal limits on 
nitrogen dioxide (NO2) for years. The government’sown reports 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-archive/environmental-audit-committee/eacpn220310/>
 show air pollution is causing 40-50,000 deaths every year, by exacerbating 
respiratory illnesses, heart disease and asthma. New evidence suggests it is 
not only finding its way into our lungs, but into our brains too, where it may
bring about the premature onset of Alzheimer’s disease 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/05/toxic-air-pollution-particles-found-in-human-brains-links-alzheimers>
. In thewords of MPs from all parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/27/uk-air-pollution-public-health-emergency-crisis-diesel-cars>
, we are facing a public health crisis.

Theresa May has pledged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/theresa-may-launches-tory-leadership-bid-with-pledge-to-unite-country>
 that she will fight the “burning injustices” that entrench social inequality 
and blight the life chances of children from working-class families. She says 
that many in Westminster “don’t know what it’s like to live like this and need 
to be told that what the government does isn’t a game”. But perhaps the prime 
minister is among them.

Children know that air pollution is not a game because they are substantially 
more vulnerable to toxins in the air, which permanently stunt the development 
of their lungs.So too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/10/londons-black-communities-disproportionately-exposed-to-air-pollution-study>
 are people from ethnic minority backgrounds, those living in areas of higher 
levels of deprivation, the elderly and those with chronic health conditions. In 
short, they are the most vulnerable people in our society.

Yet still, the apathy persists. It has now been more than a year since the 
Volkswagen scandal broke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2015/sep/24/vw-volkswagen-diesel-emissions-carmaker-why-video>
, when a major car manufacturer was revealed to have been covering up air 
pollution throughcriminal activity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/16/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-criminal-evidence>
. In the US, VW has agreed to pay $15.3bn to compensate consumers and mitigate 
some of the damage it has done to the environment. In the UK the government has 
failed to take legal action or compensate consumers – all while lobbying at an 
EU level to water down regulations that would encourage the car industry to 
change. Indeed, the only reason the government has an air quality plan at all 
is because thesupreme court ordered it to draw one up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/29/supreme-court-orders-uk-to-draw-up-air-pollution-cleanup-plan>
 18 months ago.

So what now? Speaking at prime minister’s questions today, May promised that 
the government did not “doubt the importance of the issue” and would look again 
at the proposals. She is right, it will – because it will have to. It now has 
one week to negotiate with the NGO ClientEarth, which emerged victorious from 
the high court this morning. It will be forced to scrap its current air quality 
plan, which called for clean air zones in just five cities, and backed the 
mayor’s plans in London, but did not mandate change in major cities such as 
Manchester and industrial hot spots such as Port Talbot.

Any new plan is likely to implement clean air zones in many more cities and 
could mean that diesel cars will face charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/diesel-vehicles-face-charges-after-uk-government-loses-air-pollution-case>
 in many city centres. But the government should ensure local authorities have 
proper resources to implement the zones. It is also likely the government will 
have to redo the flawed modelling on which its current plans are based, which 
fail to properly take into accountthe vast discrepancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/21/all-top-selling-cars-break-emissions-limits-in-real-world-tests>
 between tests in the laboratory and tests on the road.

But even this is likely to be inadequate. Road transport is the number one 
contributor to NO2 pollution and diesel is the main culprit. Yet we currently 
have a tax system that incentivises consumers to purchase diesel cars, which 
currently make up close to half of the nation’s fleet.Research published today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/make-central-london-diesel-free-to-solve-air-pollution-crisis-report>
 suggests that for central London to become compliant, the proportion of diesel 
cars on the road would need to be as low as 5%. The sale of diesel cars must 
end and the government must reform a regulatorthat hauls in millions from the 
car industry itself 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2015/10/12/dieselgate-scandal-government-regulator-receives-over-80-million-from-auto-industry-in-past-10-years/>
.

But the car industry does not have to be the villain in this story. May has 
the opportunity to make it the hero and deliver a boost to the government’s 
shiny new industrial strategy to boot. Both Norway and the Netherlands 
understand this – they arestriving for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/18/netherlands-parliament-electric-car-petrol-diesel-ban-by-2025>
 an emissions-free industry within the decade. China hasannounced 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-28/china-embraces-hybrids-in-pivot-from-plug-in-path-to-clean-cars>
 a boost to its hybrid industry and even Germany, the nation that invented the 
car, is now mooting a federal proposal 
<https://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/11/01/germany-really-going-ban-petrol-diesel-cars/>
 for a ban on petrol and diesel by 2030.

Electrics, hybrids and hydrogen are the future of the global car industry. If 
the UK doesn’t move fast by delivering the incentives and infrastructure 
required to clean it up, we will get left behind. If the prime minister 
realises this opportunity, perhaps then she might really start to play the game.
 