
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> threatened 
Toyota on Thursday with a “big border tax” if it didn’t build cars meant for 
the US within the states, the latest in a series of attacks on car 
manufacturers and the first time since his election that he has threatened a 
foreign company.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Toyota Motor said will build a new plant in Baja, Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mexico>, to build Corolla cars for U.S. NO 
WAY! Build plant in U.S. or pay big border tax.
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817071792711942145> January 5, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817071792711942145> 
The $1bn plant will be located Guanajuato, a state in central Mexico, not Baja 
California, as Trump tweeted.Toyota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> plans to increase capacity at an 
existing plant in Tijuana, Baja California, that makes Tacoma pickup trucks.

Toyota plans to manufacture 200,000 Corollas at the new plant. The Corolla is 
the second bestselling compact car in the US 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/toyota-president-strikes-friendly-tone-on-trump-1483637844>
 behind fellow Japanese manufacturer Honda’s Civic.

Trump’s latest threat follows a similar one against General Motors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/donald-trump-general-motors-tax-chevrolet-cruz>
 over its plans to manufacture compact cars south of the border for US export.

Jorge Guajardo, the former Mexican ambassador to China, immediately lit into 
Trump <https://twitter.com/jorge_guajardo/status/817077682290749440>: “If you 
think intentionally wrecking your neighbor’s economy is what’s going to bring 
peace and stability to US you’re in for a big surprise,” he tweeted.

Trump, who was elected on a promise to restore US manufacturing jobs, has 
spent the week instructing automakers to move their compact car production out 
of Mexico. On Tuesday he told GM that it too must weigh his opinion favorably 
against the financial efficiencies offered on foreign soil. “Make in U.S.A. or 
pay big border tax!” Trumptweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/816260343391514624>.

Last month Trump threatened “retribution 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/805380553008680961>” against 
companies outsourcing factory work to foreign facilities. “There will be a tax 
on our soon to be strong border of 35% for these companies,” he tweeted, naming 
car and air conditioner manufacturers in the same series of remarks.

In recent weeks, Trump also threatened aerospace firms Boeing and 
Lockheed-Martin, both of which rely heavily on government contracts for 
multibillion-dollar revenues. Those threats, also tweeted, shocked shareholders 
and caused stock prices to plummet.

But threatening car companies with taxation has barely caused the market to 
blink. The US president cannot personally levy taxes; that duty falls to state 
legislatures and the US House of Representatives, which holds the “power of the 
purse”.

Trump’s campaign platform heavily criticized companies for moving labor out of 
the US, but thus far his favored method of dealing with corporations has been 
rewards via back channels, rather than punishment. Instead of taxing air 
conditioner company Carrier more for exporting jobs, however, Trump and Indiana 
governor Mike Pence offered the Indiana-based company $7m in tax breaks to keep 
700 jobs.
 