
Trading standards officers have accused the government of failing to protect 
consumers after it emerged that the local council budget for policing rogue 
traders has fallen to just £1.99 a year per citizen.

Trading standards to investigate ‘fake’ British farm brands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/16/trading-standards-investigate-fake-british-farm-brands>
The warning follows a recent wave of high-profile consumer safety scandals, 
including diesel emissions cheating at Volkswagen, injuries from exploding 
hoverboards and fires caused by thousands of unsafe tumble driers.

Austerity cuts imposed by central government have left local government 
trading standards teams fearful of the financial risks of taking on major 
prosecutions, theChartered Trading Standards Institute has warned 
<http://www.tradingstandards.uk/templates/asset-relay.cfm?frmAssetFileID=79229> 
in its latest survey of the profession. “We have a situation where trading 
standards teams in local councils are tasked with holding multi-million-pound 
firms to account, with just a handful of staff,” said the institute’s chief 
executive, Leon Livermore. “Spending so little on market surveillance and 
consumer protection, with an economy as large as ours, simply does not make 
sense.”

During the last six years, total spend nationally has fallen from £213m in 
2010 to £124m today, the survey found. Teams have been slashed, with a 12% drop 
in staff working in trading standards since 2014. This came on top of the 45% 
drop identified over the previous five years by an earlier survey.

The research is based on responses from 122 of the 192 trading standards teams 
in England, Wales and Scotland. Around 81% admitted cuts had “affected their 
ability to protect consumers”.

The institute is calling for a government-led strategic restructure of trading 
standards services, saying Britain’s exit from the European Union may mean 
further pressure on budgets. “There are more challenges ahead, as the economic 
impact of the UK exit from the EU points to a continued period of austerity and 
further funding reductions for local government,” said Livermore. “Meanwhile, 
outside the EU it is arguably more important than ever that the UK is able to 
demonstrate high standards in regulatory compliance and consumer protection in 
order to gain access to key markets.”

The VW scandal, in which “defeat” devices used to mask real diesel emissions 
were discovered in cars, hascost the company an estimated £12.7 billion 
<http://news.sky.com/story/vw-diesel-scandal-cost-rises-to-163127bn-10253725>. 
In the run-up to Christmas, trading standards officers took action against 
hoverboards – otherwise known as self-balancing scooters – after complaints 
that users were being injured when cheaper models lost power or caught fire.
Hoverboards worth £26m were seized 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/scottish-news/hundreds-dangerous-hoverboards-intercepted-glasgow-6791484#syom5o7TOOYqVl5D.97>
 at airports and warehouses across the UK.

An investigation by the Mirror newspaper found that 3,777 fires caused by 
tumble dryers 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/6000-tumble-dryers-burst-flames-7371891> 
– some of them fatal – have been reported to emergency services over the last 
six years.

The kitchen appliances that burst into flames – and the struggle to replace 
them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/30/kitchen-appliances-burst-into-flame-whirlpool-tumble-dryer-dishwasher>
Legal experts say the cuts have had a chilling effect on the willingness of 
councils to take on larger, well-funded offenders.

Jonathan Goulding, a barrister at London’s Gough Square Chambers, who has 
successfully prosecuted night clubs in York and Lincoln over fire safety, said: 
“Sometimes it is the choice between a substantial case against a nationwide 
business or a number of smaller cases against local – including rogue – 
traders. In addition, those prosecutions that are started are much more likely 
to be resolved with, for example, a caution than would have been the case 10 
years ago.”

Lee Reynolds, of the Cardiff based Apex Chambers, prosecuted one of the 
largest call-centre frauds tackled by trading standards in the United Kingdom. 
Known asOperation Bugs <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03txzbg>, it brought 
to justice a gang of con men who tricked vulnerable elderly customers out of 
thousands of pounds. “I think there is a fear now, among trading standards 
teams, of the financial impact that losing one of these big cases could have,” 
said Reynolds.

“I’ve had managers of trading standards say to me ‘look, if we lose this, 
we’ve got to lose an officer this year’ which is shocking and very worrying. 
Some councils have undoubtedly taken the decision to massively, massively 
reduce the number of cases they are bringing.”
 