
Ederson Moraes <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/121774>: Manchester City

It takes any goalkeeper time to readjust to a new league but Claudio Bravo’s 
first few months at Manchester City have been poor enough for a number of 
keepers to be linked with his position. If Pep Guardiola does want a change,
Ederson Moraes <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/121774> could be a wise buy.

Transfer window January 2017: all the latest moves and news – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
While the 23-year old Benfica goalkeeper is uncapped at senior level, he is 
tipped to become Brazil’s first choice before long and he would join a strong 
South American contingent at City. Moraes has a reputation as a ball-playing 
keeper, which the City boss insists upon, and he has impressed for the Liga NOS 
champions this season. In 10 league appearances he has produced 27 saves, kept 
seven clean sheets and conceded just four goals, boasting the best save success 
rate in Portugal (87%) and the highest rating for a goalkeepers (7.10).

Felipe Anderson <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/93026>: Chelsea

It may seem odd to suggest that a side in such form needs strengthening but 
Antonio Conte is short of wide players who can excel in his favoured system. 
The Chelsea boss is currently using Victor Moses in an unfamiliar right 
wing-back role and, even thought the Nigeria international has adapted 
impressively to his new demands, Conte may need an upgrade if his team are to 
compete on all fronts in the coming seasons.

It wouldn’t be a surprise to see Conte buy Felipe Anderson, who has been 
lighting up Serie A this season. Not dissimilar to Moses, the Brazilian has 
been deployed in a more defensive role than in recent seasons and has stepped 
up. While Moses has impressed going forward but relinquished his defensive 
responsibilities at times, Anderson has averaged 3.5 tackles per game to the 
Chelsea man’s 1.2. The Lazio winger has also completed the most dribbles in 
Italy (54), registered the most assists (seven) and earned the second highest 
rating (7.84).
 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Sébastien Haller <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/236544>: West Ham or 
Southampton

A number of Premier League <https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague>
 clubs will be looking to add firepower to their ranks, with West Ham and 
Southampton perhaps most in want of a new striker. While West Ham’s tally of 23 
goals is not awful, only three of them have been scored by strikers, while 
Saints’ tally of 19 is better only than promoted duo Hull City and 
Middlesbrough (both 17).

Finding a natural goalscorer for a modest fee will prove incredibly difficult, 
and while many Premier League clubs have not benefitted from the risk of buying 
from the Eredivisie in the past –Vincent Janssen being the most recent example 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/13/tottenham-vincent-janssen-one-man-army-az-alkmaar>
 – there is value to be had from the Netherlands.

France Under-21 international Sébastien Haller 
<https://www.whoscored.com/Players/236544> is among the top marksmen in the 
country right now and has the physical attributes to ensure he will not be 
bullied by defenders. The 22-year-old is a targetman who is capable of bringing 
others into play – winning 5.2 aerial duels per game this season – but he is 
better with the ball on the deck. Of an impressive tally of 39 league goals 
from 71 Eredivisie appearances only seven have been headers.

Conor Hourihane <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/134172/Show/Conor-Hourihane>
: Sunderland or Middlesbrough

 Infographic: WhoScored 
<http://file///Volumes/Downloads/Pictures/LIgue11617Guide.pdf> 
Sunderland and Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/middlesbrough> desperately need to create 
more chances. Boro are bottom of the league for key passes per game (6.4), with 
Sunderland almost as bad (6.8). It may pay to look down in order to look up in 
this instance, and with Barnsley captain Conor Hourihane’s contract up in the 
summer, he’ll be on the radar of clubs with tighter budgets this month.

The Irishman has registered at least four more assists than any other player 
in the Championship (11) and his stunning winner against Nottingham Forest on 
Monday was his fifth goal of the season. His delivery from both set pieces and 
open play is exceptional and his vision to pick out the intelligent movement of 
strikers would benefit Jermain Defoe. Given that he also ranks second in the 
Championship for tackles (72), it’s clear he doesn’t shirk a battle – and there 
will be plenty of those for bothSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> and Middlesbrough between now 
and the end of the season.

Virgil van Dijk <https://www.whoscored.com/Players/95408>: Manchester City

Premier League: fans from all 20 clubs make their transfer window selections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/01/transfer-window-premier-league-january-fans-shopping-list-selections>
Pep Guardiola clearly needs reinforcements for his shaky defence. Vincent 
Kompany’s injuries and the lack of cover for John Stones and Nicolás Otamendi 
mean that Aleksandar Kolarov has started 10 matches forManchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> as a centre-back this 
season.

The City backline has been short of authority and presence, and one player who 
doesn’t lack either is Virgil van Dijk. The Dutchman was an instant success at
Southampton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/southampton> following his 
move from Celtic in 2015 and he has gone from strength to strength in the 
Premier League. At the age of 25, he still has room to improve and is confident 
enough on the ball to make the step up. Having won 90 of his 118 aerial duels 
he is dominant at the back and is one of only eight players to have made 50 
interceptions this season.

• Follow WhoScored on Twitter <https://twitter.com/WhoScored> and Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/WhoScored>
• Follow Martin Laurence <https://twitter.com/martinlaurence7> on Twitter
 