
Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> blitzed five battleground 
states between them on Friday, with four days remaining until American voters 
will choose their next president.

Clinton began the day with a rally in Pennsylvania, a state where she holds a 
consistent lead over Trump, while the Republican nominee made a last-minute 
push inNew Hampshire <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-hampshire>. Trump 
has surged in recent days in the Granite State, where he scored his first 
victory of the Republican primary contest earlier this year.

Clinton’s long-held lead in New Hampshire has collapsed in recent days. She 
was shown trailing Trump or tied with him in four new public polls taken in the 
wake of theletter from the FBI director, James Comey, informing Congress that 
it was possible new emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/fbi-reopens-hillary-clinton-emails-investigation>
 had been discovered related to the investigation into Clinton’s use of a 
private email server.

Pain, anger and fear: US voters deprived of a serious presidential election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/04/voters-experiences-us-2016-election-trump-clinton-campaign>
The news has helped ensure that a number of Republicans and libertarians 
previously skeptical about Trump have now rallied around the nominee. Former 
New Hampshire governor John Sununu predicted before Trump appeared there on 
Friday that the margin for the winning candidate could come down to 5,000 votes.

Clinton’s campaign announced that she would hold a rally in Manchester on 
Sunday, in a sign of the state’s renewed competitiveness in the final stretch. 
Barack Obama will campaign in the state on Clinton’s behalf the day before the 
election.

Although New Hampshire only provides four electoral votes, a win there would 
greatly aid Trump as he navigates a narrow path to victory.
New Hampshire 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=NH> 
Trump needs to win Ohio, Florida and North Carolina to keep close to Clinton 
in the electoral college. Then, he either needs to winPennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania> or a political grab bag that 
includes New Hampshire, as well as Nevada and the one electoral vote of Maine’s 
second congressional district.

Trump faced another bad news cycle on Friday, however, after two close aides 
of Governor Chris Christie of New Jersey, a vocal Trump surrogate,were 
convicted in the so-called Bridgegate trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/04/bridgegate-chris-christie-allies-convicted-new-jersey-closures>
 over the closure of several access lanes to the George Washington Bridge in 
2013 for political reasons. Christie is leading Trump’s transition team and is 
scheduled to campaign for the Republican nominee on Saturday.

Clinton embarked on a packed itinerary on Friday, with plans to hit three key 
states in one day. The Democratic nominee held a rally in Pittsburgh, where 
thousands formed a line that snaked around the stadium of the Pittsburgh 
Steelers, the city’s football team.

She was introduced there by Mark Cuban, the influential businessman and 
investor who hails from Pittsburgh and has been a prominent backer of Clinton’s.
Cuban has repeatedly taunted Trump while stumping for Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/31/mark-cuban-insults-trump-before-backing-true-leader-hillary-clinton>
, and continued to take shots at the Republican nominee in his remarks on 
Friday.

“You cannot be president of the United States if you don’t know when to shut 
up,” Cuban said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-battleground-states-election-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd783a765b5d9e554c607d0ca45ae06a74788de79%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20and%20Clinton%20visit%20battleground%20states%20as%20election%20day%20looms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-battleground-states-election-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20and%20Clinton%20visit%20battleground%20states%20as%20election%20day%20looms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-battleground-states-election-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd783a765b5d9e554c607d0ca45ae06a74788de79%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton was introduced by Mark Cuban, the influential businessman and 
investor who hails from Pittsburgh. Photograph: Gene J Puskar/AP 
He then led a call and response with the crowd, posing questions of Trump that 
ranged from his trustworthiness to his wealth.

“Do you think he cares more about you or his bank account?” Cuban said.

“Bank account!” they shouted back.

Upon taking the stage to a raucous crowd, Clinton sought to contrast her 
economic agenda with that of Trump. Casting him as someone who neither 
possessed the leadership to steer the economy nor empathy for the working 
class, Clinton highlighted Trump’s refusal to release his tax returns as 
revealing of his character.

“Honestly, I don’t know how he lives with himself,” she said. “Doesn’t he see 
the millions of women and families struggling?”

She also struck familiar themes about her opponent stiffing his own workers 
while touting her plans to introduce 12 weeks of paid family and medical leave, 
enact equal pay for women, raise the minimum wage and expand access to 
affordable childcare.
Pennsylvania 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=PA> 
Clinton’s closing argument was not simply policy-driven, however, leaning 
heavily on Trump’s volatile persona and what that would mean for the country 
under his stewardship.

“Think about what it would mean to entrust the nuclear codes to someone with a 
very thin skin, who lashes out at anyone who challenges him,” Clinton said, 
prompting audience members to break into shouts of “No!”

“Imagine how easily it could be that Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> would feel insulted and start 
a real war, not just a Twitter war, at 3 o’clock in the morning.”

From Pittsburgh, she was scheduled to move on to Detroit and Cleveland, the 
latter of which was billed as aget out the vote concert with rapper Jay Z 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/04/jay-z-hillary-clinton-concert-beyonce-anti-trump-songs>
. Aides aboard Clinton’s press plane played down rumors that Beyoncé would join 
her husband at the event, saying only there would be special guests.

Jay Z (and maybe Beyoncé) spearhead final anti-Trump musical push
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/04/jay-z-hillary-clinton-concert-beyonce-anti-trump-songs>
Clinton was accompanied on Friday by a heavier staff presence, with at least 
eight top aides spotted boarding her plane. Before takeoff from her home of 
Westchester, New York, where Clinton typically stays overnight, she chatted 
toward the front of the plane with digital director Teddy Goff and policy 
director Maya Harris. Speechwriter Dan Schwerin was also on hand, as were 
campaign chairman John Podesta and Capricia Marshall, who served as the chief 
of protocol when Clinton led the state department.

Clinton’s campaign underscored the importance of early voting returns in a 
conference call with reporters on Friday afternoon.

They pointed in particular to turnout among Latino voters in the must-win 
state of Florida, stating it had risen 120% from 2012. Clinton’s campaign 
manager, Robby Mook, also noted a 90% increase in Asian American voters 
overall. Turnout among minorities disproportionately benefits Democrats, as 
such demographics have increasingly been marginalized by Republicans in recent 
election cycles.

In Pittsburgh, Clinton said the country was “on track right now to have the 
biggest turnout in American history”.

But she urged her supporters not to take anything for granted.

For those who knew someone considering voting for Trump, she warned, “Please 
stage an intervention.”

After his stop in New Hampshire, Trump was due to hit Wilmington, Ohio, and 
Hershey, Pennsylvania, later on Friday.

On Saturday both candidates will head south to Florida – the ultimate swing 
state that Trump at least must win if he wants the keys to the White House. 
Trump will hit North Carolina and Nevada, too, while Clinton will head back to 
Philadelphia for another star-studded concert – this time with Katy Perry in 
Philadelphia.
 