
The 2016 presidential election took a heavy toll on the vast army of 
journalists assigned to cover it, grinding down shoe leather, fingertips and 
nerve-endings in equal measure. But for one reporter, Daniel Dale of the 
Toronto Star, the race for the White House was singularly burdensome, turning 
him into a night owl.

At the end of each long day on the campaign trail, he would take a deep breath 
and launch into his second job:fact-checking 
<https://twitter.com/ddale8/status/789064293358592000> the lies of Donald 
Trump. The work would begin late, often at 2am, when all was quiet and he could 
sink himself undisturbed into a hot bath of outrageous falsehood.

He’d start by watching recordings of the rallies the Republican candidate had 
addressed that day, scouring his words for deceits that ranged from the 
whopping (“I opposed theIraq invasion 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/andrewkaczynski/in-2002-donald-trump-said-he-supported-invading-iraq-on-the?utm_term=.xfb8qGJkX#.yigOvEYqG>
”; “the election is rigged”) to the trivial (“the only way to pronounce Nevada 
is Nev-AHH-da”, when in fact most people say “Nev-ADD-a”.)

Then the reporter would scuttle through Trump’s Twitter feed 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump>, followed by news outlets and search 
engines in the hope of catching every statement he made and testing them all 
for accuracy. As the election approached, Trump’s untruths began to multiply, 
and with them Dale’s nocturnal hours, until he was at it virtually all night. 
After each of the three televised debates between Trump and Hillary Clinton, 
and in the final frantic days of the campaign, he pulled all-nighters before 
going straight back to his day job.

“Towards the end it was crazy,” Dale says. “The only thing that made it easier 
was that Trump repeated himself: we called him out for lying but he was so 
unresponsive he just kept saying the same things.”

From 15 September until 8 November, Dale recorded a total of 560 false Trump 
statements 
<https://www.thestar.com/news/world/uselection/2016/11/04/donald-trump-the-unauthorized-database-of-false-things.html>
, an average of about 20 a day. As the sleep-deprived reporter staggered into 
election day, he reflected that if his nighttime activities had reached even a 
small percentage of the American electorate, and helped them understand the 
fundamental mendacity of a candidate seeking the most powerful job on the 
planet, then “it would have been worth it”.

Then came election night. “I was as shocked as many other journalists,” Dale 
says, recalling Trump’s steady march towards the 270 electoral votes needed to 
win. Despite his own extraordinary late-night efforts; despite the similarly 
herculean efforts of theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/27/us/politics/new-york-times-debate-coverage.html>
, which dedicated 18 journalists to fact-checking the TV debates in real time, 
or ofNPR 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/ombudsman/2016/09/27/495654679/behind-the-scenes-npr-fact-checks-first-debate-in-near-real-time>
, which turned over 30 staffers to a similar endeavor; despite the Guardian’s
Lyin’ Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/lyin-trump-a-weekly-fact-check> 
column and so much more, some 61 million Americans were unfazed enough by the 
idea of a serial liar in the Oval Office to vote for him.

Fact-checking wasn’t the only journalistic tool that was deployed in 2016 with 
what now appears to be limited effectiveness. Many observers assumed the 
Washington Post’s thundering scoop of Trump’shot-mic remarks 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html>
 in which he boasted about grabbing women “by the pussy”, together with Megyn 
Kelly’s astonishingopening question 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xpRkPFu63to> at the first TV debate in which 
she reminded the candidate that he had called women “fat pigs” and “dogs”, 
would hand female voters, and thus the presidency, to Clinton. They didn’t –53% 
of white women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/white-women-donald-trump-victory>
 voted for Trump, according to exit polls.

Jorge Ramos, the lead news anchor at Univision, predicted on election day 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/11/08/media/univsion-donald-trump/> that Trump would 
lose because he had turned his back on the Spanish-language media. Didn’t 
happen – almost one in three Hispanics backed him, toRamos’s bafflement 
<http://fusion.net/story/370448/jorge-ramos-donald-trump-immigration/>.

Accomplices or antagonists: how the media handled the Trump phenomenon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/journalists-media-election-2016-donald-trump>
Newspaper endorsements, those most portentous of journalistic institutions, 
also seemed to have little purchase on the outcome of this 
convention-shattering election. TheNieman Lab 
<http://www.niemanlab.org/2016/11/has-election-2016-been-a-turning-point-for-the-influence-of-the-news-media/>
 counted 360 titles that backed Clinton, including theDallas Morning News 
<http://www.dallasnews.com/opinion/editorials/2016/09/07/recommend-hillary-clinton-us-president>
 which sided with a Democratic candidate for the first time since 1940, and USA 
Today which endorsed the first presidential candidate, period, in its 36-year 
history. By contrast, Trump drew a paltry 11 endorsements. Such overwhelming 
consensus from the nation’s press – but was anybody listening?

Put all these indicators together, and you start to wonder whether Donald 
Trump’s unlikely victory has sounded the death knell for the influence and 
authority of what he and his supporters scathingly call the “mainstream media”. 
Did the “MSM”, in particular cable TV which broadcast his every cough and 
spittle with almost obsessive dedication, help put him in the White House? 
Conversely, did the press go too far in abandoning its traditional 
even-handedness and unrestrainedly attacking Trump, as rightwing pundits are 
now suggesting? Looking forward, what will be the role of the established media 
as we head into the chilly waters of a choppy new era?

Those are just some of the glaring questions left hanging at the end of an 
epically weird election season. To begin poking some of those issues, the 
Guardian has teamed up with the Columbia Journalism Review (CJR), a leading 
source of media criticism.

It has compiled a unique oral history of the 2016 election through the eyes of 
40 of the top TV and press editors, reporters and columnists who helped shape 
and define the public perception of this year’s race.The narrative 
<http://www.cjr.org/special_report/trump_media_press_journalists.php> runs to 
11,000 words, with the Guardian publishingan edited version of it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/journalists-media-election-2016-donald-trump>
.

One of the first big questions that CJR’s oral history, in tandem with the 
Guardian’s own exploration of the subject, throws up is the role of blanket TV 
coverage in the rise, fall and rise again of President-elect Trump. Ben Smith, 
editor-in-chief of BuzzFeed, was quick tospot 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/bensmith/how-donald-trump-owns-the-old-media-and-the-new-media?utm_term=.qwjEog9J2#.rm2RkQPNG>
 earlier this year that Trump’s Twitter feed acted not only as a powerful 
megaphone channeling his voice directly to his followers (he had 13m of them on 
Twitter on election day, as well as 12m on Facebook), it also served as a news 
script for the cable channels. Trump would tweet out his latestoffensive 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/692312112115380224?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 oraggressive 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/680908733455708160?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
 tweet, often in the early hours of the morning, and TV news editors arriving 
at their desks would pick it up and turn it into ratings-friendly headlines 
that would then go on to dominate the rest of the 24-hour news cycle.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fguardian-reporters-2016-us-election-media-challenges-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guardian%20reporters%20reflect%20on%20challenges%20of%20covering%202016%20US%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fguardian-reporters-2016-us-election-media-challenges-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guardian%20reporters%20reflect%20on%20challenges%20of%20covering%202016%20US%20election%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fguardian-reporters-2016-us-election-media-challenges-video&media=>
Guardian reporters reflect on challenges of covering 2016 US election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/22/guardian-reporters-2016-us-election-media-challenges-video>
“What typically drives TV is great reporting by newspapers. Instead, Trump 
used his tweets as an alternative route to great journalism, and that turned 
out to have been a very big deal,” Smith told the Guardian.

The TV channels feasted on tweeted Trumpisms with an alacrity that many 
observers found disturbing. According to a study bymediaQuant 
<http://www.mediaquant.net/tag/donald-trump/>, Trump benefited from the 
equivalent of $5.2bn worth of free airtime from earned media, a quantity that 
the firm’s analysts said was “almost surreal in sheer magnitude”. In return, 
cable channels enjoyed amassive ratings spike 
<http://www.politico.com/media/story/2016/11/did-the-media-win-the-election-004854>
.

TV was convulsed by other controversies, notably CNN’s decision to employ 
Trump’s former campaign managerCorey Lewandowski 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/22/us/politics/corey-lewandowski-donald-trump-payroll.html>
 while he was still receiving “severance payments” from his old boss, and the 
embarrassment (also falling to CNN 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/on-media/2016/10/cnn-severs-ties-with-donna-brazile-230534>
) of Democratic strategist Donna Brazile leaking questions from a town hall 
event in advance to the Clinton campaign. More red faces erupted at NBC when 
its Access Hollywood tape of Trump’s lewd comments about women was leaked to 
the Washington Post after the networkappeared to dither 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/a-political-bombshell-was-right-under-nbcs-nose-what-took-them-so-long/2016/10/08/ec2cb410-8d7a-11e6-875e-2c1bfe943b66_story.html>
 over broadcasting it.

But these difficulties, humiliating at times though they were, pale in 
comparison with the overarching charge that TV – and to a lesser degree the 
press – was indiscriminate for far too long in its handling of Trump, engaging 
with him more like the Apprentice reality TV star that he was than the US 
president that he wanted to become. “During the primaries, cable news – in 
particular CNN and Fox, and to some extent MSNBC – gave Trump unhealthily 
generous, inflated coverage. That helped make him,” says Margaret Sullivan, 
media columnist of the Washington Post.

It takes someone with the on-the-ground experience of John Weaver, chief 
strategist to Trump’s rival John Kasich during the Republican primaries, to 
spell out the full impact of this media binge on the election. He believes it 
actively distorted the process, and even now, six months after Kasich dropped 
out of the race, you can still hear the fury in Weaver’s voice.

“I hope there’s some deep introspection at the networks and cable channels 
over the billions of dollars of free coverage they gave toDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, often without holding him 
accountable for his bizarre claims. He is judged by such a low standard by many 
of the news media, it’s troubling to me.”

The sense that the media allowed itself to be taken for a ride by the Trump 
campaign in exchange for stellar ratings came to a crunch on 16 September in 
Washington DC. By now enshrined as Republican nominee, Trump lured the pack of 
political reporters to a press conference by promising to make a statement – an 
apology, it was assumed – about his long-held and oft-repeated “birther” lie 
about President Obama having been born outside the US.

The location for the event happened to be the Old Post Office 
<https://www.trumphotels.com/washington-dc/old-post-office-transformation> on 
Pennsylvania Avenue that Trump had just renovated into a luxury hotel. For 26 
minutes he subjected the media, and through them the American people, to a 
succession of unctuous speeches by retired military leaders singing the 
candidate’s praises. Then, when Trump finally got round to issuing a21-word 
rebuttal 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/sep/16/donald-trump/full-flop-donald-trump-abandons-barack-obama-birth/>
 of his own false birther theory, he prefaced it with yet anotherlie 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/sep/16/donald-trump/fact-checking-donald-trumps-claim-hillary-clinton-/>
 that Hillary Clinton was responsible for having started the toxic rumor in the 
first place.

It was vintage Trump. Almost a half-hour of free advertising – not only for 
his presidential campaign but also for his new hotel – handed to him on a plate 
by the cable networks in exchange for a 30-second non-apology that made false 
accusations against his opponent. Nothing new there, then.

What was new was the response of the assembled media crowd who had been forced 
to sit through the ordeal, cameras rolling, keyboards rattling, as though they 
were so many of Trump’s dutiful playthings. It was a “political Rick-roll” 
fumed CNN’sJake Tapper 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/jake-tapper-trump-political-rick-roll-228281>
, referring to theRick Astley internet meme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2008/mar/19/news>, while John King on the 
same channel lamented: “We got played again.”

Jay Rosen, who teaches journalism at New York University and whose blog 
PressThink.org <http://pressthink.org/> has been a widely cited resource on the 
fraught relationship between Trump and the press in 2016, sees the DC hotel 
debacle as a seminal moment. “That’s when people in the campaign press corp got 
disgusted not just with Trump’s mendacity and manipulation but at themselves 
for playing along with it. That turned the worm.”

“It was an important turning point,” agrees Kyle Pope, CJR’s editor and 
publisher. “It’s when reporters said, ‘No more, that’s it, enough’.”

The response from the New York Times was decisive and swift. As its political 
editor Carolyn Ryan related to a recent CJRroundtable 
<http://www.cjr.org/covering_the_election/covering_the_election_trumo_clinton.php>
 of media executives, she immediately approached the paper’s executive editor.

“I went to Dean Baquet and I said, ‘Can we call this the unwinding of a lie?’ 
He understood the potency of coming out very directly and saying that, and that 
what Trump had done – a willful deceit – was far more egregious than some of 
the fabrications and stretching of the truth that we usually see in politics. 
So he was firmly behind us.”

The resulting piece 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/17/us/politics/donald-trump-obama-birther.html?_r=0>
 by Michael Barbaro marked in itself a seminal moment for the Times newsroom, 
which as Ryan pointed out is a “fairly traditional institution” that until 
recently struggled with the idea of calling a lie a lie. Yet in this case the 
editorial decision to do just that – abandoning any attachment to the “on the 
one hand this, but on the other hand that” school of journalism – came quickly 
and easily. “We decided in about 40 minutes,” Ryan said.

There has been a lot of discussion this election cycle about how Trump’s 
insurgent campaign, itsasymmetry 
<http://pressthink.org/2016/09/asymmetry-between-the-major-parties-fries-the-circuits-of-the-mainstream-press/>
 as Rosen has put it, has shaken up many of the time-honored rituals andfalse 
equivalencies 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/how-false-equivalence-is-distorting-the-2016-election-coverage/>
 of political journalism. Adam Moss, New York magazine’s editor-in-chief, makes 
clear that his magazine consciously decided to ditch the journalistic habits of 
a lifetime: “We don’t pretend to objectivity, but we do, as a rule over the 
years, try to maintain some kind of even-handedness. We abandoned that because 
we felt the threat of his candidacy and presidency was too great.”

The counterpoint to that is that several of the contributors to the CJR oral 
history express regret that, at least at the outset, the coverage of real 
estate businessman was “seriously flawed”, as Jorge Ramos puts it. The 
billionaire was underestimated as a candidate, and as a result treated 
initially as a bit of a joke. Laura McGann, a politics editor for Vox, bravely 
admits feeling guilty that she assigned a deep dive into Trump soon after he 
launched his campaign in June 2015 to a (very good) intern, adding: “I regret 
not taking him more seriously a year ago than I did.”

But BuzzFeed’s Ben Smith makes the point that, important though such 
post-election soul-searching is, it should not obscure the fact that there was 
plenty of hard-hitting reporting done even early on. “The Washingon Post, New 
York Times, we at BuzzFeed, Politico, the Guardian and many more, gave a 
thoroughly detailed account of him. Anyone who was surprised by the person who 
emerged during the campaign really wasn’t paying attention.”

You only have to credit a tiny portion of the highlights of the coverage this 
cycle to see how impressive much of it was: Mckay Coppins’seminal romp 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/mckaycoppins/36-hours-on-the-fake-campaign-trail-with-donald-trump?utm_term=.klmoDYAwP#.yf2n5rJax>
 with Trump all the way back in 2014; Susanne Craig’s heaven-sent package in 
her Times mailbox containing the billionaire’s leakedtax returns 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/03/insider/the-time-i-found-donald-trumps-tax-records-in-my-mailbox.html>
; David Fahrenthold of the Post’s work on theTrump Foundation 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-foundation-ordered-to-stop-fundraising-by-ny-attorney-generals-office/2016/10/03/1d4d295a-8987-11e6-bff0-d53f592f176e_story.html>
 and hisgroping scoop 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html>
; Ari Berman of the Nation’s probe into thereal rigging 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/did-republicans-rig-the-election/> of the 
election; Guardian columnist Lucia Graves’ interviews with women alleging the 
candidatesexually assaulted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/20/donald-trump-sexual-assault-allegations-jill-harth-interview>
 them.

So what happened to all this solid work? Why did it appear to go up in a puff 
of smoke on election night? There is a separate and febrile debate over whether 
or notopinion polls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/polls-wrong-donald-trump-election>
 were in part to blame for giving the impression that the White House was in 
the bag for Clinton, but many other theories are circulating.

One prevalent idea, as Hadas Gold of Politico tells CJR, is that the media did 
its job but the public “just did not care”. The New York Times political 
reporter Jonathan Martin offers an opposite conclusion: that the coverage did 
hit home with voters, as reflected in Trump’s historically bad popularity 
ratings. To which it might be added that Hillary Clinton is still winning in the
popular vote 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/hillary-clintons-popular-vote-victory-is-unprecedented-and-still-growing/>
.

A third line of inquiry that is likely to run and run is whether the media, in 
its coastal bubble, failed to get to grips with the anger that was brewing 
right under its nose in the American heartlands. A flick of that argument was 
given in themissive 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/13/us/elections/to-our-readers-from-the-publisher-and-executive-editor.html?_r=0>
 sent by Arthur Sulzberger and Baquet, publisher and executive editor of the 
New York Times, to their readers soon after the election. “Did Donald Trump’s 
sheer unconventionality lead us and other news outlets to underestimate his 
support among American voters?”

Answering his own question, Baquet told the Guardian US that the Times did in 
fact write extensively aboutanger in America 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/03/upshot/american-anger-its-not-the-economy-its-the-other-party.html>
 in the run-up to the election, but adds that it’s a good idea as an editor to 
be humble enough to ask oneself what questions should have been asked during 
the campaign.

“Nobody, including the Trump campaign itself, quite understood the forces that 
would lead to Donald Trump being elected in what everybody agrees was a 
surprise. A big part of my job now is to explain that in the coming months, to 
go out in the country, talk to people who feel anxious about the future of the 
country, don’t caricature them, let them speak. Just let them talk.”

A more disturbing thought is that while many news outlets took great efforts 
to chronicle theplight 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2016/09/the-original-underclass/492731/>
 of thewhite working classes 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/features/everyone-gets-it-wrong-about-donald-trump-and-white-voters-w437410>
 inmiddle America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/oct/11/middletown-gary-younge-us-election-presidential-muncie-indiana>
, their dispatches didn’t register with millions of voters for the simple 
reason that those voters weren’t reading any of us. Amid the ongoing muscle of 
Drudge, the new transcendence of Breitbart,not to mention 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/craigsilverman/viral-fake-election-news-outperformed-real-news-on-facebook?utm_term=.ho0NnkRJg#.arRVBynaL>
 theproliferation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/fake-news-donald-trump-election-alt-right-social-media-tech-companies>
 offake news sites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/barack-obama-fake-news-facebook-social-media>
, conservative Americans – and for that matter liberals – are increasingly able 
to receive information from within their own alternative bubble where their 
opinions are reinforced without being challenged by the loathed MSM.

One of the more despairing expressions of this theory was given by New York 
magazine’s Adam Moss to CJR: “The media as it used to be thought of is just not 
that important any more. It doesn’t matter that some people were doing good 
work because … we’re just talking to ourselves and people who already agree 
with us.”

Since Trump’s victory, another theory has been aired increasingly by 
right-of-center pundits such asHoward Kurtz of Fox News 
<http://video.foxnews.com/v/5205256647001> that flips the argument that the 
media did too little too late to expose Trump on its head. In this iteration, 
major outlets did too much, were too eager to go after him. The editor of the 
Wall Street Journal, Gerard Baker, tells CJR that “some reporters saw it as 
their role to stop this man from becoming president, they put themselves in the 
role of partisans”.

It fell to Piers Morgan of Mail Online, as it often does, to put the case most 
stridently <https://twitter.com/piersmorgan/status/797104362225012736>: “The 
NYT’s ludicrously biased anti-Trump barrage of bile helped him get elected.”

“That’s ridiculous,” ripostes the Times’ Dean Baquet. “We didn’t cover Donald 
Trump any more aggressively than we covered Hillary Clinton. People forget that 
we broke the story of Clinton’s emails. If both sides think you were tough on 
them, maybe that means you were fair.”

Of all the mainstream media bashing that has been unleashed since 8 November, 
one source of it stands head and shoulders above the rest: Donald Trump 
himself. Which is not surprising, given his track record during the campaign.

Reporters deemed to be producing unfavourable copy were punished by Trump: 
Jorge Ramos wasejected <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0w251in94pA> from a 
press conference after the Univision anchor dared to ask an awkward question; 
Coppins was turned away from Trump rallies as comeuppance for his caustic 2014 
profile; alengthening list 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/trump-lifts-ban-that-excluded-the-washington-post-and-other-news-media/2016/09/07/29b11d86-7501-11e6-8149-b8d05321db62_story.html>
 of other media outlets were banned by the campaign; individual journalists 
were targeted for bullying, such as NBC News’sKaty Tur 
<http://www.salon.com/2016/11/03/watch-journalist-katy-tur-responds-after-donald-trump-bullies-her-in-front-of-4000-people/>
; supporters at campaign stops were enabled to turn in anger against camera 
operators just doing their jobs, screaming: “CNN sucks! CNN sucks! CNN sucks!”

Since Trump’s metamorphosis into president-elect, the tendency to target the 
media has only got worse. Now heroutinely 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/10/trump-ditches-the-media-as-he-travels-to-meet-with-obama/>
 gives the press poolthe slip 
<http://www.kwtx.com/content/news/Trump-slips-out-for-dinner-leaves-media-behind-401521365.html>
, showing contempt for both transparency and tradition. Back on his Android 
phone, Trump is on the“failing” New York Times 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/798861300453539840> warpath, 
displaying a sort of frenzied disdain that hardly bodes well for the 
relationship between soon-to-be president and the country’s paper of record.

“I’ve never seen anything quite like this,” says Baquet, who as former editor 
of the Los Angeles Times and Washington bureau chief of the Times has seen more 
than most. “I don’t think we’ve ever had a president-elect tweeting about us, 
that’s for sure.”

As 20 January 2017 and the start of his presidency bears down upon us, much of 
the media will enter the Trump era carrying with them a profound sense of 
trepidation. “This is a moment of high danger for the press; we’re heading into 
a dark period for American democracy and American journalism,” says Jay Rosen 
of NYU. Jorge Ramos tells CJR: “I think we’ll remember this election as unique 
and very concerning for the future of the press because if this becomes the 
norm, we are in serious trouble.”

It’s not just the lack of access, mocking and bullying that can be expected 
from President Trump. There’s also the internal danger that the media will 
normalize his time in office under the cloak of traditional reverence for the 
presidency.

Contributors to the CJR’s account of 2016 point out that a pattern of 
normalization was established even on the campaign trail, when media outlets 
appeared to be willing Trump on to elevate himself from his startlingly 
unconventional approach to a proper “presidential” mode. In the memorable 
description of Tommy Craggs, Slate’s politics editor, the candidate “could have 
gone up there and danced the hoochie coochie and they would have said, ‘This is 
a welcome change in tone from Donald Trump’”.

Since the election that trend has thickened, some believe. John Weaver, the 
former chief strategist for Trump’s Republican rival John Kasich, says he is 
outraged by media references to Steve Bannon, the Breitbart chairman who Trump 
has appointed his senior counselor in the White House, as a “controversial 
figure” or an “aggressive conservative”. “No, no, that’s sugar-coating. He was 
the publisher of the news site that he said was home to the alt-right, and that 
is code for racism and sexism and fascism,” Weaver said.

So what will be the role of the “mainstream media” as it embarks, somewhat 
battered but still standing, into Trump’s America? Will it be to document the 
new administration with a detached and “objective” eye, as traditional newsroom 
canons dictate, or will it pursue that other burning function of the fourth 
estate, holding power to account?

“We will cover him fairly and aggressively, and we will not let his criticism 
of us sway us or keep us from doing what we have to do,” says Dean Baquet of 
the New York Times. “In my mind our mission is clearer than it’s ever been: we 
have to cover the giant story of this extraordinary White House, which is going 
to change American politics and policy for years to come, as aggressively, 
truthfully and honestly as we can.”
 