
In what was billed as a policy speech to lay out his vision for the first 100 
days of his administration, as part of a grand new “Contract for the American 
Voter”, Donald Trump first pledged to sue every womanwho has accused him of 
sexual assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/list-of-donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-allegations>
.


‘Brexit times five’: could Trump really win despite polls favoring Clinton?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/22/trump-clinton-polls-brexit> 
In response, a spokeswoman for Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton said the 
speech was “rambling, unfocused, full of conspiracy theories and attacks on the 
media”.

Speaking on Saturday near the site where Abraham Lincoln gave his Gettysburg 
address in 1863, Trump did not speak as the 16th president did in his second 
inaugural: “with malice toward none, with charity for all”.

Instead the Republican nominee proclaimed to an invitation-only crowd: “Every 
woman lied when they came forward to hurt my campaign, total fabrication. The 
events never happened. All of these liars will be sued after the election is 
over.”

Trump added: “It was probably the [Democratic National Committee] and the 
Clinton campaign that put forward these liars with these fabricated stories.”

“We’ll find out at a later date through litigation,” he said, “and I look so 
forward to it.”

Ten women have accused Trump of sexual assault since the leak two weeks ago of 
a 2005 Access Hollywood recording 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
, in which the Republican nominee boasted of attempting to “fuck” a married 
woman and grabbing women’s genitalia without their consent.

In Los Angeles on Saturday afternoon, the lawyer Gloria Allred held a press 
conference at which she introduced an 11th accuser.Jessica Drake 
<https://twitter.com/thejessicadrake>, an adult film star and sex educator, 
detailed what she said was an encounter with Trump at a golf tournament in Lake 
Tahoe “10 years ago”.

When she went with two other women to Trump’s hotel room, Drake said in a 
statement, he “grabbed each of us tightly in a hug and kissed each of us on the 
lips without asking for permission”. Drake said Trump then offered her $10,000 
to return to his room.

In her own statement, Allred said: “Mr Trump, this morning you spoke at 
Gettysburg where many brave patriots fought and died. You have dishonored their 
sacrifice by threatening wives, mothers and daughters who have made accusations 
against you.”

The Trump campaign did not immediately comment on the new allegation.

At Gettysburg, the Republican presidential candidate also railed against the 
media, singling out the corporate owners of NBC, CNN and the Washington Post, 
all outlets he has complained about during his campaign, for special scrutiny 
under a Trump administration.

Of Comcast’s purchase of NBC Universal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/feb/13/comcast-general-electric-nbc-universal-rockefeller-plaza?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+theguardian%2Fmedia%2Frss+%28Media%29>
, he said: “It concentrates too much power in one massive entity that tries to 
tell voters what to think and what to do.”

Trump pledged that his administration would veto the reported acquisition of 
Time Warner by AT&T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/21/att-time-warner-takeover-acquisition>
, as a matter of policy. Time Warner is the corporate owner of CNN, which 
carried the Gettysburg speech live.

Trump’s words came after he voiced familiar criticism of the press, because 
“at my rallies they never show the massive crowd size”.

In a Friday night conference call with reporters, the Trump campaign billed 
the speech as its version of the Contract with America that was pushed byHouse 
Republicans in 1994 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/mar/10/usa.edpilkington> as a concrete 
list of their pledges if elected.

Most of the policy proposals Trump eventually presented were rehashes of 
proposals that had already been made on the campaign trail.In a speech in June 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/presidential-races/284436-trump-lays-out-goals-for-first-100-days-as-president>
, he outlined some plans for his first 100 days in office.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-gettysburg-contract-with-america-sue-accusers-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F837b364c9b2f863be844f792efe0c9a5982823bb%2F0_202_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20uses%20Gettysburg%20address%20to%20threaten%20to%20sue%20sex%20assault%20accusers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-gettysburg-contract-with-america-sue-accusers-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20uses%20Gettysburg%20address%20to%20threaten%20to%20sue%20sex%20assault%20accusers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-gettysburg-contract-with-america-sue-accusers-hillary-clinton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F837b364c9b2f863be844f792efe0c9a5982823bb%2F0_202_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Pete Seville holds a Donald Trump flag near the Eisenhower hotel. Photograph: 
Mark Makela/Getty Images 
On Saturday, Trump reiterated pledges to cut taxes, repeal Obamacare and spur 
energy production by removing environmental regulations. He also added details 
to proposals such as those concerning childcare, whichhe and his daughter Ivanka
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/13/trump-childcare-proposal-paid-maternity-leave>
 announced in September and a recent pledge to introduce a constitutional 
amendmentto impose term limits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/18/donald-trump-congress-term-limits-clinton-final-debate>
.

Trump also promised to “cancel billions in payments to UN climate change 
programs” and to suspend immigration from regions “where vetting cannot safely 
occur”.

Trump says countries are turning on US because 'the world hates Obama'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/21/donald-trump-michelle-obama-philippines-duterte-clinton>
On his signature proposal to build a wall on the US border with Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/31/donald-trump-mexico-meeting-president-pena-nieto-immigration>
 and make Mexico pay for it, Trump offered a subtle change in tone. Although he 
has long insisted that Mexico will pay for the wall “100%” – and said at 
Gettysburg “they’ll be happy to pay for it” – he suggested Mexico would now 
“reimburse” the US for the cost of constructing the barrier.

Christina Reynolds, a spokeswoman for the Clinton campaign, responded to the 
speech in a statement: “Trump’s major new policy was to promise political and 
legal retribution against the women who have accused him of groping them.


“Like Trump’s campaign, this speech gave us a troubling view as to what a 
Trump State of the Union [address] would sound like: rambling, unfocused, full 
of conspiracy theories and attacks on the media, and lacking in any real 
answers for American families.”

On the Friday night press call, a senior Trump aide contrasted the unveiling 
of proposals at such a symbolic venue with the actions of the Clinton campaign, 
who the aide said was “going to sit on [its] lead. They are going run out the 
clock.”

With 17 days to go until the election, the RealClearPolitics aggregate 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/us/general_election_trump_vs_clinton-5491.html>
 has national polls showing Clinton with a lead of more than six points.
 