
Lest there be any doubt, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> made clear Monday that he is 
running a scorched earth campaign for the next month.


Speaking in a high school gym in Beaver County, Pennsylvania, his first public 
event since theleak on Friday of his 2005 comments about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 groping women without their consent, Trump amplifiedhis rhetoric from Sunday 
night’s debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/debate-donald-trump-threatens-to-jail-hillary-clinton>
 and attacked rival Hillary Clinton and her husband – former president Bill 
Clinton – in starkly personal terms.

Trump, who invited four women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/09/donald-trump-women-bill-clinton-sex-scandal-hillary-debate>
 who claimed to be the victims of misconduct by the Clintons to be his guests 
at the debate on Sunday, renewed his offensive against his Democratic opponent.

The Republican nominee called Bill Clinton “a predator” and said his wife 
enabled him “instead of trying to stop it, she made possible for him to take 
advantage of more women, she put more women into harm’s way”.

He also threatened that “if they want to release more tapes saying 
inappropriate things, we’ll continue to talk about Bill and Hillary doing 
inappropriate things.”

Trump also referenced the Chappaquiddick incident – in which a woman died 
after a car being driven by the late senator Ted Kennedy went off a bridge in 
1969. Trump cited the incident as another example of Democratic scandals 
covered up by the media.

The speech came as Republican leaders increase their efforts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/paul-ryan-ends-support-trump-campaign-endorsement-republicans>
 to distance themselves from their party’s nominee. Speaker Paul Ryan told 
members of the House GOP caucus on Monday “you all need to do what’s best for 
your district” and seemed to write off Trump’s chances of winning, saying he 
would “spend his entire energy making sure that Hillary Clinton does not get a 
blank check with a Democrat-controlled Congress”.

After widespread condemnation over his debate threat to jail his political 
rival, Trump did not explicitly renew his calls to jailHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> if he was elected. 
Instead, he took a somewhat milder tone and merely called for a special 
prosecutor to investigate Clinton. Trump also suggested – without evidence – 
that the NSA might have the missing emails that Clinton deleted from her 
personal email server.

But Trump also attacked Clinton on policy grounds. He railed against the 
Democratic nominee from the left on entitlement reform and claimed that she 
wants to “knock the hell out of Medicare and Medicaid”. The former secretary of 
state has committed to expanding both programs.

He also attacked Clinton for her support for “open trade”. “You know what that 
does to your community,” Trump asked the crowd. “It’s the end.” He also 
returned to familiar attacks and falsely claimed Clinton is “for radical 
unlimited immigration”.

Trump once again offered a 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/02/donald-trump-renews-voter-warning-and-says-clinton-could-be-crazy>
 vague, evidence-free warning of voter fraud in Pennsylvania. He told the 
almost entirely all-white crowd “it’s so important that you watch other 
communities because we don’t want this election stolen from us”. He has made 
this statement several times in the past in the Keystone state, seemingly based 
on a popularrightwing conspiracy theory 
<http://billypenn.com/2016/08/08/what-sean-hannity-got-wrong-about-philly-election-fraud/>
 that Mitt Romney was the victim of voter fraud in Philadelphia in 2012. The 
theory, which is a dogwhistle reference to African American voters, is premised 
on the fact that in 59 precincts in majority black neighborhoods, Romney did 
not receive a single vote. There are 1,687 precincts in the city and Obama 
received over 85% of the vote there in 2012.

While a new NBC/WSJ poll 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/first-read/poll-after-trump-tape-revelation-clinton-s-lead-double-digits-n663691>
 showed the Republican nominee falling behind Clinton by 14 points in a two-way 
race, Trump supporters in Pennsylvania were unfazed by the nominee’s growing 
woes. Instead they took heart in what they saw as a dominating debate 
performance, one which former New York mayor Rudy Giuliani told the crowd was 
“the best performance any presidential candidate had in the history of debates”.

Joe Tedeski, a Trump supporter who watched the debate, thought his candidate 
won while Clinton was “the greatest liar I’ve ever seen”. He dismissed concerns 
about Trump’s remarks saying “people change, attitudes change” and insisting 
that Trump’s graphic description of groping women without their consent was 
“just talk” and that he had never actually engaged in that behavior.

This was echoed by Isaac Foldi of Bloomingdale, Ohio, who was decked out in 
Trump merchandise for the event and praised his candidate’s performance. In 
particular, Foldi pointed to Trump’s line that Clinton was “no honest Abe” as 
an effective zinger. While the Trump supporter thought the nominee’s 2005 
comments were “not acceptable”, he found them insignificant compared to 
Clinton’s sins. “It makes little sense to go after him for saying some crude 
things when Hillary humiliated women raped and assaulted by her husband.”

Trump is scheduled to hold another rally in Pennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania> on Monday night before 
spending the next two days in Florida.
 