
When she entered the race for Pennsylvania’s Senate seat last August, Katie 
McGinty faced an uphill battle.

Once a staffer for vice-president Al Gore and Pennsylvania governor Ed 
Rendell, never elected to office, she had to defeat former representative Joe 
Sestak in a bruising Democratic primary. The next challenge was to overcomea 
16-point lead 
<https://www.qu.edu/news-and-events/quinnipiac-university-poll/2016-presidential-swing-state-polls/release-detail?ReleaseID=2273>
 held by the incumbent senator, Republican Pat Toomey.

Now, with less than a month to go before the election, the latest poll from 
Bloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-10-13/pennsylvania-poll> shows 
McGinty edging Toomey, if within the margin of error. And as the days to the 
vote count down, the Republican must keepdancing around 
<http://triblive.com/politics/politicalheadlines/11296649-74/trump-toomey-campaign>
 his feelings for his party’s presidential nominee, Donald Trump.

Toomey has tried to avoid alienating both Trump’s hardcore supporters and the 
80% of voters who have said they are bothered by Trump’s 2005assertion that he 
gropes women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 without consent, and subsequent claims from women that he did exactly that to 
them.

In interviews with Philadelphia’s local papers 
<http://www.philly.com/philly/news/politics/20161012_Will_Toomey_back_Trump__He_says_he_may_not_tell_voters.html>
, Toomey tried to balance without a position on Trump, saying: “I hoped that 
Donald Trump would persuade me. I remain unpersuaded.” Even as many 
noncommittal Republicans fled from Trump in the wake of the video’s 
publication, Toomey refused to renounce 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/pat-toomey-trump-undecided-229624> the 
nominee entirely, earning at least one comedian’sderision 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ubEwHwdyTpY>.

On Friday, McGinty was in Philadelphia at the Christian Street YMCA – the 
first black YMCA tohave its own building 
<http://www.hmdb.org/marker.asp?marker=81915> and one of the few places in the 
city whereAfrican Americans were allowed to swim and use exercise facilities 
<http://articles.philly.com/1987-10-23/news/26217044_1_ymcas-adult-literacy-prominent-blacks>
 before the second world war. She was joined by New York senator Kirsten 
Gillibrand, before a phalanx of television cameras and a round table of mostly 
African American women support an increased minimum wage and access to 
high-quality, low-cost childcare.
Pennsylvania 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/08/state-factboxes/?id=PA> 
McGinty and Gillibrand listened intently as the women spoke, with the former 
nodding her head and taking notes – particularly about the grandmothers in the 
group. They said that they have found themselves filling in gaps in childcare, 
setting aside their own lives to make up for day care facilities with waiting 
lists and organizations that charge for infant care, one woman said, “as much 
as college tuition”.

McGinty eventually encouraged one women from the Service Employees 
International Union (SEIU) to speak about the importance ofthe Fight for 15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/14/fight-for-15-convention-workers-protest-presidential-debates>
, a nationwide push for a minimum wage of $15 per hour. “We know that America 
hasn’t gotten a raise in 16 years, and it’s a problem,” the attendee said. 
“When everything around you goes up, but your salary, your wages don’t, you’re 
always working from behind. You never catch up.”

“We know it’s the right thing to do” to raise the minimum wage, McGinty said. 
“It’s time to get moving on this.”

After the panel, McGinty spoke to reporters about Toomey’s argument that only 
he can provide a check on the power of a Democratic administration and build 
bipartisan support for legislation. Toomey has citedhis co-sponsorship of a 
2013 gun control bill 
<http://www.politifact.com/pennsylvania/statements/2016/jun/15/katie-mcginty/pat-toomeys-gun-control-bill-and-katie-mcgintys-po/>
, which failed, as an example of his bipartisan nature, even thoughhe voted 
against expanded background checks 
<http://www.witf.org/news/2016/06/gop-senator-pat-toomey-sides-with-nra-on-gun-votes.php>
 earlier this year, as McGinty noted.

She argued further that that she would build bipartisan consensus on a federal 
minimum wage increase.

“I do think that we can build a bipartisan consensus, and the reason is that 
it’s not only the right thing to do, but it’s the smart thing to do from a 
business and an economic point of view, “ she explained. “You don’t have to 
just think about that theoretically: that’s exactly what we’ve seen in those 
states and localities that have already gotten out there and increased the 
minimum wage.”

“There are ways that you can talk everybody’s language, meet their values and 
priorities and get initiatives like this done.”

Can Trump really win Pennsylvania? Stranger things have happened in 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/25/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-pennsylvania>
But asked about Donald Trump’s outreach to liberals on child care on family 
leave, she encouraged Pennsylvanians not to believe the hype: “It won’t happen 
at all”.

“There is nothing in Donald Trump’s personal demeanor, record or his own 
business practices that would indicate that he has even the basic minimum of 
respect for women, children and families.”

McGinty and other Democrats see Trump’s cratering numbers as a vulnerability 
for Toomey and other Senate Republicans in swing states likePennsylvania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/pennsylvania>, and she tried tie her 
opponent to his party’s presidential nominee.

“It is long past due for any profile in courage from Pat Toomey,” she said, 
noting that he still hasn’t said whether or not he plans to vote for Trump. “We 
have seen a Republican nominee who degrades our prisoners of war, who insults 
families that made the biggest sacrifice for this country, who was spoken 
despicably about women and now we have strong evidence that he’s turned those 
words into action and aggressive action that amounts to sexual assault.

“It’s nothing short of despicable for Pat Toomey not to stand up right now, 
today, toDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and 
make clear that he is not fit to be president of the United States.”

The senator’s position on Trump, she said, was a “political calculation” and 
evidence “he’s putting his own interest in front of the interests of his 
constituents”.

Before everyone parted ways,Gillibrand took MicGinty aside, almost out of 
hearing range of the media, and offered advice for the last few weeks of the 
campaign. “Stay tough,” she told McGinty. “Talk about what your values will be.”
 