
If Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> loses the US 
election, will the tide of populism that threatened to overwhelm the world 
after the Brexit vote in June begin to wane? Or will the revolt against 
globalisation and immigration simply take another form?


The rise of protectionism and anti-immigrant sentiment in Britain, America, 
and Europe is widely believed to reflect stagnant incomes, widening inequality, 
structural unemployment, and even excessive monetary easing. But there are 
several reasons to question the link between populist politics and economic 
distress.

Most populist voters are neither poor nor unemployed; they are not victims of 
globalisation, immigration, and free trade. The main demographic groups behind 
the anti-establishment upsurge have been people outside the workforce: 
pensioners, middle-aged homemakers, and men with low educational qualifications 
receiving disability payments.

In Britain, where detailed analyses 
<http://lordashcroftpolls.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/How-the-UK-voted-Full-tables-1.pdf>
 of the votes actually cast in the Brexit referendum are now available, the 
group most directly affected by low-wage competition from immigrants and 
Chinese imports –people under 35 – voted against Brexit by a wide margin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/meet-the-75-young-people-who-voted-to-remain-in-eu>
, 65% to 35%. Meanwhile, 60% of pensioners who voted backed the leave campaign, 
as did 59% of voters with disabilities. By contrast, 53% of full-time workers 
who participated wanted Britain to remain in Europe, as did 51% of part-time 
workers.

The British data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/31/people-who-felt-marginalised-drove-brexit-vote-study-finds>
 suggest that cultural and ethnic attitudes, not direct economic motivations, 
are the real distinguishing features of anti-globalisation voting. Asked 
whether “social liberalism” is a “force for good” or a “force for ill,” 87% of 
remain voters said it was a force for good, while 53% of Leave voters called 
liberalism a “force for ill.” On “multiculturalism,” the difference was even 
starker – 65% of leave voters were against it, while 86% of remainers approved. 
Anotheranalysis published by the BBC <http://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-36803544>
 after the referendum found one of the strongest predictors of a leave vote to 
be support for capital punishment.

In America, polls suggest that gender is an even more important indicator of 
support for Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/donald-trump-male-entitlement-women-2016-election>
 than age or education. Early this month, when Trump was only a few points 
behind Clinton in overall support, aWashington Post/ABC poll 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/10/13/donald-trumps-facing-an-apocalyptic-election-scenario-thanks-to-women-voters/>
 compared voting intentions with the 2012 election. It found not only thatwhite 
men backed Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/08/angry-white-men-love-donald-trump>
 by a margin of 40 percentage points, but also that their support for Trump was 
13 points higher that it was for Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican nominee.

White women, by contrast, marginally supported Clinton and had swung by 15 
percentage pointsagainst the Republicans. Among voters without a college 
education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/white-college-graduates-donald-trump-support-falling>
, the gender difference was even starker: less-educated white men favored Trump 
by a 60% margin and had swung in favor of the Republicans by 28 percentage 
points, while women had swung by 10 percentage points in the opposite direction 
and only marginally supported Trump.

It seems, therefore, that the conflicts generally ascribed to economic 
grievances and globalisation are actually the latest battles in the culture 
wars that have split western societies since the late 1960s. The main relevance 
of economics is that the 2008 financial crisis created conditions for a 
political backlash by older, more conservative voters, who have been losing the 
cultural battles over race, gender, and social identity.

The dominance of free-market ideology before the crisis allowed many 
controversial social changes, ranging from income inequality and intensified 
wage competition to greater gender equality and affirmative action, to go 
almost unchallenged. “Progressive” social liberalism and “conservative” 
free-market economics seemed to be two sides of the same coin. But when 
free-market economic liberalism failed in the 2008 crisis, political challenges 
to social liberalism could no longer be deflected by invoking impersonal 
economic laws.

But if social change can no longer be legitimised as the necessary condition 
for economic progress, it seems unlikely that democracies will now vote to 
reinstate the social conditions before the ascendancy of economic liberalism 
and globalisation. Racial and gender equality are now backed by clear 
majorities in the US, Britain, and most European countries, and even apparently 
popular policies such as trade protectionism and strict immigration controls 
rarely muster more than 30-40% support in opinion surveys. Why, then, did 
Brexit win, and why is it still possible that Donald Trump will be the next US 
President?

Both Brexit and Trump were powered by an unstable alliance between two very 
different, even contradictory, movements. The bulk of their supporters were 
indeed social conservatives and protectionists who wanted to undo the social 
changes that began in the late 1960s.

Two of the most effective slogans of the Brexit and Trump campaigns have been 
“Take back control” and “I want my country back.” But the social conservatives 
inspired by such atavistic and authoritarian sentiments do not make up 
majorities in any western country. On its own, social conservatism could never 
mobilise more than 30-40% of voters. To achieve majorities, the socially 
conservative protectionists had to unite with the remnants of the 
Thatcher-Reaganlaissez faire movement, who resent the interventionist economic 
management of the post-2008 period and want to intensify the competition, 
deregulation, and globalisation that social conservatives resent.

This unstable political compound is now dissolving in the US, and also in 
Britain, where prime minister Theresa May’s government is divided between 
ideological nationalists and economic liberals. If the US election on 8 
November confirms Trump’s failure to bind social conservatives and economic 
liberals into a winning coalition, similar disintegration is likely among 
European populists, too.

In that case, the Brexit vote will begin to look like an aberration – not the 
start of a powerful new trend toward nationalism, protectionism, and 
de-globalisation, but the end of a backlash against modernity by an unstable 
alliance of social authoritarians andlaissez faire market liberals. It will be 
the last gasp of an ageing generation that tried to impose its nostalgic 
parochialism on an increasingly cosmopolitan younger generation, but succeeded 
in only one unfortunate country.

 * Anatole Kaletsky is chief economist and co-chair of Gavekal Dragonomics. A 
former columnist at the Times, the International New York Times and the 
Financial Times, he is the author ofCapitalism 4.0, The Birth of a New Economy 
<http://www.publicaffairsbooks.com/book/paperback/capitalism-40/9781586489625>.

© Project Syndicate <https://www.project-syndicate.org/>
 