
The late US senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said, “Everyone is entitled to his 
own opinion, but not to his own facts.” 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2010/11/moynihan-letters-201011> That may be 
true. But, entitled or not, politicians and electorates are constructing their 
own alternate realities – with far-reaching consequences.

Nowadays, facts and truth are becoming increasingly difficult to uphold in 
politics 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/british-leadership-deficit-by-lucy-p--marcus-2016-07>
 (and in business andeven sports 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/international-olympic-committee-corruption-by-lucy-p--marcus-2016-08>
). They are being replaced withwhat the American comedian Stephen Colbert calls 
“truthiness” <http://www.avclub.com/article/stephen-colbert-13970">: the 
expression of gut feelings or opinions as valid statements of fact. This year 
might be considered one of peak truthiness.

To make good decisions, voters need to assess reliable facts, from economic 
data to terrorism analysis, presented transparently and without bias. But, 
today, talking heads on television would rather attack those with expertise in 
these areas. And ambitious political figures – from the leaders of the Brexit 
campaign in the United Kingdom to US Republican presidential candidate Donald 
Trump – dismiss the facts altogether.

The environment is ripe for such behaviour. Voters, particularly in the 
advanced economies, are jaded by years of broken political promises, 
revelations of cover-ups, and relentless political and media spin. Opaque or 
dubious dealings have cast doubt on the integrity of organisations and 
institutions on which we should be able to rely. For example, theNew York Times 
recently published a series of articles 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/09/us/politics/think-tank-scholars-corporate-consultants.html>
 on thinktanks that highlighted the conflict of interest faced by those who 
operate as analysts, but are beholden to corporate funders and sometimes also 
act as lobbyists.

As soon as a few experts are found to have been offering half-truths – or 
worse – the credibility of the entire field can be called into question.

 Christine Todd Whitman, who was Head of the US Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) on 11 September 11 2001, told residents of New York City that the 
air was safe to breathe and the water was safe to drink in the days after the 
terrorist attack on the World Trade Center. But, asa 2003 EPA report noted 
<https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-10/documents/wtc_report_20030821.pdf>
, the agency “did not have sufficient data and analyses to make such a blanket 
statement” at that time. With cases of severe respiratory illness piling up, 
Whitman now admits that the statement was wrong.

Likewise, as the recently published Chilcot report 
<http://www.iraqinquiry.org.uk/the-report/> showed, the Iraq War was launched 
in 2003 under false pretences. Intelligence reports had not established that 
there were weapons of mass destruction in the country, yet British prime 
minister Tony Blair dutifully followed US president George W. Bush in ordering 
his military to invade. The consequences of that decision are still emerging.
If our leaders can be so willfully wrong about such consequential matters, how 
can we believe anything they tell us?

This question has opened the door for a new, more overt truthiness, espoused 
by the likes of Trump, who seems to introduce freshly invented “facts” on a 
daily basis. Trump’s surrogates, for their part, use television appearances and 
social media to restate the falsehoods, seemingly operating under the principle 
that if you repeat something often enough, it will become true.

And many voters seem willing to go along for the ride. When 40 leading 
Republican foreign policymakers and national-security expertssigned a letter 
expressing their opposition to Trump 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/08/08/us/politics/national-security-letter-trump.html?_r=1>
, whom they fear would be “the most reckless president in American history,” 
their concerns were largely disregarded. Trump’s response – that those leaders 
are the ones who made the world “such a dangerous place” – sounds just 
plausible enough to justify ignoring their warning. Evenoutright lies spoken in 
a nationally broadcast interview go unchallenged 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/08/us/politics/matt-lauer-forum.html>, as if 
Trump were indeed entitled to his own facts.

The leaders of the UK’s campaign to withdraw from the European Union enjoyed a 
similar advantage in the run-up to June’s Brexit referendum. They painted a 
wholly false picture of the country’s circumstances – from its role in the EU 
to the impact of immigration – and knowingly made impossible promises about 
what would happen if the public voted “Leave”.

For example, leaders like Boris Johnson, now Britain’s foreign secretary, 
declared that the £350m supposedly paid weekly to the EU (a deeply flawed 
figure that fails to take into account the benefits received) would be 
redirected to the National Health Service. The eave campaign even plastered the 
pledge onto the side of a campaign bus.

Now that the referendum is over, Johnson and others have backtracked, and the 
campaign has rebranded itself the “Change Britain” movement and promised to 
redirect EU funds to other areas instead. This has infuriated many, especially 
giventhe recent warning by the body that represents hospitals across England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/10/hospitals-on-brink-of-collapse-say-health-chiefs>
 that underfunding has pushed the NHS to the brink. Brexiteers have also walked 
back pledges to curb immigration, amid a sharp increase in hate crimes across 
the UK that their rhetoric helped to fuel.

The downsides of Brexit should have been obvious to voters before the 
referendum – not least because so many economists, defense experts, and world 
leaders spelled them out during the campaign. But, as leading Brexiteer Michael 
Gove proudly observed, people in the UK had “had enough of experts”.

In fact, it seems that some people voted for Brexit specifically because so 
many experts spoke out against it 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/brexit-voters-ignoring-experts-by-jean-pisani-ferry-2016-07>
. They seemed to believe Brexiteer MP Gisela Stuart: “the only expert that 
matters” is the voter. It should be no surprise that the post-referendum 
reality is not what many Brexit voters expected.

Yet the revelations of the falsehoods that propelled the leave campaign to 
victory have hardly driven people back into the arms of experts. Truthiness is 
on the march, particularly across Europe and the US – in large part because so 
many of the authorities who should be calling out the lies are tainted by 
truthiness themselves.

• Lucy P. Marcus, founder and CEO of Marcus Venture Consulting, is professor 
of leadership and governance at IE Business School and a non-executive board 
director of Atlantia

 * Copyright: Project Syndicate 2016 <https://www.project-syndicate.org/> 
 