
London Underground <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-underground> and the 
rail unions said they were prepared to resume talks later this week over safe 
staffing levels on the tube, after a day in which millions of commuters were 
affected by a strike across the network.

Representatives from the TSSA union, who represent station staff, will meet on 
Wednesday and talks could resume afterwards. The unions have an ongoing mandate 
from a ballot in the autumn that allows them to call further strikes in the 
coming weeks, but sources indicated that further industrial action was not 
expected.

London Underground strike knocks confidence in capital's new mayor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-knocks-confidence-in-londons-new-mayor-sadiq-khan>
Full tube services will be restored on Tuesday morning, but commuters in 
London’s suburbs and the south-east are braced for more disruption as train 
drivers, mainly in the Aslef union, along with someRMT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/rmt> members, strike on Tuesday, Wednesday 
and Friday, and virtually no trains operating on the Southern network.

Tube stations throughout the centre of the capital were closed by the 24-hour 
walkout by staff in the TSSA and RMT unions which began at 6pm on Sunday night, 
leaving commuters to crowd onto trains or attempt to board busy buses slowed by 
gridlocked roads.

Limited tube services ran in outer zones on the London Underground network 
that normally carries 4 million passengers a day.Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London laid on additional buses, 
but they did little to alleviate many journeys, with heavy traffic delaying 
their progress. Many turned to walking or cycling, with almost twice as many 
bikes from the capital’s cycle scheme hired than normal.


Most national rail services were running into the capital, although Southern 
remained disrupted by the effects of an overtime ban by train drivers. At one 
point, Clapham Junction, the country’s busiest interchange on a normal day, was 
evacuated because of overcrowding.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftube-strike-brings-manic-monday-for-commuters-in-gridlocked-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12867280cccc338b5584c8a46fd4ac9663e59067%2F0_127_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tube%20strike%20brings%20manic%20Monday%20to%20commuters%20in%20gridlocked%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftube-strike-brings-manic-monday-for-commuters-in-gridlocked-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tube%20strike%20brings%20manic%20Monday%20to%20commuters%20in%20gridlocked%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftube-strike-brings-manic-monday-for-commuters-in-gridlocked-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12867280cccc338b5584c8a46fd4ac9663e59067%2F0_127_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Blackfriars tube station was closed by the 24-hour strike. Photograph: Hayoung 
Jeon/EPA 
TfL said it had run some trains on eight of its 11 tube lines on Monday and 
opened more than 60% of the stations across the network, but unions accused it 
of “dangerously exaggerating” the level of service available, leading people to 
expect to travel and causing overcrowding at stations.

The strike came as a blow to London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, whom Conservatives 
accused of breaking his campaign pledge to prevent such action. Khan said: “I 
share the deep frustration of millions of commuters whose journeys have been 
disrupted, all because of a completely unnecessary strike.

“We’ve made huge progress on addressing this dispute, which began under Boris 
Johnson, and we are committed to resolving it amicably.

“A good deal, that will ensure station safety and staffing levels across the 
tube network, remains on offer, and I urge the unions to continue talks. 
Londoners deserve a resolution to this issue without any further industrial 
action.”

About 3,700 station staff went on strike, mostly RMT members employed as 
customer service assistants or supervisors, working in the ticket hall and 
manning gates and platforms. The strike was part of a continuing row over the 
impact of ticket office closures and the loss of 900 jobs as part of TfL’s 
“modernisation” plans brought in by London’s previous mayor, Boris Johnson.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fgridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gridlock%20on%20London%20streets%20as%20tube%20strike%20hits%20%E2%80%93%20timelapse%20aerial%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fgridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gridlock%20on%20London%20streets%20as%20tube%20strike%20hits%20%E2%80%93%20timelapse%20aerial%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fgridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video&media=>
Timelapse video of gridlock on London streets as tube strike hits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2017/jan/09/gridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video>
TfL has admitted that too many jobs were cut, but unions say that its offer of 
reinstating 200 did not go far enough.

An independent review in the autumn by watchdog London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> TravelWatch, commissioned by Khan, 
found that many tube passengers had been adversely affected by the changes, but 
it did not call for ticket offices to be reopened.

The unions said there were safety fears about the running of the tube, 
including concerns over overcrowding, monitoring of stations and trains, and 
the personal safety of staff working alone.

Steve Griffiths, London Underground’s chief operating officer, said: “We had 
always intended to review staffing levels and have had constructive discussions 
with the unions. We agree that we need more staff in our stations and have 
already started to recruit 200 extra staff and this is likely to increase 
further as we work through the other areas that need to be addressed.

“All of this will ensure that our customers feel safe, fully supported and 
able to access the right assistance in our stations at all times. We encourage 
the unions to continue working with us on this process and the only way to 
resolve this dispute is to keep talking about how to improve our stations.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftube-strike-brings-manic-monday-for-commuters-in-gridlocked-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d03105c436fec74906d25c1758e28ee641893f2%2F0_162_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tube%20strike%20brings%20manic%20Monday%20to%20commuters%20in%20gridlocked%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftube-strike-brings-manic-monday-for-commuters-in-gridlocked-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tube%20strike%20brings%20manic%20Monday%20to%20commuters%20in%20gridlocked%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Ftube-strike-brings-manic-monday-for-commuters-in-gridlocked-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d03105c436fec74906d25c1758e28ee641893f2%2F0_162_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
 Commuters take a shortcut through a construction site during the 24-hour tube 
strike. Photograph: Ben Stansall/AFP/Getty Images 
Manuel Cortes, the TSSA’s general secretary, said that while hiring more staff 
was a step in the right direction, “200 jobs cannot plug the gaping hole that’s 
been left in the system by devastating Tory attacks on TfL’s budget”.

In his 2015 spending review, George Osborne, the then chancellor, cut about 
£700m from TfL’s central government grant until 2020.

Cortes said: “Put quite simply, these levels of cuts are not compatible with a 
safely run, properly staffed tube and my members are highly anxious about the 
impact this is having and will continue to have on their ability to keep you 
safe.”

The RMT leader, Mick Cash, turned his fire on tube bosses for talking up the 
number of services in operation. “The truth is that London is on an almost 
total shutdown,” he said, adding that TfL should come up with “serious and 
urgent plans”, including a schedule for restoring staffing to a safe and 
sustainable level. The union would remain available for talks to do so, he said.


















 