
London Underground <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-underground> 
services will be severely disrupted from Sunday evening after a second union 
involved in a dispute over jobs rejected a new offer.

Members of the Transport Salaried Staffs’ Association will walk out for 24 
hours from 6pm. The Rail, Maritime and Transport union had already decided to 
press ahead with the strike despite thelast-minute offer from LU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/07/rmt-walks-out-of-talks-aimed-at-averting-london-tube-strike>
.

TSSA’s general secretary, Manuel Cortes, said: “Our reps have decided to go 
ahead with our 24-hour strike action at 6pm today. Whilst they accept the offer 
of more staff is a step in the right direction to restoring tube safety 
standards, they do not believe the offer will return those standards with the 
urgency that is now needed.

“We remain committed to taking part in further talks to seek a resolution to 
this dispute.”

RMT’s general secretary, Mick Cash, said in a message to union members: 
“Despite the best efforts of your negotiators over many days,London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Underground has not put forward 
acceptable proposals to address the staffing and safety issues.”


Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London advised 
passengers that there will be a severely reduced service across the tube 
network on Sunday evening and all day on Monday because of the strike.


The RMT <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/rmt> said more than 800 jobs had 
been axed under the Fit For The Future programme, adding that LU was offering 
to reinstate only 150. Most of the 500 new jobs claimed by the company were to 
fill vacancies and staff turnover, according to the union.

The RMT added that LU was refusing to reopen any of the closed ticket offices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/03/tfl-managers-disgusting-celebrating-london-underground-tube-ticket-office-closures-rmt>
.


Mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, said: “My message to the unions is clear - it is 
not too late to cancel this strike and get back around the negotiating table 
for the sake of all Londoners.


“I have instructed Transport for London to continue negotiating and we will be 
available around the clock to resolve this dispute.


“This strike is going to be a huge inconvenience to commuters, tourists and 
TfL staff. And it is pointless. There is a good deal sitting on the table that 
will ensure station safety and staffing levels across the Tube network. I am 
willing to carry on negotiations.


“This historic dispute has nothing to do with the millions of Londoners this 
strike is punishing. It must be called off.”
 