
With brightly coloured halls and gadget-filled classrooms where students work 
on science projects from sound waves to hovercrafts, the Harmony Science 
Academy in Houston is like any other science and technology-focused high school 
in the US.

But Harmony’s flagship campus in Houston has become an improbable battleground 
in a spat between Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and a dissident 
Turkish cleric.

The Turkish government has hired an international law firm to investigate a 
large chain of charter schools in Texas and across the country, which it 
alleges is connected to a dissident Turkish cleric – and one-time political 
ally of Erdoğan –Fethullah  
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/10/17/turkeys-thirty-year-coup>Gülen 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/10/17/turkeys-thirty-year-coup>.

Lawyers for the Turkish government allege that the charter schools are 
misusing US taxpayers’ dollars and acting as a front forGülen 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/10/17/turkeys-thirty-year-coup>, a 
Turkish Muslim cleric who has lived in self-imposed exile in Pennsylvania for 
the past 17 years. Harmony denies these claims.

The Turkish government has also blamed Gülen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/17/fethullah-gulen-alleged-coup-mastermind-and-friendly-neighbour>
 for last July’s failed coup attempt, a charge he denies. In his absence, a 
trial began in Turkey last month 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-turkey-security-court-idUSKBN13H1NX?feedType=RSS&feedName=worldNews>
 in which Gülen and 72 others are accused of trying to overthrow the government.

Fethullah Gülen: who is the man Turkey's president blames for coup attempt?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/fethullah-gulen-who-is-the-man-blamed-by-turkeys-president-for-coup-attempt>
Gülen has denied any link between him and the schools, but the Trump 
administration may bring fresh scrutiny. Michael Flynn, the newly appointed 
national security adviser, wrote a febrileopinion piece published on election 
day 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/pundits-blog/foreign-policy/305021-our-ally-turkey-is-in-crisis-and-needs-our-support>
 in the Hill that criticised the charter schools, called for Gülen’s 
extradition and compared him with Ayatollah Khomeini and Osama bin Laden.

Last year the Turkish government retained Amsterdam & Partners, the law firm 
of Robert Amsterdam, to investigate the numerous alleged Gülen-linked schools 
across the country. Amsterdam, 60, is a London-based, American-born, 
Canada-raised lawyer who has previously represented Thaksin Shinawatra, the 
former prime minister of Thailand; Kim Dotcom, the founder of Megaupload; and 
the Russian dissident Mikhail Khodorkovsky.

In May he filed a 32-page legal complaint 
<https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/2841806/TEA-Complaint-Harmony-Public-Schools-5-24-2016.pdf>
 (pdf) about Harmony to the Texas Education Agency (TEA) with accusations 
including connections to Gülen, improper use of public funds, discriminatory 
hiring practices and salaries and preferential contract awards.

The TEA dismissed his complaint 
<https://static.texastribune.org/media/documents/harmonyletter.pdf> (pdf) in 
October, saying that an investigation was unwarranted. Amsterdam, though, is 
not giving up. He is planning a press conference in Illinois this month, where 
he said he will outline accusations of cronyism and misuse of public funds in 
the same vein as allegations his team have made in Texas and Ohio.

“It’s outrageous, it’s a complete pillage of the US educational system to the 
tune of tens of millions of dollars,” he said.


The firm has been investigating what it says is Gülen-linked activity in 
Africa, England and elsewhere in Europe. Globally, Amsterdam claims, the 
so-called Gülen schools “are serving as a funding mechanism for a political 
organisation that is determined to overthrow the government of a major Nato 
ally”.

Gülen’s Hizmet is a popular movement that at times has appeared cultish – 
spawning thinktanks, businesses, schools and publications across the globe, 
while building up substantial wealth and influence in the process.

A complex web of conspiracy that uses American taxpayers’ money to fund the 
Hizmet movement is alleged: Turkish building contractors and vendors are given 
preferential treatment, while employees privately contribute to Gülen-linked 
causes anddonate to US lawmakers 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2015/10/29/turkish-faith-movement-secretly-funded-200-trips-lawmakers-and-staff/74535104/>
. Schools employ numerous Turkish teachers, often bringing them over on 
expensive visas to fill jobs that could have gone to locals.

A spokesman for Gülen, Alp Aslandogan, denied formal ties between the Hizmet 
movement and the schools. “We absolutely reject the suggestion that the schools 
in question in any way channel money to any place,” he told the Guardian.

Aslandogan, who said he acted as a landlord for a Harmony campus in Austin 
about a decade ago, is president of a New York-based non-profit “inspired by” 
Gülen’s teachings.

He said Amsterdam’s efforts should be viewed within the context of the Erdoğan 
government’s crackdown on perceived opponents since the coup attempt, which has 
led to thousands of arrests in Turkey and thecurtailing of free speech and 
press freedom 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/18/world/europe/turkey-press-erdogan-coup.html>.

'We became the news': staff at Turkey's Cumhuriyet speak out over arrests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/we-became-the-news-staff-at-turkeys-cumhuriyet-speak-out-over-arrests>
“I think that this is very weird, that the Turkish government is spending 
Turkish taxpayers’ money going after American institutions for things that 
American authorities are supposed to do. I think that is nonsense. This is 
basically just pursuing perceived critics in foreign lands for domestic 
political goals. This is absurd,” Aslandogan said.

“[One of Gülen’s] most important principles is legal and ethical conduct,” he 
added. “If an individual who is sympathetic to Mr Gülen willingly committed 
some wrongdoing, Mr Gülen would be the first to condemn it.”

Charter schools – privately run, publicly funded and often enjoying a large 
degree of autonomy – have mushroomed across the US since the 1990s. They are no 
stranger to controversy, with detractors citing lax regulation and a creeping 
privatisation of public school systems.

One place in Amsterdam’s sights is California, the state with the most charter 
schools <http://www.ccsa.org/understanding/numbers/> in the country and the 
centre of a fierce debate between pro- and anti- charter forces, with millions 
of dollarsspent on legislative campaigns 
<http://www.scpr.org/news/2016/05/25/60908/charter-groups-spending-big-in-california-legislat/>
.

In October, for reasons not related to academic performance, the Los Angeles 
board of education voted to close three charter schools known for importing 
Turkish workers. Officially, the LA Timesreported 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/education/la-me-edu-charter-school-oversight-20161019-snap-story.html>
, paperwork violations influenced the decision .

One afternoon after the TEA’s findings were released, Soner Tarim sat in the 
boardroom of Harmony’s headquarters next to a freeway in west Houston. Tarim, a 
graduate of Texas A&M University, co-founded his first school in Houston in 
2000. Centred on STEM education in lower-income areas, Harmony now has 48 
campuses inTexas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas> with over 30,000 
students and a waiting list of more than 35,000. Harmony says it has a 100% 
college acceptance rate, a 98% seniors graduation rate and plans to expand to 
55 campuses by 2020.

The CEO has faced opposition from some conservative groups and fielded 
questions about his company for years. In 2011 theNew York Times ran a detailed 
story <http://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/07/education/07charter.html> examining 
Harmony’s business dealings and hiring practices.

Tarim termed Amsterdam’s allegations “a complete lie” and called for 
politicians to clamp down on what he described as a foreign government’s 
attempt to influence public education.

He insisted that the schools do not discriminate and that of more than 5,200 
vendors who work with Harmony, only a handful were likely to be Turkish-owned 
businesses. “What the Turkish government is doing through Amsterdam is bullying 
the public school system and they’re trying to take away time and effort, 
taxpayers’ money and the time of the state agencies,” he said.

In recent years, Tarim said, Harmony has made enhanced efforts to be 
transparent about its finances and dealings. “Harmony’s a success story of 
immigrants,” he said. “Some of this, there is Islamophobia or xenophobia 
elements … but regardless, I think it’s because people tell us that when you 
become the largest in any industry you become targeted from left and right for 
many reasons.”























 