
The US has confirmed it has received a formal extradition request from Ankara 
for the Turkish cleric Fethullah Gülen, but not over the July coup attempt the 
Turkish authorities has accused Gülen of orchestrating.


The state department’s announcement came after US officials met their Turkish 
counterparts in Ankara to discuss Gülen, who has lived in rural Pennsylvania 
for the past 17 years in self-imposed exile. Vice-president Joe Biden is 
expected in the Turkish capital on Wednesday to meet PresidentRecep Tayyip 
Erdoğan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>.

According to the White House, Biden will emphasise “ongoing strong support” 
for Turkish democracy in the wake of the foiled coup by a segment of the armed 
forces, but the Turkish leader is expected to focus his attention on the Muslim 
cleric, who was once his ally but whose presence in the US has now become a 
serious irritant in relations between Washington and Ankara.

Erdoğan has previously warned the Obama administration it had to “choose 
betweenTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> and Gülen”.

“We can confirm now that Turkey has requested the extradition of Gülen,” a 
state department spokesman, Mark Toner, told journalists on Tuesday.

Toner added that the extradition request was not related to the 15 July 
attempted coup, but was for other issues for which Gülen was being sought by 
authorities in Ankara. He did not specify what those issues were.


Fethullah Gülen: alleged coup mastermind – and friendly neighbor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/17/fethullah-gulen-alleged-coup-mastermind-and-friendly-neighbour>
 Erdoğan’s government has blamed Gülen for orchestrating the abortive putsch, 
in which over 200 people were killed, and has rounded up his alleged supporters
. Ten of thousands of suspected Gülen supporters have been dismissed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/datablog/2016/aug/19/turkeys-post-coup-crackdown-in-figures>
from jobs in the judiciary, armed services or media, and many have been 
imprisoned.

 Earlier this months, the state department said that it had received a sheaf 
of documents from Turkey about Gülen, but could not confirm at that time the 
documents amounted to an extradition request. Any such request and US response, 
they said, would be governed by theextradition treaty 
<http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/dpb/2016/08/260915.htm> both countries signed in 
1981.

 From the US, Gülen has run an extensive social network in Turkey, promoting 
interfaith dialogue and providing social services. It operated in partnership 
with Erdoğan’s Justice and Development party (AKP) until the relationship 
between the two mensoured in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/23/why-do-some-turks-hate-the-gulenist-movement-so-much>
 and then turned to enmity the following year, when a corruption scandal 
erupted implicating the president’s closest associates and family. Erdoğan 
blamed Gülen for planting the allegations. The Turkish government has since 
described the Gülen movement as a terrorist organisation.
 