
BLATTER UP


Switzerland is nice at Christmas time. Well, The Fiver doesn’t know that for 
sure but it imagines a self-regarding, snuggly central European version of 
Hygge – Swygge? – without the deep-seated sense of unease but replete with cosy 
snowbound houses high above Lake Geneva insulated from the outside world, 
nourished only by warm lighting and a conveyor belt sending festive supplies of 
cheese and chocolate from somewhere closer to the earth’s core. What else could 
one want at this time of year? A steady plop of Christmas cards through the 
letterbox might liven things up – perhaps if you work for Fifa they’ll come 
with an extra present or two inside – and it’s always the time of year to hear 
from old friends by phone, too. So spare a thought for Sepp Blatter, who is 
experiencing the kind of winter isolation that society is quite properly 
working hard to address.

“I have sent him a letter and I have his personal number and I was told that 
it’s still correct,”Blatter said this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/sepp-blatter-fifa-gianni-infantino-no-respect-cas>
 of Gianni Infantino, his successor as chief wrecking ball at Fifa HQ. “Never, 
never an answer, never. I have never seen in any company that the new president 
… was not paying respect to the old president.” Stay right by the phone, Sepp. 
Or perhaps don’t, because it’s possible that when Gianni said “I will work on 
that” in response to your list of questions to solve within Fifa, he was 
pulling the same restrained pre-excuse as someone who “should be able to make” 
post-work drinks with the overly insistent ex-colleague who they never really 
liked but for some reason remains on the email chain. Or WhatsChat group, if 
that’s how decision makers in the Alpine foothills roll nowadays.

Sepp Blatter: Gianni Infantino has shown me no respect
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/sepp-blatter-fifa-gianni-infantino-no-respect-cas>
Let’s be fair: Gianni might well be genuinely busy. Maybe he’ll atone by 
popping round with a hamper in the next couple of weeks – one filled with 
home-conceived treats to improve the lot of all who hold the world’s game at 
heart. That 48-team World Cup with groups of three should sit nicely under the 
tree, but there’s a bonus thrown in too – Friday’s reports have Infantino’s new 
broom sweeping the prospect of penalty shootouts at the end of all group games 
on to the table. If you don’t get the gift you want, perhaps you’ll win the 
Christmas lottery? It all sounds unnecessarily confusing, if a potentially 
attractive sop to those who might want to wind to the end of Slovenia v 
Paraguay. Blatter, of course, was a keen proponent of extending football’s 
global reach and that, indeed, goes down as one of the successes under his 
presidency. Presumably, though, even he can see that turning a World Cup into 
something resembling the 1970s NASL might not go down especially well despite 
the modern appetite for almost anything but a full 90 minutes sitting still.

That being the case, perhaps Infantino’s blindsiding of his old chum makes a 
certain degree of sense – if we’ve learned one thing this year, after all, it’s 
that echo chambers are all the rage. But Sepp still has Infantino’s number – or 
so he thinks – and perhaps he should swallow his pride and dial those digits 
one more time. It sure beats waiting around and going stir crazy inside the 
house, even if Infantino paying heed to anything Blatter suggests would appear 
less likely than the most magical festive miracle.

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“At my debut we played in a stadium that holds 30,000 and there was 60,000 – I 
don’t understand how. People were standing on the floodlights, on the 
scoreboard. I was thinking, ‘What? This isn’t even safe!’ But people there will 
do anything to watch the match. Sometimes in a Premier League game the fans are 
a bit quiet but [there] you just hear trumpets, everything” – Arsenal’s Alex 
Iwobi tells Amy Lawrence what it’s like to betreated like a king in Nigeria and 
taking advice from his big uncle, Jay-Jay Okocha. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/alex-iwobi-arsenal-extra-sessions>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-fiver-sepp-gianni-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e218df2846bcc572aefbf1d4fa83dba84ab6f66%2F0_0_3660_2832%2F3660.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Turning%20a%20World%20Cup%20into%20something%20resembling%20the%201970s%20NASL&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-fiver-sepp-gianni-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Turning%20a%20World%20Cup%20into%20something%20resembling%20the%201970s%20NASL&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-fiver-sepp-gianni-fifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e218df2846bcc572aefbf1d4fa83dba84ab6f66%2F0_0_3660_2832%2F3660.jpg>
 Alex Iwobi. Safety not guaranteed. Photograph: Stuart MacFarlane/AFC 
FIVER LETTERS

“Jürgen Klopp’s approach to making himself uncontactable was revealed by Andy 
Hunter on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/jurgen-klopp-liverpool-roberto-firmino>
, Klopp explaining: ‘The first thing I did when I left Dortmund, I took my 
phone and deleted all the numbers so I was not reachable.’ Considering Klopp’s 
lack of understanding about how phones work, it surely makes his success at 
football team management all the more remarkable” – Jez Smith.

“How ironic that something described as ‘percussive’ (yesterday’s Quote of the 
Day) unites two people – The Fiver and Richard Keys – with reputations for 
banging the same drum over and over again for as long as anyone can remember” – 
Ed Taylor.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
also tweet The Fiver.Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’the day is … Jez 
Smith.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/uk?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

NEWS, BITS AND BOBS

The National Police Chiefs’ Council has said 83 potential suspects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/police-confirm-83-potential-suspects-identified-in-child-sex-abuse-scandal>
 have been identified in connection with allegations of historical child sexual 
abuse in football.

Atlético Madrid’s new 67,000-capacity cash machine will be called the Wanda 
Metropolitano stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/atletico-madrid-wanda-metropolitano>
. Ah, because it’s sponsored by the Chinese property company. “They are the 
best partners on our journey to keep working for a better future,” whooped club 
president Enrique Cerezo.

Bournemouth are also on the hunt for a new ground, in time for the 2020-21 
season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/bournemouth-new-stadium-site-dean-court-vitality-stadium>
. “We are not going to develop a stadium we do not own and will not be held to 
ransom over a price to purchase the existing site,” sniffed a club statement.

His agency publishes details of His income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/cristiano-ronaldo-191m-income>
 as evidence that he has paid his taxes.

AFC Wimbledon’s Jake Reeves seems to have the right idea before their first 
Football League trip to MK Dons. “We would like to think we have done it the 
right way and are going in the right direction where hopefully they are going 
in the other direction,”he tooted 
<http://www.getwestlondon.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/afc-wimbledon-ex-brentford-player-12294426>
. “There’s no remorse, no mercy on that comment either.”

Bobby Zamora, 83, has called time on his playing career due to a dodgy hip.

Jürgen Klopp wants Liverpool keeper Loris Karius to “close his ears” to 
criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/jurgen-klopp-tells-loris-karius-to-close-his-ears-to-criticism>
. He’ll need to learn how to stop spilling simple shots before tackling that 
tester.

And Newton Aycliffe have given manager Peter Dixon the boot after members of 
his team fought their way into Morpeth Town’s dressing room, following their 
3-2 FA Vase defeat. Players involved inthe incident 
<http://www.itv.com/news/tyne-tees/2016-12-08/durham-fa-investigate-incident-after-non-league-game/>
 have also done one. “It’s been a rough week for us,” sighed chairman Allan 
Oliver.

STILL WANT MORE?

Bournemouth’s Harry Arter talks again with Stuart James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/08/harry-arter-bournemouth-daughter>
, reflecting on 12 months of pain, anger, envy and finally happiness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-fiver-sepp-gianni-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc7904c5f038f677a6d2f0eb5ddf133a69f30775%2F0_29_3476_2085%2F3476.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Turning%20a%20World%20Cup%20into%20something%20resembling%20the%201970s%20NASL&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-fiver-sepp-gianni-fifa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Turning%20a%20World%20Cup%20into%20something%20resembling%20the%201970s%20NASL&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-fiver-sepp-gianni-fifa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc7904c5f038f677a6d2f0eb5ddf133a69f30775%2F0_29_3476_2085%2F3476.jpg>
 Do read. Photograph: James Marsh/BPI for the Guardian 
Will Toby Alderweireld keep Tottenham watertight against Manchester United and 
might Troy Deeney finally hit 100 goals for Watford against Everton? That and
eight more Premier League things to look out for. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/premier-league-10-things-to-look-out-for-this-weekend>

Simon Burnton’s jumped back into the time machine to recall the forgotten 
story of Jeff Hall,the player whose death turned the tide against polio. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/09/fogotten-story-jeff-hall-death-polio-birmingham-city>

It’s a big weekend in the USA! USA!! USA!!!, so here’s our writers’ MLS Cup 
final predictions. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/mls-roundtable-seattle-sounders-tfc-final>

Alan Pardew will receive anything but a warm welcome at Hull City this 
weekend, two years after butting David Meyler,writes Louise Taylor. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/09/alan-pardew-headbutt-hull-crystal-palace-newcastle-david-meyler>

Could Dele Alli be lured to France by PSG and will Manchester United allow 
Ashley Young to join Everton? Moretittle-tattle right here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/09/football-transfer-rumours-dele-alli-to-psg-for-50m>

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>!

1986: RIDICULOUSLY STACKED <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?yr=1986>
 