
Bon Iver
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6C5sB6AqJkM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6C5sB6AqJkM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6C5sB6AqJkM&media=>
Bon Iver: 'There are people who are into being famous. And I don’t like that'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/sep/24/bon-iver-justin-vernon-22-million-interview>
The new Bon Iver album, 22, A Million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/29/bon-iver-22-a-million-the-downsides-of-success-never-sounded-so-good>
, wears the artist’s interest in numerology on its sleeve, but that’s only the 
beginning of Justin Vernon’s fascination with the strange mystical powers 
sometimes associated with numbers. The album track listing is largely made up 
of figures and symbols, andinternet gaming language leet 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leet>: song titles include 715 – CRΣΣKS and M♢♢N 
WATER, which resemble Mr Robot’sesoteric episode titles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/08/eps10hellofriendmov-does-mr-robot-have-the-worst-tv-episode-titles-ever>
 and Aphex Twin’sown brand of song titling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2001/oct/05/artsfeatures3>. Then there’s 
the single, 33 “GOD”, released 33 days before the album and which is 3 minutes 
and 33 seconds long – 33 was the age Jesus died. The song666 ʇ 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=96t0rlPmn2E> seems to be some sort of 
reference to Satan but what does it all mean? Vernon isn’t saying much beyond 
revealing that the album title and opening track (deep breath) 22 (OVER S∞∞N) 
came about after he was feeling a bit low – as you would, face with all those 
numerals – and sang the line “It might be over soon” into a portable sampler. 
When he chopped the sample up, it sounded like “two-two” – 22 – his favourite 
number, which signifies his dual identity. He’s subsequently said that the rest 
of the numerology “doesn’t mean anything”, but qualified that by suggesting he 
was lying, which makes 22, A Million pop’s own Rubik’s cube.


The Beatles
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fbon-iver-numerology-music-beatles-wu-tang-clan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb375e182de4cf02389f7060d01c83b707603ae2e%2F0_152_8834_5300%2F8834.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turn%20it%20up%20to%2011%20(or%20maybe%20666)%3A%20when%20numerology%20and%20rock%20collide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fbon-iver-numerology-music-beatles-wu-tang-clan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turn%20it%20up%20to%2011%20%28or%20maybe%20666%29%3A%20when%20numerology%20and%20rock%20collide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fbon-iver-numerology-music-beatles-wu-tang-clan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb375e182de4cf02389f7060d01c83b707603ae2e%2F0_152_8834_5300%2F8834.jpg>
 Nine Days A Week: The Beatles Photograph: Copyright Apple Corps 
The Beatles <https://www.theguardian.com/music/thebeatles> song Revolution 9 
and John Lennon’s 1974 solo hit #9 Dream are pretty well known, but this is 
only the tip of the iceberg of the Fabs’ and in particular their late 
guitarist’s obsession with the number 9. Lennon was born on the 9 October 
(1940) and lived at 9 Newcastle Road, Wavertree, Liverpool (three names 
containing nine letters, you’ll note). There, he penned One After 909 and would 
catch the number 72 (7+2=9) bus to art school. “The number follows me around,” 
Lennon once explained, and it certainly does seem a bit spooky that musical 
partner Paul McCartney’s surname had nine letters and that the Beatles 
themselves lasted for nine years. Other instances of Beatle-related nines are 
too numerous to mention, but significantly, Lennon was shot dead in Manhattan 
(a name with nine letters) on 8 December 1980. The weirdness would end there, 
except time zone differences meant that in his birthplace Liverpool the date 
was the 9th. True to Lennon’s #9 dreams, the surviving Beatles released their 
digital remasters on 9 September 2009 – 09-09-09.


The Wu-Tang Clan
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHnOZea4Zgbc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHnOZea4Zgbc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHnOZea4Zgbc&media=>
Numerology features regularly in hip-hop too, but few acts are quite as nuts 
about numbers as the Wu. Their classic debut, Enter The Wu-Tang (36 Chambers) – 
an invitation into the mystical lair of a mythological clan of musical 
visionaries, the Shaolin – was released on 9 November 1993. This means it has 
the extremely powerful “master 33 numerology” (the date 11/9/1993 breaks down 
as 1+ 1+ 9+1+9+9+3 = 33). However, the RZA once explained that they were 
actually most fascinated with the number eight. The original Clan consisted of 
eight members; they called one album 8 Diagrams and another (Wu Tang Forever) 
featured thenumber prominently on its sleeve 
<https://wordsfromthewu.wordpress.com/tag/numerology/>. Last year, they 
unveiled a figure 8de résistance when a sole copy of an album titled Once Upon 
A Time In Shaolin was auctioned on a website Paddle8site for several million 
dollars on the condition that the wealthy buyer didn’t make the music 
commercially available for 88 years.


Mozart and Bach

Magic numbers: composers and their clandestine codes | Tom Service
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2010/jul/01/composers-clandestine-codes-plato>
Pop’s fascination with numbers stretches from pop balladeer Adele 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adele> (whose three albums, 17, 21 and 25, 
are all titled after her age when she recorded them) to New Yorkshire 
math-rockers¡Forward, Russia! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2006/may/12/popandrock.shopping5>, whose 
singles had numerical titles. However, musicians have been crafting clandestine 
numerical codes for usmere mortals to decipher for centuries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2010/jul/01/composers-clandestine-codes-plato>
, and the practice was particularly rife among the great classical composers. 
Mozart, for example, was such a numerologist that he even used secret numerical 
codes in letters to his wife, and was another big fan of the number 3. (He was 
a freemason for his final seven years, and the figure is significant in Masonic 
practice.) Not to be outnumbered, Bach’s family name spells outa sequence of 
musical notes <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BACH_motif>: B flat, A, C, H [in 
German musical nomenclature, the note B natural is written as H]. Replacing 
each letter with its corresponding number in the alphabet, his name also 
translates as 2+1+3+8: his life and work are littered with the number 14. We’d 
love to ask him about this, but sadly his number came up in 1750.


Led Zeppelin and Marilyn Manson
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjtN8oBjMr_E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjtN8oBjMr_E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjtN8oBjMr_E&media=>
There’s probably no deep and meaningful significance to the oft-quoted 
cinematic joke that Spinal Tap’s amps “go up to 11”, but in real life hard rock 
has a lot of number nuts, and some edge towards the dark terrain of occult 
symbolism. Led Zeppelin’s first four albums were each known by a number, and 
Led Zeppelin IV depicted the band members as four symbols chosen from what 
Aleister Crowley devotee Jimmy Page called “standard occult works 
<https://mysterioustimes.wordpress.com/2013/12/03/the-occult-symbolism-of-led-zeppelin/]>
” (his was a mysterious “ZoSo” squiggle). More recently, there’s “Antichrist 
Superstar” Marilyn Manson, whose favourite number – 15 – is also the 15th sign 
of the Tarot, the devil’s card, and who was born (as the rather less 
Satanic-sounding Brian Warner) on January 5 (1-5) 1969 (1-5). The God of Fuck’s 
obsession with the number 15 peaked when 1998 album Mechanical Animals 
contained 15 tracks, spelled his name Mar1lyn Man5on and was released on the 15 
September. Previously, the dark lord had found salvation in another number: 
three. His 1996 record AntiChrist Superstar, the first of a three album 
triptych, divided into three cycles and charted at – but what – number three.

 