
Not too many people go on holiday hoping for bad weather. Here I’m surrounded 
by them. We’re at yet another gas station, somewhere in southern Oklahoma. The 
sun is shining obstinately; it’s another beautiful day, apart from a distant, 
unremarkable line of cumulus congestus, the type you’d see on many a summer’s 
day in the UK. It was our second day stormchasing and I couldn’t fathom why 
Roger, our tour leader and a well known figure on the chase circuit, was so 
fired up by these innocuous-looking piles of fluff. I was soon to learn why. 
While we do see them in Blighty, here on the US Great Plains, a tower of 
cumulus can spawn a monster. And we were about to see its teeth close up.

In the stuffy old Reader’s Digest compendium my grandad gave to me, the most 
worn of the pages are the ones about the weather. In particular, one with a 
photo of the elephant’s trunk of a tornado snaking outlandishly across the 
Great Plains. From the first time I saw that old black-and-white photo I wanted 
to see a tornado.

And now I’m here in Oklahoma. The previous day I’d seen a handsome “supercell” 
thunderstorm spawn some huge hail, but no tornado – and my expectations were 
low. I knew enough about them to know they were rare. “If I see a tornado,” I 
said that day, “I’ll wear my underpants on my head.” So, we waited in the 
service station while the team – seasoned chasersRoger Hill 
<http://www.silverliningtours.com/about-us/our-team/roger-hill/>, Mike Doyle 
<http://www.collectorsweekly.com/stories/54835-16th-annual-rohde-ranch-insulator-roundu>
,Bill Rhode <http://www.silverliningtours.com/about-us/our-team/bill-rhode/>, 
Ryan Shepherd <http://www.silverliningtours.com/about-us/our-team/ryan-shepard/>
and weather forecasterJustin Noonan 
<http://www.silverliningtours.com/about-us/our-team/justin-noonan/> from 
Brisbane, keenly studied the doppler radar models in the van.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a2df0442e9410062cc262ef8b4af01f071a8d8d%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twister%20tales%3A%20stormchasing%20in%20Tornado%20Alley%2C%20Oklahoma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twister%20tales%3A%20stormchasing%20in%20Tornado%20Alley%2C%20Oklahoma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a2df0442e9410062cc262ef8b4af01f071a8d8d%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Forecast bad = good … stormchasers check weather details on a laptop 
Of course, I was wrong about those clouds. To our west those harmless-looking 
ice-cream scoops had smashed into the stratosphere and spread into a gigantic 
anvil. And now it advanced in our direction like the gaping maw of a whale, 
blocking out the sun. The storm was brewing.

We head toward it. Roger gathers the troops and we all pile into the vans, 
heading west on Highway 29. Above us, a low, bullet-grey roof of cloud. In the 
distance, a distinct, localised lowering of the cloud base. Promising. Over the 
CB radio fitted to each van, Roger’s giving us updates on the growing chaos. 
“This storm’s developing a huge hook,” his models are telling him – as we can 
see from our own laptop in the front. “We’re gonna have a freakshow coming up 
here real soon,” says Roger.

We turn left on to a side road going south – perfect positioning to watch the 
storm pass us. That cloud is still lowering to the west – a classic wall cloud. 
We stalk further south, every eye searching west for gaps in the trees to the 
horizon. Nothing doing. A few of us take our eye off the ball, losing interest, 
fiddling with cameras.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b2b1ac2902bb2807b58653442df0c275d2a531%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twister%20tales%3A%20stormchasing%20in%20Tornado%20Alley%2C%20Oklahoma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twister%20tales%3A%20stormchasing%20in%20Tornado%20Alley%2C%20Oklahoma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b2b1ac2902bb2807b58653442df0c275d2a531%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Cloudy with a chance of … mammatus cloud formations, southern Oklahoma. 
“Tornado at three o’clock!” I turn once more to the west and as a gap in the 
trees finally opens up, I can scarcely believe what I am seeing. Touchdown! The 
wall cloud has dropped a wide cone and there is debris being kicked up on the 
ground. At first it looks like an immense kettle has been left on as moisture 
and debris is siphoned into the thunderstorm above. I need to get out and see 
this urgently. We head up a long rise to gain a better view and as we crest the 
modest hill we leap from the vans to watch the boiling cone split into six 
vortices, all spinning round the central vortex like witches dancing round a 
cauldron. And it’s coming this way.

Roger’s giving us updates on the growing chaos. 'We’re gonna have a freakshow 
coming up here real soon,' he shouts

As it advances, the wall cloud around the snaking funnel develops into a 
rotating upturned crown of dirty cloud, a boiling mass that seems to have a 
life of its own. At first gunmetal grey with the sun behind it, the macabre 
maypole dance has now morphed into a wobbly funnel. Now it tightens into a 
pirouette – the classic elephant trunk, now light grey against the darkening 
plains. Less than a mile away now. Which way is this thing going? Roger decides 
it’s time to move. “Let’s go. We gotta get south of this thing.” But as we 
scramble the vans it becomes clear that we haven’t time. “We’ll never make it,” 
says Roger over the PA. “Turn the vans round so we’re ready to head north if 
this thing turns.”

We’re stuck in the van looking at this thing coming at us. It could be risky 
outside, but I can’t make do with witnessing something I’ve waited all my life 
to see through raindrops and safety glass. I slide open the door and watch over 
the roof of the van. It’s getting closer, but I’m too transfixed to move. Now 
Roger and the crew are out too; I take that as a sign of safety. It looks as 
though it will pass south of us. It’s been steadily moving east and looks like 
continuing that way. We watch in awe as the rotating wall cloud, now above us 
like a huge spaceship, sucks in air around us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3625cb7ea002ed318cf725e83318ee2dda91f82f%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twister%20tales%3A%20stormchasing%20in%20Tornado%20Alley%2C%20Oklahoma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twister%20tales%3A%20stormchasing%20in%20Tornado%20Alley%2C%20Oklahoma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3625cb7ea002ed318cf725e83318ee2dda91f82f%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 There she blows … the storm captured from Dave Hall’s vehicle 
“Ow!” I hear someone say. Then a golfball lands on the grass in front of me. 
And another. Hail. Another hits the camera. Yet nobody takes cover, they are 
transfixed as the huge fat finger scores a line through crops and trees, now a 
beautiful solid funnel from ground to cloud … as it finally crosses the road 
perhaps a quarter of a mile away.

The noise it makes is strangely familiar, like a large waterfall. We step away 
from the power lines as the tornado sends great waves towards us, whipping the 
wires off their poles. Suddenly, the funnel seems blacker and grainier; 
something has been picked up. There’s a collective gasp as pieces of something 
wooden are whipped into the air. A roof comes off a barn seemingly at a safe 
distance from the funnel but it, too, is sucked into the cloud. Finally, it 
marches into the east, a beige grey trunk that begins to slim down into a long 
translucent tentacle. We clamber back in the vans, all of us dumbstruck. “I’ve 
seen over 700 tornadoes,” Roger says over the CB, “and on a scale of one to 10, 
that was about a 9.8.”

We head east following the storm’s progress on radar and radio. The local 
station is providing a running commentary. As we head toward the village of 
Sulphur, all hell breaks loose on the airwaves. Not another one? Half a dozen 
smartphones go off. There’s an emergency alert coming through: “There is a 
tornado warning in this area till 4.30pm CDT. Take shelter now.” The local 
radio has a crew on the ground. Suddenly they are saying there is anEF4, 
possibly an EF5 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enhanced_Fujita_scale>on the 
ground, moving east. It may go just north of Sulphur. “My God,” says Roger, 
“there it is. To the north, a massive wedge.”

That day was a particularly eventful outbreak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/10/oklahoma-tornado-kill-two-people-ohio-tennessee-texas>
, spawning 23 tornadoes across the state. Not every day is like that. Overall, 
we did well to get four chase days out of eight, and only one of those produced 
tornadoes, but boy, was it worth it. The other three days produced wonderful 
electrical storms, glorious structure and, if you’ve never heard the sound of a 
billion pieces of softball-size hail being churned 30,000 feet above you, let 
me tell you it is weird. But unlike the movie Twister, not every day is Tornado 
Central. So it helps if you’re also interested in severe weather generally. A 
tornado is just the icing on the cake. “Storm chasing is, simply put, ‘mobile’ 
storm observing”, says Dan Robinson ofStormhighway 
<http://stormhighway.com/chasingfaq.php#3>. “It is a ‘weather safari’ with the 
intent to see and photograph natural phenomena.” May is the best month to go, 
but you can also encounter severe storms in April, June and autumn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99781b3b8901044dbf682b8207ecb589042f999b%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twister%20tales%3A%20stormchasing%20in%20Tornado%20Alley%2C%20Oklahoma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twister%20tales%3A%20stormchasing%20in%20Tornado%20Alley%2C%20Oklahoma&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Ftwister-tales-stormchasing-oklahoma-tornado-alley-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99781b3b8901044dbf682b8207ecb589042f999b%2F0_259_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Stormchaser and tour guide Bill Rhode in habitual pose in front of the 
Oklahoma tornado. 
So who goes stormchasing? All sorts. <http://stormhighway.com/cdb/> Some 
people are weather experts and photographers – and they are essential as 
guides. Indeed, the more you know, the more you’ll get out of it. You’ll learn 
about the anatomy of a thunderstorm – about drylines, rear flank downdrafts and 
mesos. But you don’t have to be an expert, or some sort of extreme sports nut. 
On our tour there were a pair of retired Australian twins, a gap-year 
traveller, a photographer, a window cleaner and a pub landlord – and that was 
just in our van.

As we head toward the village of Sulphur, all hell breaks loose on the 
airwaves. Not another one?

Prepare to spend much of your time in Tornado Alley (anywhere on the US Great 
Plains from south Texas up to Nebraska) driving – as much as 500 miles in a day 
– and waiting at gas stations. I loved all of this, though. You’ll make 
wonderful new friends. The food … well, the food is a bit meh. At any one time 
you may be 200 miles from a salad. But the accommodation was better than I 
expected. You’ll probably stay in decent two-star accommodation – perfectly 
comfortable with all mod cons, and it’s included in the price. Early in the 
season you might be based in Oklahoma City, later on in Denver, with impromptu 
stops in towns such as Abilene, Texas – wherever the wind blows you.

Is it safe? In short, yes. Safer than skydiving, whitewater rafting and 
climbing. As Dan Robinson says: “It’s about seeing the lions in their habitat, 
not getting into their dens.” And stormchasers respect that people do get hurt 
in these storms. But we are interested in the spectacle itself, which is ruined 
when there’s harm done.


As a hobby, it isn’t cheap – at least in Tornado Alley – mainly because of the 
amount of travelling you do. A week on the plains with accommodation and fuel 
might cost £1,000, and professional chase outfits such as the one we went with 
charge $2,000-$3,000 a trip. We paid our fees in instalments over a year. But I 
think it’s worth it. Nobody I spoke to on our tour, or the previous one, which 
was much less successful in terms of intercepts, regretted a moment. Fingers 
crossed for bad weather …

• The writer travelled on the T3: The Great Plains Cyclone Tour with Silver 
Lining Tours <http://www.silverliningtours.com/>, which offers a range of 
multi-day tours, including accommodation, from $2,500
 