
3.57am BST 

Good night, Baltimore!

We're about to sign off now. What a day! Baltimore, you've excelled yourself, 
and your people have been amazing hosts. We're thinking about return visits 
already. Also we've barely scrapped the surface of the nightlife. Matthew and 
Lane, the owners of WC Harlan, have just come down. They've been following our 
journey through their city. "You should stay out late," says John, "we could 
take you to places that are really weird." Oh, the temptation.

Late nights and early mornings in Baltimore must really be something. But 
we're heading off to Philly tomorrow (keep those tips coming), so we need to 
hit the road early. (Must. Show. Restraint.) We're going to finish these 
cocktails – which are delicious – then head back to Hotel Brexton to crash out. 
Night all. Thanks for your tips!

Updated at 3.57am BST

3.52am BST 

John, the guy behind the twitter account <https://twitter.com/bad_decisions> 
for the barBad Decisions 
<http://www.makeabaddecision.com/Bad_Decisions/Home.html> in Fell's Point, has 
come to join us, too. He bought his bar in 2008, just before the economy 
tanked, so it's been a tough ride to the top, but it's well established now as 
one of the bars to go to in Baltimore – for tourists and locals. Just wish we 
had more time. 

3.49am BST 

'A love letter to Baltimore'

This rush to take in a long day in Baltimore is making everyone wistful … and 
Guardian editors are notoriously nostalgic for a certain HBO drama alluded to 
many times today. What could be more appropriate, therefore, as we slowly recap 
the day, than to hear David Simon, Bunk, Prop Joe and Bubs wax affectionate for 
Baltimore?

And for those who haven't yet seen the show, don't fear for any spoilers – 
it's just a bunch of proud professionals describing the city as they see it.

3.35am BST 

WC Harlan

One of the people who have kindly left tips for us is the owner of WC Harlan 
<https://id.theguardian.com/profile/albinopines/public> bar in Remington 
(Hampden and 23rd). He suggested we come down and check it out, so here we are. 

We never would have found it without that tip. It's a word-of-mouth joint 
that opened at the beginning of the year. It's hidden behind a nondescript 
black door on a residential street and has an old speakeasy vibe, lit by 
candles, with jazz music in the background. Cocktails are the speciality. We're 
about to check out the menu. 

Updated at 3.39am BST

3.29am BST 

Vicky's all too right – you can't do everything, especially in a city as 
packed full of diversity as Baltimore. Even their aquarium, named the National 
one <http://www.aqua.org/>alongside its smaller counterpart in Washington DC. 
It has five whole floors of exhibits, including a massive recreation of a coral 
reef and another of a kelp forest. It has aring of sharks 
<http://www.aqua.org/explore/baltimore/exhibits-experiences/shark-alley>, a 
freshwater crocodile <http://www.aqua.org/explore/animals#location=.l01>, and 
hundreds and hundreds of jellyfish 
<http://www.aqua.org/explore/baltimore/exhibits-experiences/jellies-invasion>, 
which, as we've recently been told, aretaking over the world 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2013/sep/26/jellyfish-theyre-taking-over/?pagination=false>
. 

To stave off any fears of jellyfish invasions, you can watch the aquarium's 
peaceful live feed far from its inhabitants' tentacles and teeth.

3.12am BST 

Hampden

Hampden is a lovely neighbourhood. Lots of little low-rise houses with wooden 
front porches. We passed the famousCafe Hon <http://cafehon.com/> – with a 
giant flamingo on its front - andCommon Ground cafe 
<http://www.commongroundsny.com/>, which were both tipped. You can't do 
everything. Shopping must be good round here during the day, with boutiques 
lining 36th Street – the main road. 

2.56am BST 

Aisha (@aishamk <https://twitter.com/AishaMK>), who recommended this place via 
Twitter, has called in to join us for ice cream. She's a photographer and went 
to Mica art school. Originally from DC, she has been in Baltimore since 2006. I 
ask her why she's stayed. Meg interrupts, "Er, why wouldn't she?" Fair point. 
Reminds me of the John Waters quote we started the day with.

Editor's addendum: below the line, TheGribbler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2878648> quotes – what else – 
The Wire <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i6EpfCzdMoY>, to that same point: "Why 
would anyone want to leave Baltimore, man, that's what I'm asking?" 

Updated at 2.57am BST

2.41am BST 

And as if that wasn't enough, the spoons here change colour. Watch this. 

2.33am BST 

Ice cream

Dessert time! We made it to the Charmery in Hampden. It opened around three 
months ago. The whole place smells of waffle cones – they make them on site. We 
just tried a spoonful of every flavour going. Most of them shouldn't work, but 
they do. Old Bay caramel is my favourite (a scoop of pure Baltimore), but 
there's also red licorice, baklavah, Berger cookie and cream (the local cookie 
that tipsters have mentioned) and pickle. Yes, pickle. And it's good. Really, 
it is. 

Updated at 2.34am BST

2.14am BST 

We're saying bye to the Woodberry now. On the way out, we come across a fire 
pit outside. A nice smell of bonfire in the early autumn air. It's still just 
about warm enough for outdoor dining. 

1.57am BST 

Yesterday at the Visionary Art Museum <http://www.avam.org/> I learnt of an 
unlikely connection between the famous Baltimore drag queenDivine 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divine_(performer)> and a recent British prime 
minister. Beneath a giant sculpture of Divine was the story of how she 
co-founded the Alternative Miss World contest with British artistAndrew Logan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrew_Logan>. When the original Miss World 
contest took legal action in the 70s, Logan and Co called on a young British 
lawyer to put their case together. They won. His name?Mr Tony Blair 
<http://www.avam.org/our-visionaries/andrew-logan.shtml>. 

1.50am BST 

Kylie studied in Washington DC for a semester and is now kicking herself for 
not making that 30-minute train journey before. Half an hour that's all it 
takes to get to Baltimore. The Bolt Bus <https://www.boltbus.com/>, like the 
Megabus <http://us.megabus.com/>, is also a really cheap way to get here from 
New York, taking around four hours. 

1.40am BST 

Speaking of architecture, LindaR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4185899> has suggested below 
the line two architectural oddities that there isn't nearly enough time for 
Vicky to see. Thus, the condensed Wiki of her tips

The Pagoda of Patterson Park 
<http://pattersonpark.com/places-in-the-park/pagoda/>: on a hill that was key 
to defending Baltimore from the British in1812 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/War_of_1812> – during a war that otherwise didn't 
go so well <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burning_of_Washington>for the young US 
– an architect was commissioned to build the city an observation tower. 
Ironically, he chose to follow all the latest British fads of the moment 
(1891), and chose to build the tower, seeing that his Victorian peers overseas 
were fascinated by Asian art. Thus: a pagoda in Baltimore, and an unclear 
verdict as to who won Hampstead Hill (yes, even the name).

Our other incongruous structure of the Baltimore skyline is the Druid Hill 
Conservatory <http://www.rawlingsconservatory.org/>, which, like any good 
preserve for flora built in the 19th century, has rooms for orchids, palms and 
cacti – and also hosts events such as "The Drunken Botanist 
<http://www.rawlingsconservatory.org/the-drunken-botanist/>", in which an 
author will discuss "the dizzying array of plants that humans have, through 
ingenuity, inspiration, and sheer desperation, contrived to transform into 
alcohol."
 Howard Peter Rawlings Conservatory. Photograph: /Wiki 
Updated at 3.15am BST

1.28am BST 

Architectonic Baltimore

Meg is still with us. She knows everyone, and the city inside out. She's a 
12th generation Baltimorean. She is doing a lecture soon about why Baltimore is 
more than The Wire and she's eager for people to get to know other sides of the 
city. She is also on the board for the Baltimore architecture foundation and so 
has been pointing out some incredible buildings. The architecture here has 
really impressed us all. Meg says she loves it because it has it all, from 
classic Georgian to beaux art to brutalist. And the row houses, of 
course, which are so uniquely Baltimore. 

Updated at 1.35am BST

1.13am BST 

We're balancing out the soup with some kale salad and green beans, so we don't 
feel too guilty. 

However, we have just had a great ice-cream tip. We're hoping it's still open 
when we're done. 

Updated at 1.14am BST

1.02am BST 

Greta: "Watching the Woodberry Kitchen's chefs is like watching a 
choreographed dance."

Updated at 1.13am BST

12.54am BST 

Woodberry Kitchen

It's pretty swish here. Huge, high ceiling. Lots of exposed brick and iron. 
Out back there are stacks of crates full of organic produce, and the menu lists 
all the farmers they work with. We've started with an oyster stew ($12) – it's 
essentially a cream and butter soup with oysters at the bottom. It's amazing. 

Updated at 1.17am BST

12.45am BST 

Woodberry

Woodberry is a neighbourhood in the north-central part of Baltimore, still 
within the city limits but quite a way from the Inner Harbour area where most 
tourists stay. It was a surprisingly green drive up here. There are converted 
mill buildings along the Jones Falls river. Many were abandoned until recently 
and one has become the Woodberry Kitchen, which is renowned for its 
farm-to-plate philosophy. 

Updated at 1.17am BST

12.26am BST 

Reader's guide to an evening in Charm City

Vicky and the team have tentatively decided on Woodberry Kitchen 
<http://www.woodberrykitchen.com/> for dinner and WC Harlan 
<http://www.yelp.com/biz/wc-harlan-baltimore> for a drink (per albinopines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317949>, among others), but 
not for lack of reader tips for meals and beverages.

Bertha's Mussels <http://www.berthas.com/>, back in Fell's Point, was 
recommended by 50states1day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12223034> for its "piece de 
resistance", its "Pelican Shrimp … honestly the best shrimp I've ever eaten".

Over at Witness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc>, 
meanwhile theinbetweendream 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/theinbetweendream> left an epic set of 
recommendations (previously quoted in full), suggesting not just Woodberry but 
also13.5 Wine Bar <http://135winebar.com/>, The Food Market 
<http://www.thefoodmarketbaltimore.com/>, and Rocket to Venus 
<http://www.rockettovenus.com/> for "fried PB&J".

Chap's Pit BBQ <http://www.chapspitbeef.com/> comes recommended by 
KurtDaConqueror <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12321188>, who 
has apparently taken 'The Wire' food tour and memorized the bit of trivia that 
"Dee and his friends went there in season 1 after one of them was promoted in 
the Barksdale hierarchy."

Other choice tips include Bo Brooks <http://www.bobrooks.coma>for crabs (what 
else), Holy Frijoles for $2 tacos (per @AishaMK <https://twitter.com/AishaMK>) 
and The Helmland <http://www.helmand.com/> for Afghan food, per ustr2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4215901> – and the unverified 
bit of trivia that its owner is Hamid Karzai's brother, per Luckychips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3810497>.

And finally, @Judio12 <https://twitter.com/Judio12>, @martindonnelly 
<https://twitter.com/martindonnelly> and AlexBoh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2928937> cut to the chase and 
demand that Vicky try Natty Boh, akaNatural Bohemian 
<http://nationalbohemian.com/agegate/?backto=/&loopval=1>, Baltimore's proud 
local beer.

12.05am BST 

Today we've been hopping in and out of cars to save time, but yesterday I had 
chance to take theCharm City Circulator <http://www.charmcitycirculator.com/>, 
which is a free bus service. Yes, completely free. It launched in 2010 as an 
eco initiative to encourage people not to be so reliant on their cars. There 
are a few lines across town and they come every 10 minutes. Boris, can we get 
one of these in London, please? As if.

11.55pm BST 

Foreshadowing …

11.46pm BST 

Some street art from the Station North neighbourhood, aka Charles North. It's 
another area undergoing revitalisation. 

There are murals on the floor too.

11.31pm BST 

Charles Village

Updated at 11.32pm BST

11.19pm BST 

The Painted Ladies of Baltimore

We've lucked out Meg is joining us and she has a car. That means we can get 
round more of your tips, in less time, we hope. A couple of minutes from the 
diner is the Charles Village area, which is known for its colourfully painted 
houses, nicknamed the painted ladies. We're going to do a bit of neighbourhood 
hopping round here. 

11.08pm BST 

This is not a recommendation to walk through Baltimore discalced 
<http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/discalced> – just a grateful anthem 
forxpix <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27270952> below 
the line.

Updated at 11.10pm BST

10.58pm BST 

Just a reminder that our next stop is Philadelphia. We're heading there 
tomorrow, via … we don't know where. Anyone got tips on which route to take, 
where to stop and what to see when we get there? We haven't got a place to stay 
yet either so need to get moving on making a reservation. Know a good hotel or 
B&B? Not too expensive, but with plenty of character.
 Recharging 
Updated at 11.02pm BST

10.48pm BST 

We've had a surprise visitor. I went to the bathroom and came back to find a 
lady sitting down at our table with Greta. It turns out it's one of our 
commenters, Meg Fairfax Fielding (aka blogger@pigtowndesign 
<https://twitter.com/PigtownDesign>), who has popped by to join us! She saw we 
were in the Paper Moon Diner and, seeing as she lives just round the corner, 
thought she'd swing by and say hi. That's the beauty of live-blogging, folks.

Updated at 12.05am BST

10.33pm BST 

Oh and there is a massive display of Pez dispensers again. I swear I haven't 
seen these things since the 80s and now that is the second display in as many 
days. What's with the Pez obsession, Baltimore? 

Updated at 10.38pm BST

10.18pm BST 

Just your average, ho-hum mannequin garden …

… run by Mike, manager of this wacky, nutty cafe.

10.07pm BST 

Paper Moon

The Paper Moon Diner <http://papermoondiner24.com/> is an explosion of colour 
that appears from nowhere after driving past the campus of theMica art school 
<http://www.mica.edu/>. It's brightly painted on the outside, and the garden is 
filled with all manner of oddities: a mannequin with a headdress made of 
spoons, a cow with five-inch eyelashes, a yellow bath tub filled with plants. 
Inside is like a bizarre toy store, with dolls and toy cars hanging from the 
ceiling.

9.52pm BST 

Bal'more tuneage

While the team is taking a moment to recoup, another playlist, this one with 
special thanks to @artbaretta <https://twitter.com/artbaretta> – tell us songs 
and we'll add 'em to the next one!

9.29pm BST 

We need a recharge – both us and our phone batteries. We're heading to Paper 
Moon Diner, as recommended in the comments below 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27259779>, for coffee. 
We're catching a taxi ride with Willy, a former gangster, so he says. Now he's 
in his early 70s, although that's hard to believe, and he wants to talk to us 
about the Karsdashians and America's Next Top Model. 

Updated at 9.33pm BST

9.14pm BST 

No poetaster

The Poe trivia, rumours and editorial corrections have been bouncing around 
the blog as Vicky rambles through Baltimore – what about some creative versions 
of his work?

First up: a surreal little animation of The Tell Tale Heart from 1953, banned 
from sight for British audiences and nominated for an Oscar in the states. Not 
sure what that means, exactly, so you can judge the creepy conscience tale for 
yourself:

And because Christopher Walken cannot resist anything and everything 
unsettling, he once recorded a reading of The Raven.

Updated at 11.19pm BST

8.41pm BST 

Steamed, spiced crab, wrapped in the newspaper match report of the Ravens NFL 
game yesterday – it doesn't get more Baltimore than that. I've been 
wondering what makes crab so special here. 

We've just had an education courtesy of Damye Hahn, who is the 
great-granddaughter of the founder. Her son works here too – fifth generation 
Faidleys.
 Damye Faidley working the counter. 
Maryland steams crabs, whereas a lot of places boil them. They also use their 
famous Old Bay seasoning. The slaw here has celery seeds in, which is her a 
German grandmother's recipe. Most importantly they use lump crab here. That's 
the good stuff. It takes 40 crabs to make a 1lb can. 

Updated at 8.41pm BST

8.21pm BST 

Wow. The crab cakes deserve the hype. Fleshy and full of flavour. There are no 
seats in here. You just stand up at the counter. Over one million clams and 
oysters are served annually, according to a sign.

The staff are really friendly, too. "Did you have enough?" calls a woman from 
behind the counter with a big grin. I get the feeling they get a lot of happy 
customers here.

Updated at 8.39pm BST

8.03pm BST 

At first we couldn't find Faidley's. Only because we were saying it wrong 
(it's fade-lees). Once we got that right, people's eyes light up. "Ah, you made 
the right decision," they say.

We get chatting to a guy called Mark at the counter. He has been coming here 
since the 70s. He's ordered the lump crab cake, the speciality. As have we.

Updated at 8.40pm BST

8.00pm BST 

Actually we lied. We do do know this tune - but it's not very complimentary. 
And we're all about the positive...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dyhdh8kSM7lY&media=>
close 
Updated at 8.03pm BST

7.51pm BST 

Ronald has inspired us - and we want to sing Baltimore's praises, too.

But we don't know any Baltimore tunes.

So, we asked Pasta Primavera <http://www.pastaprima.net/‎> - a Baltimore based 
independent music blog - to come up with a playlist for us. We couldn't find a 
fishy-sounding music blog. Sorry. And we don't know any of these tunes or 
bands, either. But you might - so you can sing along. And you can send us 
requests, too, and we'll cue 'em up for you - in the comments below or to
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>.

7.44pm BST 

So, Lexington Market <http://www.lexingtonmarket.com> is pretty intense. It's 
full of life. Everyone is talking at once. Quite a contrast from where we came 
from, which was deadly quiet.

On the way into the market - which is like a big food hall- we meet Ronald. 
Slung over his shoulder is range of scents for women and men, which he's 
selling.

"Erm, is that one called pussy? And what's that other one say - Michelle 
Obama?" I ask.

"Yeah," he says, "and they smell good."

Ronald is quite a character and he's singing Baltimore's praises. "Anything 
can happen here. It's baby New York. I love my city," he says.

Updated at 12.04am BST

7.31pm BST 

Reminiscence road: @Pigtown 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27268321> recalls the time 
they tookThe Guardian US <https://www.theguardian.com/us>'s very own Steve 
Busfield <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stevebusfield‎> (editor of the 
The Wire Re-Up 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780852652213>
 blog and book) around town to make the point thatBaltimore: It's Not Just The 
Wire 
<http://www.pigtown-design.blogspot.co.uk/2013/07/baltimore-its-not-just-wire.html>
. Steve took his daughters - just to be safe! 

[That's enough Wire - ed]
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/993898> Pigtown  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/993898> 23 September 2013 6:58pm
 <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27268321> 
I took one of your Guardian colleagues on a tour de Baltimore earlier this 
summer. @Busfield wrote the book on The Wire for the Guardian.

You can read about our 24 hours in Bmore here 
<http://www.pigtown-design.blogspot.com/2013/07/baltimore-its-not-just-wire.html>
. We managed a baseball game, lunch at Lexington Market, a Wire Tour, the 
military tattoo at Fort McHenry and more. Great fun with Busfield and his girls!

Updated at 12.04am BST

7.23pm BST 

Wire reader challenge:

@TonySoprano77  <>has popped up from below with this little bit of mischief 
about The Wire...
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4769481> TonySoprano77  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4769481> 23 September 2013 
6:46pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27267965> 
The Wire quiztime! You Guardian writers better step up! This one must come out 
of your memory, so dont cheat and look it up on internet or playback the dvd.

What did the waiter say when D'angelo took the dessert off the cart for his 
girl at the restaurant in season 1?

Updated at 7.34pm BST

7.13pm BST 

OK, Baltimore - it's crab time.

We've had plenty of tips for Faidley's <http://www.faidleyscrabcakes.com> (@ 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27266227>mwcarruthers 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27266227> - again - below 
in comments, and from local newspaper man and bloggerJohn Houser III 
<http://www.rouxde.blogspot.co.uk/> in this Guardian article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/21/baltimore-food-us-road-trip>).

Wire fans: This place was a winner for McNulty, too. He brought a crab cake 
delivery for his nightshift colleagues.

"Faidleys? You alright McNulty," said Kima. We're heading to Lexington market.

Updated at 7.18pm BST

7.02pm BST 
 American Visionary Art Museum, Baltimore, with Cosmic Galaxy Egg by Andrew 
Logan. Photograph: Massimo Borchi/Atlantide Phototravel/Corbis 
We've had multiple recommendations for the American Visionary Arts Museum 
<http://www.avam.org> (thanks hellsbadger 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27157104> and mwcarruthers 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27145202>among others)and 
we really wanted to go. But it's closed on Mondays. GAH!

Yet the plan wasn’t a complete washout. Well, at least, not for me. I arrived 
earlier than the others, so I was able to pay it a visit yesterday by myself. 
And it was extraordinary. And brilliant.And frankly every city should have a 
museum like this one.

It’s designed to celebrate the outsider and houses the work of all sorts of 
unconventional artists, including the homeless, or just people whose work would 
have otherwise been overlooked.
It’s impressive from the outset. The building is flamboyantly decorated in 
mosaics of shattered mirror and broken glass. Inside, the main hall has a quote 
by Einstein: “Imagination is more important than knowledge.” Beneath it, 
there's an array of paintings, models and carvings, all with a little panel 
explaining the artist’s story. Every one is fascinating.

Upstairs, there’s a man’s collection of over 1,000 Pez-sweet dispensers 
(remember them?) and a stegosaurus made of rubbish. There’s also an area 
dedicated to the work ofFrank Bruno  <http://www.artistfrankbruno.com>(that’s 
the apocalypse-inspired artist from Arizona, not the British boxer). I read how 
he was denied admission to art school, but later managed to sell a painting 
through gallery; how he hated dealing with art dealers and since then he’s 
vowed never to sell another piece of his work – not even to a fanbase that 
includes Johnny Depp.

So, in sum, the advice to come here was spot-on. Definitely worth seeing. Just 
don’t come on a Monday.
 American Visionary Art Museum, Baltimore. Photograph: Massimo 
Borchi/Atlantide Phototravel/Corbis 
Updated at 12.03am BST

6.37pm BST 

Poe story correction: Poe had his last drink at the Horse You Came In On on 
October 7 1849. He was found soon after, delusional, in the street outside. He 
was taken to Washington College Hospital and died soon after, at 5am

Updated at 12.03am BST

6.35pm BST 

We were told to try one if the beers by local brewery Brewers Art. Happy to 
oblige. This one is called Resurrection.
Natalie Aja (@natalieaja) 
@vickybaker <https://twitter.com/vickybaker> @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> and checkout Max's in Fells Point. Try to 
get a local brew Union, Heavy Seas or Resurrection (:#baltimore 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23baltimore&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/natalieaja/statuses/382150438227050496> September 23, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/natalieaja/statuses/382150438227050496> 
Updated at 6.36pm BST

6.24pm BST 

We're in the Horse You Came In On bar. It's an old-fashioned saloon, with 
swing doors and bar stools designed to look like horse saddles. Jack Daniels 
bottles line the walls and there's some live acoustic music, playing to a 
handful of patrons. The bar man confirms that Poe died here [er not, true 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edgar_Allan_Poe> - ed]. It was his favourite 
place and he was here all the time [probably true - ed].

Oh, and it dates back to 1775 - the only pub in Maryland open before, during 
and after the prohibition <http://www.thehorsebaltimore.com/history/>.

Updated at 7.15pm BST

6.19pm BST 

We're deliberately resisting bringing you too many Wire references too early 
in this blog, and instead refer you to a scene from one of author David Simon's 
earlier works of genius - Homicide, Life on the Street, featuring one John 
Waters, and with reference to one Edgar Allan Poe.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI9XT_I1t5aA&media=>
close 
Updated at 6.46pm BST

5.55pm BST 

So calm on the water, no sound at all but the ripple of the sail.

We're heading back to shore now.

Some tippers have mentioned Edgar Allan Poe, who lived in Baltimore and died 
here. He liked to drink in a saloon calledThe Horse You Came In On <>, 
apparently. Allegedly, he was walking home from the pub when he was found 
delirious on the streets of Baltimore, and died the next day in hospital aged 
40. There arerumours that his ghost lives on in the bar 
<http://www.baltimorestories.com/main.cfm?nid=2&tid=59>. It's here in Fells 
Point, so we're going to go and check it out.

Updated at 6.21pm BST

5.35pm BST 

5.27pm BST 

Sail's up. It's a 32ft boat with a small room and three beds - somehow. We're 
heading past all the industrial shipyards.

"Ooh, it's like series two of the Wire," I say.

"I haven't seen TV in eight years," says Alex.

Wire banter is off the cards, then. Although that would almost take us back to 
series 2, wouldn't it? .

Updated at 5.33pm BST

5.01pm BST 

So we're off on an adventure. We just met Jared and Alex in their boat, moored 
by the pier. They're planning to take it - and its Grateful Dead flag - around 
the world. They've covered 500 miles so far, from Long Island. We're jumping 
aboard and going for a sail to see Baltimore from the other side - from out on 
the water.

Updated at 5.26pm BST

4.58pm BST 

Fells Point naval history 101 (with thanks to the Pride of Baltimore website 
<http://www.pride2.org/history/1812.php>).

During the second war of independence, in 1812, American privateers, many of 
them sailing out of Chesapeake Bay in Baltimore Clippers built in Fells Point, 
captured or sank some 1,700 British merchant vessels during the two and a half 
year war.

In retaliation for the actions of the Baltimore privateers, the British 
launched the Chesapeake Campaign in 1814 for the purpose of "cleaning out that 
nest of pirates in Baltimore." Its goal - to shut down the shipyards of Fells 
Point and halt the production of the deadly Baltimore Clippers.

On their way up the Bay, the British captured and sacked Washington, DC. They 
burned the Capitol and White House. Continuing up the Bay, they sought to 
capture Baltimore by land and by sea. On September 12, 1814, Baltimore troops 
fought a two-hour battle to delay the British land forces at the Battle of 
North Point before they reached the City. Fort McHenry, at the mouth of 
Baltimore harbor, withstood a ferocious 25-hour naval bombardment on September 
12 and 13, 1814. It was during this bombardment that Maryland lawyer/poet 
Francis Scott Key, spotted "by dawn's early light" the huge "star spangled 
banner" still flying over Ft McHenry. He penned a description of the sight and 
the poem has gone down in history as "The Star Spangled Banner."

Updated at 5.00pm BST

4.46pm BST 

So we've only seen one side of Baltimore so far, but downtown is immaculate. 
Brick buildings, all perfectly kept. Fells Point square, down by the waterside, 
is full of ice-cream parlours, restaurants and pretzel stalls. But on a 
low-season Monday afternoon, there are no tourists in sight. 'A nest of 
pirates' is what the British dubbed Fells Point, back in the days when it was 
one of the most important shipbuilding centres in the nation. It's certainly 
not like that now.

4.42pm BST 

Well fed and well caffeinated, we're heading out into the surrounding streets 
of Fells Point, a lovely neighbourhood that tippers have recommended. We've 
called into the Chesapeake Souvenirs & Gifts store in the main square. We're 
talking to the owner, Sandra, who worked here for 13 years before taking it 
over. Big sellers seem to be anything crab related. Greta is buying a snow 
globe - one in every city, that's the plan.

Updated at 4.43pm BST

4.19pm BST 

This is how much better Kylie feels after a Blue Moon breakfast (#not 
celebrating Man City's victory).

4.03pm BST 

While we're waiting for updates from Vicky and Greta, we want to make it clear 
that the choice of the Blue Moon Cafe was in no way related to Man City's 
drubbing of Man Utd yesterday. Is there a blue moon over Baltimore? We couldn't 
say...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPrBb89yncJ4&media=>
close 
3.56pm BST 

Breakfast (and maple syrup) - you are in us!

French toast is served. Wow. Intense sugar rush for a Monday morning. It's 
really good - not greasy at all. I'm pretty sure it's going to beat me though. 
It's huge. The place is still buzzing, constant flow of diners, staff rushed 
off their feet. Constant filter coffee refills, though - one of the great 
things about breakfasts in the US.

We're in! We've got a table and there's a massive glass bottle of ... 
something on the table. Greta is inspecting it. It's syrup. A litre of syrup. 
This bodes well.
I've ordered the house speciality, Captain Crunch French toast. Toast fried 
and encrusted in sugary cereal, topped with fresh fruit and cream.
There's also a dish known as Sweet Baby Jesus - hash browns stacked with jumbo 
lumb crab meat, smothered in cheese, two eggs, hollandaise sauce and Maryland 
Old Bay seasoning. Phew. It's an effort just to type it, let alone eat it. 
We're passing on that one and saving our crab experience for later.

Updated at 4.17pm BST

3.38pm BST 

Bawlmor. Baldamore. Bawlmer. Better bleeve it, hon!

Nice tips sent in by @theinbetweendream on GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com>, also touching on the local accent...

You Ain't Seen Bawlmor 'til You Seen Hampden Hon! 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc/552069>

Baltimore is the home of the Hons. There is a distinct class of people here 
and a unique language known as "Bawlmorese."

If you want a truly Bawlmor experience, you'll head to Hampden, a local 
neighborhood nestled behind Johns Hopkins University. Head up 83 N from the 
Inner Harbor and exit on Falls Road. You'll make a right on 36th Street - 
affectionally known as "De Avenue Hon" and you will be dropped into a world of 
hipsters and hons. You can shop all day in antique shops, used bookstores, 
clothing and consignment shops, order up a massage, and even take in a yoga 
class.

For good eats, these are my recommendations -

Coffee and a light breakfast/lunch - Common Ground.

Brunch or Breakfast - Cafe Hon or Golden West.

Exotic but Amazing Cuisine - Corner B.Y.O.B (Yes, it's BYOB and it's cash 
only, corking fee), but ...

Take away Alcohol - Wine Source (just behind Corner BYOB, very convenient! and 
has a huge selection of wines, beer and liquor)

Fine Dining - 13.5 Wine Bar, The Food Market, or if you want to drive a bit - 
I definitely recommend Woodberry Kitchen down Union Street)

Dessert - walk to Rocket to Venus and order the fried PB&J...Delicious!

For a true Bawlmor experience, travel to The Dizz on Remington, just off the 
beaten path. You'll get one of the best burgers in town!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By theinbetweendream <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/theinbetweendream> 

20 September 2013, 0:26 

The accent, apparently, takes some getting used to, as touched upon - 
none-too-sensitively, it has to be said - by Baltimore sportswriter and 
novelist Frank Deford in theSmithsonian magazine 
<http://www.smithsonianmag.com/travel/bleeve_it.html>:

Baltimoreans talked funny, a horribly grating nasal accent, sort of lispy, 
somehow produced because it was here where the harsh Bronx tones from the North 
crashed head-on into the softer hillbilly lilt moving up from the hollows of 
the Alleghenies. All sorts of dictionaries have been written, trying to capture 
the accent and its spelling. Here is a sampling:Bawlmer, air hametown, is in 
the state of Merlin, which is bounded onna ees by the Lanick Ayshun and onna 
souf by air Merkin capital, Warshnin, Deecee. You better bleeve it, hon.

Deford goes some way to digging himself out of the hole by paying this 
somewhat backhanded compliment to his home town:

The three best-known Baltimore writers contemporaneous with me are the 
novelist Anne Tyler and the film director-screenwriters Barry Levinson and John 
Waters. Tyler and Waters concentrate their work virtually exclusively on 
Baltimore; Levinson, mostly so. (The best Bawlmer accent ever realized by an 
outsider was by Danny DeVito in Levinson's Tin Men.) The devotion to things 
Baltimore by these storytellers best illustrates, I think, what a singular and 
vivid place it is. Baltimore has character and nuance, and although I may not 
have written about it all that much myself, I know that even though I left 
there many years ago, Baltimore put its stamp on me in ways I'm not so sure 
other more standard-issue cities could impress on their expatriates.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuJF--0xbjmQ&media=>
close 
Updated at 3.47pm BST

3.13pm BST 

We made it to the Blue Moon Cafe  <>in Fells Point. It's very cute. A 
blue-and-purple, ivy-covered, end-of-terrace building. And there's a queue - 
even on a Monday. Our Russian taxi driver told us it was popular. We've put our 
names down and we're waiting on the pavement for a table.

3.07pm BST 

We've just been to the Peabody Institute <http://www.peabody.jhu.edu/> at 
Mount Vernon Place to try and get a look at its incredible library. Our luck 
was out as someone has hired it to film a commercial, but we had a little peak 
in the reception at its ornate spiral staircase.
 George Peabody Library, Baltimore. Photograph: Jacob Kepler 
Updated at 3.10pm BST

2.26pm BST 

Before breakfast, we're taking a wander around the neighbourhood, Mount Vernon 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mount_Vernon,_Baltimore>. It's full of stunning, 
historical buildings. At its centre is the Washington Monument, which predates 
the more famous one in DC, which was built by the same guy,Robert Mills 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Mills_%28architect%29>. George is looking 
almost like a roman emperor at the top there.

2.18pm BST 

For breakfast, we’re going to follow up on a tip that came through Twitter from
@suziexlee <https://twitter.com/suziexlee/status/380687845989814272> for the 
Blue Moon Cafe <>.
I’ve taken a look at the website, and it seems to be a local favourite. The 
main photo also makes it look as though the owner - Conceptionista Sarah 
Simington - might read your tarot cards or discuss horoscopes while you eat 
your pancakes. Intriguing.
Have you got a better suggestion for breakfast? We’re going to need a good 
joint tomorrow, too, before heading onward to Philly, so get in touch.

We’ve heard that Michel Phelps, who grew up on the outskirts of Baltimore, has 
been known to fuel up at Pete’s Grille andwe all know about his breakfasts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2008/aug/13/michaelphelpsreallybigbrea>
. Is that worth a look? Or anywhere else? We may need a breakfast of champions 
ourselves, as we have a lot of driving ahead of us in these next few days.
Suzie Lee (@suziexlee) 
@guardian <https://twitter.com/guardian> @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> Blue Moon Cafe in Baltimore is a hole in 
the wall with infamous Captain Crunch French Toast!
 <https://twitter.com/suziexlee/statuses/380687845989814272> September 19, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/suziexlee/statuses/380687845989814272> 
2.16pm BST 

So, this is us – the first all-female Guardian road trip.

That’s me on the left. I’ve been working on all the other TwiTrips from the 
other end, on the Guardian travel desk, putting the other writers through their 
paces, watching the editor crack his whip. I’m not yet sure if this trip is my 
reward or my comeuppance.

There’s Greta <http://www.gretarybus.com>, our photographer, in the middle. 
Originally from Idaho, she went to college in Montana, but now lives in Maine. 
Later in the week, we’re hoping to swing by her current hometown, Portland, 
which she says has lots of cool hotspots - if you know where to look. Also, 
Greta arrived in town last night just before midnight after attending a 
friend’s wedding, so we’ll be getting her an extra-large coffee to start the 
day.

And, finally, on the right is Kylie <>, who usually works as a TV producer and 
has just arrived from a shoot in Mexico after a 48-hour journey (so will also 
need a strong coffee). On this trip, she will be taking charge of the driving 
and navigation, as Greta and I blog and post photos. Can anyone hazard a guess 
as to where Kylie is from? I’ll give you a clue: she grew up on a farm where 
her family had a pet kangaroo.

1.42pm BST 

This is the sixth and final live roadtrip in the series, and I’ll do a proper 
introduction of our team shortly.

The story so far: we grouped together last night at the Brexton Hotel 
<http://www.brextonhotel.com/> in Mount Vernon. This historic neighbourhood was 
tipped by a few people in our comments section (thanksoriginalversion 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27167368>), and also our 
local experts in last week’s travel Q&A 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27110072>.
It’s a beautiful red-brick building, built in the late 1800s and with interior 
spiral staircases leading to turrets on the top. It was the adolescent home of 
Wallis Simpson andfell into complete disrepair 
<http://www2.citypaper.com/news/story.asp?id=3021>, laying empty as a 
“crumbling pigeon coop”, until an ambitious 2010 makeover. A room now cost 
around $130 (£80) a night, which seems like a good deal having surveyed some of 
the other hotels in the city, including the few B&Bs (fully booked) and the 
pricey, big chain properties down by the regenerated harbour.
All in all, the Hotel Brexton is a decent base and well located, but the 
downside is the breakfast: hidden in a basement room, with coffee coming from a 
canteen-style machine. So, we’re going to skip that today and head out into the 
city. Any recommendations for a good breakfast, Baltimore-style?

Updated at 2.05pm BST

12.00pm BST 

Waking up in Baltimore

“Good morning, Baaal-ti-more!” If you’re hearing that in a singsong voice, it 
may be because you’ve seen the musical Hairspray, famously set here. Tracy 
Turnball’s opening number is a warts-and-all love song to her hometown, 
namechecking the good points, as well as the neighbourhood rats and the 
“flasher next door”. They’ll be none of those on this trip, I hope, but those 
lyrics do say something about the city’s fairly gritty reputation. Apparently, 
some show called The Wire was set here too. Never heard of it.*
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFjjWJEeVpBw&media=>
close 
From what I’ve read about Baltimore, it seems like a down-to-earth and 
self-aware sort of place. Also things are moving on fast. There are 
regeneration stories aplenty, and I’ve been hearing a lot about its thriving 
arts scene. And although I’ll move on from the John Waters references in a 
moment, this is a great quote from him:

I would never want to live anywhere but Baltimore. You can look far and wide, 
but you'll never discover a stranger city with such extreme style. It's as if 
every eccentric in the south decided to move north, ran out of gas in 
Baltimore, and decided to stay.

Is he right? Today’s the day to find out.
It’ll be a whistlestop tour - we have just over 24 hours in the city - but 
we’ll be packing in as much as we can, based on your suggestions, and we’re 
live-blogging it all the way. That means if you dive in with a good comment, we 
can head right over there. (Hint: we’ll need places to eat and drink, plus 
sights to see all day and some bars for this evening.)

We’ve had some brilliant tips already, but please keep them coming, and also 
for the other places on our hitlist – Philadelphia, Boston, Portland...

* Of course, I was kidding about not having seen the Wire. It is mandatory for 
Guardian workers to pass a test on series one to five before being allowed in 
the building. I’ll try and pick out some sites from the show as we make our way 
around town.
 