
5.04am BST 

Goodnight from the Slippery Noodle Inn

Bingo. We're just in time. At Indiana's oldest blues bar.

Doug Deming & Dennis Greunling are paying the tail end of a swing set, knees 
bending, bass speed-walking, slathered slicked hair unmoving.

They've been going for five hours, and not a hair on the singer's head is out 
of place. He's leaping around the stage, as the bass player stands statically, 
eyes closed, one thick tattooed arm jumping up and down the neck, the other 
slapping in a frenzy.

The harmonica player is quite something, dressed as a peculiar blues-goth 
hybrid with black circular glasses, a Brad Pitt Interview With 
A Vampire-a-like, throwing his upper body into the mic during solos.

A small, whooping crowd taps and nods along appreciatively. There's 16 of us 
in total. 

A superb end to the evening. Indiana...you've delivered. Until tomorrow … 
thank you.

4.58am BST 

Day two – mapped

From the president's barber shop to the dunes, corn and steak delirium of 
Indianapolis, the course of Benji's second day on the road.

4.47am BST 

En route

4.39am BST 

Blues for dessert, after dessert

We've headed out onto South Illinois street, wobbling our way under the Amtrak 
tracks towards The Slippery Noodle, hoping it's not too late for some blues.

4.15am BST 

The main course

Almost floored. My steak slices like butter. We three lucky swines.

In important unrelated news: we discover that Hollis used to be a salmon boat 
captain in Alaska.

Updated at 4.37am BST

4.03am BST 

Shrimp cocktail update

Gary and Hollis are almost crying. It's a horseradish grenade in a bowl.

They can barely talk. It's horseradish with a side of shrimp. I'm smugly 
dissecting my lettuce salad.

3.53am BST 

Meat sweat delirium

I nip outside. More baseball fans walking past from the game aimed towards the 
bars on Meridian Street.

I'm standing next to a steak casualty – they serve 32oz cuts in here – he's 
mobbing his brow and pacing in circles. A bad case of meat sweat delirium.

I've plumped for a 6oz filet mignon as part of a $35 menu … don't judge me.

3.44am BST 

Not so secret sauce

Brett brings the steak knives. He's worked here for 10 years. His favourite 
customers? John Travolta and Robert Duvall. 

Why's the shrimp cocktail so damn good?

"It's the cocktail sauce, lots of horseradish, it's almost like a sweet 
wasabi".

I nod knowingly.

Updated at 3.52am BST

3.38am BST 

Indy brew

Courtney, our waitress, has brought us a round of Sun King Weemac – a dark 
Scottish-style ale brewed a few blocks from here. Yummy.

3.33am BST 

St Elmo

We've made it to the restaurant and are huddled around our table, the wall 
behind us crammed with signed pictures of visitors. 

Our table is framed by an intriguing collection: we've got TV presenter Dick 
Clarke, film critic Gene Shalit, and a picture of a guy standing next to a 
freshly-captured Saddam Hussein.

Updated at 3.36am BST

3.22am BST 

Into Indianapolis!

Late into Indy, aimed for the cheapest in a trio of side-by-side Mariott 
Hotels opposite Victory Field, where the drabs of a local minor league baseball 
game are filing out of the stadium.

Our unscientific Twitter poll has yielded a clear dinner winner: St Elmo's, 
home to the "best shrimp cocktail in the world" according to @Z_Everson 
<https://twitter.com/Z_Everson>.

A bold claim, one I'm wholly unqualified to judge – my pseudo-Kosherness means 
I'm passing this one on to Hollis. I'll report his facial expressions 
diligently. 

3.09am BST 

Chicken-fried conversation

[Editor's note: related to this culinary mystery is chicken fried steak, which 
the Guardian tackled here 
<http://english2english.tumblr.com/post/51171005387/an-answer-the-sweet-sweet-mystery-of-chicken-fried>
.]

Updated at 3.09am BST

3.01am BST 

St Elmo's, by a landslide

2.52am BST 

Movie maize

So what if the film takes place in Nebraska – Benji has learned from Stephen 
King that corn is terrifying and full of demonic spirits that possess your 
friends...

Updated at 2.53am BST

2.38am BST 

Cruising

2.22am BST 

Dillinger 101

@LiterateIndy <https://twitter.com/LiterateIndy> and others on Twitter want 
Benji to pay his respects to the final resting place of Indianapolis-born John 
Dillinger, the prohibition-era bank robber declared "Public Enemy No 1".

For the complete low down on Dillinger's life and crimes, you can check out 
thisremarkably thorough site 
<http://www.johndillinger.com/index.php/about-dillinger>, or the FBI's rather 
less breathless account of his case 
<http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/history/famous-cases/john-dillinger>.

If you're only in it for the highlights, courtesy the former of those two:

• Dillinger escaped prison with a "using a gun which had been carved out of 
wood [to take] two of his keepers hostage. After locking up the warden … he 
commandeered two machine guns. After freeing a fellow inmate, he ultimately 
made his way out a side door … to make his getaway in the sheriff's V-8 Ford."

• His gang included an "underworld character Lester Gillis, better known as 
Baby Face Nelson, known for his reputation as a trigger-happy killer."

• Trying to evade the law, Dillinger had plastic surgery done and tried to 
remove his fingerprints. "Some friends on seeing John later, thought he looked 
like he had the mumps."

• After being betrayed by a "woman in red" – an immigrant who knew Dillinger's 
girlfriend and was eager to stay in the country – FBI agents killed Dillinger 
in a shootout outside a movie theater.

Finally, @CrownHillTom <https://twitter.com/CrownHillTom> handily provides a 
map <http://www.crownhillhf.org/docs/Map_to_Dillinger.pdf> to his final resting 
place.

2.02am BST 

On through Indy

Reluctantly, we've left Bill and Larry at the truck stop and its onwards to 
Indy as the sun sets. We'll arrive around dinner time - there's been two clear 
forerunners among your tips:Shapiro's Deli and St Elmo's Steakhouse. Which is 
best?'

For after, The Slippery Noodle Inn – the oldest blues bar in the state. Any 
advice?

CD update: we're seven tracks into Foreigner's "Acoustique" album. It's 
masterful. Hollis, a die-hard metal fan, is pleasantly surprised. 

Updated at 2.10am BST

1.50am BST 

Twitrip of the corn

We decided to inspect the corn. It's huge … 10ft tall at least, and it goes on 
forever.

Hollis starts talking about the Children of the Corn 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0087050/> movie. I run back to the car, you know, 
just to check we locked it.

1.40am BST 

Priority shopping

We've scored some excellent stuff in the station shop: 

• "Acoustique" album by Foreigner

• Indiana fridge magnet: "What happens here stays here … but nothing ever 
really happens here"

• A foot and a half of smoke stack

• Cheese and sausage in gastronomic harmony

• Blue raspberry Twizzlers

1.27am BST 

BBC Trucker Edition

We head inside to the 24-hour all-you-can-eat Iron Skillet diner, and saddle 
up next toBill, a trucker from Kansas.

"When I was growing up, if you wore white socks you got you ass kicked."

I can't remember why he told us that. He's come from Georgia this morning. 
Larry, across the bar, has come from Milwaukee, and started at 4am this 
morning. He's spending the night here.

Our Englishness is a talking point. "I once lived next to an English lady," 
Larry says, "she had 10 children."

True story: Larry and Bill both listen to the BBC World Service in their 
trucks. They're very nice men … they wish us well and safe travels

Updated at 2.01am BST

1.13am BST 

Truckers' atlas

1. We found a truck stop: rows and rows of the things. Big hulking bruisers, 
noisy as – the engines are all running, pumping the air conditioning as drivers 
sleep in the cabs.

Updated at 1.35am BST

12.41am BST 

Ticket to ride

Benji just missed Valparaiso's annual popcorn festival 
<http://www.valparaisoevents.com/popcorn%20festival/>, and there was a '
Fiddlefest <http://artscouncilsi.org/2013-harvest-homecoming-fiddlefest>' 
nearby just months ago. The midwest takes its fairs seriously, and Indiana is 
no different <http://www.indianafestivals.org/>. A quick perusal of the state's 
2013 guide 
<http://www.indianafestivals.org/docs/FG13_Whole_Book_WEB_BOOKMARKS.pdf> – 
fronted by a goateed man joyously galumphing astride a horse, sword in hand – 
reveals over 475 planned events.

Just earlier this year, Indiana hosted the Shipshewana Pajama Sale, the Jasper 
Strassen Fest, the Fiber Fest & Spin-In, the Makarusa Maple Syrup Festival, the 
Mansfield Village Mushroom Festival and Car Show, the Sassafrass Tea Festival & 
Civil War Living History, the Indiana Gourd Society State Gourd Show, the Lore 
of the Laughery, and the St Joe Pickle Festival. 

There isn't nearly enough time to visit one, so we can let David Foster 
Wallace explain the festival fanaticism to us in his classic Harper's piece 
<http://harpers.org/wp-content/uploads/HarpersMagazine-1994-07-0001729.pdf> 
about a midwestern state fair:

Here you're pretty much away all the time. The land is big here – board-game 
flat, horizons in every direction. See how much farther apart the homes are, 
how broad the yards: compare with New York or Boston or Philly. Here a seat to 
yourself on all public transport, parks the size of airports, rush hour a 
three-beat pause at a stop sign. And the farms themselves are huge, silent, 
vacant: you can't see your neighbor. Thus the urge physically to commune, melt, 
become part of a crowd. To see something besides land and grass and corn and 
cable TV and your wife's face. Hence the sacredness out here of spectacle, 
public event: high-school football, Little League, parades, bingo, market day, 
fair. All very big deals, very deep down. … The faces in the sea of faces are 
like the faces of children released from their rooms … The real spectacle that 
draws us here is us.

Updated at 1.02am BST

12.21am BST 

It's getting corny

Corn fields, discount tobacco stores, giant adverts on the sides of lorries 
parked in lay-bys, corn fields, car showrooms, local mayoral candidate adverts, 
more corn fields. We're truly on the road now, making progress, roughly 40 
miles north of Lafayette.

We're hoping for a few stops between here and Indy. Ideally a service station 
where we can play "CD roulette" – dip your hand in the discount CD bucket and 
buy the first one you touch. Also I want a T-shirt with an animal on it.

12.08am BST 

Busted

While Gary works …

Benji sleeps.

11.49pm BST 

The lonesome crowded midwest

Reader picks (thanks, CAD777 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12239763>!), the requisite, 
requested Cougar, and Modest Mouse. (They were once considered indie, right?)

Updated at 12.10am BST

11.29pm BST 

The speedy way

11.19pm BST 

Horse-drawn tippage

CAD777 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12239763>, providing 
some great recommendations below the line, has suggested a town that's a bit 
too far to make but still very fun to say: Shipshewana 
<http://www.shipshewana.com/>.

Home to a large Amish community and in Shipse you can browse all types of 
handmade goods and also sample some delicious food. They also host a large flea 
market and livestock sale which was my favorite thing to do while visiting my 
grandparents.

The Guardian's own Indiana native, Katie Rogers, just told me that 
Shipshewana's Amish community apparently has all kinds of tricks for watching 
TV, mostly involving fast food. She left the office, however, before explaining 
what this means exactly, or what programmes the Amish like to watch.

11.09pm BST 

The Blue Yonder

Our very chirpy waitress Taylor looks like she's ready to go to church in a 
plain, tidy white dress. A closer look: the dress has a number of white skull 
and crossbones stitched into it. 

The turkey clubs are good. Their stand-out feature: tangy sweet "bread and 
butter" pickles. We cause a minor furore by asking for a mixed fruit cobbler we 
see on an adjacent table – it's an exclusive feature of the senior (elderly) 
menu. The lead waitress is unsure, but it gets authorised.

The bathrooms have fake ostrich skin walls.

The "Blue Yonder" Lounge is shaped like an airplane and is awesome.

Another waiter with a very sensible side parting takes our bill and bids us 
farewell.

"Bye guys, don't do anything I wouldn't do" he laughs nervously. 

Updated at 11.09pm BST

10.36pm BST 

Turkey paraíso

The Strongbow's thing is turkey. I ask ask our waitress Taylor, why is this?

"Because no one else around here does turkey."

I order a turkey guacamole club, which turns out to be absolutely nothing like 
the discouraging squares of bread first served us. It is a club proper.

10.28pm BST 

Inside, we're one of three parties, and have lowered the average age by about 
40 years. 

Updated at 10.29pm BST

10.20pm BST 

Valmericana

We're on outskirts of Valparaiso, on one of those quintessentially American 
strips of road flanked on either side with a symmetrical loop of outlets. All 
the usual suspects are here: Wendy's, Staples, Walmart, Taco Bell, yadda, 
yadda. 

And then there's the Strongbow Inn, an unremarkable prefab building with the 
Stars and Stripes billowing from a stump in the carpark.

10.07pm BST 

Explosive tippage

Cubsml34 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10776743> has brought 
some of thatanarchic Illinois spirit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/26/twitter-road-trips-chicago-memphis#block-521bbdf4e4b055bf6bac8899>
across the border, back again, and below the line:

You can participate in a great Illinois tradition and buy gobs of fireworks in 
Indiana, bring them back into Illinois where they are illegal, and really stick 
it to the man by shooting them off and watching your paycheck explode right in 
front of you!

9.54pm BST 

So long dunes

We've only seen a tiny fraction of the park, which apparently has whole 
forests and marshlands, but it's already time to get back on the road.

We're off to Valparaiso to refuel at the Strongbow Inn 
<http://www.strongbowinn.com/>, on NWIresident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12239390>'s advice. Any tips 
there or for the road ahead?

9.42pm BST 

Rad waves

If I don't get a third nipple out of this...

9.36pm BST 

Polaroid perfect

9.28pm BST 

Lakeshore

The water was fringed with families, sheltering under umbrellas in the heat, 
occasionally wading out into the shallow water towards a sand bank a few 
hundred yards out. Everyone seemed at peace with the steel mill to the left, 
and the nuclear plant to the right. I joined them.

Updated at 9.51pm BST

9.21pm BST 

A trio of trees defying logic and growing on sand dunes.

9.03pm BST 

8.57pm BST 

The south shore

We've arrived at the dunes – 25 miles of wild beaches 
<http://www.nps.gov/indu/index.htm> on Lake Michigan's southern shore. At their 
eastern edge you can see the silhouettes of a swathe of vast steel mills; out 
to sea you can just about make out a couple of giant freighters. An oasis 
flanked by industry. I'm off for a swim. 

Updated at 9.04pm BST

8.49pm BST 

We're looking...

But so far no stands, just highway and the odd occasional tower.

8.30pm BST 

America's corroded girdle

We've entered the "rust belt". Miles of roads flanked by decades-old 
industrial hulks, pylons and train tracks. We've been keeping pace with a 
mile-long freight train for about 10 minutes now. I can't remember seeing its 
front or back.

8.19pm BST 

8.04pm BST 

And they're off - to milk something.

And as they're hitting the road for the first time proper, here's the first 
proper road trip playlist - bye bye Chicago/Illinois, hello Indiana.

And remember - we do take requests. We'll even cue them up nicely for you in a 
playlist. So do send in your tuneage. (Are you listening Indiana?)

You know what to do: below in the comments, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash>.

8.00pm BST 

Deviation

Like all great unplanned trips, we're willing to change directions regularly. 
Before the dairy farm, we're heading around the southern shores of Lake 
Michigan towards theIndiana Dunes National Lakeshore <http://www.nps.gov/indu>, 
due partly to a groundswell in the comments section, and the fact that it 
includes the words "dunes" and "lakeshore" in it. Perfect.

7.48pm BST 

Indiana calling

After a fine finale in Chicago - huge thanks again to @megaheid 
<https://twitter.com/MegaHeid> for the tip - we're on the road, aimed for the 
I65 into Indiana. We've picked up essential provisions - beef jerky, Twizzlers 
and a Hershey's bar. We've covered about 10 blocks, and have already finished 
the jerky.

We're aimed for the Fair Oaks Dairy Farm <http://fofarms.com> thanks to 
@siobhanoc1 <https://twitter.com/siobhanoc1/status/372389080916455424>'s tip. 
I'm gonna milk something and there's nothing you can do to stop me.

7.21pm BST 

Tah dah!

Well, that was superb. Obama came to the Hyde Park Hair Salon for 20 years, as 
a teacher at the nearby Chicago University, a civil rights attorney, and, 
eventually, as Senator.

His barber Zariff isn't here today - he's currently on one of his regular 
trips to DC, visiting his most famous customer. I get Jaron, who gives me a 
neat Obama cut, and my first ever wet shave.

It's amazing - he coats my face in Moo's shave gel and lathers two or three 
times, wraps my face in two rounds of hot towel, before incrementally making 
his way through my beard, Pharcyde & Common on the stereo. He finishes up with 
running alcohol... "Smoother than a baby's thighs". $35 including tip.

Essential detail: Jaron learned to shave watching YouTube videos of Turkish 
barbers in Istanbul.

Essential detail #2: Thanks to @megaheid <https://twitter.com/MegaHeid> for 
the snip tip!

Updated at 7.45pm BST

7.18pm BST 

Smoother than a baby's thighs

Updated at 7.21pm BST

7.16pm BST 

Razor light touch

Updated at 7.22pm BST

7.11pm BST 

The full monty

7.09pm BST 

The B side

Updated at 7.10pm BST

7.08pm BST 

And it begins - the A side

Updated at 7.10pm BST

7.07pm BST 

A last minute instruction...

Updated at 7.22pm BST

6.49pm BST 

Mr President

6.30pm BST 

Meanwhile, back in Chicago...

The team has made it to the Hyde Park Hair Salon...and that famous chair.

Updated at 6.35pm BST

6.22pm BST 

Indiana tippage - sorta

We're indebted to @stephani - um, we think - for these Indiana tips. We can't 
wait.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4200150> stephani  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4200150> 27 August 2013 5:51pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26396659> 
Sadly, Indiana is a drive-through state. I just came off a long 12-hour road 
trip from Washington, DC to Chicago. However, there are a few things I could 
recommend.

Indiana Dunes. They aren't as impressive as the dunes in West Michigan, but 
they are worth a look. The State Park is near Michigan City, not far from Gary.

Downtown Gary is an aging rustbelt city, full of vacant buildings, and worth 
seeing if you are into that sort of thing (sort of a mini Detroit). Also the 
Gary Works (steel mills) is just off the Chicago Skyway, kind of impressive in 
their own right.

Columbus, Indiana is worth a stop on your way from Indianapolis to Louisville. 
The city has a surprising collection of noteworthy buildings designed by noted 
architects like Eero Saarinen, I.M. Pei, among others. I enjoyed my afternoon 
there.

Parke County, Indiana is the covered bridge capital of world 
(http://www.coveredbridges.com). It's downstate, near Purdue University. I 
camped near there, years ago.

Indiana Dunes now has two three yays, as @NWIresident 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26397363> has tipped it 
under the line, and@woyce  <https://twitter.com/woyce/status/372140416964907008>
tipped it yesterday on Twitter - only she was a bit more fulsome in her praise:

I've always loved the Century of Progress homes at the Indiana Dunes & Conner 
Prairie, just NE of Indy.

Wiki says 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Century_of_Progress_Architectural_District‎>: 
"The Century of Progress Architectural District, a part of the eastern unit of 
Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore, is an historic district on Lake Front Drive 
in Beverly Shores, Porter County, Indiana. The district comprises five 
buildings, all from the Homes of Tomorrow Exhibition during the 1933 Century of 
Progress World's Fair which took place in Chicago."

So, that's good. Eh?

Also Columbus, and Eero Saarinen, I.M. Pei, also gets a second nod, following 
a tip yesterday on Twitter from@stpaulspot 
<https://twitter.com/stpaulspot/status/372147417216331776>.

Hoosiers, we're hearing you.

Updated at 6.46pm BST

5.58pm BST 

Radio contact
GreatAunt.co.uk (@GreatAuntUK) 
@benjilanyado <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado> hahaha I listen to WILV 
Rewind 100.3 or Q87.7 for what they call Alternative (basically Radio1)
 <https://twitter.com/GreatAuntUK/statuses/372399610901573632> August 27, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/GreatAuntUK/statuses/372399610901573632> Rob Brazier Jr 
(@robbrazierjr) 
@benjilanyado <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado> The Loop, if you dig rock 
music.
 <https://twitter.com/robbrazierjr/statuses/372398277066772480> August 27, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/robbrazierjr/statuses/372398277066772480> 
A couple of radio stations suggestions coming in via Twitter.

Would be great to hear about Indiana stations, too. Would save us living with 
this earworm for the duration of the drive. 

Doh!

5.42pm BST 

Obama's snipper 101

If there's one thing Barack Obama is unwilling to compromise, it's the quality 
of his do. The President has been a patron of the same Chicago barbershop, the
Hyde Park Hair Salon <http://hydeparkhairsalon.net>, for over 20 years, even 
flying his favourite barber, Zariff, over to Washington to keep him trim. The 
neighbourhood barbershop, which was founded in 1927, has a solid history of 
celebrity clientele including Muhammad Ali, Spike Lee and Chicago's first 
African-American mayor Harold Washington - but they haven't let it go to their 
heads. President or not, the classic “Home of the Obama Cut” will only set you 
back $21.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWybwZMC6y5s&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWybwZMC6y5s>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWybwZMC6y5s&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWybwZMC6y5s&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWybwZMC6y5s>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWybwZMC6y5s&media=>
close 
Updated at 7.37pm BST

5.38pm BST 

We've picked up our car ... the road part of this trip begins.

Gary is at the wheel, and doing admirably. Gary belly update: unsettled. We're 
aimed for Obama's favoured barber shop in Hyde Park before hitting the big 
roads to Indiana. Gonna see what they can do with my Jewfro.

Two things we need from you, dear readers: a name for the car - something 
suitable for the trip. Indy the Jeep? Dolly? Elvis?

Also: a radio station please, Chicago and/or Indiana. Thanks in advance.

5.25pm BST 

Indiana, make some noise

Come on good people of Indiana - Hoosiers 
<http://www.netstate.com/states/intro/in_intro.htm>, if we may be so bold to 
refer to you by your nickname - the reputation of your honourable state is 
being besmirched. "Nothing to see", 'driveby state',"cornfields" blah blah.

But we are coming to you and we need to hear from you. We need you to shout as 
loud as you can: "We are here! We are here! We are here!" in a "Guardian hears 
a Hoosier" sort of way.

Send us things to see and do - no matter how small - and prove all the 
naysayers wrong!

Usual places: @BenjiLanyad <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado>o, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/about/resources/buttons#hashtag>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/521c75f6e4b055bf6bac88c2>, or in 
the comments below.

Updated at 5.43pm BST

4.42pm BST 

Breakfast - you are in us

A mound of omelette, needlessly - but wonderfully - accompanied by raisin 
toast and maple syrup, and never-ending coffee.

Best of all, our waitress Beverly gave each of us a whopping great cuddle as 
we left. Her sister lives in Indiana, she says. "There's nothing there. Have 
fun skipping through the cornfields."

Updated at 4.43pm BST

4.35pm BST 

Lou's - we are in you

We're in Lou Mitchell's, a classic Chicago diner and campaign trail pit stop. 
[Editor's note: Lou's, established 1923, is close to Union Station and the 
beginning of Route 66 and was frequented by many travellers before their 
journey along the road, earning it the nickname "the first stop on the Mother 
Road."]

I love these places. I've been called "darling" twice in the last five 
minutes. 1980s leather booths, seats at the bar, constant movement and steaming 
coffee.

We're chatting to Jackson, a UIC maths student who comes here once a week. We 
ask him for tips between here and Indiana. "There's nothing in Indiana," he 
says. Encouraging.

Updated at 4.42pm BST

4.31pm BST 

Breakfast here we come

We're en route to Lou Mitchell's <http://www.loumitchellsrestaurant.com/>, a 
local staple recommended by@GreatAuntUK 
<https://twitter.com/GreatAuntUK/status/372118553530748928>, a Brit living in 
Chicago. We're having our first lunatic taxi experience. The driver took us 
eight blocks the wrong way, almost ran down a few cyclists, tried to start the 
meter on $9, kept pressing a button that added a dollar to the fare every few 
minutes. Then we almost stole his shoes. Long story. We called each other 
assholes and went our separate ways.

4.26pm BST 

The Huffington Post has compiled a list of what not to do in Chicago 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/viator/what-not-to-do-in-chicago_b_3750420.html>
, written by a Windy City resident. How did our Benji fare?

Well, there's good news and bad news.

 * 
Top marks to him – and mainly to you, readers, who pointed him the right 
direction – for taking the architectural boat tour. "If anything is a must-do 
in Chicago, this is it," they say. Well consider that must-do, done.

 * 
"Do not wait in line to go up the Willis [formerly Sears] Tower," they say, as 
the queues are too long. Benji worked this out for himself (read: photographer 
Hollis told him) and he headed to the John Hancock Tower, where he enjoyed 
astonishing views for the price of a coffee. More great views were had later on 
the roof of the J Parker bar. So far: winning.

 * 
"Do not confine yourself to downtown." Ticked that box. As Benji also got out 
to North Avenue beach.

 * 
The quickest way to stamp tourist on your forehead is, they say, to ask for 
ketchup on your hotdog. Does that apply to monstrously large Slayer burgers, 
too? We don'tthink Benji committed any ketchup-based sins there, but he has 
already offended the whole of the city with his views on deep-dish pizza, so 
let's move on ...

 * 
And the final piece of advice: do not be afraid to ask questions. Well, we 
don't have to worry about Benji being too shy. He's already had on-the-spot 
tips from Callie, the J Parker waitress from Indiana, and talked a passerby 
called Mike into giving him an impromptu tour of Lincoln Park.

In sum, good job, Benji. You're practically a local now.

4.20pm BST 

Oh, what a day

Yesterday. What a day. We started on an architectural boat tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/26/twitter-road-trips-chicago-memphis#block-521b8307e4b04c508c463bcf>
, and finished at aBone Thugs-N-Harmony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/26/twitter-road-trips-chicago-memphis#block-521c2196e4b04c508c463c12>
 gig followed by a round of the local grapefruit moonshine. Well done all of 
you.

We've just checked out of the ACME Hotel <http://www.acmehotelcompany.com/> 
(from $129 per night) – a great little boutique place recommended by
@HeloRighetto <http://twitter.com/helorighetto>. I imagine it's the nicest 
place we'll stay all trip.Tonight, we need a bed for the night in Indianapolis 
– any suggestions?

Today, it's everything between here and there – south Chicago then across 
state lines to Indiana, and, crucially, Gary. Yup, a town called Gary. There, 
we will in no way resist the temptation of lining up my travelling buddy Gary 
with as many signs as possible.

And after that... it's a whole long chunk of the I65 towards Indy. Any 
diversions, send them over. Usual places:@BenjiLanaydo 
<https://twitter.com/benjilanyado>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/about/resources/buttons#hashtag>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>

Updated at 4.27pm BST
 