
1.54am BST 

Good night, and thanks again!

Sorry, just wiping the lobster off my hands. We just shared a whole one, with 
corn on the cob, melted butter and loaded potato skins (and a little bit of 
salad). I'm overjoyed about this because one tipper worried me early in the 
week saying they might be out of season. Not just yet, it seems. Another close 
shave. 

We're about to sign off now (we actually need to get down to Rockland before 
bed, perhaps with time for a quick nightcap, following those added tips below). 
Monday, and our stating point in Baltimore, seems like a lifetime ago. We've 
certainly packed in a lot of places, a lot of miles, a lot of great meetings 
with people and a hell of a lot of food. From the oldest burger joint in 
America to the biggest globe in the world; from clam shacks to oyster bars; 
from goth dives to speakeasies; from the Boston T to hitching an impromptu ride 
on a boat in Baltimore harbour, it's been a fantastic trip. 

Thanks so much to everyone who had spared us their time in person or here in 
the comments, on Twitter, on Instagram and on Guardian Witness. We only wish 
we'd had time to be able to follow each and every tip. Hopefully, other people 
will be able to use all the great advice you've shared. If you do, let us know.

Oh, look at blueberry pie and ice-cream just landed in front of me. Time to 
go. Thanks again from all of us. Night all!

1.42am BST 

There's really no better way to end a New England road trip. Just look at this 
guy! He's delicious.

Updated at 1.51am BST

1.11am BST 

And a side note …

This is the final road trip in the series. Over the past six months, we've 
blogged fromJacksonville to Key West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/interactive/2013/may/10/florida-usa-road-trip-twitrip-interactive>
,Seattle to San Francisco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/interactive/2013/jun/07/pacific-coast-usa-twitrip-interactive>
, Austin to Albuquerque 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/interactive/2013/jul/01/texas-new-mexico-twitter-road-trip-interactive>
,Las Vegas to Denver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/interactive/2013/jul/31/las-vegas-denver-twitter-road-trip-interactive>
, Chicago to Memphis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/interactive/2013/sep/03/chicago-memphis-twitter-road-trip-interactive>
 and Baltimore to Bar Harbor.

We've covered close to 10,000 miles, received thousands of tips and met 
hundreds of brilliant people all willing and proud to show us their corner of 
the vast landscape that is the USA. And we still haven't scratched the surface. 
We hope we come back again soon to cover a small fraction of the places we 
missed.

Updated at 1.28am BST

12.56am BST 

Oh, and the place is famous for its margaritas, holding a best-in-town award 
from the Bar Harbour Times. Tonight's special: an apple cider margarita. It 
would be rude not to ...

12.49am BST 

Top tip, folks. Loving the Side Street Cafe, a one-storey wooden 
detached building with a veranda wrapping around the front, lined with fairy 
lights.

The menu tells it how it is: "Here's the deal … you can really add lobster to 
just about anything on our menu! You want a lobster-topped cheeseburger, go for 
it!"

Seriously, what's not to love here? 

12.45am BST 

Harbored in Bar Harbor

It's completely dark now, but Bar Harbor is buzzing. It's certainly a tourist 
hot spot. We drive past plenty of little souvenir shops and ice-cream parlours. 
There's an outdoor movie screening in the square, which has drawn a crowd. 

Most importantly, the street lighting here is really low, so you can see the 
stars. We've got an outdoor table at the cafe (it's packed inside) and it's 
just warm enough.

12.39am BST 

Baltimore to Bar Harbor – mapped

Dear readers, Vicky's epic, five-day road trip up the east coast is about to 
come to an end. From thestreets of Balitmore, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor>
 upthe steps of Philadelphia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/24/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor>
, throughBoston's shores and ends 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/25/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor>
 and capped bythe cliffs of Maine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/26/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor>
 – it's been one hell of a trip. It wouldn't have been possible with Greta, 
Kylie and every generous tipster who guided them and left comments along the 
way.

Recap with the complete map, if you'd like, and thank you for all your help!

Updated at 12.46am BST

12.33am BST 

Phew. It's tough nigh impossible to beat Greta's photos from the top of 
Cadillac Mountain, but something's got to tide us over while the team descends 
through Wi-Fi-less national park. Thus, the work of Maine's adopted son,Winslow 
Homer <http://www.winslowhomer.org/>.

The Met (of Art <http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/homr/hd_homr.htm>), who 
ought to know says Homer's "regarded by many as the greatest American painter 
of the nineteenth century", and his work can be found in most of the nations' 
major art museums, including Portland's own <http://www.portlandartmuseum.org/>
. 
 'Cloud Shadows' Photograph: /Wiki 
The Boston-born artist made his name sketching the American Civil War 
<http://www.portlandmuseum.org/Content/7652.shtml> for Harper's Magazine and 
eventually moved to Prout's Neck, Maine, where he spent the rest of his life. 
He also produced what's considered his greatest work there, which largely 
revolves around – you guessed it – the sea.
 'Sunlight on the Coast' Photograph: /Wiki 
Updated at 12.38am BST

12.17am BST 

Coming back down to earth …

And we're off for celebratory end-of-trip drinks and dinner at the Side Street 
Cafe <http://www.sidestreetbarharbor.com/>in Bar Harbor, following tips 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27153094%20>.

Updated at 12.17am BST

11.58pm BST 

Just think, if we'd queued for Reds Eats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/27/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5245d249e4b0c07967813a8f>
 we would have missed it all.

Updated at 12.02am BST

11.55pm BST 

We're at the top! There's a little car park and some walking trails built into 
the rocks, offering the perfect viewing platforms. The suns just about set now, 
leaving behind a gentle glow. 

Updated at 12.02am BST

11.48pm BST 

Wow. Actually, to our complete surprise, our timing is spot on. The sun is 
dropping more with every turn the car takes around the mountain. The sky is 
turning pink and mauve. We can see for miles. The islands dotting the sea look 
incredible. 

11.36pm BST 

The Eye of the Tiger is back on the stereo to see us through. It's the song of 
the trip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/25/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor>
. Note to Rocky: youboxing up those Philly steps 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NubH5BDOaD8> is nothing compared to our epic 
east coast road trip.

Updated at 12.14am BST

11.31pm BST 

A(r)cadia!

We're here! Acadia National Park <http://www.nps.gov/acad/>! Now powering 
through to get to the top of Cadillac Mountain, racing against the setting sun. 
We need pics from the top! 
 Arriving at Mount Desert Island 
11.25pm BST 

Acadia 101

Strongly recommended 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27402150> by readers, 
Acadia <http://www.nps.gov/acad/index.htm> mashes the qualities of other US 
national parks into one: an island, a forest, a swamp, lakes, and mountains.

In fact, it has the tallest mountain on the US Atlantic coast. It's literally 
all downhill from here on the American east coast. Plus there's a 'Night Sky 
Festival', hiking, biking, your pick of fishing along cliffs or beaches, as 
well asloons, falcons 
<http://www.nps.gov/acad/planyourvisit/upload/Bird-checklist.pdf>, bobcats and 
seals <http://www.nps.gov/acad/planyourvisit/upload/mammals2006.pdf>. This is 
exciting.

Updated at 11.45pm BST

11.11pm BST 

Sights seen on the journey: plenty of pretty Maine chapels with their white 
steeples, one chipmunk, a sign welcoming "leaf peepers", the Baits Motel (for 
fishermen). 

And a pirate-themed crazy golf course. Why didn't anyone tip that? 

Updated at 11.11pm BST

10.54pm BST 

Mt Battie

Below the line, lamericaine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12218325> recommends heading to 
the top of Mount Battie in Camden, Maine. Vicky's committed to Acadia at this 
point – especially now that she's caught sight of encourage signage – so we can 
enjoy Mt Battie vicariously, with Christopher Setterlund 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/cjsetterlund?feature=watch>'s video on YouTube. 

It's $4.50 to get up there, and Setterlund provides dry commentary and a 
camera-guided tour of the many lighthouses and landmarks (including Acadia 
itself!) visible from the top of the hill.

But is it "Bát-tie" or "Bat-tée"? 

10.42pm BST 

Signs for Acadia national park appearing now. Think we're about half an hour 
away 

10.34pm BST 

Weather report

Today has been another incredible day for weather. It started cloudy but soon 
cleared and the sky is now perfectly blue, with bright sunlight illuminating 
the multicoloured leaves in the trees. We just missed a thunderstorm the day 
before we got to Baltimore and since then it had been perfect, dry T-shirt 
weather - with just a little touch if autumn freshness – all the way. Is the 
weather always like this at this time of year or have we been lucky? 

10.30pm BST 

10.26pm BST 

10.21pm BST 

 We hit the small town of Union and there's a farmers market going on (crates 
of vegetables, raw honey, goat meat and goat-milk soap). Some of the traders 
are bartering.

10.11pm BST 

Back on the road …

It's a huge contrast from the interstate driving we've done earlier in the 
trip. The landscape has opened up. The forests are stretching further and 
further out in all directions. Occasionally there is a little inlet of water, 
or a lone wooden house.

10.01pm BST 

A bit of fishing for Maine tuneage for Vicky's time on the road just led us to 
excellently named Gordon Bok.Wiki <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gordon_Bok> 
gives us an endearingly biased account of his work, and makes Bok sound rather 
like the mythical king of the world's sea-people:

Bok draws on his experience in and around the working boat culture of the Gulf 
of Maine. He spins into song the diverse voices of fishermen and other sea-folk 
… At times, he reaches deep into the wealth of sea myth that haunts the North 
Atlantic. To animate these legends of Selkie-folk, sea fairies and 
boat spirits, he resorts to freer forms.

As much energy as Bok invests in making songs – many of which have grown 
permanent roots in the rough shores of New England and have all but passed into 
tradition – he is equally energetic as a folklorist and gatherer of songs. His 
repertoire overflows with contemporary songs written by his friends from all 
over North America, Australia, and the British Isles, but it only starts there: 
he sings, in the original languages, folksongs 
from Italy, Portugal, Mongolia, French Canada, Latin America, and the Gaelic 
Hebrides, among other places, not mentioning the huge body of old anglophone 
folklore over which he exercises mastery.

He is also an artist/master craftsman mainly dealing with sea themes done 
in wood carvings.

So there you have it. Gordon Bok.

Updated at 10.31pm BST

9.52pm BST 

Scenic soup

Ok, mobile soup-eating accomplished. It wasn't easy, especially as we have 
just left route 1 and are now on more windy roads towards Bar Harbor. Things 
have really started to get stunning now.

Updated at 10.13pm BST

9.32pm BST 

We're booked in tonight at Ledges by the Bay 
<http://www.ledgesbythebay.com/index.php>, a waterfront hotel in Rockport. So 
we're heading back there after we've hit Bar Harbor andAcadia National Park 
<http://www.nps.gov/acad/index.htm>.

Clearly we'll be needing a drink to celebrate having made it all the way from 
Baltimore. Where should we go? With sea views, of course.

9.27pm BST 

Littoral Maine 

Updated at 10.12pm BST

9.08pm BST 

Except, like an idiot, I don't order pie. I order soup. Who gets soup to eat 
in the car? I mean itis acorn squash, apple cider and sage soup. But still. Not 
the greatest of car foods. I hope you don't have potholes in this part of 
Maine. 

8.55pm BST 

Then it's a quick stop at Treats <http://treatsofmaine.com/> – a deli cafe – 
for takeout. A fresh pumpkin-maple pie has just come out of the oven? Smells 
fantastic.

8.48pm BST 

On the way out, we talk to a customer, Betty, in an excellent lighthouse 
sweater.

She's originally from New Jersey, but now lives in Maine. Her twin sister's 
still in New Jersey; they were born a few minutes apart but on separate sides 
of midnight, so they have different birthdays. She's exceptionally sweet and 
holds Greta's hand throughout our conversation.

Updated at 8.49pm BST

8.40pm BST 

They do lobster roll here too, but, in truth, we are still watching the clock. 
We want to get to Bar Harbor while it is still light. We're going to be 
decisive. We'll get drinks to go, and some takeout food from a spot Greta knows 
a little further up the hill. Our drinks order? It's got to be three of the 
house specialities, Sarahnade, a mix of homemade lemonade and pomegranate. 
That'll hit the spot.
 Sarahnading the costumers. 
Updated at 8.44pm BST

8.27pm BST 

Sarah's

One of our kind tipster 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27406711>s suggested 
Sarah's as an alternative. It's a traditional-looking restaurant directly 
opposite, with a big painting of a ship above the bar and wooden booths, 
with views over the water. 

8.12pm BST 

Painted white and red, it's tiny, like a little streetside food wagon, just at 
the bottom of the hill, before the Donald E Davey Bridge. There's a handful of 
a parasoled plastic tables behind it, but the set-up is fairly grab-it-and-go. 
If you can get anywhere near it, that is.

I still can't get over the queues. The lobster rolls are said to be legendary 
and something certainly smells good. Unfortunately, our schedule is just too 
tight to wait. Although, on the upside, it looks like we have plenty of other 
options nearby. 

Updated at 8.15pm BST

7.58pm BST 

Ok, the warning signs were there. We'd had lots of tips for Red's Eats and 
we've read online how all its popularity causes "the longest 'traffic jams' in 
Maine". But still we weren't quite prepared for the length of the queues of 
people outside. They're huge! Not sure we have time to spare for this.

We're taking ExileMan 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27406711>'s advice below 
the line, and popping over the road toSarah's, where "The bread and soup bar is 
a hearty and wholesome meal".
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE5tDe-XPWvo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE5tDe-XPWvo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE5tDe-XPWvo&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE5tDe-XPWvo&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE5tDe-XPWvo>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DE5tDe-XPWvo&media=>
close 
Updated at 8.08pm BST

7.44pm BST 

Wiscasset is seriously cute. A line of shops - delis, art galleries, antiques 
shops and homeware stores - leads down to the waterfront.

7.40pm BST 

The guys are just getting into Wiscasset now...
 The bridge over the Sheepscot river  The town of Wiscasset 
7.25pm BST 
 The pretty town of Wiscasset, Maine Photograph: /Wiki 
Here's what we've scratched up about Wiscasset.

First the pro forma history lesson: Samuel de Champlain 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samuel_de_Champlain> fetched up here in 1605. A 
couple of hundred years later, it was the busiest seaport north of Boston. Then 
came the trade embargo with England leading up to the second war of 
independence. Bye bye prosperity. Damn Brits! However, the good years did leave 
behind lots of pretty houses, so now Wiscasset does a nice line in tourism. 
Possibly with lots of Brits.

Now the interesting bit: In 2009, the town LOST a legal battle 
<http://lincolncountynewsonline.com/Main.asp?SectionID=1&SubSectionID=75&ArticleID=44133>
 to reclaim an original copy of theDeclaration of Independence that was 
ACCIDENTALLY SOLD by the estate of the daughter of a former town official, Sol 
Holbrook. (How do you ACCIDENTALLY sell a defining piece of your history?) The 
court ruled that the true owner was not the town of Wiscasset, but Richard L 
Adams Jr, who bought the document in 2001 for $475,000. Where did he buy it 
from? A London book dealer, of course. Damn Brits!

Updated at 1.16am BST

7.23pm BST 

These roads aren't just tree-lined now, the trees are spreading out as far as 
we can see.

7.06pm BST 

Ah, look, this is more like it. New England trees lining the road, their 
leaves turning.

6.56pm BST 

Ah. No snow globes, sadly. But we like their collection of old 3D maps that 
look like they've come off classroom walls and the globe marbles.

I like this place. I like the fact that someone one day thought, "You know 
what this place needs... the world's biggest globe in the foyer."

But, anyway, we're done. Time to head back to the car.

Next stop: Wiscasset for lunch.

Updated at 6.58pm BST

6.42pm BST 

Feeling a bit dizzy now. We're going to exit through the gift shop and see if 
Greta can add to her snow globe collection. A globe within a globe maybe?

6.41pm BST 

It's open to the public and there is a map shop. We've climbed the stairs to 
look at it from above. It's slowly spinning and we're pointing out countries 
excitedly as if we've never seen one of these things before.

6.38pm BST 

This is a great tip! We never would have known this was here. The world's 
biggest globe at the offices of map company DeLorme. Even Greta, who lives up 
the road in Portland, has never been here.

6.34pm BST 

Eartha

(as tipped by ExileMan  
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27380975>and aeausa) 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27405519>

Housed in a three-story glass atrium in the HQ of the DeLorme mapping 
corporation in Yarmouth, Maine,Eartha  
<http://www.delorme.com/about/eartha.aspx>is a model (1:1,000,000, 1mm = 1km) 
of the earth with mountains and landforms in full 3D, that rotates and 
revolves, simulating the earth’s real movements.

So far, so unremarkable.

Now the good stuff: It measures 41.5ft in diameter and weighs 2.8 tons, took 
two years to build, and it represents earth as it is seen from space.

It took two years to build and is the world's largest revolving globe.

Stick that on your bedside table!

Updated at 6.47pm BST

6.12pm BST 

We're back in the car, heading to what we've been told is the biggest globe in 
the world.

As Vicky, Greta and Kylie hit the road again, it's nice to be able to give you 
a sense of the landscape they're driving through. We've dug up this film - 
Neptune, which is still in production, by independent Portland filmmakerDerek 
Kimball <http://www.lasthouseproductions.com>. In part, it's a love letter to 
the wild and rugged landscape of Maine, and it's relying on donations to be 
finished.

Updated at 6.17pm BST

5.51pm BST 

Kris and his wife Marilyn, who is from Maine, have been here for six years. 
Before that they had a crafts shop in the west Highlands for 30 years.

Marilyn says it is taking some to readjust, coming from a community where they 
knew everyone. It's changed a lot since she grew up here.

She says: "It was a farming and fishing community, now it's a tourism 
community. Our house [a traditional "shack" handed down from her mother] is now 
stuck in the middle of of millionaires' row. But it's the same everywhere with 
a coastline. It's the same in the Highlands. It's probably the same in the 
Seychelles, too, with locals there wishing they could live on the beach."
These guys are lovely. We tell them we'll send tourists their way to buy 
paintings. "Sure," says Kris. "They can come to my house, too."

The lighthouse itself is as picturesque as you might expect, sitting proudly 
on its little rocky headland, surveying its territory and the scattering of 
boats below. There are patches of yellow and purple wild flowers all around.

Updated at 6.13pm BST

5.44pm BST 

Well, this fella couldn't be more Maine.

Except he is from Scotland.

The very Scottish sounding Kris Kristiansen sells his oil paintings of Maine 
seascapes here, donating a portion of the profits to the town for the upkeep of 
the lighthouse, a few metres away from his stall.

We buy one of a boat being tossed around in a storm. It's called All Washed 
Up, which seems appropriate as we're pretty tired right now from our mad dash 
across the east.

Updated at 5.51pm BST

5.28pm BST 

We like to think we leave no stone unturned in our quest to animate a 
destination. So, ever since Vicky raised the question about Portland music last 
night,we've Alan in our NY office has been trawling his internal jukebox to 
bring you the sweet Maine music. Here's what he found - the first four bands 
are from Portland, ME:

Updated at 5.51pm BST

4.48pm BST 

Following a Twitter tip-off, our (not so hungry) bloghounds are heading off to 
Portland Head Light <http://www.portlandheadlight.com> at Cape Elizabeth. It's 
another blast from the colonial past, built in the late 18th century:

Portland Head has long protected Portland and the adjacent area. Cape 
Elizabeth residents were deeply committed to American independence from British 
rule. In 1776, the new Town of Cape Elizabeth posted a guard of eight soldiers 
at Portland Head to warn citizens of coming British attacks.
Liberty Peace Love (@LuvLibertyPeace) 
@vickybaker <https://twitter.com/vickybaker> @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> Check out Two Lights, Portland Head Light, 
& Bug Light-you can walk to the Bug Light. Enjoy the coastal views!
 <https://twitter.com/LuvLibertyPeace/statuses/383612569774088192> September 
27, 2013 <https://twitter.com/LuvLibertyPeace/statuses/383612569774088192> 
Updated at 4.56pm BST

4.36pm BST 

Getting down with the US breakfast lingo, we've ordered our eggs "medium 
easy". And we do love the unlimited coffee refills out here.

"Anyone for more of the shakes?" says the server, as he hovers over our mugs 
with the filter pot.

4.34pm BST 

We figure that since our donuts were "heathy" this morning, we can justify a 
second morning food stop. That's fair, right?

Darla, owner, with her hair in braided pigtails, is quite a character. There's 
been a diner on this spot since the '30s; it's been Marcy's since the late 
'80s, and she bought it two years ago.

We're sitting up at the bar and she's talking to us as she turns over a grill 
laden with eggs and hash browns.

We are here to show Brits what an American breakfast is all about.

"You're gonna ruin them," she says.

Updated at 4.35pm BST

4.17pm BST 

Great tip below the line from KentuckyFriedColonel, another stellar tipster on 
this trip. And we do like a starry, starry night.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4507377> KentuckyFriedColonel 
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4507377> 27 September 2013 
4:12pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27402150> 
I didn't know if you knew that it's currently the 5th Annual Acadia Night Sky 
Festival around Acadia National Park. There seems to be loads of events 
happening until Monday, and the great thing is that they're happening at night! 
You may even make it in time for today's activities. Link is here:

http://www.acadianightskyfestival.org/

Updated at 4.26pm BST

4.13pm BST 

Our call for local Portland musicians has been answered.

We've just meet Megan Jo Wilson 
<http://www.meganjowilson.com/my-music/team-northrup/%20> (left) and Sara 
Hallie Richardson <http://shrichardson.bandcamp.com/album/restless>. We will 
have to cue some of their sounds up for the car journey later. *

* But if you just can't wait - here's clippage. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUmdgzgn9pSs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUmdgzgn9pSs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUmdgzgn9pSs&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUmdgzgn9pSs&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUmdgzgn9pSs>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUmdgzgn9pSs&media=>
close Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7mUCGrpsgKo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7mUCGrpsgKo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7mUCGrpsgKo&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7mUCGrpsgKo&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7mUCGrpsgKo>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7mUCGrpsgKo&media=>
close 
3.59pm BST 

We haven't had chance to go to an all-American diner as yet on this trip, so 
we're following this tip for Marcy's, from a non-affliated tweeter called 
@marcylara <>.
Marcy Lara (@marcylara) 
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> theres a diner in 
Portland called Marcy's Diner ;). Never been but friends brought me back a mug 
and raved about breakfast!
 <https://twitter.com/marcylara/statuses/383436153224822784> September 27, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/marcylara/statuses/383436153224822784> 
Updated at 4.03pm BST

3.48pm BST 

To help those cruise ship blow-ins understand a bit more about Maine, here's a 
clip from New England comic Tim Sample on getting to grips with the Maine 
accent - accents being a particular talking point on this tour. As suggested by 
readeraeausa,  <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27374606>
who has been serving us well with tips all week.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTz9LBxNai4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTz9LBxNai4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTz9LBxNai4&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTz9LBxNai4&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTz9LBxNai4>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhTz9LBxNai4&media=>
close 
Updated at 5.02pm BST

3.44pm BST 

Woah. This is unexpected. We turn a corner and run into the mother of all 
cruise ships.

Greta, who lives here and is offering great insider info as we go along, says: 
"I always find it funny to see people coming off the cruise ships dressing how 
they think Maine should be. All hiking boots and chunky sweaters, even when 
it's 85F out and they are only walking around town."

3.38pm BST 

Portland is a city of 500,000 people. There's an eastern prom and a western 
prom. We are on the east side. By the road is a row of archetypal New England 
houses, big and detached with inviting verandas. Below a long, green park runs 
alongside the ocean, which is dotted with sailing boats and tree-filled 
islands. We're looking out over Casco Bay. It's pretty idyllic around here.

Updated at 3.39pm BST

3.19pm BST 

We're taking a drive around town. We're at the modestly named Top Of The World 
park, in the East End, looking out over the city. 

3.16pm BST 

While Vicky, Greta and Kylie experience a near-religious sugar rush in the 
Holy Donut, we'll set the day up with some tunes. Vicky asked last night if any 
famous musicians/bands hail from Portland (Maine)... we haven't established 
that yet, so if you know any, spare our blushes and let us know.

In the meantime, we wasted no time in asking the Portland music blog 
Hillytown.com <> to give us a playlist. Here's what we got. Enjoy. And send us 
your requests. Please. And we'll play 'em.

Updated at 3.21pm BST

2.56pm BST 

Now Leigh, the owner, has come in.

The business started when she started experimenting in her kitchen just a 
couple of years ago and took her donuts down to a local cafe. They sold like 
the hot cakes they were and she saw a gap in the market for comfort food with 
an organic twist.

Updated at 3.21pm BST

2.50pm BST 

We're spoit for choice here: Maine blueberry, sweet potato ginger, apple 
cider. From the old wood frontage, retro signs and worn-in furnishings, it 
feels like it has been here for ever, but it turns out that's a ploy; it opened 
in March 2012. They're opening their second location next month.

We meet Jeff, the owner's brother-in-law. Which one is his favourite?

"That is like asking which one of my children is my favourite."

He wriggles on the spot.

"Maybe the dark chocolate sea salt, that's the most popular one. Or the bacon 
cheddar." 

Updated at 2.58pm BST

2.44pm BST 

First stop of the day: The Holy Donut <http://www.theholydonut.com>.

Thanks to @avcrofts <https://twitter.com/avcrofts/status/382982752854740992> 
for the tip on Twitter. It's pretty busy in here, a steady stream of people at 
the counter, getting their morning donut fix. They make their donuts with 
mashed potato and all natural, local ingredients. Even the coloured glazes come 
from fruit juice.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn3K_4tY12XE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn3K_4tY12XE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn3K_4tY12XE&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn3K_4tY12XE&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn3K_4tY12XE>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dn3K_4tY12XE&media=>
close 
Updated at 2.52pm BST

2.31pm BST 

Good morning, Maine!

We're in Portland today and heading onward up the coast to the our final New 
England destination: Bar Harbor.

Yesterday in Boston: we went on the trail of Whitey Bulger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/26/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-524466aae4b04fc121705fed>
 (he of the movie Departed) in Southie; wecaught the T 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/26/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-52445eb7e4b04fc121705fe6>
; we got a dose of history after we sawa guide in 18th-century dress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/26/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-52448f31e4b0761b18b0f19b>
 and kidnapped him, so he could give us an alternative Freedom Trail (in the 
park, while eating Italian food); we explored the North End; we had theGreat 
Cannoli Challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/26/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-524495cbe4b04fb60c602681>
 (Mike's got the local vote, but we were also very taken withMaria's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/26/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5244886de4b0761b18b0f197>
). Then we hit the road to Maine, stopping inthe other Essex  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/26/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5244b9a2e4b0161c92c1c7de>
and eatingclams in Ipswich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/26/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5244c751e4b04fc121706007>
.

We finally made it to Portland and went to Eventide oyster bar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/26/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5244edf9e4b04fb60c60268d>
. We're ticking off plenty of classic seafood dishes as we go along. More 
today, we hope.

Please keep those tips coming as we head on up the coast: @VickyBaker 
<https://twitter.com/vickybaker>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, via GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc> or in the 
comments below.
 Gary, the 18th-century cannoli tester ... and Boston tour guide 
Updated at 8.35pm BST
 