
5.57am BST 

Signing off from the Violet Hour

We've reached our final stop o the evening. The entrance to Violet Hour is a 
wall. We walk past it twice. On our third pass, we spot the outlines of a door. 
Bingo. Inside, it's dark. All we have is candles. 

At the bar, we sit next to Dylan Laurino, @juicymerchguy 
<https://twitter.com/juicymerchguy>, who insists we try malort – a local 
moonshine made from grapefruit. "It tastes like fucking citrus garbage", he 
says, "the bartenders won't even charge you it tastes that bad". 

The bartender pours one for everyone at the bar. Ryan's description is spot 
on. Generous, even. However, they have a fancy version – a malort cocktail 
featuring bourbon, punt e mes, malort, bitters. It's significantly less 
garbage-tasting, and potent enough to suitably end the evening.

Chicago, you've been superb. The day began with an architectural boat tour, 
and finished with Bone Thugs-N-Harmony and grapefruit moonshine that tastes 
like garbage. Bravo.

Tomorrow, onwards …

5.57am BST 

Day one mapped

The first day of Benji's road trip took him winding through the windy city's 
downtown, from the deep dishes to the North Shore to the hipster enclave of 
Wicker Park.

5.47am BST 

Superb. Crowd writhing. It's a Monday night. 

5.36am BST 

Multitasking, Thugs' style

Work, play, and retweeting top tippage.

Updated at 5.39am BST

5.15am BST 

Nostalgia and aliens playing basketball

Some kind words (and love for Kuma's) below the line from Hawkeye1980 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4357593>:

Pics brought a tear to my eye. Lived in Chicago seven years and never wanted 
to leave … interestingly captures this spectacular American city with an eager 
outsider's eye (Big props for sojourning to Kuma's) Downtown's iconic and all, 
but I could walk around Lincoln Park and Old Town for ages. There's a real 
warmth to those streets. Thanks for the postcard.

Kevinstar <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12237544> was also 
generous, also loves Kuma's, and could not be more correct about 
Chicagoans: "We are much more than Al Capone, Michael Jordan and Oprah".

We should not, however, forget the greatest basketball player of all time 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LAr6oAKieHk> and co-star of Space Jam 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0117705/>. 

The 90s nostalgia is strong right now.

4.55am BST 

Bone Thugs

The Chicagoan Gods are smiling on us. We followed Ryan to Double Door, where 
Bone Thugs-N-Harmony are playing – yes, them of the mid-90s – and we got in. 
I'm pretty sure I know every word to The Crossroads 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VMYAEHE2GrM>, and I'm going to prove that to 
these people.

This was named in the top 5 hipsterest nightbourhoods in the US – by Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/morganbrennan/2012/09/20/americas-hippest-hipster-neighborhoods/>
 no less – and there's nothing that shows your hipster credentials more than 
loudly shouting every word to The Crossroads by Bone Thugs-N-Harmony in public. 
I got this.

4.40am BST 

We've made friends in Wicker Park

Three facts about Ryan, the guy with a mohawk helmet.

1. Ryan used to be a pro ballroom dancer.

2. Ryan has "lived a hard life and came out of it alive".

3. Ryan is going to a Bone Thugs-N-Harmony concert right now, at a place called
Double Door <http://www.doubledoor.com/>, and he's gonna try to take us with 
him.

Updated at 4.55am BST

4.23am BST 

Cross cultural asides

And as the gang heads to meet whomever's out Monday night in Chicago, we can 
take a quick architectural interlude courtesy @woyce <https://twitter.com/woyce>
, who more or less hit upon the two highlights that the team missed. 

Frank Lloyd Wright – the eccentric Beethoven-inspired fellow who designed the 
Guggenheim – lived and worked in Chicago's environs for many years. The fruits 
of his labor in the area have been recommended to us by LaVacheKyrie 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26226769http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26226769>
 and others, and you can tour many of these buildings, includinghis home and 
studio <http://www.gowright.org/> out in the burbs.

What's all the fuss? Ever helpful Wiki illustrates a sample of the weirdness:
 Frank Lloyd Wright designed home in Oak Park. Photograph: /Wiki  Frank Lloyd 
Wright home and studio. Photograph: /Wiki 
And what of the Bahá'í? The Chicago-area temple 
<http://www.bahai.us/bahai-temple/> is actually the oldest of the extant seven 
around the world, and like its famous counterpart in Israel, gardens and 
fountains surround the massive central dome. The state tourism board named it 
"one of the seven wonders of Illinois".
 Chicago's Bahai temple. Photograph: /Wiki 
4.08am BST 

Wild things

While the guys are struggling to (literally) feed their carnivorous instincts, 
we can glance at Chicago's more naturally feral inhabitants – the city's world 
class collection of flora and fauna, as recommended by readers yet unseen by 
the Guardian's wandering trio.

@Ameritoon <https://twitter.com/Ameritoon> recommended the Lincoln Park Zoo 
<http://www.lpzoo.org/>, which from their website, seems to be full of various 
sorts of babies: baby gibbons, langurs, takins, gorillas, bushbabies 
<http://www.lpzoo.org/animals/new-arrivals> and so on. Visitors are presumably 
astounded to see adorable wildlife not on internet slideshows – and for free! 
(Furthermore, Chicago seems to have itsred pandas 
<http://www.lpzoo.org/animals/factsheet/red-panda> in check, unlike Washington 
DC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2013/jun/25/red-panda-washington-national-zoo-video>
.)
 Chicagoans who would not struggle with Kuma's burgers. Photograph: /Lincoln 
Park Zoo 
Should you find Lincoln Park a bit too dry, Chicago is also home to the Shedd 
Aquarium <http://www.sheddaquarium.org/>, the largest indoor aquarium in the 
world, per their website. Like the zoo, though, it has an enormous number of 
animals who don't belong anywhere near Illinois: a giant octopus, frogfish 
<http://www.sheddaquarium.org/frogfish.html>, beluga whales 
<http://www.sheddaquarium.org/oceanarium.html>, a blue iguana 
<http://www.sheddaquarium.org/worldwaters.html>, and, of course, sharks 
<http://www.sheddaquarium.org/blacktipreefsharks.html>.

And last but not least is the Garfield Conservatory 
<http://www.garfield-conservatory.org/>, one of the largest in the country, 
complete with six greenhouses and "two grand exhibition halls". There are 
interior deserts, rain forests and 300-year-old ferns growing here, and the 
glass edifice – itself around since the 1840s –stands in Garfield Park 
<http://www.chicagoparkdistrict.com/parks/Garfield-Park/>, which has everything 
your 19th-21st century park goer could dream of: winding paths, sport fields, a 
pool and a pond.

3.50am BST 

Gary, meanwhile, opted for the "Mastodon", which is only slightly more 
recognizable as a burger.

Whether he can bring out his inner Ice Age hunter and defeat the thing remains 
to be seen.

3.31am BST 

A witness to the herculean

This is Pauline. Pauline has seen an actual human eat two Slayer burgers in a 
row.

3.22am BST 

Benji v Slayer

Oh my days. This is barely a burger. This is an edible autonomous state. This 
burger could legitimately operate own legal system. There's a mound of cheese 
on top of a mound of meat on top of a mound of other stuff that I can't really 
make out because it's dim-lit in here and I've taken my glasses off because I 
might cry.

3.08am BST 

Talking smack n' cheese

They've just delivered a "side" of mac n' cheese. It could comfortably feed a 
family of three. I'm a peculiar mix of scared and exhilarated. I'm also 
slightly worried that if I don't finish this someone here will put me in a 
headlock.

2.51am BST 

Kuma's

We're inside, and we've met the manager, Frank DeBose. Brilliantly, he's 
telling us about his love of Manchester City – he lived in Didsbury for seven 
years in the 80s.

He's also running us though the menu, recommending the "Slayer": 10oz of beef, 
chili, caremalized onions, andouille (what's that?!), cherry pepper, Monterrey 
jack, scallions, anger. Yup, anger. apparently it really ties the burger 
together. I've ordered one. Braced for impact.

[Editor's note: andouille is a kind of sausage popular in Cajun cooking, and 
also what a French epicurean sort might idiomatically call you 
<http://www.wordreference.com/fren/Andouille> for ordering a dish named the 
"Slayer".]

Updated at 3.10am BST

2.36am BST 

Cornering Kuma

Arrived in Avondale … a distinct neighbourhood feel. Low orange light, 
low-rise, grungy.

 We're loitering outside of Kuma's. We can hear the music inside pumping. 
They're playing a kung-fu movie above the bar in which everyone is dying. I'm 
hungry.

2.23am BST 

Cabbing with Benji and Gary

Does not much amuse their cab driver …

Or Hollis.

Updated at 2.26am BST

2.16am BST 

The night ahead

From here we'll head to Avondale, for dinner at Kuma's Corner 
<http://www.kumascorner.com/>, a highly endorsed tip kicked off by @MarkPakulski
 <https://twitter.com/MarkPakulski> and re-suggested 
<https://twitter.com/benjilanyado/status/372122155775184896> by many since. 
It's a heavy metal burger joint. I don't fully get this. Must I mosh as I 
munch? 

The Yelp page <http://m.yelp.co.uk/biz/kumas-corner-chicago> is overwhelming – 
people love this place. 

But what of Avondale? Is it a one-metal-burger-joint town? Tips welcome. From 
there we'll aim for Wicker Park, Chicago's hippest hood. I just said "hippest 
hood". Will they not let me in now? 

2.03am BST 

Not bad

J Parker's is not bad at all … 

but the road awaits, so we'll have to look back fondly after coming back down 
to earth.

Updated at 2.08am BST

1.51am BST 

Insta-updates: bonanza!

Callie, our waitress, is from Indy – currently sharing tips off the I65.

A bit of the sunset hour at J Parker …

And an update on Gary: he took American prescription cold medicine an hour 
ago. 

1.35am BST 

J Parker's jaw-dropping rooftop

Tip of the day so far, from @karlazimmerman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12220601>.

We're up on the roof of the J Parker <http://www.jparkerchicago.com>, as 
witching hour turns to sunset hour. The savvy locals are up here too, none as 
sweaty as me. They've been home and re-humanised. 

It's a well-dressed crowd, scattered across the rooftop with sensible indie 
wafting from the speakers. The view … lordy. 

Updated at 1.38am BST

1.21am BST 

Wandering the town

12.59am BST 

This is the gloaming

We've entered the American "witching hour", the time between work and 
everything else. These folk go home, refresh, re-apply, before heading out.

We Brits, mistakenly I think, have no time for such temperance – we hit the 
pub and go hard, early. Lincoln Park is full of strollers now, ambling up and 
down Wells Street. I like.

Updated at 1.13am BST

12.41am BST 

The readers' guide to Chicago happy hour

The guys plan on venturing into Wicker Park after dinner for the flavor of 
Chicago's breweries, music and nightlife. (They're deciding between a couple 
options –Big Star? Velvet Hour? Map Room? – so you can still help make up 
Benji's mind for him @BenjiLanyado <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado>.)

But readers have supplied plenty of choices all around the city:

Nellie DeBruyn <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12025008>
 recommends "the West Loop for meals and cocktails. Check out Aviary 
<http://theaviary.com/> and … If the price of admission is too frightening, 
stroll up the street toPublican <http://thepublicanrestaurant.com/>, or over a 
ways toAu Cheval <http://auchevalchicago.com/> for the best burgers in town and 
amazing music to accompany."

ianmichaelgumby <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10663406>
 disagrees about Aviary, and throws in a counteroffer: "Aviary is over priced. 
And over rated. Or you could hitMatchbox 
<http://www.yelp.com/biz/the-matchbox-chicago> on Milwaukee"

johnakirk101 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10400144>
 suggests Owen and Engine <http://www.owenandengine.com/%20>, "winner of best 
fish and chips in Chicago", would appeal to anyone with a taste for craft beer 
and pub food.

missMM <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12237132> has suggested 
a slew around Logan Square and the West Loop: TheWhistler 
<http://whistlerchicago.com/> ("a bar, gallery, record label, and venue") 
Scofflaw <http://scofflawchicago.com/> (a gin bar), Three Dots and A Dash 
<http://threedotschicago.com/> (tiki!), Longman and Eagle 
<http://www.longmanandeagle.com/> (an inn), The Drawing Room 
<http://thedrchicago.com/> (a restaurant), as well as the "divine"
rooftop of Little Goat <http://www.littlegoatchicago.com/> (a diner below and 
a bar atop). She also recommends the "good dive"Delilah's 
<http://www.delilahschicago.com/>.

And finally, Hiro111 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3994321>
 throws in an entire list of beers to try, since "Chicago is all about the 
local beer these days … [besides] Goose Island, other fine Midwestern brews to 
sample include: <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26369478>

Revolution (Chicago)
Two Brothers (Chicago suburbs)
Three Floyds (Indiana)
New Glarus (Wisconsin, admittedly hard to find in Chicago)
Capital (Wisconsin)
Great Lakes (Ohio)
Founders (Michigan)
Boulevard (Missouri)

Updated at 1.40am BST

12.18am BST 

Chicago III

A playlist in part for @missMM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12237132>, who wouldn't let us 
get away with omitting Sufjan Stevens.

With the day winding down in the windy city, the team is starting to think 
about tomorrow's plan. What should they see on the road to Indy? Are there 
strange Midwestern foods to try? Bizarre roadside attractions to behold? People 
to meet and detours to make? 

Tell us below the line or by tweeting to @BenjiLanyado 
<https://twitter.com/benjilanyado>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>

11.58pm BST 

Consuming substances

Recharging batteries – both literally and figuratively – on Well St, Lincoln 
Park. It's the post-work witching hour, restaurants opening and prepping for 
the evening.

Meanwhile on Twitter, two major food tips are emerging: Kuma's Corner  
<http://www.kumascorner.com/>for burgers, and Hot Dougs 
<http://www.hotdougs.com/> for, yup, hot dogs. @MarkPakulski 
<https://twitter.com/MarkPakulski?original_referer=https%3A%2F%2Fflexible.gutools.co.uk%2Fadmin%2Fpreview%2F521b31e3e4b055bf6bac8848&tw_i=372086050404831232&tw_p=tweetembed>
 makes a convincing case for the burgers:

Gary's belly update: tranquil. His sinuses, less so. He's got a minor cold, an 
just dipped into a Walgreens for some meds. They IDed him for looking under 40 
– what they have him taking includes an active ingredient of meth. Look forward 
to Flying Gary in T-minus 30 mins.

Updated at 12.14am BST

11.39pm BST 

No ma'am, we're musicians

Lest we forget the other all-time movie filmed and set in Chicago, The Blues 
Brothers <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0080455/>.

11.19pm BST 

Pit stop

At St Michael's <http://www.st-mikes.org/> Church in Old Town.

Updated at 12.07am BST

11.10pm BST 

Walking Lincoln

We're in Lincoln Park, where we found ourselves walking in sync with Mike 
Robinson, who lives here.

[Editor's note: the people of Illinois are, unsurprisingly, rather proud of 
Abraham Lincoln, who served their state in the Senate before becoming 
president. This 12ft statue has a double in Parliament Square, and its title 
more or less reflects how Chicagoans feel about the Civil War leader: 'Abraham 
Lincoln: The Man.')

We wander past Twin Anchors <http://www.twinanchorsribs.com/>, a dive bar with 
blackened windows – Mike tells us about how the area used to be home to dozens 
of German brewers, and the area proliferated with speakeasies during 
Prohibition.

Twin Anchors was one of them. It's totally different here – low-rise and 
leafy, lined with old stone and wooden slat houses. Mike explains – this was 
the northern limit of the Great Chicago Fire 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Chicago_Fire> in 1871. 

10.48pm BST 

Anglo-American Gothic

Sadly, there's not nearly enough time to make the Chi Art Institute 
<http://www.artic.edu/>, which has come highly recommended by @mouseboy33  
<http://twitter.com/mouseboy33>and johnakirk101 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10400144>, among others. Among 
the collection <http://www.artic.edu/aic/collections/> – which is massive, 
ranges from ancient artifacts the world over, and generally looks spectacular – 
is one particularly (in)famous painting: American Gothic, byGrant Wood 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grant_Wood>.

Courtesy Wiki:
 American Gothic, by Grant Wood. Photograph: /Wikipedia 
At this point, though, parodies of the painting may have become more famous 
than the original; they feature zombies, presidents, Muppets, TV characters, 
Legos and go on and on and on 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=american+gothic&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ei=SsgbUt6iBcOHhQfWuYHoCQ&ved=0CAkQ_AUoAQ&biw=773&bih=929#fp=619f30099b52d0cf&q=american%20gothic%20parody&revid=874051136&tbm=isch&imgdii=_>
. Have any of your own?

10.31pm BST 

Where to?

Your whims are Benji's command, readers – tell us where to go!

10.01pm BST 

North Avenue Beach

From a 95th floor lookout over Chicago's sprawling downtown … to the beach, in 
under 10 minutes. Great tip from @MaxineSheppard 
<https://twitter.com/MaxineSheppard>. We're currently perched at Castaways Bar 
and Grill <http://www.castawayschicago.com/index.html>. 

It's shaped like a giant boat and they're playing One Direction, but we'll 
forgive them that, because the views are beautiful – clean blonde sand with a 
sprinkling of people laid out along the shore, some swimming out between wooden 
pylons in the water. I repeat: we're 10 mins from downtown. Bravo Chicago.

9.44pm BST 

Prohibition's Day Off

In case vicariously touring Chicago with Benji doesn't quite have the 
delinquent kick you're looking for, two classics of the 80s show the city from 
three very different points of view: students playing hooky, gangsters brewing 
hooch, and the authority figures trying to catch them. Ferris Bueller's Day Off 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0091042/> and The Untouchables 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0094226/>.

Below the line, @johnakirk101 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26365960> has suggested 
that the crew reenact two iconic scenes: leaning down from the Sears Tower
 (which@mouseboy33 <https://twitter.com/mouseboy33/status/372056089203703809> 
tells us is not to be called the Willis Tower 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Willis_Tower>) and the Union Station 
<http://blog.amtrak.com/2013/06/untouchabes-stair-scene/> shootout. Without 
time to run hijack parade floats or rob banks, however, we're left with YouTube 
to console us.

Oddly enough, both films center around a battle of wits: Sean Connery's 
hard-boiled cop v Robert De Nero's vicious Al Capone, and Matthew Broderick 
eponymous Ferris v his high school's Ahab-like dean of students. Not sure what 
all these defiant rule-breakers say about Chicago …

And curiously, Chicago Magazine 
<http://www.chicagomag.com/Radar/Deal-Estate/August-2013/Ferris-Bueller-House-Is-Back-but-Without-Ferris/>
 tells us that Ferris' famous house –glass walls intact 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G-Nunm3Sbzo> – is for sale if you want it … 
only $1.5m.

Updated at 10.00pm BST

9.19pm BST 

Chicago tuneage

The guys are heading up to North Avenue Beach, so to accompany them (and us) 
we've compiled reader requests and bands with ties to the windiest of 
cities. Tells us your picks in the comments below, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, and we'll add them to the next one!

9.02pm BST 

Dissolving city

8.38pm BST 

The view from (close to) the top

Oh wow, this is incredible. We were walking north toward Lincoln Park, right 
next to the famousJohn Hancock Tower <http://www.johnhancockcenterchicago.com/>
. Our photographer Hollis had a superb diversion. Tourists here are usually 
corralled towards the "observatory" on the 94th floor, for $20 a pop.

One floor above that, fairly unmarked at street level, is the Signature Room, 
free for all. I'm currently sipping a coffee next to floor-to-ceiling windows 
with the most astonishing views of the city. 

My ears are popping a little. To my left, a vast ridge of skyscrapers stretch 
from the shores of Lake Michigan to the edges of the downtown district. East 
Chicago is sprawling in front of me, dissolving into the clouds in the 
distance. Magnificent.

Updated at 8.45pm BST

8.02pm BST 

And the winner is...

No dilemma for Benji, who needed little persuasion...we're now looking for 
Lincoln Park tips!

8.00pm BST 

Split vote

While Benji and the boys have been shoeing in the pie, we have a split vote on 
what to do next.

Some readers are pointing us in the direction of history and the arts downtown:

 @woyce  <http://twitter.com/benjilanyado>says: Jane Addams' Hull House  
<http://www.uic.edu/jaddams/hull/>is undervisited & close to downtown.

@mouseboy33  <http://twitter.com/mouseboy33>reckons: "Chi History Museum 
<http://www.chicagohistory.org>. Chi Art Insitute <http://www.artic.edu>."

Others reckon a trip to the burbs and Frank Lloyd Wright architecture is in 
order:

LaVacheKyrie: 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26226769http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26226769>
 "for a Brit, I'd recommend a visit to the Frank Lloyd Wright buildings in Oak 
Park (especially the octagon shaped studio, andRobie House  
<http://www.gowright.org/research/wright-robie-house.html‎>in Hyde Park)."

While @MaxineSheppard  <http://twitter.com/benjilanyado>pushes for the beach: 
"Fairly busy beach, but North Avenue Beach House is shaped like an ocean liner".

Gah! So much to do, so little time. Advice please?

7.40pm BST 

Let them eat pie

We've made it to Gino's East <http://ginoseast.com>. OK, let's talk about the 
deep dish. You know what? It's fine. In fact, I'd go as far as saying its good. 
These guys clearly know what they're doing - the crust is big, but not 
offensively so. And the stuff in the middle, it's upside down (sauce over 
cheese), but the sauce is rich and sweet. 

Also, a new mantra from our photographer Hollis: if in doubt, "dip it in 
ranch". This improves the deep dish experience by approx. 20%.

Gino's East is great fun - almost entirely daubed in graffiti from visitors.

I found a friendly face, and added my own. 

Updated at 7.43pm BST

7.00pm BST 

Instagram tips

Our photographer Hollis Bennett has taken over the Guardian News Instagram 
<http://instagram.com/guardiannews> feed for this trip from Chicago to Memphis, 
and you can also leave tips there

@chicagofoodlord <http://instagram.com/chicagofoodlord> has offered:

my Wicker Park favs are Lockdown Bar and Grill, Antique Taco, and Mana Food 
Bar (vegetarian but still delicious)

Updated at 7.01pm BST

6.54pm BST 

Deep thinking

For all you never ever wanted or needed to know about the evolution of the 
deep-dish pizza/pie in Chicago, we point you in the direction of the
chicagoeater.com blog archives 
<http://chicago.eater.com/archives/2012/05/08/chicagos-deep-dish-history-the-beginning.php>
:

Deep dish pizza first appeared in a commercial setting when Ike Sewell and Ric 
Riccardo (born Richard Novaretti) opened the restaurant now known as Pizzeria 
Uno in 1943...Sewell pushed for something much more substantial than the 
Neapolitan version and the two came up with deep dish pizza.

The only problem being:

there is zero evidence to support the notion that two guys with no known 
cooking acumen came up with the recipe for deep dish pizza.

Enough said. Over to @grantkmartin  <http://twitter.com/grantkmartin>on 
Twitter:

Deep dish is a scam, a tourist trap. Some people like it, some don't

Or maybe @curlyadamb <http://twitter.com/curlyadamb> has it down pat:

Italians cooking pizzas in frying pans in their tenement ovens after leaving 
the old country... I think

6.35pm BST 

Doh!

Appears Benji is being led by his belly. And despite professing a distrust for 
all things deep-dish - "Fact fans: why does Chicago do this deep-dish pizza 
thing? Who started this madness? Was it a mistake? It's ok you can tell me" - 
he's doing the deep-dish thing.

6.20pm BST 

Beyond the belly

Lots of food tips coming in - for deep-dish pizza at Gino's Eas 
<http://www.ginoseast.com>t, tacos on the patio at Big Star 
<http://bigstarchicago.com> in Wicker Park, for Franks N Dawgs 
<http://franksndawgs.com> in Lincoln Park (shark bacon, eggs, and scallop 
sausages) andDevil Dawgs <http://devildawgs.com>. Thanks to all on Twitter and 
below ... but it feels like indigestion could be approaching after that 
breakfast. And we're mindful of poor Gary's constitution!

What else should our crew SEE and DO?

Updated at 6.24pm BST

5.44pm BST 

Muddy waters

Great story: in the late 1800s, Chicago had a dirty water problem - all the 
city's waste was, erm, dumped into the Chicago River, which flowed into Lake 
Michigan, where they got their drinking water from. Euw.

So, in 1889, the city's planners reversed the flow of the river, using 
"engineering and gravity", according to our guide. They reversed the river!!

Everyone was happy and healthy. Apart from the city of St Louis, who were the 
proud new downstream inheritants of Chicago's cumulative crap. St Louis sued 
Chicago, but it all ended OK. "In fact, by the time the waste water hit St 
Louis, it was fine because it had been 'naturally aerated' on the journey" says 
our guide.

Updated at 6.31pm BST

5.32pm BST 

View from a boat

The Chicago Architecture Foundation River Cruise 
<http://www.architecture.org/tours/boat-tours> takes in some of the greatest 
architecture in the world - in every style - in a few short blocks. From the 
Tribune Tower to the Wrigley Tower to Trump Tower - from Deco to Gothic to 
Modern to Spanish Renaissance. Mind blown again!

Updated at 5.45pm BST

5.26pm BST 

It's grrrr-eat

35 West Wacker - a post-modern Goliath that houses the Leo Burnett advertising 
company. This is where Tony the Tiger was invented. MIND BLOWN.

Updated at 5.28pm BST

5.06pm BST 

Tribune Tower 101

We're indebted to A View on Cities 
<http://www.aviewoncities.com/chicago/tribunetower.htm> for this background on 
the Tribune building:

In 1922, the Chicago Daily Tribune organized a competition for the 'most 
beautiful and eye-catching building in the world'. Raymond Hood - who would 
later build theRockefeller Center 
<http://www.aviewoncities.com/nyc/rockefellercenter.htm> in New York 
<http://www.aviewoncities.com/nyc.htm> - and John Howell won the first place 
due to their Gothic design...

The award was very much criticized at the time as the Gothic design went 
against the modernizing trend set by the Chicago School and against the ideas 
of the more functional European architecture, later known as the International 
Style, which reduced decorations to the bare minimum. It would in fact be the 
second place design from Eliel Saarinen and another major contender from Walter 
Gropius which would greatly influence later skyscraper designs.

The Tribune Tower was completed in 1925 and reaches a height of 141m.

4.55pm BST 

Gothic gawking

Sitting on the banks, braced for a boat trip on the Chicago River. Can't stop 
staring at theTribune Building <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tribune_Tower> 
across the water. I just love this stuff, built in an era of 1920s showing-off 
exuberance, when frills and grand flourishes were the foundations of anything 
big. The top 10 floors look like a cathedral. Doing neck exercises.

4.48pm BST 

And the winner is...

Looks like they're heading for a boat tour of Chicago architecture - despite 
them eating enough at breakfast to sink an architectural tour boat

Updated at 4.51pm BST

4.15pm BST 

Next course?

With breakfast all but over ... what should Benji do next?

In our expert Q&A last week 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26225483>, Chicago resident
ChrisdesGarennes <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12182716> 
suggested a feast for the eyes:

Some of the best tours in Chicago are offered by the Chicago Architecture 
Foundation. They offer a variety of different kinds (walking, boat, elevated 
train) and I recommend for first-time visitors to take the classic river 
architectural boat tour for a good overview of Chicago architecture

Seconded by @klemieur  <https://twitter.com/klemieur>and thirded by @Ameritoon 
 <https://twitter.com/klemieur>on Twitter. Fourthed by Nellie De Bruyn 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26362286> in the comments 
below.

Appears to be winning by a country mile. Any advances? Tips to the usual 
places, please:@BenjiLanyado <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel> or below in the comments

Updated at 4.42pm BST

4.00pm BST 

Happy eater

Updated at 4.01pm BST

3.55pm BST 

Cheesy/eggy/supersized breakfast

Swimming in ingredients at Yolk <http://eatyolk.com>. This is breakfast as our 
American God intended. Nothing is straight up - there are five different eggs 
Benedict, ranging from "caprese" (mozzarella, pesto etc) to "south of the 
border benny" featuring chipotle, cilantro (CORIANDER!) and chorizo.

Jetlagged Gary is almost crying with joy. I have a rabbit in the headlights 
moment, and somehow order three slices of cake slathered in cheese then deep 
fried and grilled.I'm eating deep-fried cheesy cake for breakfast.

So far: EXCELLENT.

Updated at 4.45pm BST

3.44pm BST 

3.37pm BST 

Meet the team

Left to right: Gary (the driver), Benji (knee-knacked blogger), Hollis (the 
photographer)

3.24pm BST 

3.10pm BST 

Chicago playlist

While we're waiting for Benji and the team to get their first coffee rush 
going, let's spin a few tunes courtesy of our resident DJ@jaimeblack 
<https://twitter.com/jaimeblack> at Dynasty Podcasts 
<http://dynastypodcasts.com>.

We will be taking requests throughout the trip, so tell us what you want to 
hear, and we'll put it up on our daily playlists - in the comments below, or
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/about/resources/buttons#hashtag>

2.38pm BST 

Goo-oo-d mor-n-ing Chicago!

My name is Benji Lanyado, and I'm yours.

For the next five days, I'm going to be travelling from Chicago to Memphis, 
guided solely by your tips.

I've just woken up.

Today, the Chi City and I are going on a hot date. By the end of it, we will 
have fallen in love and consummated our relationship in a blur of Frank Lloyd 
Wright and deep-dish pizza. Actually, maybe not deep-dish pizza, which I 
profoundly distrust. I'm willing to give it a go, but I'm telling you, it just 
doesn't add up.

Anyway, I have company. Hollis Bennett <http://www.hollisbennett.com> is our 
Nashville-based photographer who has the enviable task of visually capturing 
our trip, and the unenviable task of trying to make me not look like an idiot 
in the pictures. 

Also on board is Gary Engelbert. That's correct: Engelbert. Gary is one of my 
oldest friends, and here are a couple of things you need to know about him: 1) 
Gary is the designated driver for this trip. Tomorrow we're picking up a SUV. 
Gary has never before driven anything bigger than a Peugeot 205. 2) Gary's 
constitution frequently fails him when he departs the UK. I'll be giving you 
(and more importantly, his mum) regular status updates as we travel. Currently: 
encouragingly calm.

Right, let's do this. I'm at the ACME Hotel <http://www.acmehotelcompany.com> 
in downtown Chicago (thanks to@HeloRighetto <https://twitter.com/HeloRighetto> 
for the tip), and I need to get my bearings. What's the first thing I should do 
in this city?

Tips to the usual places please: @BenjiLanyado 
<https://twitter.com/benjilanyado>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, or in the comments below. 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>
 