
4.11am BST 

Summary

Philly certainly seems to have its own thing going on. We only wish we had 
more time. We're about to sign off now. Onward to Boston tomorrow.

Oh, and the tattoo challenge? How's this? Benjamin Franklin, dressed 
as Eazy-E, in a Phillys hat. Excuse my hairy legs. Night all! 

4.05am BST 

There's a whole bunch of us in the bar now. The three of us, George and his 
friends, Sean from@wonderfulmachine <https://twitter.com/wonderflmachine> and 
another few folk we seemed to have picked up on the way. We've been taking 
about the regeneration of Philly.

We also spoke about how people are moving here from New York. They got priced 
out of Manhattan, then Brooklyn, and this seemed like a good alternative. 
Although the people of Philly weren't so pleased when the New York Times wrote 
a piece referring to Philadelphia as "the next borough 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/08/14/fashion/sundaystyles/14PHILLY.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
". 

4.01am BST 

It's an attractive neighbourhood. More rows of brick terraces, all fairly low 
rise. On the walk over, we saw the lit-up skyline in the distance. We're about 
two miles from the centre of town.

3.55am BST 

Jerry's

Jerry's has only been open a few months. I just spoke to Bill, the owner, who 
said an old beer joint lay on this spot called Jerry's. He kept the name in 
homage to his brother of the same name who passed away. It's a cool vibe, 
and also classy. There's a really nice finish to all the furnishings and 
fittings, and that's because Bill owns a masonry company and dabbles in 
antiques dealing. 

3.52am BST 

Comfort food tippage

2mWingspan <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1596579> has noted 
an important point of cheesesteak etiquette. If you choose to bravethe whiz 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheez_Whiz> – though provolone is a perfectly 
respectable alternative, be sure to state it as such:

Order a "with whizz"...3,000 calories or so of wholesome goodness.

Meanwhile, MoreaMou <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12334869>
 and @KoryStamper <https://twitter.com/KoryStamper> press for Federal Donuts 
<http://www.federaldonuts.com/> on 2nd Street, and recommend going early – 
before they run out. Should the team head there for breakfast tomorrow?

3.40am BST 

We're walking down to Jerry's <http://jerrysbarphilly.com/>, tipped by 
@wonderfulmachine <https://twitter.com/wonderflmachine>, whom we're meeting 
there.

3.33am BST 

George is telling us the story behind his music mag. He's a journalist and 
university lecturer.

"In 2010 I took a bunch of students to London and realised they were mostly 
interested in getting drunk in a foreign place, so I thought I'd harness that 
in a good way and make a magazine. They interviewed bands, wrote reviews. And 
when I got back to Philly, my friends in the music industry said, 'Why don't 
you do that here?' So I did. We now put it out every three months, written by 
friends, students and former students."

Updated at 3.37am BST

3.22am BST 

Since Vicky, Greta and Kylie are out enjoying fine Philadelphia beverages at 
Johnny Brenda's, it's a good opportunity to note that not only is Pennsylvania 
the cradle of the United States, it's also the birthplace of American beer.
Yuengling <> is the oldest brewery in the US, and a number of smaller 
enterprises have recently found success, like Yards, Victory and Philadelphia 
Brewery.

Be warned, however, that Pennsylvania has peculiar, very old laws which have 
made BYOB restaurants commonplace throughout the state. EvenWiki 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_films_and_television_shows_shot_in_Pennsylvania>
 says these laws are "some of the most restrictive in the United States, and 
contain many peculiarities not found in other states". Alas, William Penn's 
Quaker spirit of tolerance didn't sink in among future legislators. 

Updated at 3.38am BST

3.12am BST 

Backtracking a moment …

We've met George from Jump Philly at Johnny Brenda's, about six blocks' walk 
from Kraftwork.

Updated at 3.34am BST

3.00am BST 

Johnny Brenda's

We've made it to the reader bar of choice, Johnny Brenda's. 

A band called Tin Horses are playing upstairs. The blurb says they have Kurt 
Vile sound."He's from just up the road, too," says George. I like a bit of Kurt 
Vile, so we're heading up to check them out. 

2.45am BST 

Classic Philly

Over at Witness, tshelley <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/tshelley>
 recommends Philadelphia icons, likeIndependence Hall  
<http://www.nps.gov/inde/index.htm>and the Art Museum 
<http://www.philamuseum.org/>, the latter of which also comes recommended by a 
boxer who will not be named.

Independence Hall, of course, is where representatives of the various colonies 
decided they'd like to break up with George III and Parliament, to which end a 
few of their leaders signed a declaration, and, a few years later, a 
constitution. It's all very interesting, the more so forthe cracked bell 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=liberty+bell&sugexp=chrome,mod=9&ie=UTF-8>
 kept in a glass house out front, as well as the strange men who wander around 
pretending to be Ben Franklin.

The Art Museum, however, may give you more bang for your cultured buck. It's 
got one of the biggest permanent collections of art in the country,with Renoir, 
Van Gogh, Picasso and Dalí hanging inside and that statue of Rocky just out the 
front door.

Plus, massive outdoor concerts are frequently held on the museum steps, and 
they're often free.

Finally, for your pure art fix, the Barnes Foundation 
<http://www.barnesfoundation.org/collections/art-collection/> has recently 
moved from its idiosyncratic grounds on the city limits to a new location 
downtown, and is one of the most curious collections of impressionists (and 
plants) in the US.

2.34am BST 

Meanwhile, back in Kraftwork

We're waiting for the people from Jump, and are playing a game with the 
Kraftwork waiter, Ben.

The game is called the guess-who's-on-an-online-date game. We figure it's not 
going so well for the couple outside the window. Awkward. 

2.25am BST 

Vicky's right, sports are terribly important to Philadelphians. We even have a 
"curse" story, which goes when a building first exceeded the height ofCity Hall 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Philadelphia_City_Hall> – the historic and 
geographic center of the city, complete with a statue of William Penn standing 
at its highest – the teams started losing.
 The 'curse' of William Penn, standing way up on top of the clock tower, was 
broken after 25 years of misery with the Eagles, Phillies, Sixers and Flyers. 
Photograph: /Wiki 
And not just one. All of them. For 25 years the city didn't win a championship 
in any of the big four American sports: baseball, American football, basketball 
or hockey. It probably didn't help that as fans, Philadelphians are more bitter 
than Baltimore, meaner than New Yorkers, and as diehard as Bostonians. Fans 
once pelted and booed Santa Claus at an Eagles game, and for whatever reason, 
we have possibly the weirdest mascot in sports, the Phanatic 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ajfgh_Iqef0>. 

When a team finally did win (the Phillies in 2008), the city went more or less 
insane: people climbed buildings, lamp posts, closed schools, and took off from 
work.

It's a neurosis, and we're proud of it – just ask Tina Fey, another local with 
strong opinions.

Updated at 2.44am BST

2.13am BST 

Greta popped out to take some photos outside and heard what sounded like a 
fist fight. It turned out to be a hockey match in a public park. There was 
basketball going on, too. They're shooting some b-ball outside of the school! 

Sport is a big deal here in Philly. 

2.03am BST 

Update: Not sure we're going to get chance to go for cheesesteaks ourselves. 
We need to meet the Jump folk now! Argh. 

[Editor's note: in review: Jim's and Dalessandro's were among the top choices 
among readers for cheesesteaks, though the more famous spots of Pat's and 
Geno's – two cheesesteak joints across from each other in South Philly – also 
got solid billing (from2mWingspan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1596579> and those on Witness 
and yesterday). Termini's and Isgro got shouts for their cannolis (per 
ree_and_leaf <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11555854> and 
others)]

Updated at 2.16am BST

1.49am BST 

Kraftwork

We're here at Kraftwork <http://kraftworkbar.com/>. After such a late lunch, 
we're just having some bar snacks and a local beer, Cicada, from Yards brewery, 
half a mile down the road (and which was tipped earlier). They have 25 
craft beers on tap. And the penny has just dropped for me: that's where the 
bar's name comes from. (Bit slow; it's been a long day.) 

We've had loads of good restaurant tips and we're missing out on a lot, we 
know, but you can't do it all. What about those Philly cheesesteaks? We've been 
hearing mixed reports. Can we deduce from the comments that the best choice 
would be Jim's?
 Just a delicious apple pie empanada snack. 
Updated at 2.05am BST

1.29am BST 

Seeing as it's only a few days from October, we should mention also the 
recommendation ofsheilad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4205572> and others: Eastern 
State Penitentiary. This abandoned prison (insofar as a place can be 
"abandoned" when it hosts tours and is featured on "Ghost Adventures") is one 
of the oldest penitentiaries in America, having opened in 1776 and kept Al 
Capone within its walls.
 Al Capone's cell. Photograph: /Wiki 
Having visited a few times, your humble subeditor can attest that the prison 
is sufficiently creepy, decrepit and vast to merit a trip. Abandoned for 
decades with only vandals to inhabit it, it's now open totours by day 
<http://www.easternstate.org/home> and a haunted house by night 
<http://www.easternstate.org/halloween>, meaning you can measure your visit to 
match your comfort with vast fortresses and pitch-black cellblocks that were 
once home to murderers. It's probably not haunted, but it sure feels that way.

Updated at 1.29am BST

1.10am BST 

Boathouse Row

Night in Philly isn't just Fishtown and Center City – driving along the river 
at night provides a surprising pleasure in and of itself. Purplearth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2892007> and others have 
recommended Kelly Drive, a park and road along the river that passes under 
historic bridges and has the Art Museum in sight, for a scenic place to walk, 
run and bike. 

The Schuylkill is also famous for being one of the best racing rivers in the 
US, and hosts a number of regattas every year. Lining the river are university 
and high school boathouses, painting a pretty picture of 19th century buildings 
set against forested hills and the city's old and new architecture. At night, 
however, the boathouses really shine – literally.
 Boathouse Row. Photograph: /Wiki 
Updated at 1.10am BST

12.58am BST 

Also, Jump Philly <https://twitter.com/jumpphilly> tweeted us. They're the 
folk from thelocal music mag  <http://jumpphilly.com/>that created our first 
Philly playlist. We're meeting them in a bit at Johnny Brenda's, per consensus 
below the line, for the lowdown on the music scene here.

12.51am BST 

In a taxi heading to Fishtown…

12.47am BST 

Night is arriving in Philly. Good times and grainy instagrams ahead! 

12.37am BST 

Philly tuneage part II, this time with a shout to Pigtown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/993898> below the line!

12.21am BST 

Mummers

There's apparently a band traipsing around the UK calling themselves The 
Mummers <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Mummers>. If you've ever passed 
through Philadelphia around New Years, you know that in the US, the Mummers are 
a much stranger phenomenon than an indie band with horns based out of Brighton. 

Like a freezing Mardi Gras celebration, the Mummers march every year, all day, 
with elaborate costumes, moveable scenery, floats and gigantic bands, dancing 
and playing all manner of music. Because it's Philadelphia, it's also a 
competition, for which the bands prepare for months. It's weird, so I'll just 
let Wiki and YouTube depict the madness.
 Mummers. Photograph: /Wiki  Mummers. Photograph: /Wiki 
12.01am BST 

Maxamillion's cuts

On our way to our coffee stop, a particularly stylish barbers shop caught our 
eye (2035 Chestnut Street). We couldn't resist popping in. We met Maxamillion, 
the owner. 

He proudly showed us his 1930s chairs, "like the Rolls Royce of barbers' 
chairs".

TwiTrip followers will remember that my colleague Benji went to Obama's barber 
shop in Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/interactive/2013/sep/03/chicago-memphis-twitter-road-trip-interactive>
. Benji, we see your Obama and we raise you Kobe Bryant. Does that work? Sort 
of.

Anyway, Max was cool, super sharp, and his customers can sit back and watch 
Philly go by from the window-facing "Rolls Royce" chairs. 

12.01am BST 

We're at La Colombe, having a quick coffee break. Another good tip from 
@rayajalabi <https://twitter.com/rayajalabi>.

Updated at 12.15am BST

11.44pm BST 

A word about jawn

Alan here, with a retort to Vicky's question about hoagies. The Philly accent, 
maybe not as famous as Bawlmore's mumbles, New Yawk's squawks, Bahston's 
aspirations, is proud and distinct, for we have the most "volatile" of accents 
– a true melting pot of American dialects and old Britishisms, very much made 
our own.

We mash consonants, replace vowels at whim, and even when we enunciate we 
condense whole phrases into single words: "What did you eat?" becoming 
"Wha'djeet?" We drop syllables on whims, and written vowels sound nothing like 
spoken vowels ("horrible" being "harrible", for instance). "Towel" is one 
syllable, and "bottle" has no "t"s. Yet we enunciate, too, differentiating 
between "mary", "marry" and "merry". It can sound like a language wholly 
separate from English, and we even have our own vocabulary. A brief guide below.

Jawn: The universal pronoun. It means whatever you need it to mean at that 
instant, and if you're talking to a Philadelphian, chances are they will know 
exactly what you're talking about. Eg "Pass me that jawn".

Hoagie: The sandwich franchise Subway has never really caught on in Philly, in 
part because we don't understand the terms sub or grinder. Does that sandwich 
really look like a submarine? What exactly has been ground up in that sandwich? 
There's a whole set of competing mythologies 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoagie#Hoagie> as to where "hoagie" came from; in 
the end it may be a nonsense word, but at least it's a nonsense word with 
personality. A hoagie can be whatever you want it to be – toasted, Italian, 
roast beef, veggie, melted, tuna – it's not just another sandwich, it's 
self-expression. Wawa <http://www.wawa.com/WawaWeb/> – an extraordinary 
deli-convenience chain revered in the Delaware Valley – holds an annual 
Hoagiefest. We take this jawn seriously. (Timothy Foden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10241823> knows.)

Iggles: aka The Eagles, our annually heartbreaking American football team. 
Similarly, bagels are "beggles".

Wooder:  How Philadelphians pronounce "water". It's ridiculous, I know. A 
source of constant confusion at non-regional restaurants and jokes from friends.

Wooder Ice: Simply, flavored ice. Rita's <http://www.ritasice.com/> is the 
staple, seconded by Allison Robertshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10495815>.

Schuylkill: A river, pronounced "skoo-kull".

Down the shore:  The south Jersey Shore (and sometimes Delaware) is, 
shockingly, the vacation place of choice for many residents of south-eastern 
PA. This seemed perfectly respectable in our lives until MTV got ahold of a 
disreputable crew from north Jersey and New York. Cape May is a world apart.

Yo, yous: A certain film about a boxer spread the stereotype that we shout 
"Yo" constantly. This is more or less accurate, though you'll hear it less 
often around Rittenhouse Square or among swanky circles. "Yous", on the other 
hand, as in "yous guys", is also common, but could simply be mumbling.

There's far too many quirks for me to catalogue here, so you should check out 
any number of great linguistic blogs 
<http://dialectblog.com/2011/07/15/philadelphia-accent/> and articles 
<http://articles.washingtonpost.com/2013-04-29/national/38895127_1_accent-sounds-regional-dialects>
 on the topic 
<http://www.npr.org/2013/04/05/176368267/dialects-changing-but-not-disappearing-in-philadelphia>
. There is an entire department at the University of Pennsylvania dedicated to 
our speech, and they've been studying it for decades 
<http://archives.citypaper.net/articles/081497/article008.shtml>. Or you can 
just watch this guy talk.

Updated at 3.32am BST

11.37pm BST 

Shadowing Philly.

11.28pm BST 

Chris, at the museum, was a great guide, even though he did make me feel a 
limitless queasy. He was just clocking off for the night and heading off on his 
bike.
 Not Chris – only one of his fellow Philly cyclists. 
We've seen a lot of cyclists here. Chris tells us the city has tried to become 
more cycle-friendly in recent tears, with more cycle lanes cropping up. There 
are movements to get a public bike system, like New York, but they're a way off 
yet. 

Updated at 11.56pm BST

11.06pm BST 

Vicky, Kylie and Greta have set off to briefly recharge before more adventures 
downtown, and are leaning toward diving into Fishtown this evening. MancInExile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4173381> and YouAreWrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10124308> have each suggested 
Johnny Brenda's <http://www.johnnybrendas.com/>, and have respectively 
recommendedKung-Fu Necktie <http://kungfunecktie.com/>, and Kraftwork Bar 
<http://kraftworkbar.com/>, too, all excellent options. It may have to come 
down to a reader vote – where should they head?

Like any native, I've got my opinions – but will limit my Fishtown commentary 
to a bit of news from local 6ABC 
<http://abclocal.go.com/wpvi/story?section=news/local&id=9137362> this summer:

Joe Malseed saw the 18-inch reptile this week in the city's Fishtown 
neighborhood and snapped a photo before calling for help.

He says the alligator was in a puddle and appeared to be emerging from a 
nearby sewer. He says it was docile until a man tried to get a closer look and 
it hissed.

The reptile has been named Allie-Gator.

The animal control team said Wednesday despite the name it hasn't determined 
the alligator's gender because, "Who's going to do that job?"

Allie-Gator will remain with the team until a permanent home is found.

11.00pm BST 

And to round out our Mütter Museum coverage – a creepy selfie using the 
reflection in a shellacked painting made of blood.

Updated at 11.08pm BST

10.52pm BST 

10.46pm BST 

Someone contacted the museum once and said, "Hey, I have a whole jar of skin 
that I've collected from my feet. Would you like it?"

"Sure," they said. "Send it in." And here it is. Oh good. 
"Are you sure it's feet skin?" asks Greta."

Oh, yes, our director smelled it."

There's a video of this incident online apparently. It made Reddit explode. As 
a result, the museum is doing an Ask Me Anything session this Friday at 10am. 
If anyone has any questions. We'll be in Maine by then. Jars of dead skin far 
behind us, I hope. 

[Editor's note: video found, extremely dry fun, pun necessary.]

Updated at 10.52pm BST

10.37pm BST 

This place is fascinating, but not sure it's a great after-lunch stop. Oh, 
look, here are some pieces of Einstein's brain. Just a bit, kept on a slide. 
And a wallet made of human skin. I'm not too sure about all this. Wasn't 
Silence of the Lambs filmed round here, or was that Baltimore? 

10.22pm BST 

Mütter Museum

We've raced over to the Mütter Museum before it closes as tipped by miquon 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/miquon> and others. It's a medical 
museum, filled with oddities. The main collection – donated by Thomas Dent 
Mütter – is 150 years old. It was originally geared towards physicians, but 
after a while it started to gather interest from the general public. 

"People sometime think of us as a babies-in-jars place but we are much more 
than that. It's designed more to show how far we have come in medicine," says 
Chris who is showing us around. 

Updated at 11.19pm BST

10.05pm BST 

Out on the street, it's still sunny. It's always sunny in Philadelphia, right? 

9.54pm BST 

We've a few recommendations for Fishtown, as an emerging area, good for bars, 
etc. Can anyone recommend anywhere specific to check out tonight? Somewhere a 
bit different? 

9.42pm BST 

Greta went for a pulled pork sandwich at Tommy DiNic's 
<http://tommydinics.com/>, as seen on Man v Food 
<http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL646B8082530F446E>. 

I went to another sandwich stall. "I'll have a hoagie, please. What is a 
hoagie?"

Turns out it's just a sandwich, a sub. There seems to be no limit to the 
amount of filling he's trying to get into this thing. 

[Editor's note: a hoagie is not just a "sub". More on this jawn later.]

9.36pm BST 

We run into Ed, a cop from the Philadelphia Crime Scene (he's on Flickr under 
@phillycop <http://www.flickr.com/photos/philly_police/>). He's going to show 
us what's what. He eats here all the time. There's a philly cheesesteak place, 
but it's a tourist trap, he says, "I'm a snob about these things." 

"How do feel about gator?" he says. 

"Gatorade?" we ask. "

"No, alligator. Gator gumbo. There's a stall right down there."

It's not very Pennsylvania, but Kylie is sold. She'll take one. 

Updated at 11.56pm BST

9.26pm BST 

We're in! it's awesome, full of individual stalls and we want to eat at every 
one of them. We're heading toHatville Deli <http://hatvilledeli.com/>, the 
Amish place we've heard so much about. But no, wait, it's closed! Nooo!

Updated at 9.27pm BST

9.18pm BST 

Reading Terminal Market

There's a sign taped to the pavement on the street outside Reading Terminal 
Market, encouraging you to do a little dance as you wait for the lights to 
change. We like that. We're dancing. Mainly because we're starving and we've 
finally made it. At last! 

Updated at 10.05pm BST

8.58pm BST 

Illadelphia

Alan here, helping helm the blog for the evening and inserting a disclaimer 
about any Philly-inflected bias that may appear from this point forward...

Plus tunes! (Special thanks to YouAreWrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10124308> below the line, who 
was quite right to give us some songs to play.)

Updated at 8.59pm BST

8.30pm BST 

We're still walking. Nearly there, surely. Otherwise I might just make a run 
on the nearest pretzel vendor. "OK, I'm getting hungry now," says Kylie. 
"You're not going to do 20 Instagrams of my food again before I'm allowed it 
eat it, are you?" Erm...

Updated at 8.41pm BST

8.26pm BST 

Walking, passing through the gay district now, I think it's a big deal. The 
street signs have rainbows on them. The Guardian's Raya Jalabi – who lefta 
small tome in the comments below 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27304939> about Philly 
eats –recommends <https://twitter.com/rayajalabi> "the US' oldest LGBT 
bookstore", Giovanni's Room. 

Updated at 8.45pm BST

8.10pm BST 

We've taken a slight scenic detour. Down some tree lined little lanes, lined 
with terrace houses with shuttered windows and, in one case, an old pillar 
where you could tie your horse. If it were still the early 1900s.

8.06pm BST 

We've heard a lot about Philly street art already  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2013/sep/21/philadelphia-urban-street-murals-in-pictures>
and, within five minutes of walking, we round a corner and see this, just above 
a branch of Subway.

7.40pm BST 

We passed a very tempting street cafe on the way in, but out heart is set on 
Reading Terminal Market. heading there now. It's walking distance, luckily.

Updated at 8.08pm BST

7.32pm BST 

We're here! First impressions: beautiful. Narrow streets, unlike most big US 
cities.

"Built for horse drawn carriages," says Daniel, the hotel manager as we check 
in toRittenhouse 1715 <>. The hotel is in converted stables, built in 1902.

Updated at 7.43pm BST

7.28pm BST 

A native Philadelphian informs us (actually, it's Alan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alan-yuhas> who helps steer this blog from 
our New York offices - but he is from Philadelphia originally):

The Roots are probably Philly's most famous new musical outfit, but Dizzy 
Gillespie and John Coltrane lived here for a spell, as did Patti LaBelle. Will 
Smith, of course, left his mark on all of us, and then there's Hall and Oates, 
The Wonder Years, A Sunny Day in Glasgow, Clap Your Hands Say Yeah, The Walkmen 
...

What, Alan? No mention of this stirring anthem to The City of Brotherly Love 
from a national treasure across the pond. How very dare you!

Updated at 8.38pm BST

7.04pm BST 

Philly - we are almost in you!

We can see Philly! Skyscrapers straight ahead. 

"We need some epic entrance music," says Kylie.

Eye of the Tiger, surely. Cranking it up.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWP10GRrVRrY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWP10GRrVRrY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWP10GRrVRrY&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWP10GRrVRrY&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWP10GRrVRrY>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWP10GRrVRrY&media=>
close 
Updated at 7.21pm BST

7.00pm BST 

There's no shortage of choices for lunch in Philly, so the team are going to 
have their work cut out narrowing the options:BarbJ 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27192686> recommends 
cheesesteaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/21/best-philly-cheesesteak-philadelphia>
 atPat's <http://www.patskingofsteaks.com> and Geno's 
<http://store.genossteaks.com> - "don't be put off by the Cheez-Whiz, it's 
still good"; "skip the cheesesteaks and go toTony Luke's 
<http://www.tonylukes.com> for a roast pork with broccoli rabe," says Osager 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27144433>; the Reading 
Terminal Market <http://www.readingterminalmarket.org>comes with universal 
approval, and a special rhapsody forHatville Deli <> from jayBwalker 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27150526> -" it's run by 
an Amish family from Lancaster, Pennsylvania- the sandwiches are generously 
portioned and tasty, and their fresh apple cider is... words cannot describe 
how brilliant it is!"

It all sounds - too brilliant for words. Especially for a hungry trio fresh 
from the road

Updated at 12.23am BST

6.51pm BST 

We are a little way off - but close. Just in Pennsylvania.

6.37pm BST 

We're closing in on Philadelphia now, and getting hungry. The time has come: 
Greta has busted out The Fresh Prince of Bel Air theme tune on the iPod and 
we've had the obligatory group singalong. Except there's a bonus verse. Eh? 
That's thrown us.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAVbQo3IOC_A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAVbQo3IOC_A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAVbQo3IOC_A&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAVbQo3IOC_A&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAVbQo3IOC_A>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAVbQo3IOC_A&media=>
close 
6.22pm BST 

Five Eight "interesting" things we've found out about Delaware by groping 
around the internet 
<http://blog.delawareinc.com/interesting-facts-about-delaware/#sthash.Wmeqc936.dpuf>
 forfive one minute*:

Delaware is the second smallest state.

It is the least populous state. No, it's not. Wyoming is. As kohastings 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27302938> correctly points 
out in the comments. Delaware? Only fifth least populated!

It is one of only five states without a sales tax.

Its official state name is “The First State”, because it was the first of the 
13 original Colonies to ratify the Constitution in 1787, thus becoming the 
first state in the nation. Because of this, Delaware is given the first 
position in congressional votes, and national events, such as Presidential 
Inaugurations (eh?)

The state bird is the Blue Hen, after the prized Blue Hen cocks carried with 
soldiers for cock fight entertainment during the Revolutionary War.

Rehoboth Beach is nicknamed “The Nation’s Summer Capital,” because of the 
number of people from Washington DC who go on vacation there.

Peach blossom is the state flower but it raises more apples than peaches 
(CAITLYN! see post below)

Dover is the state capital.

* We are indebted to brainfrz76 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27303865> who saw straight 
through our wild bluffings and raised us with a screed of good learning about 
Delaware below in the comments.

Updated at 8.05pm BST

5.56pm BST 

We've just crossed the state line into Delaware. There's a farmers market by 
the road side.

It's a pretty picture of autumn colours - piles of pumpkins and "mums" flowers 
("they're our autumn flower," says Greta.)

I ask Caitlyn, behind the counter, if they sell anything that is typically 
Delaware.

"Delaware is famous for peaches and tomatoes," she says. "But we're all out of 
peaches and those tomatoes are from Pennsylvania."

Oh.

Updated at 6.13pm BST

5.50pm BST 

Delaware, we are in you!

Cell coverage is getting a bit patchy as the team enter the second smallest 
sate. But this is Joe Biden country - that's Joseph Robinette Biden, former 
Delaware senator, and the 47th and current vice-president of the US. Rambling 
Joe Biden. Gaffe-prone Joe Biden...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHWlSX9TT2eo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHWlSX9TT2eo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHWlSX9TT2eo&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHWlSX9TT2eo&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHWlSX9TT2eo>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHWlSX9TT2eo&media=>
close 
Updated at 10.04pm BST

5.36pm BST 

The road trip selfie by Greta Rybus. Safe to assume that the roads are pretty 
quiet in these parts - we hope.

You can see all of Greta's fantastic photographs of the road trip at Guardian 
News's Instagram feed <http://instagram.com/guardiannews>.

Updated at 10.04pm BST

5.15pm BST 

This route is certainly more scenic than the interstate. We're driving through 
farmland and plenty of corn fields.

Updated at 5.32pm BST

4.45pm BST 

First reader challenge

It's become something of a tradition on these #TwiTrips for readers to throw 
down a challenge to our dusty, bleary-eyed but BRAVE road warriors. This one is 
no exception. Reader @Dirlewanger has suggested that they (yes, all three of 
them) get a tattoo in Philly. The gauntlet has been thrown. Will it be 
accepted? And what should inkings should they get? Suggestions welcome.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12286455> Dirlewanger  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12286455> 24 September 2013 
3:32pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27296643> 
Get a tattoo from Dan Henk at Deep Six

Updated at 4.59pm BST

4.37pm BST 

Vicky is looking for scenic stop-offs, and - probably by now - a good lunch 
stop en route to Philly.

Anyone know of a good place to get seafood? Ha! No. Really... let us know the 
best place to crush a crustacean or two -@VickyBaker 
<https://twitter.com/vickybaker>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash>, or below in the comments

4.27pm BST 

This is a lovely pitstop. Also I've finally stopped mis-reading Cheasapeake as 
Cheapskate, which is progress.

We're getting back in the car. Any more places we should see before getting to 
Philly?

4.08pm BST 

Hats off for the tips to cross the Bay Bridge. No traffic today, so we cruised 
along it, looking out over the Cheasapeake Bay. We looked out longingly at the 
few sail boats dotting the water. We're just pulling in to the yacht club now, 
on the other side, for a better view.

Updated at 4.08pm BST

3.43pm BST 

We are on the way, via Annapolis. It's a beautiful day in this part of the 
world - blue sky, not a cloud in it. We're going through Delaware later, very 
briefly. Can anyone teach us anything about Delaware?

Updated at 3.48pm BST

3.41pm BST 

Hitting the road to Philly.

3.30pm BST 

And just to prove (to Bodie) that Philly does have good tunes, here's our 
first on-the-road-playlist for the trip. Our thanks toJUMP Philly <> - "we 
cover any and all types of music happening in Philadelphia - because there is 
so much happening here within our city limits" - Magazine.

As ever, we're taking requests, so do you send us your Philly tuneage, and 
we'll put it into a playlist. To the usual places:@VickyBaker 
<https://twitter.com/vickybaker>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash> or below in the comments.

Updated at 8.25pm BST

3.24pm BST 

The leaving of Baltimore. It had to be done. And so did this clip - the famous 
quote from Bodie in The Wire, Season 2 (that should be the last mention of it, 
er, we think).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di6EpfCzdMoY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di6EpfCzdMoY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di6EpfCzdMoY&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di6EpfCzdMoY&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di6EpfCzdMoY>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di6EpfCzdMoY&media=>
close 
3.19pm BST 

Public opinion - on Twitter and below the line - has dictated our route from 
Baltimore to Philadelphia. The 95 is quickest but dull apparently, so we're 
branching out, as suggested byHolgate 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27148522> (seconded and 
thirded byhellsbadger 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27157216> and 
KurtDaConqueror <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27182181>)

For the first leg from Baltimore to Philly, avoid I-95 by looping south: take 
the Ritchie Highway south to Annapolis, cross the Chesapeake Bay Bridge, and 
head up through Delaware. It doesn't add a huge amount of time or miles to your 
trip, and you get a much more interesting drive, as well as seeing the Naval 
Academy.

3.14pm BST 

As Vicky and the team negotiate their way through the Baltimore traffic, we'd 
like to bring you one last fanfare for the city, courtesy of photographerJacob 
Kepler <http://www.jacobkepler.com>- who, #TwiTrips regulars will remember, was 
the snapper on theVegas-Denver road trip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/interactive/2013/jul/31/las-vegas-denver-twitter-road-trip-interactive>
, but who was born and raised in Baltimore.

We salute you Baltimore with this gallery of images 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2013/sep/24/locals-view-baltimore-in-pictures>
 Domino Sugars sign in Baltimore. Photograph: Jaco  LP Steamers Crab House, 
Baltimore. Photograph: Jacob Kepler  Steamed spiced crab, Baltimore. 
Photograph: Jacob Kepler  George Peabody Library, Baltimore. Photograph: Jacob 
Kepler 
Updated at 12.16am BST

2.53pm BST 

We just met Skip* in The Bun Shop. 

He's a flight steward and a part-time music producer. He's well travelled in 
these parts, so we asked him for a hotel tip in Philly. He tippedRittenhouse 
1715 <>, which was also in the Guardian top 10 Philadelphia hotels list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/21/top-10-philadelphia-hotels-bed-and-breakfasts>
. So, that's where we are heading.

It appears to be busy in Philly. A lot of places are fully booked and we hear 
there might some sort of food festival going on - though we can't find anything 
online about it.
We also got a great tip from @Tola25 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27154378> for the 
Independent hotel <http://theindependenthotel.com/>, but sadly that's one of 
the ones that is booked up.

* Skip just joined Twitter so he can follow our trip.

Updated at 3.43pm BST

2.24pm BST 

The Bun Shop
We're about to go and pick up the car, but beforehand, we had time for one 
quick below-the-line tip that came in late last night. Thanks,Wes Peterson 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27287737> - who pointed us 
in the direction of somewhere just on our doorstep.@aishamk <> mentioned it, 
too, so we knew we had to check it out.

We were expecting a hole-the-wall joint, but this place is pretty hip: a big 
open space, full of reclaimed furniture, with its exposed iron girders painted 
gold.

The "rotiboy" buns – Malyasian-style with a hint of vanilla – are just out of 
the oven and smell fantastic. They are served in white-paper bags; no plates.

Lauren, on the counter, tells us The Bun Shop only opened in April.

"It's done really well, almost surprisingly," she says. "Opening here just 
before summer is tough, because there are so many students that go home, but 
it's worked out for us."

It's open from 7am until 3am and bands sometimes play. There's no liquor 
licence, but they are working on that, or getting a BYOB set up.The Bun Shop 
<https://www.facebook.com/TheBunShop‎>, 239 W Read St.

Updated at 2.25pm BST

2.07pm BST 

Heading to Philly

We're up and at 'em and ready to head from Baltimore to Philly. Or we will be 
when we've found coffee.

Yesterday was a quite the start to the trip. Baltimore has set the bar high.

Quick recap: we stayed in Wallis Simpson's old home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-524012a2e4b078484b5fd2d7>
; we hitcheda ride on a boat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-52406549e4b018876726dbd2>
 in the harbour; we tried the local brew inthe pub where Edgar Allan Poe had 
his last drink 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-52407899e4b09e440159acd7>
; we sampled thefamous crab cakes from Faidley's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5240936ce4b018876726dbd9>
 and got the low-down on the family recipe from the founder's great 
granddaughter; we saw akitsch Pez collection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5240ac0de4b018876726dbdd>
 – twice; we got driven around bya 70-year-old "former gangster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5240a1d3e4b018876726dbdc>
" who has redirected his energies into US gossip magazines;we had dinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5240d142e4b09e440159acf3>
, fresh from the farms of Maryland; we triedpickle and Old Bay ice-cream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5240ea98e4b09e440159acf7>
 - withmagic spoons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5240eadbe4b09e440159acf8>
; and we ended up ina speakeasy-style cocktail bar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5240f92de4b018876726dbed>
, with some new-found friends.
That was the biggest surprise, perhaps. That people from Baltimore saw we were 
live-blogging about their city so came out to meet us:@PigtownDesign 
<https://twitter.com/PigtownDesign>, @bad_decisions 
<https://twitter.com/bad_decisions>, @aishamk <https://twitter.com/AishaMK> - 
aka Meg, John and Aisha. By the end of the night, there were seven of us, 
talking all things Baltimore, inWC Harlan 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/WC-Harlan/400230510066048‎>. Matthew – the 
bar's owner, who invited usvia the comments in the blog 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27147977> – says the city 
used to feel like it was in New York's shadow, but that has changed. It's 
stopped trying to copy what's going on over there, and is now confidently doing 
its own thing. There's a great music scene here (as we found yesterday through 
ourcrowd-sourced playlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5240a865e4b078484b5fd30c>
). "There is still an underdog feeling," he says, "but I think we all like 
that."
Matthew also said there were plenty of new bars opening up around his, so the 
Remington neighbourhood is the one to watch. The other day he saw John Waters 
and Victoria from hip Baltimore band Beach House having a drink together. Wish 
we could have been there that night.
 WC Harlan bar, Baltimore 
Updated at 2.07pm BST
 