
5.54am BST 

Goodnight, Nashville!

We finish in Hollis's honky tonk of choice: Roberts. A "shotgun bar" – Long 
and thin and lined with shelves of cowboy boots and neon, fans spinning lazily 
overhead.

The band are rolling through rockabilly; a guitar, double bass, fiddle, and 
peddle steel guitar – the music here is a little more refined, less Bon Jovi, 
more Jerry Lee Lewis.

A couple at the front are in full swing – him in a cowboy hat; swirling her in 
a black dress, red lipstick, and plenty of tattoos. The bar in the middle is 
filling up, braced for the post-football surge. We're perched here now, a 
cowboy in a string vest on one side, a man in a full cow-print suit behind us, 
and the singer has just stated yodelling. Perfect.

We're signing off for the night – a huge thanks to everyone who contributed 
today. Tomorrow, our finale ... onwards to Memphis.

Updated at 5.55am BST

5.40am BST 

And above it all, the captivatingly weird, hulking AT&T building – "The Batman 
Building" to locals – with giant antennae for ears and spotlights swinging 
around in the clouds.

5.33am BST 

On the doors: bouncers in Stetsons. Outside: tipsy groups pacing up and down 
the strip; men in tees and shorts, girls in perilously high heels or shop-fresh 
Rhinestone Cowgal getup – shiny cowboy boots and checked shirts.

5.25am BST 

Every bar has a band in the window banging though the obligatories: Dixie Land 
Delight by Alabama, Friends in Low Places by Garth Brooks, and Rocky Top, the 
University of Tennessee fight song.

5.09am BST 

Nashvegas

Downtown: a five block honky tonk Vegas, lined with neon and more than 50 bars 
stretching down Broadway from 5th avenue to the Cumberland River. It's brash, 
bright, teetering between classic and tacky, and I instantly love it.

Updated at 5.27am BST

4.48am BST 

Cross cultures

We cross a bridge over train tracks into the Downtown district. In front of us 
is a perfect example of the contrasts of the South.

In the near distance, the headquarters of LifeWay, the biggest Christian 
publishers in the US, with a giant granite cross built into the facade. In the 
foreground, the neon glow of Déjà Vu Showgirls strip bar. In between, a huge 
gastropub called the Whiskey Kitchen.

Updated at 5.18am BST

4.40am BST 

Day four – mapped

Benji hit the road – sadly passing Dinosaur and Mammoth Cave – but making up 
for it with ghostly bourbon, the most interesting Corvette inventor in the 
world, regal chicken, and the classiesthonky tonks establishments in all of 
Music City. 

4.32am BST 

Even the taxidermy likes Patterson House! At least I think that could be 
called a smile …

4.22am BST 

A selection of Nashville's own along with a crew from Jack White's Third Man 
Records <http://thirdmanrecords.com/artists/>.

3.57am BST 

Doug, our barman, is indulgently excellent – squeezing homemade bitters from 
tiny bottles with a miniature pipette, twisting orange peel with an elaborate 
double-wrist flourish. Large spherical ice balls are served spinning in the 
glass, the liccor poured over the top. He has a beautiful waistcoat. 

I get a Black Walnut Old Fashioned: old forester bourbon, Demerara syrup and 
Nux Alpina Black Walnut Liqueur. Horrifically good.
Gary gets a Blue Ridge Manhattan: Wild Turkey 81 rye, Carpano Antica ("the 
greatest sweet vermouth ever" says Doug), Dolin Dry Vermouth, Laphroig.

It comes with a sidecar – a little flask of what didn't make it into the glass 
from the shaker. His eyelids droop a little as he's drinking it. 

3.50am BST 

Hollis' message: "All is well. All is very very well."

3.42am BST 

Mixomytosis

Updated at 3.46am BST

3.26am BST 

The Patterson House

We find the address he's given us. No sign on the road, just a door with "The 
Patterson House" on it. 

Hollis has been wearing a Nashville Rugby vest for the last two days. He's in 
the lobby, wearing a buttoned up polo, and – ah, it all makes sense now – his 
wife Katie is here too.

Through the curtains and into the bar, a beautiful dim-lit room with a large 
central mahogany bar dotted with candles under a pressed tin roof. A dive bar 
this ain't.

Updated at 4.37am BST

3.14am BST 

They're back!

We're on Hollis time. He's told us to get to our hotel an clean up. Gary was 
instructed to put on a shirt and I was forbidden from wearing flip flops. We 
wash. It's the first time all day I haven't been sweating. We're off somewhere 
fancy.

Within two minutes of leaving our hotel I'm sweating again. Significantly so.

3.09am BST 

Wiki's history of honky tonk

Nashville, being Music City and all, has certain strong associations with the 
genre and/or bars known as honky tonks. Here is everything the internet's 
collective brain knows abouthonky tonk <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Honky-tonk>
, distilled.

The origin story:

The origin of the term honky tonk is unknown. 

In 1889, the Fort Worth Daily Gazette, wrote:

"petition to the council is being circulated for signatures, asking that the 
Honky Tonk theater on Main Street be reopened." 

The piano theory:

One American manufacturer of large upright pianos was the firm of William Tonk 
& Bros, which made a piano with the decal "Ernest A. Tonk". However, these 
pianos were not manufactured until 1889, after the first occurrences of honky 
tonk in print.

In 1900 the New York Sun wrote an article that suggested this:

An unsuspecting group of cowboys looking for recreation mistook the 
honk-a-tonk-a-tonk-a sound from a flock of geese for the sound of a bass viol, 
after which the name stuck.

In 1929, the Los Angeles Times explained honky tonks thusly: 

"In these establishments, which were often of enormous size, much liquor was 
dispensed at the tables which crowded the floor, and entertainment of doubtful 
quality was given on a stage at one end of the room."

At this point Wiki intervenes:

Synonymous with beer joint and similar terms, honky tonks usually serve beer 
or hard liquor and may have had a bandstand and dance floor. Many may have only 
a juke box.

Musical definition, at last (sort of):

The first music genre to be commonly known as honky tonk music was a style 
of piano playing related to ragtime, but emphasizing rhythm more 
than melody or harmony; the style evolved in response to an environment where 
the pianos were often poorly cared for, tending to be out of tune and having 
some nonfunctioning keys.

 Lyrics tended to focus on working-class life, with frequently tragic themes 
of lost love, adultery, loneliness, alcoholism, and self-pity.

Wiki's heroes of honky tonk:

The Bill Doggett Combo, Fats Domino (who even Vladimir Putin likes 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IV4IjHz2yIo>), Floyd Tillman, Webb Pierce, Hank 
Locklin, Lefty Frizzell, George Jones and Faron Young.

Ernest Tubb (the troubadour below) is the man credited with bringing the tonk 
to Nashville, after which Hank Williams assumed the mantle of Nashville's 
musical king.

The modern era:

The Rolling Stones went ahead and got gigantic inflatable dolls involved with 
'Honky Tonk Woman', and since then the genre's become the provenance of Willie 
Nelson and Garth Brooks, among many, many others. 

So there you have it: Wiki's brief history of honky tonk, with inflatable 
dolls and Mick Jagger.

Updated at 3.24am BST

2.50am BST 

Top tippage: Music City Part II

Bluebird Cafe <http://www.bluebirdcafe.com/>: aka Nashville's "centrifuge" 
(the show's, that is). The music venue bills itself as "one of the world’s 
preeminent listening rooms … where the “heroes behind the hits” perform their 
own songs." Via @Z_Everson <https://twitter.com/Z_Everson>, @seacs 
<https://twitter.com/seacsi> and others.

Grimey's <http://www.grimeys.com/> for in-store performances, 'new and 
preloved music', indie expertise, and vinyl … so much vinyl. Via tammymercure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12203342>.

URP Music Distributors <http://www.urpdist.com/>: vinyl so intense they have a 
countdown for Record Store Day … which is still over 200 days away. From the 
ubiquitous @2HellW4Giveness <https://twitter.com/2HellW4Giveness>.

The Music City Tippler <http://musiccitytippler.com/> for the music and craft 
cocktails, which Becky Lynn Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12246678> seems to have 
realized would command Benji's attention.

Third Man Records <http://thirdmanrecords.com/news> – Jack White's recording 
studio andmusic mecca 
<http://www.avclub.com/articles/we-visit-jack-whites-magic-factory-third-man-recor,99478/>
. See concerts, buy music, hope to catch a glimpse of the man himself or Thom 
Yorke 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/radiohead-recorded-at-third-man-jack-white-confirms-20120705>
 or any number of White's famous friends 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Um5-Dru7sX4>. Recommended by @2HellW4Giveness 
<https://twitter.com/2HellW4Giveness> and littmanwrites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12190485>.

Now we just have to decide which of these to do …

2.45am BST 

It should be known there is a James Brown Tribute Show at BB Kings tonight, in 
case that detail might persuade readers to turn Benji loose there.

2.26am BST 

Top tippage: Music City Part I

The venue and club tippage has been superb, which bodes wonderful things for 
Nashville's music scene. Here's a selection of what Benji and the guys could 
see tonight and tomorrow.

First off, this is Nashville – home of the Country Music Hall of Fame 
<http://countrymusichalloffame.org/>. It's unclear whether the 'Carrie 
Underwood: The Blown Away Tour Exhibition 
<http://countrymusichalloffame.org/current/view/carrie-underwood-the-blown-away-tour-exhibition>
' would Benji blow away any more than the 'Reba: All the Women I Am 
<http://countrymusichalloffame.org/current/view/reba-all-the-women-i-am>' 
exhibit, but I for one sincerely hope that readers band together with 
@2HellW4Giveness <https://twitter.com/2HellW4Giveness> and make him check it 
out.

Tootsie's Orchid Lounge <http://www.tootsies.net/> is more or less the 
informal home of honky tonk, and was once the favored hangout of Hank Williams 
and Willie Nelson. Via jonesdog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1882685>.

Bourbon Street Blues & Boogie Bar <http://www.bourbonstreetblues.com/>, also 
from jonesdog <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1882685>, who 
gives it a an honest, laconic and rather compelling endorsement:

Go to Tootsie's and Bourbon Street Blues. But really, just do a dive crawl. 
There's fantastic music everywhere. And I hate country music.

And before we get to yet more tippage, Dadstheman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11912350> suggested for the 
legendary BB Kings Blues Club <http://www.bbkingblues.com/> and its All-Stars. 

1.59am BST 

Top tippage: Nashville dining edition

Benji and the guys elected to eat early and make the most of the night, 
availing themselves of Prince's regal chicken. But the tips for Nashville grub 
have been great:

Monell's Restaurant <http://monellstn.com/>, for the southern family style pot 
roast, cheese grits, and biscuits and gravy. It comes with a ringing 
endorsement.

The Pharmacy, Nashville's 'Wurst-Burger' joint – and biergarten – comes 
recommended by @ChelseaMSchmidt <https://twitter.com/ChelseaMSchmidt> for its 
phosphate (ie itssoda 
<http://www.tennessean.com/VideoNetwork/1382643431001/101-Seconds-Making-a-Pharmacy-phosphate-soda>
)

@ChelseaMSchmidt <https://twitter.com/ChelseaMSchmidt> also suggests Marche 
Artisan Foods <http://www.marcheartisanfoods.com/>, especially the decadent 
sounding vanilla bourbon latte and croissant french toast.

Cafe Coco <http://www.cafecoco.com/> in "Nashvegas 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Nashvegas>" the late-night 
destination of choice, according to @mpressmeredith 
<https://twitter.com/mpressmeredith>. Benji has been tailgating, so …

@2HellW4Giveness 
<https://twitter.com/2HellW4Giveness/status/373151993746837504> – who's been 
all over the Nashville tips – suggests this Barista Parlor 
<http://www.baristaparlor.com/>, which with any luck the guys can make for 
breakfast tomorrow.

And finally, @BreakonaCloud <https://twitter.com/BreakonaCloud> recommends 
Live on the Green <http://www.liveonthegreen.net/> for the food and the music – 
which is kind of a big deal here in Nashville.

Updated at 2.10am BST

1.30am BST 

Thursday night lights

It's game night in Nashville – a big one.

It's the first game of the SEC season, and local university Vanderbilt is 
hostingOle Miss from Mississippi. Wedgwood Avenue is packed, cars streaming 
towards the stadium and carparks buzzing with tailgate pre-parties, football 
fans pumping beer from kegs into ubiquitous red cups.

We join an Ole Miss tailgate, and have a beer with Kurt and Westley, two hulks 
of men who have driven 5 hours from the bottom of the state to be here. 

Kurt and Westley teach me three things:

1. Mississippi State "suck ass"

2. Robert Nkemdiche, Ole Miss's number 5, is a beast: 6'5", 297lbs, 40 yards 
in 4.6 seconds, and he has an eight-pack.

3. Louisiana State University (LSU) are "cocksuckers".

Updated at 4.37am BST

1.09am BST 

As Benji's mentioned on various occasionally, our photographer Hollis is a 
Nashville local – and the Guardian has requested his expertise in the past. See
the whole set here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2013/aug/29/nashville-road-trips-locals-view-in-pictures#/?picture=415199565&index=10>
.
 Downtown Nashville. Photograph: /Hollis Bennett  A Nashville musician playing 
for change. Photograph: /Hollis Bennett  A Nashville campervan. Photograph: 
/Hollis Bennett 
Updated at 1.13am BST

12.51am BST 

How better to celebrate the guys' entry into the city than a playlist 
by Nashville music blogBreak on a Cloud <http://Breakonacloud.com>?

12.37am BST 

Nashville … in real life

Updated at 4.37am BST

12.24am BST 

Nashville … on TV

Two Guardian takes on the soapy TV sensation Nashville 
<http://watchabc.go.com/nashville/SH55199662>, from our skeptical Andrew Collins
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/aug/29/nashville-box-set-review>
 and our in-office TV die-hard Raya Jalabi. First, Collins'review of the first 
series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/aug/29/nashville-box-set-review>:

I hereby testify that you needn't dig country music to dig Nashville. All 
that's required is a soft spot for Dynasty-grade feminine rivalry and 
interlocking love triangles, not to mention endless, twang-accompanied 
establishing shots of tourist-brochure Tennessee.

By the end of 21 episodes, every possible romantic configuration has been 
road-tested – even, shock-horror, a gay lunge, at which point that other 
essential country element, tragedy, heaves into shot.

I have tired of far more fashionable US dramas than this grand old opera, 
whose second season can't come too soon. Maybe we're all a little bit country 
after all.

Raya, on the other hand, hurls an encyclopedia of trivia at us:

• Rayna James, lead character country singer of the show, has hair "so famous 
it hasits own tumblr <http://conniebrittonshair.tumblr.com/> 'dedicated to 
Connie Britton and her hair.'"

• Bluebird Cafe <http://www.bluebirdcafe.com/> is what Raya calls the show's 
"centrifuge".

• Every episode is named after a Hank Williams 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=95aP0OWx4jY> song.

• Hayden Pannettiere, who plays a ambitious-upstart/riva/co-star country 
singer to Britton's veteran, has a mother named Jolene … "likethe Dolly Parton 
song <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1plvBR02wDs>."

• "The Musica Statue <http://www.flickr.com/photos/41930315@N04/4890198249/>
 in Nashville's downtown features in Hayden's first music video featured on the 
show."

• "Actress Kimberley Williams-Paisley, who plays the woman Rayna James' 
husband cheats on her with, is married to real life country music starBrad 
Paisley <https://bradpaisley.com/home>." 

• Rayna James kids' on the show are sisters in real life, and have a YouTube 
channel, and were cast forthis video 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7_aJHJdCHAo>. "They were on Ellen or something."

In the least soapy clip of the show I could find, Raya is evidently alluding 
to these two.

Updated at 5.58pm BST

12.03am BST 

Just so, so good. A quarter leg with thick crunchy spicy batter, I eat it 
three times: first a general trim; then into the nooks of the leg and thigh; 
then a forensic nibble; finally biting into the gristle and bone.

I'm trying to recall eating better chicken, and I'm not sure I can. And I have 
a Jewish mother.

My hands are coated in pale orange grease and debris. I'm sweating, lips 
burning. I'm a mess. My cup runneth over.

11.52pm BST 

Royal chicken

Prince's couldn't be more innocuous, a turning off a junction of three petrol 
stations, a single sign on a small strip of shops, between a nail salon and a 
discount sportswear store.

Inside, five booths, white painted wood with plastic tablecloths. In the back, 
a hole on the wall with a till and a vending machine for drinks. Another table 
selling chess pie in plastic cases.

Hollis, a local, orders the "mild" option of chicken spiciness … alarm bells.

Updated at 4.38am BST

11.44pm BST 

Missing Mammoth

Time constraints mean Benji won't get to the Mammoth Caves 
<http://www.nps.gov/maca/index.htm>, unfortunately, but the park deserves a 
quick glance, if only from afar.

The cavern complex is home to eyeless fishes, has a room called the 'Ruins of 
Karnak', and stretches over 400 miles of passages. Ancient Americans lived in 
them and 19th century prospectors fought for them. There's a huge forest 
preserve above, and you can spelunk and camp as you please.

(All this and the photos courtesy the ever helpful National Park Service.)
 Broadway in the Mammoth Caves, KY. Photograph: /NPS  19th century relics in 
the Mammoth Cave TN. Photograph: /NPS 
11.34pm BST 

Tennessee we see you!

We've crossed state lines and a time zone, currently on the outskirts of 
Nashville with a thick stream of rush hour traffic coming in the opposite 
direction.

We've got a hot chicken date. @savoryexposure <http://www.savoryexposure.com/>
 has chosen an early dinner for us, at Prince's 
<http://www.seriouseats.com/2010/01/princes-hot-chicken-shack-in-nashville-tennessee-best-fried-spicy-chicken.html>
, a popular "Nashville hot chicken" joint in the north of the city. 

Hot chicken, I learn, is marinated in buttermilk, breaded, served with cayenne 
pepper sauce, pan fried and served in a white bread sandwich. So excited I'm 
almost crying.

Updated at 4.38am BST

11.18pm BST 

Harland

While the crew is still in the state, we'd be remiss not to say something 
about another Kentucky institution:KFC. The 'secret recipe of 11 herbs and 
spices' was created byHarland Sanders, aka the Colonel. 

Sanders modified a pressure cooker into a fryer and thus turned his Corbin, KY 
service station into a chicken shop. He then made a fortune and lived to the 
ripe old age of 90. He was … colorful. Per Josh Ozersky atTime 
<http://content.time.com/time/printout/0,8816,2019218,00.html>:

His white suit wasn't the invention of a marketing committee; he wore it every 
day and was never seen in public for the last 20 years of his life in anything 
else. (He had a heavy wool one for winter and a lighter cotton one for summer.) 
He was a failure who got fired from a dozen jobs before starting his 
restaurant, and then failed at that when he went out of business and found 
himself broke at the age of 65. He drove around in a Cadillac with his face 
painted on the side before anybody knew who he was, pleading with the owners of 
run-down diners to use his recipe and give him a nickel commission on each 
chicken. He slept in the back of the car and made handshake deals. … He once 
shot a man in a gun battle, but was never charged as the other guy started it. 
He was a lawyer who once assaulted his own client in court. He was indeed a 
Kentucky Colonel, an honorary title given to him by not one but two governors. 
… He deserves to be remembered at least for having a verifiable existence.

Updated at 11.20pm BST

11.09pm BST 

The weather's turned south just as we did. Good thing we're headed for caves. 
Huge, labyrinthine caves. Nothing could go wrong.

10.59pm BST 

A playlist wrought from the Corvette factory and clashing Twitter requests 
<https://twitter.com/benjilanyado/status/373170389608071169>. 

10.40pm BST 

The most interesting man in the world?

Other than that, my favourite bit was learning about Zora Arkus-Duntov, the 
designer and "patron" saint of the Corvette. They like him here. A lot. 

Next to a glass case holding his ashes – yup, his ashes are in the museum – a 
plaque:

"He was a risk taker. A dashing ladies man. A daring race driver. A brilliant 
engineer. An opportunist. Reckless. Resilient … He was a man who packed the 
experiences of 9 or 10 lifetimes into one. A man who defines the term 'living 
on the edge'."

"He raced motorcycles, smuggled gold during the Depression, flew for the 
French Air Force. Married a dancer from the Foliés Bergére. He designed 
locomotives, hand grenades, tractors and lathes, and twice won his class at Le 
Mans … Zora was a renegade, who believed in himself. He didn't wait for things 
to happen hemade things happen. He didn't just live the American Dream, he 
helped invent it, by immortalising one of the foremost expressions of fun and 
freedom, the Chevrolet Corvette."

Updated at 12.03am BST

10.34pm BST 

Gary and I did get a really nice picture taken though.

10.26pm BST 

Inside, more cars. Cars and pictures of cars and models of cars and stickers 
of cars, and a huge gift shop selling car things.

I get about halfway around the never-ending museum route before remembering 
that I'm really not that interested in cars, despite having tried really hard 
in the past. Sorry.

Very happy and slightly wild-eyed museum attendants hide behind corners here, 
pouncing on you with car facts every 300 yards or so. Alas, even that didn't 
get me going.

But if you like cars you should definitely come here. They have lots of cars 
here.

10.12pm BST 

Meta live blogging. 

10.05pm BST 

Corvette country

Driving into Bowling Green, past the vast Corvette plant – a huge ugly tin 
shed that runs for miles. Car parks as far as the eye can see.

Across the freeway, the National Corvette Museum. It's about 35 degrees (95F), 
but in the middle of so much tarmac, it feels 10 degrees hotter (no conversion 
necessary). Museum employees are loitering outside the building, there's a 
convention going on – three of them in a row say hello. 

The car park is crammed with classics, all belonging to convention goers 
inside. 

Updated at 4.38am BST

9.52pm BST 

Things that are in no way incongruous in Kentucky include Scotland and tinted 
windows and patriotic decals on a massive pickup.

Updated at 10.16pm BST

9.42pm BST 

Jurassic Kentucky

More crestfallen than John Hammond consoling himself with ice cream 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UwgLVk_-5cM>, Benji has just learned of and 
passed by Kentucky's one and onlyDinosaur World <http://www.dinosaurworld.com/>
. He reacted calmly.

The 'life-size dinosaurs located outside in a natural setting 
<http://www.dinosaurworld.com/our_dinosaurs/>', alas, might not be the most 
stunning models of paleontological fidelity – or even of Jurassic Park – but 
the museum also has fossils, an artificial dig site and lots of real science.

Though Benji doesn't have time to make Dinosaur World, he should heed Ian 
Malcolm and remember that life will find a way 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SkWeMvrNiOM>.

Updated at 9.59pm BST

9.22pm BST 

'Decadent and Depraved'

While the guys are on the road, a quick look back at Louisville is in order, 
if only to honour the great Kentuckian Hunter S Thompson, whose old home Benji 
cruised past last night. 

Thompson had quite a bit to say about his hometown's most famous event – even 
though he couldn't see the race from his spot at Churchill Downs. He wrote a 
piece for Scanlan's in 1970 titled 'The Kentucky Derby Is Decadent and 
Depraved’ – a couple gonzo highlights below:

Finally we decided just to go ahead and steal two [press] passes, if 
necessary, rather than miss that part of the action. This was the last coherent 
decision we were able to make for the next 48 hours.

Rain all nite until dawn. No sleep. Christ, here we go, a nightmare of mud and 
madness …. Drunks in the mud. Drowning, fighting for shelter …. But no. By noon 
the sun burns, perfect day, not even humid.

Total chaos, no way to see the race, not even the track … nobody cares. Big 
lines at the outdoor betting windows, then stand back to watch winning numbers 
flash on the big board, like a giant bingo game.

Somewhere up in the boxes a voice screeched, "Turn around, you hairy freak!" 
The race itself was only two minutes long, and even from our super-status seats 
and using 12-power glasses, there was no way to see what was really happening.

The rest of that day blurs into madness. The rest of that night too. And all 
the next day and night. Steadman was lucky to get out of Louisville without 
serious injuries, and I was lucky to get out at all. One of my clearest 
memories of that vicious time is Ralph being attacked by one of my old friends 
in the billiard room of the Pendennis Club in downtown Louisville on Saturday 
night. The man had ripped his own shirt open to the waist before deciding that 
Ralph wasn't after his wife. No blows were struck, but the emotional effects 
were massive.

We can only hope Benji takes Thompson's energy and eye as inspiration for road 
tripping journalism, if not his exact methods. You can check out Thompson's 
whole piece here at Grantland 
<http://www.grantland.com/story/_/id/7887639/looking-back-hunter-s-thompson-classic-story-kentucky-derby>
. 

Updated at 9.57pm BST

8.54pm BST 

Kentucky tuneage

Benji's request for playlist requests is well intended, if a little Australian 
infused <https://twitter.com/mrdavidwhitley/status/373171131676897280> … but 
it's not like Kentucky – the Bluegrass State – doesn't have its own musical 
tradition. And it's notall bluegrass … just mostly bluegrass (and Clapton for 
kicks).

The guys are already Tennessee bound, so head below the line and tell us what 
you want to hear and we'll start piling on the Nashville classics!

Updated at 9.58pm BST

8.51pm BST 

8.42pm BST 

Wired explains what might be discomfiting Benji so, with its illuminating 
article: "What's inside a Slim Jim 
<http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/magazine/17-09/st_whatsinside>?" 
There's meat, anyway …

Beef
It's real meat, all right … The US Department of Agriculture categorizes beef 
into eight grades of quality 
<http://www.fsis.usda.gov/factsheets/inspection_&_grading/index.asp>. The 
bottom three …and come from older steers with partially ossified vertebrae, 
tougher tissue, and generally less reason to live. ConAgra wasn't exactly 
forthcoming on what's inside Slim Jim.

Mechanically separated chicken
Did you imagine a conveyor belt carrying live chickens into a giant machine, 
set to the classic cartoon theme "Powerhouse"? You're right! Well, maybe not 
about the music. Poultry scraps are pressed mechanically through a sieve that 
extrudes the meat as a bright pink paste and leaves the bones behind (most of 
the time).

Wired reveals that Slim Jims – and presumably most brands of meat sticks – 
also include 'corn and wheat proteins', 'lactic acid starter culture' (bacteria 
to kill bad bacteria), 'dextrose' (to feed the good guy bacteria), salt, 
preservatives, and soy – for flavor!

8.22pm BST 

Hollis bought a Matador meat stick at the service station. It consists of beef 
and "mechanically separated chicken".

I have a small bite. I'm chewing for about three minutes before it's good to 
swallow. Easily in the top three worst things I've ever eaten.

8.12pm BST 

Axing for trouble

A few miles outside Bardstown, we stop at a service station and local car boot 
sale. I buy a $4 axe head from a man named Russ.

Russ' roadside emporium:

Updated at 8.16pm BST

7.53pm BST 

Benji and the boys are making their way to The National Corvette Museum in 
Bowling Green - a showcase for the sexy little sports car that has been in 
production since 1953.

This one was in production in 1983.

Updated at 7.53pm BST

7.25pm BST 

Raid!

A quick stop in the centre of Frankfort for a souvenir bottle - somewhat 
ironically, Buffalo Trace can only sell three of its varieties on site. At the
Capital Cellars <http://capitalcellars.net> in town, there are hundreds of 
bottles stacked on the shelves. The clerk, Tony, grew up in Harrow on the 
outskirts of London, but moved to Frankfort for a woman in 1982. The whiskey 
probably helped, too.

Updated at 7.46pm BST

7.22pm BST 

For medicinal purposes

We're taken on a whistlestop tour by David. My favourite fact: according to 
David, it's the longest running distillery in the US, continuously operating 
since 1773... including during the Prohibition period.

How did they manage that? Well, in 1920, 26 states passed the Medicinal 
Whiskey Act, allowing up to three pints of 100 proof whiskey per person per 
month (including babies) to be prescribed by your friendly local doctor for 
various ailments, including tension, and headaches. During the 14 years of 
Prohibition, Kentucky doctors signed over 6 million whiskey prescriptions. 
Patients from states without the law would flock to Kentucky for "second 
opinions".

We visit the a bottling line, where streams of Blantons Burbon are being hand 
labelled, waxed, and dropped into boxes.

Then to a storehouse, one of a dozen storing 300,000 American Oak barrels on 
the property.

It's dark, and the air is thick with liquor - the "Angel's share". 10% of the 
whiskey evaporates in its first year of storage, and 3-4% every year after that 
as the proof increases - the average Buffalo Trace is stored for just over 
eight years.

Finally, a tasting with Don. A sip straight up; a sip after a firm swirl 
(better); and a sip with a drop of water to "take the edge off". Don gives us a 
sip of Bourbon Cream for dessert - the equivalent of Baileys, it's delicious - 
and then a little mixed with root beer for a mini bourbon float. Every now and 
then, Don tells us, he likes to have a little Bourbon Cream on his oatmeal in 
the morning, to "hit the road running".

Updated at 12.02am BST

6.54pm BST 

I ain't afraid of no ghosts

6.24pm BST 

Spirit in the spirits

On Twitter, @mpressmeredith  <https://twitter.com/mpressmeredith>introduces a 
spooky note. Turns out the distillery is haunted. Bumps in the night, shivers 
in the cellars. Wooh! Who ya gonna call?Ghostbusters Ghost Hunters...
Meredith Tarr (@mpressmeredith) 
@benjilanyado <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado> enjoy your Buffalo Trace tour 
- but watch out for ghosts!https://t.co/lSB7LludgY <https://t.co/lSB7LludgY>
 <https://twitter.com/mpressmeredith/statuses/373130830261940224> August 29, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/mpressmeredith/statuses/373130830261940224> 
Updated at 6.26pm BST

6.04pm BST 

Buffalo Trace 101

What we Wik <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Buffalo_Trace_Distillery>i know 
about Buffalo Trace:

The company claims the distillery is the oldest continuously-operating 
distillery in the United States...Records indicate that distilling started on 
the site sometime before 1773 by Hancock Lee who died in 1776... The first true 
distillery was constructed [here] in 1812 by Harrison Blanton.

[Burks' Distillery, who produce Makers Mark in Loretto, is listed in the 
Guinness Book of World Records as the oldest operating bourbon distillery.]

The distillery is located on what the company claims was once an ancient 
buffalo crossing on the banks of the Kentucky River in Franklin County

5.52pm BST 

Bouquet of bourbon

The road that dips into Frankfort from the interstate is cut deep into a 
limestone hill. Hollis is talking about trucks, and how our Jeep, which Gary 
and I are very proud of, is embarrassingly wincy - the kind of car you might 
get around here after you've just passed your test, to get you going.

We arrive at the Buffalo Trace  <http://www.buffalotrace.com>distillery - a 
complex of old redbrick buildings, barrels in the windows. In places, the brick 
is blackened - it looks like soot, but it's actually a unique fungus that only 
grows where alcohol vapours are present.

You can smell the sweet, oaky bourbon waft. Combined with the thick, wet air - 
it's incredibly humid here - it feels like we're wading through a bourbon bath. 
Now there's a thought ...

Updated at 6.07pm BST

4.45pm BST 

Coming up ...

After last night's exploration of Louisville, the crew are now heading out of 
town to go in search of ...bourbon.

Presumably to discover the provenance of what they were quaffing last night. 
They're heading into the bluegrass Kentucky countryside, aiming for theBuffalo 
Trace distillery <http://www.buffalotrace.com> in Frankfort (as recommended by 
@Duderonomy <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26451248>). 
They are also going to check out the Corvette Museum (@Baron254 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26442770>) and Mammoth 
Caves (@nemocapn <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26444270>
) in Bowling Green.

Sadly, that means no time for Louisville's greatest son - and the greatest - 
at theAli Center <http://Alicenter.org>, or the Louisville Slugger Museum 
<http://slugger.com>, the factory where the famous baseball bats are made and 
the game's history is recorded.

Neither passed the "Hollis test" - "too cheesy, nice enough, but made for 
tourists". Thumbs down.

Hard man to please. But he's not as hard as Ali...

Updated at 7.42pm BST

4.14pm BST 

Elixir of the South

At Wagner's Pharmacy  <http://wagnerspharmacy.com/>in Churchill Downs, you 
drink ice tea - two pints of the stuff in a huge plastic tumbler. Every order 
is met with an instant response, "sweet or un-", a sure-fire sign that we're 
not quite in the real South yet - in the South, it's sweet or nothing.

Our omelettes arrive. Hollis ordered a "Pam & Jacks" - green pepper, onion, 
tomato, ham, bacon, sausage and two types of cheese. It's the size of a pizza, 
and the height of a sandwich. Zach (@eaterlousiville 
<https://twitter.com/EaterLouisville>) walks in to join us, immediately 
pointing at it. "What the hell is that?"

Updated at 4.24pm BST

4.09pm BST 

Nose bags on

Breakfast at Wagner's Pharmacy <http://wagnerspharmacy.com>, another tip from
@eaterlousiville <https://twitter.com/EaterLouisville>. It's a cracker. 
Wagner's has been serving workers from the Churchill Downs race course across 
the road - home to the Kentucky Derby - since 1922. Jockeys, hot walkers, stall 
cleaners and owners all come in here for their breakfast, and so do we.

It's a Thursday, so the University of Louisville sports alumni breakfast is 
underway in the front. Derby week is the only week they don't meet here, when 
they all go to someone's house for donuts.

In the back, the kitchen and bar are festooned with pictures of Derby winners: 
our booth is framed byVentian Way <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Venetian_Way> 
(1960),Majestic Prince <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2i871XZYFoE‎> (69) and 
Dancer's Image <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dancer's_Image> (68).

No one who works here is under 50, and everyone who works here calls us 
"sweetie" and "darling". The chairs and tables: pale orange leather and scraped 
laminate wood, untouched since the 80s. I love it.

Updated at 4.25pm BST

3.24pm BST 

Under starter's orders

Day four. Today, the bar is high, for two reasons.

One: yesterday was brilliant; from Jewish diners to artistic refuges in the 
woods to high-stakes Louisville ping pong, via a Indiana University statistics 
class. Beat that.

Two: today, everything must go through the "Hollis filter". Our photographer, 
Hollis, is a Nashville resident, and, as this is his turf, it's only right the 
we let him vet your tips, Roman Emperor style ... Thumbs up, or thumbs down.

We're heading south from Louisville this morning... What should we do? Tips to 
the usual places, if you please: @BenjiLanyado 
<https://twitter.com/benjilanyado>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/about/resources/buttons#hashtag>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, or in the comments below.
 