
The time has come: it's the final TwiTrip and this time we're heading east.

With five successful road trips done, the last in our series goes from 
Baltimore, Maryland, to Bar Harbor, Maine. The loose plan for the 800-mile 
week-long trip is to take inPhiladelphia and Boston on the way, via Connecticut
. After all, state-hopping is surely the best thing about this tightly packed 
corner of the US.

For those not yet familiar with the setup of a TwiTrip, the idea is that all 
our moves are guided by you, the reader, in real time. That's everything: from 
where we stay to where we eat and break the journey. You don't have to be on 
Twitter to get involved: you can also leave a message on the daily live blog, 
or onGuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc>.

Clearly this region, in and around New England, played a huge role in American 
history, but history doesn't tend to make for good live-blogging, so I want to 
focus on the now. Take me to places that help me understand the area's identity 
– or identities – in 2013.

At this point, I also have to hold my hands up and admit that my knowledge of 
Baltimore and Philadelphia rests mostly on The Wire and the early works of Will 
Smith. In Philly, is "a place called the Plateau 
<http://rapgenius.com/Will-smith-summertime-lyrics#note-771060>" still where 
everybody goes in summertime? And how about in early fall? See, I told you I 
need help.

Maine is another mystery, but it sounds idyllic, with its rocky coastline and 
autumn foliage. I'm dying to get stuck into the seafood. Chowder, crab cakes, 
lobster: where can I try the very best? And, of course, we're also going to 
need to know where to find the top Philly cheesesteak andBoston cream pie 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boston_cream_pie>.

Boston will be the only place I've already visited, but that was over 10 years 
ago, when I tumbled head first into every tourist cliche: I sat inside the 
Cheers bar (even though only the exterior was featured in the TV show) and I 
caught the train to Cambridge to have a look at Harvard from the outside – both 
were about as exciting as they sound. Please save me from making such fruitless 
journeys again.

Finally, I'm a strong believer in the idea that the people make the trip, so 
I'd love you to point me in the direction of some interesting local characters. 
A restaurant or guesthouse owner perhaps, or a gregarious shopkeeper with 
plenty of stories about their neighbourhood and local life. The sort of people 
who are real personalities and who other tourists could meet, too.

Luckily, I'll be travelling all the way with Greta Rybus 
<http://www.gretarybus.com/>, a brilliant photographer based in Maine, who has 
an online projectwhoimetblog.com <http://www.whoimetblog.com/>, featuring 
portraits and short interviews with fascinating "ordinary" people. We'll be 
sending her into overdrive to do as many as possible in a week, and she'll also 
be taking over theGuardian's Instagram feed <http://instagram.com/guardiannews>.

If you know this part of the US and have some tips to share, please get in 
touch. Or, if you fancy a trip in the future, let us do the groundwork and you 
can follow in our footsteps.

Either way, join us online on 23 September, when we'll be waking up in 
Baltimore, ready to hit the road.

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 