
Who is best on Twitter? 

For me, the best person on Twitter is JK Rowling 
<https://twitter.com/jk_rowling?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
. Not only does she talk about her product [books] and the brand that she’s 
created, but she also shares her opinions.


Obviously that can be polarising, sharing her views on politics wouldn’t 
necessarily be something you’d have thought would increase her sales. But she 
does it proudly and with humour. More than anything else, she is listening to 
the conversation that is taking place [on Twitter]. She is not just talking 
about herself; she is genuinely interested in what is happening around her.


In the business world, for all his fame and celebrity, Lord Sugar 
<https://twitter.com/Lord_Sugar> definitely listens to what people are saying 
on Twitter. And David Gold [chairman at West Ham United FC] will often hear 
what’s being said about the club on Twitter and respond to rumours and 
complaints.

David Gold (@davidgold) 
Andre Ayew is available for the Leicester game. dg https://t.co/VVoEUHX1AL 
<https://t.co/VVoEUHX1AL>
 <https://twitter.com/davidgold/status/814921844138643456> December 30, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/davidgold/status/814921844138643456> 
What makes a good tweet?

Hashtags are important; hundreds of thousands of organic hashtags exist. There 
are local hashtags across the UK; for example, every Monday night the#Dorsethour
 <https://twitter.com/search?vertical=default&q=%23dorsethour&src=tyah> hashtag 
trends.


People use hashtags to share beautiful images of the county; they use it to 
share information about farmers’ markets happening in their town; they use it 
to talk about restaurants there.


If you’ve got a business in an area with a local hashtag, the first thing you 
should do is search that hashtag and see what people are saying. Follow a few 
active accounts, think about how you can add to the discussion, then engage in 
it.


Join a Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> conversation 
like you’d join a conversation in a pub; don’t barge in, don’t try and 
dominate, listen as well as talk. If you abide by that etiquette, then there 
will definitely be massive opportunities.


How can a business build its profile on Twitter?

Some companies employ outside providers to build their business profile for 
them, but those that do it well listen as well as talk. We advise celebrities – 
and the same advice would apply to businesses – to be aware of news stories 
that are breaking before they tweet. [As a business], feel free to retweet 
others’ comments and share links to others’ content. That’s the pattern of 
behaviour of real people, and the more a business can emulate it the better.


What have been the biggest trends in social media in 2016, and what do you 
expect in 2017?

It’s been fascinating to see how our experience of humour and comedy is 
changing. Increasingly the way many of us who use social media see comedy isn’t 
watching a sitcom, but seeing ameme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/30/evil-kermit-perfect-meme-terrible-times>
 orgif  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/shortcuts/2014/jan/24/gifys-new-award-best-gifs-cats>
sitting in our timeline – then we watch the joke evolve over the day. It’s how 
people connect with each other, and one way businesses can connect with people.


It’s going to be another year of video growth in 2017, particularly on mobile: 
90% of all content consumed on Twitter is on people’s phones.

If you think about the way people see video [on social media], maybe they’re 
scrolling through, the sound is off, but the video catches their eye. I’ve seen 
video used fantastically by restaurants, for example, to give a sense of the 
venue’s ambiance.

There has been an explosion of interest in live streaming this year, and we’ve 
seen more brands using it. The critical thing for any company is to consider 
how they can benefit from a live stream and what it will add [to their 
customer’s or potential customer’s experience].

What was your favourite Twitter story in 2016? 

The story <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-devon-38141319> I found most 
interesting was about an autistic boy who needed a replacement for his Tommee 
Tippee cup. His dad had a challenge in that his son wouldn’t drink out of 
anything else, but the cup had been discontinued by Tommee Tippee.

Grumpy Carer (@GrumpyCarer) 
Reward for cup like this! Son has severe #autism 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/autism?src=hash> & would rather go to A&E 
dehydrated than use ANY other cup - colour shape etc PLEASE SHARE
pic.twitter.com/iglWs9IKA9 <https://t.co/iglWs9IKA9>
 <https://twitter.com/GrumpyCarer/status/798212421370318848> November 14, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GrumpyCarer/status/798212421370318848> 
The dad, Marc Carter, tweeted the request for a cup and got dozens of cups 
sent to him by the public. Then Tommee Tippee found the old mould and made 500 
cups for his son.


It’s an example of how a company can listen, and can be seen to be sympathetic 
to the people who use their products.


How has Twitter changed customer service?

Ultimately, Twitter is a medium of truth. If you are delivering bad customer 
service, no one should be surprised to hear that people are talking about it 
being bad.


If you want to improve your service, then Twitter is a really powerful place 
to do that. Anyone who commutes to London will find that their experience is 
difficult. So what’s been interesting for me over the last 12 months is that 
people who commute into London have been able to find others in the same 
situation.


Southern rail strike causes worst disruption in 20 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/13/southern-rail-strike-after-court-rejects-appeal-live-updates>
Train companies that run services out of London – like South West Trains 
<https://twitter.com/SW_Trains>, Southern Trains 
<https://twitter.com/SouthernRailUK> are having to communicate more effectively 
about their plans.


How can small businesses work with social media influencers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/may/27/instagram-menswear-influencers-blake-scott-jamal-jackson-perkens-bien-aime>
?

It works best when partnerships feel authentic. We’ve probably all witnessed 
someone posting something like how they’ve enjoyed a delicious creamy yoghurt, 
with the brand’s hashtag – when a post doesn’t seem authentic it can be 
jarring. Try to find a partnership that seems plausible and sincere.

Bruce Daisley was a speaker at the Digital Transformation Conference 
<http://digitaltransformationconf.co.uk/> in London.


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 