
4.19am BST 

Till tomorrow, Beantown!

Boston, we're signing off as we head off into the night. It won't be a late 
one, as we need to see the city tomorrow, but we need to check out that brew 
pub before bed, and maybe get some ice cream on the way (those non-tapas dishes 
really were small).

Please keep those tips coming for Boston-by-day. Then we hope to be in 
Portland, Maine tomorrow evening. Good night! 

4.14am BST 

Boston 102

As taught by its native writer David Lehane – best known for his 
novels-turned-movies Mystic River, Gone Baby Gone and Shutter Island. Here he 
is inthe Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/17/opinion/messing-with-the-wrong-city.html>, 
during one of Boston's darkest moments: 

"I do love this city. I love its atrocious accent, its inferiority complex in 
terms of New York, its nut-job drivers, the insane logic of its street system. 
I get a perverse pleasure every time I take the T in the winter and the 
air-conditioning is on in the subway car, or when I take it in the summer and 
the heat is blasting. Bostonians don’t love easy things, they love hard things 
— blizzards, the bleachers in Fenway Park, a good brawl over a contested 
parking space."

4.01am BST 

Filmic Boston

Vicky, Greta and Kylie are on their way to Cambridge Brewing Co – and may yet 
run into the same sort of masters students that Damon and Affleck roundly told 
off in Good Will Hunting. Those two aren't the only two filmmakers who've 
fallen in love with Boston, though – Wahlberg and DiCaprio have taken a knack 
to it too, among others.

In recent years, David O Russell's The Fighter (Lowell, technically) and 
Martin Scorcese'sThe Departed have been the Boston films to beat. Often 
literally. Does Beantown have minimum violence and profanity levels to its 
movies? Does it require one of these actors to be in any movie associated with 
it? Is there a secret Boston-Hollywood club?

We don't have answers. Instead, we have YouTube. (Warning: these clips don't 
contain violence but do feature profanity and/or Mark Walhberg.)

3.51am BST 

Definitely an interesting dinner, but I think tomorrow, for lunch, we need 
something that's really Boston. Seafood? Or Italian food in the North End? Also 
we're planning a cannoli hunt – where can we find the best of the best? 

3.45am BST 

"Watch what you say, they might spit in our food," says Greta. It's true; 
live-blogging restaurant reviews is a hazardous pursuit. We like the food 
though, really we do. Portions are small, but we were warned about that. 
 Not a burger in sight. 
3.39am BST 

It's a bit of a strange one. On one hand, it's a classy cocktail bar with 
a note in the menu kindly asking you not to refer to their food as tapas 
(that's just Spain and this is international, darling). Yet there's also a 
birthday every five minutes, when the staff – dressed, it seems, as flamenco 
dancers and saloon girls – erupt into song, with tambourines. 

3.30am BST 

The decor is … ecclectic. That's not to say I don't like it. It works well, it 
just takes a moment to get your head round it. There are some stunning stained 
glass windows by the bar, plenty of boudoir-style lampshades, and a mannequin 
of a glamourous Miss Haversham-character raised high on the wall. 

3.17am BST 

Cuchi Cuchi

A giant mermaid sculpture and fairy lights mark the entrance to Cuchi Cuchi. 
It's packed inside, and quite a contrast from some of the sterile-looking 
buildings in the vicinity for pharmacutical companies and the like.

3.06am BST 

Movie MIT

The people of MIT – whether they be students, faculty or fictional janitors – 
are famously entrepreneurial, and stories about these vaunted figures have duly 
been told in print and film. But while the alumni Bens Bernanke and Netanyahu 
dominate headlines, others make it to the silver screen.

First up, the true story of a group of MIT colleagues who hit Vegas  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MIT_Blackjack_Team>and counted cards all the way 
to hundreds of thousands of dollars and gambling infamy. The movie made about 
their exploits, 21 <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0478087/>, inspired whole 
documentaries <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QflVqavHHM0>about the art of odds 
and cards.

The other MIT movie won Oscars, is fictitious, and became an instant classic – 
if only for Matt Damon's bottomless well of quotable lines and Ben Affleck's 
brutally exaggerated accent.

Updated at 3.13am BST

2.45am BST 

Mixology

Some pre-beer science. Just popped into MIT on way to dinner (as recommended 
by quite a few readers, includingAlwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/755616> and former MIT-er aeausa
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10130272>). This is a small 
flowering plant on a molecular scale, apparently. 

"We've been to Yale and MIT, our parents will be so proud," says Greta. 

Updated at 2.53am BST

2.32am BST 

Boston 101

As taught by the Dropkick Murphys.

2.19am BST 

Rough plan is emerging: Cuchi Cuchi and then Cambridge Brew Co, or the other 
way around. We're pretty tired after a day on the road, so maybe no random goth 
parties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/24/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor>
 tonight. Although, you never know. 

2.08am BST 

Cambridge!

Phew. We're at the hotel. We need a beer after this journey. We're keen to try 
out this tip, which was the very first one we received when we first put out 
the shout last week: theCambridge Brewing Company <http://www.cambrew.com/> at 
Kendall Square. (First drink's for you, dr8765 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4631009>.) 

We've just checked in the hotel, just around the corner. It's as if we planned 
the trip around a need for a good beer.

Updated at 2.12am BST

1.51am BST 

Reader's guide to a night in Cambridge

Though Vicky's still taking suggestions for where to grab dinner in drinks in 
Cambridge tonight (and you can tweet her @vickybaker 
<https://twitter.com/vickybaker> or vote below the line to sway her choice), 
we've received a bunch of good tips about her options in Boston.

ebby33 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12312347> recommends 
Cuchi Cuchi <http://www.cuchicuchi.cc/> in Cambridge, "where they also serve 
really nice international "small plates" until 10.30pm … they're pricey, but 
worth it", to which the ubiquitous aeausa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10130272> follows up with 
dessert:Toscanini's Ice Cream <http://www.tosci.com/>, apparently rated the 
best in Boston for years, according to their site's billing.

We've also received tips for the burgers and craft beers at RF O'Sullivans 
<http://www.rf-osullivan.com/>, the southern food at M3 
<http://www.yelp.com/biz/m3-somerville>, and the Portuguese at Atasca Hampshire 
<http://www.yelp.com/biz/atasca-hampshire-cambridge>. Burgers, at least, are 
out of the evening equation, for sure …

And finally, there's @mrdavidwhitley <https://twitter.com/mrdavidwhitley>:

What's the verdict? Any Quebecois restaurants in the area? Any secret 
Cambridge bars that don't mind live blog publicity? Or Portuguese food and the 
very aptWheel of Indecision <http://www.yelp.com/biz/bukowski-tavern-cambridge>
? 

Updated at 2.12am BST

1.27am BST 

At last! We see the skyscrapers of Boston. We've passed some boat 
houses alongside the Charles river. Someone just suggested another burger for 
dinner. The team is definitely all burger-ed out. 

1.10am BST 

Lesson learnt: getting a last-minute, affordable hotel in Boston is no easy 
task. After a lot of calling around, we've booked into theKendall Hotel 
<http://kendallhotel.com/> in Cambridge. 

As for refueling … where can we get fed and watered nearby? 

Updated at 1.26am BST

1.01am BST 

Tuneage II

From the passenger's seat along Rt 84, it's the second edition of Zach's New 
England playlist.

12.49am BST 

Speaking of UMass Amherst, western Massachusetts is a worthy destination for a 
much quieter, relaxed road trip than Vicky's schedule will allow for. All 
valleys, forested hills and minor mountains, the Pioneer Valley is considered 
prime "fall foliage" country, and is full of trails and B&Bs. The biggest city 
in the area,Springfield <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pioneer_Valley>, was 
founded in the earliest days of English colonization, and was the first place 
somebody in the New World thought tocall somebody else a witch 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pioneer_Valley#Witchcraft_and_the_New_World.27s_first_banned_book>
 –a long British tradition <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zrzMhU_4m-g>.

And it's got culture, too! Emily Dickinson 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/emily-dickinson> wrote her poems in a 
strange little house here <http://www.emilydickinsonmuseum.org/>, Chinua Achebe 
<http://www.masslive.com/news/index.ssf/2013/03/chinua_achebe_former_professor.html>
, Joseph Brodsky <https://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/russian/joseph_brodsky> and 
Robert Frost <https://www.amherst.edu/library/archives/holdings/frost> taught 
nearby, and the college town of Amherst boasts not just the Pixies but alums 
such as David Foster Wallace <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IYGaXzJGVAQ> and 
David O Russell <https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-o-russell>, who, 
coincidentally, recently won plaudits for his movie set in Philadelphia 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1045658/>.

Wallace, of course, immortalized Boston and its environs – or at least an 
alternate version of Boston <http://www.infiniteboston.com/>– in his novel 
Infinite Jest, and you can take tours 
<http://www.infiniteboston.com/post/27284682170/exploring-wallace-boston> of 
all his real and imagined locations 
<http://www.infiniteboston.com/post/27284682170/exploring-wallace-boston>. Fans 
have evenplotted them out on maps <http://infiniteatlas.com/>, made Flickr 
photo tours <http://www.flickr.com/photos/25383051@N05/sets/72157612365092520/>
, and created internet monuments <http://www.thehowlingfantods.com/dfw/> to the 
monumental novel.

Updated at 1.22am BST

12.36am BST 

We're listening to the Pixies now to get us in the mood. It's educational, as 
Frank Black might shout. He and guitarist Joey Santiago met at the University 
of Massachusetts Amherst. 

12.15am BST 

Autumn glory

Route 84 is tree-lined and some of the leaves are just, just beginning to 
turn. Little patches of burnt yellow and burgundy. We have been hoping to catch 
New England in its autumnal glory. Are we still a little early? Greta assures 
us it will all be OK when we get to Maine. Not the full picture perhaps, but it 
should offer a good taste of it. 

Updated at 12.39am BST

12.01am BST 

In honor of Rhode Island, which will be missed – literally, by Vicky – here's 
the state in the words ofone very thorough commenter 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27181273> who values 
liberty, tolerance and seafood above all else:

There is one tiny little apparently forgotten state being traversed on this 
itinerary that merits a pause of a day or two, as it can lay claim to being the 
true birthplace of the rebellion against Crown rule, the tradition of religious 
tolerance, and the separation of church and state that was eventually enshrined 
in the US constitution.

And, equally important, the home of the best seafood anywhere en route, 
including what are indisputably the world's best oysters.

So: get off 95 right after crossing into Rhode Island from Connecticut, veer 
south on the Boston Post Road (Route 1) and stop for a good, long waterfront 
lunch at theMatunuck Oyster Bar  <http://www.rhodyoysters.com/>on Succotash 
Road. Then continue on 1 until the turnoff to the Jamestown and Pell bridges to 
Newport, where you will visitAmerica's first synagogue  
<http://www.tourosynagogue.org/>and the unforgettable Cliff Walk  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newport_Cliff_Walk>past the front lawns of the 
Robber Baron palaces <http://www.newportmansions.org/> a few miles away.
 Newport Cliff Walk. Photograph: /Wiki 
Then head north through Providence (you can stop there next time) and stop at 
Pawtucket's Slater Mill <http://www.slatermill.org/>, a monument to 
intellectual property theft that kicked off the second North American phase of 
the industrial revolution. But don't leave Providence without at least one 
great Italian meal - the choices are many.

Updated at 12.01am BST

11.55pm BST 

We're all disappointed to miss Rhode Island though. We really fancied that 
ferry trip from Providence.

Updated at 12.40am BST

11.47pm BST 

Time seems to have run away for us a bit, with our detour into New Haven 
(although it was well worth it). We're taken advice from below the line to take 
the quickest route to Boston. That's inland through Connecticut. Any tips to 
break up the final legs of the journey?

11.40pm BST 

On the road again

We're back the car. Boston is finally appearing on the road signs. We're 
gradually closing in. Just passed Glastonbury, the other Glastonbury in 
Connecticut.

11.35pm BST 

Below the line, aeausa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10130272> has led the 
commenters in providing what might be the comprehensive guide to Boston and its 
environs. There will be future thankful mentions as Vicky approaches the bay – 
along with shout outs to ebby33 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12312347>, Alwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/755616> and others – but for 
now, we'll just honor your continued excellence as commenters withaeausa's <> 
request for James Taylor. 

Keep sending tips for the the road, Beantown itself and the road trip tunes 
you'd like to hear!

11.17pm BST 

Beinecke 101

The team is exploring Yale's Beinecke Library 
<https://flexible.gutools.co.uk/admin/content/>, which, with its massive 
collection and bizarre architecture, looks like a bibliophile's happy fever 
dream.
 Beinecke Library. Photograph: /Wiki 
The climate-controlled, modernist-styled hall holds six stories of books, and 
counts James Joyce,Hemingway 
<http://beinecke.library.yale.edu/about/blogs/yale-collection-american-literature/2013/02/23/beinecke-top-tens-ernest-hemingway>
,Dickens 
<http://news.yale.edu/2012/02/07/yale-celebrates-dickens-200th-birthday>, Walt 
Whitman <http://beinecke.library.yale.edu/about/blogs/poetry-beinecke-library> 
andthe Gutenberg Bible 
<http://beinecke.library.yale.edu/about/news/centuries-old-gutenberg-comes-air>
 among its stacks. They've even got alchemy in European pop culture 
<http://beinecke.library.yale.edu/collections/highlights/book-secrets-alchemy-and-european-imagination-1500-2000>
 and the enigmatic Voynich manuscript 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2013/07/the-unread-the-mystery-of-the-voynich-manuscript.html>
, which was recently written about inthe New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/books/2013/07/the-unread-the-mystery-of-the-voynich-manuscript.html>
 for being completely baffling:

The oddest thing about this book is that no one has ever read it. … Called the 
Voynich manuscript after the rare-book dealer who stumbled upon it a century 
ago – [it's] written in an unknown script, with an alphabet that appears 
nowhere other than in its pages. The writing system is oddly beautiful, full of 
looping and fluid curves. … What these glyphs signify – whether they represent 
phonetic information or numeric values or something else – is anyone’s guess.
 Not the Voynich. Just yet another cool book. 
And that Forbes Smiley story mentioned a moment ago? It's behind the New 
Yorker's paywall 
<http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2005/10/17/051017fa_fact_finnegan>; the Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/03/arts/design/03maps.html?pagewanted=all>, on 
the other hand, tells us that Smiley, an antiquities dealer, used an X-Acto 
knife blade to steal a maps worth almost $1m. He didn't get very far: police 
found a map worth $150,000 in his pocket and the others in his briefcase. In 
2006, Smiley pled guilty to 97 
<http://www.thecrimson.com/article/2006/6/30/map-dealer-admits-to-97-thefts/>
 thefts over the years and landed in prison facing possible $1.6m fines.

So it goes in the tweedy underbelly of academia.

Updated at 11.20pm BST

10.57pm BST 

Security is high here. We've left out bags in lockers.

"There are cameras over every table," says Steve. Was anything ever stolen?

"There have been a few cases," he says. "The most famous was Forbes Smiley. 
The New Yorker did a big piece on it in 2005."

We're intrigued. 

10.45pm BST 

Head of department Steve is giving us a little tour.

 He shows us one of their most prized objects: a Lewis and Clark map from 
1810. They hand drew it as they travelled on the first expedition across the 
American west.

We ask Steve what its value is. "Huge," he says.

"We don't know exactly, because we'd never sell it." He estimates it's in the 
10s of millions, but says that is a stab in the dark.

10.36pm BST 

Beinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library

We're at the Beinecke rare books library. Amid all the old university 
buildings, it certainly stands out. Built in early 1960s out of marble from 
Vermont, it's a giant cube with a geometric grid pattern on the front. 

10.21pm BST 

Connecticut has something of a habit for claiming intellectual property rights 
– sometimes spuriously. New Haven-ites and others have demanded credit for a 
lot more than the hamburger.Wiki 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/New_Haven#Notable_inventions_and_formations> 
gives us the rundown (with editor's notes appended in brackets).

1776: Yale student David Bushnell invents the first American submarine. [Which 
failed to sink a British warship <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Turtle> 
in the revolution.]

1787: John Fitch builds the first steamboat. [Which he built in Philadelphia 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Fitch_(inventor)>.]

1793: Eli Whitney invents the cotton gin. [Yes, Industrial Revolution 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Industrial_Revolution> Eli, of history textbook 
infamy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eli_Whitney>.]

1836: Samuel Colt invents the automatic revolver in Whitney's factory. 

1860: Philios P Blake patents the first corkscrew. [Though it's probably an 
English invention, implied to have existed back in John Worlidge's 1861 
Treatise on Cider 
<http://luna.folger.edu/luna/servlet/detail/FOLGERCM1~6~6~22243~101647:Vinetum-Britannicum--or-A-treatise->
.]

1878–1880: The District Telephone Company of New Haven creates the world's 
first telephone exchange and the first telephone directory and installs the 
first public phone. [Most of the first actual inventing and experimentingtook 
place in Boston <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_the_telephone>.]

1892: Local confectioner George C Smith of the Bradley Smith Candy Co invents 
the first lollipops. [Though people have beeneating sugar-on-a-stick since the 
middle ages <http://www.candyfavorites.com/shop/catalog-lollipop-history.php>, 
andthe word first appeared a century earlier 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lollipop>.]

1911: The Erector Set <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Erector_Set>, the popular 
and culturally important construction toy, is invented in New Haven by AC 
Gilbert. [Were Erector Sets to New Haven kids what Lego is to the world?]

1920: The Frisbee is said to have originated on the Yale campus, based on the 
tin pans of the Frisbie Pie Company which were tossed around by students on 
the New Haven Green. [This should probably not be a point of pride.]

Updated at 10.22pm BST

10.08pm BST 

We notice that all the signs in Louis Lunch are spelt wrong. It's deliberate – 
an in-joke because of the proximity to Yale.

"Everyone is just so educated round here," says Jeff. Speaking of which, we 
are heading there now. We've got atip to check out the Beinecke Library 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27331723>. 

9.50pm BST 

Right, we've carved our names in the table. (Jeff gave us that screwdriver, by 
the way.) It's time to go. 

9.40pm BST 

Jeff, great grandson of the owner, swears by their claim on the oldest burger 
title, as they have been operating in the same area since 1885. They flame 
grill the burgers in their original 1898 cast-iron stoves. 

The rules: strictly no ketchup. 

"We look down on condiments," says Jeff. "A lot of places put ketchup all over 
it because it is an inferior product, but we work to bring people the very 
best. We cut and grind out own meat onsite every day."

9.32pm BST 

Louis Lunch

We're making up for our Burger King faux pas in New Jersey (it was an 
emergency, people, not a choice). I've never been to a burger joint like this 
one. A short, squat, brick building with heavy wood furniture. The counter is 
more like the bar in an old English pub.

9.24pm BST 

We've got a tip to visit Louis' Lunch <http://www.louislunch.com/> in New 
Haven, the oldest burger joint in the US, so they say. I'm sure others lay 
claim to that title too, but we're off to find out the full story.

Their line is that one day in 1900, a man dashed in and asked for something to 
eat on the run. The owner quickly stuffed a broiled beef patty between two 
slices of bread and the hamburger was born. 

9.14pm BST 

The company is Austrian, but has had its US HQ here since 1973. "How's the 
company doing?" I ask, thinking surely the heyday is over.

"Bigger and better than ever," says the manager dryly, looking a bit offended 
that I should ask. The visitors centre opened 1.5 years ago and 
received 100,000 visitors in its first year. 
 Not Oompa-Loompas. 
9.07pm BST 

There's a visitors' centre with a glass wall on to the factory. You can make 
your own dispenser or buy a bucket of the stuff. 

9.00pm BST 

This is all a bit Willy Wonka. 

8.46pm BST 

Revenge of Pez

Ok, America, this is getting weird. we've already mentioned our 
blast-from-the-past reminder of Pez dispensers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/23/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-5240ac0de4b018876726dbdd>
, thanks to the display at the American Visionary Arts Musuem in Baltimore and 
the again at the second display at Paper Moon Diner. Now as we drive through 
Connecticut, we see thePez Museum <http://www.pez.com/visit_us/> in Orange. We 
are going to have to swing by. 

8.33pm BST 

New England Tuneage Part I

Zach Nugent, arts producer for New Hampshire Public Radio (and Greta's 
boyfriend) has generously supplied us with a playlist to welcome the team into 
New England … and enough east-coast-related songs to last them quite a 
distance. We'll keep posting his picks as the journey continues, but your 
musical wishes are our command. Tell us what we missed!

8.20pm BST 

We're far from you now, New Jersey, but an apology is in order. You have no 
idea how good those diners sound to us, but the brillant tips from@walkprinceton
 <> came just a little too late for us. (Someone please go on our behalf.)

Next stop: New Haven.

8.10pm BST 

We are going to need a place a drink after this massive journey. Tips on 
Boston bars? We like the sound of this one.

7.32pm BST 

New Haven 101

Most famous for: Yale University - the town's biggest earner and employer. The 
University's assets include an endowment valued at $19.4 billion. Founded 1701 
- third oldest academic institution in the US (after Harvard and the College of 
William and Mary in Virginia)

Who's been to Yale? Who hasn't. Five US Presidents, inc Gerald Ford, George H 
W Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W Bush; authors Sinclair Lewis, and Tom Wolfe; 
actors, directors and producers Paul Newman, Vincent Price, Meryl Streep, Jodie 
Foster, Angela Bassett, Frances McDormand; composers Charles Ives and Cole 
Porter; child psychologist Benjamin Spock.

And then there's: The first time a rock star was arrested at a concert. Jim 
Morrison 1967, New Haven <http://www.jimmorrisononline.com/arrests/>. "While 
backstage with a girl, a police officer, not realizing it was Jim, told the 
couple to leave. Jim resisted and was maced by the cop. During the performance, 
Jim began to recount the story about 'the little blue man, in the little blue 
cap'. The police finally had enough, stopped the concert and arrested 
Morrison." Cue near riot.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGk22g10d6A0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGk22g10d6A0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGk22g10d6A0&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGk22g10d6A0&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGk22g10d6A0>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGk22g10d6A0&media=>
close 
Updated at 7.47pm BST

7.04pm BST 

We've had some great views of the Manhattan skyline on our way through. Just 
exited the Bronx. Bye, NYC. See you next time. Got a date with Boston.

"Welcome to the New York Thruway: New England section," says the sign. We like 
the sound of this.

Updated at 8.16pm BST

6.52pm BST 

New Jersey Turnpike? Got to be done. Corny but classic. And Paul Simon is from 
New Jersey.

This is from the Simon and Garfunkel free benefit concert in Central Park 
in 1981, in front of more than 500,000 people. Proceeds went to the 
redevelopment and maintenance of the run-down green space in the middle of 
Manhattan. Bonus shout out to the unsung heroes selling loose joints and 
donating half the proceeds to the city.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvCbOEZ8c8dM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvCbOEZ8c8dM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvCbOEZ8c8dM&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvCbOEZ8c8dM&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvCbOEZ8c8dM>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvCbOEZ8c8dM&media=>
close 
Updated at 6.56pm BST

6.32pm BST 

@WalkPrinceton -  <https://twitter.com/WalkPrinceton>Got those awesome diner 
tips on Twitter a bit too late. We could try the one in Edison though, maybe. 
Just seeing if it would slow us down.

Oh no, actually have passed Edison.
Walkable Princeton (@WalkPrinceton) 
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> @vickybaker 
<https://twitter.com/vickybaker> Or if you can hold on, Skylark in Edison, on 
Rt 1 just off the Turnpike is classier and the typical retro style.
 <https://twitter.com/WalkPrinceton/statuses/382913782193741824> September 25, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/WalkPrinceton/statuses/382913782193741824> 
Updated at 6.34pm BST

6.21pm BST 

We pulled off the New Jersey Turnpike and into a truckers' rest stop. It's 
standard fare on offer: fast food. Burgers and fries it is, then. The usual 
tourist/server exchange ensues.

"I asked for small. Oh, that is small? Oh. Ok."

We're going to feel great after this. For about 10 minutes.

6.15pm BST 

We know how he feels.

Below the line, Menardo 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27331723> has quite 
rightly taken me (me is Andy in the London office) to task for describing his 
response to our proposed route as "apoplectic". Sorry, I panicked. Maps makes 
me nervous. Friends? Anyway, he's suggesting another way, through the 
Berkshires and then taking in theMohawk Trail 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mohawk_Trail> "which still has vestiges of early 
driving culture in America".

Pazuzu  <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27332759>plumps 
for the interior route over the coastal drive, taking in the Hudson Valley and 
the Catskills "which has wonderful little towns like Rosendale and Phoenicia".

And Mark Baglin <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27333374> 
agress withKFC <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27329615> 
that the team should head to Provincetown and, from there, catch the ferry over 
to Boston - "fun with great views of the Harbor Islands, and you may, if you're 
lucky, catch sight of a whale or two".

But wait, ohno...Alwick 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27334848> tells us that 
this is not a car ferry. Zut!

So many choices, so little time. And breathe.

Updated at 6.27pm BST

5.51pm BST 

Nathan's hotdogs booth! It caught our eye from the road. And it does Philly 
cheesesteaks, too! Probably not the best in Pennsylvania, but we're starving.
But, wait, is that a closed sign? Nooo. Will we ever eat again?

5.38pm BST 

It's a big day on the road today. Kylie is in the driving seat and Greta is 
snapping pics through the window (not that the landscape is wildly exciting at 
the moment, lot of road works). I'm trying to look busy, checking tips on 
Twitter, in the hope that Kylie won't suggest a game of 20 questions. Last time 
we played that on a road trip, she got annoyed with me for squandering my 
questions.

"Is it a fruit?"

"Yes."

"Is it a pineapple!?!"

"Dammit Vicky, come on, play properly. Narrow it down first."

She plays 20 questions tactically. They're competitive these Aussies, aren't 
they? Although, it was a pineapple, incidentally.

5.17pm BST 

So the team are on the road to Boston - or by the side of a road consulting a 
map. Either way, it's time to cue up the first playlist of the day. There's 
nothing clever, scientific or insider cool about this one, I'm afraid. The 
loose idea is that all the bands have some connect with the states that Vicky, 
Greta and Kylie will be passing through today: PA, NJ, NY, CT and MA. That's 
it. We're sure you will have much better suggestions, so do sling them our way, 
and we'll be more than happy to stick them on play:@VickyBaker 
<https://twitter.com/vickybaker>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, or in the comments below. We thank you.

4.50pm BST 

On the way into the US on Sunday, Kylie, our driver, arriving via Mexico, got 
a full grilling from US immigration.

"So tell me again, what is it you are doing? Where are you going? Why?"

Kylie was worried for a moment. Then the woman reached for a pen.

"Wait a moment. What's that Twitter address again? I'll write it down and 
tweet you some tips."

Philly immigration lady, if one of those tips yesterday came from you, speak 
now.

4.34pm BST 

Interesting Philly footnote in the comments below from Pigtown 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27330860>, who's been 
serving us prime cuts all week:

Kevin Bacon's father was the city planner responsible for much of 
Philadelphia's look today, mixing the modern with the historic.

Edmund Norwood Bacon (1910-2005), urban planner and architect, is sometimes 
described as "The Father of Modern Philadelphia." His ideas that shaped modern 
Philly include: Penn Center, Market East, Penn's Landing, Society Hill, 
Independence Mall, and the Far Northeast. He also unsuccessfully opposed the 
development of skyscrapers in Center City Philadelphia taller than Philadelphia 
City Hall. (cf Wiki)

4.21pm BST 

We have consensus on the route to Boston, heeding Menardo 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27329246>'s apoplectic 
response (and having consulted a map). The team are now following
KentuckyFriedColonel 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27329615>'s advice (sorry 
MisterMeaner <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27312707>), 
and heading East then North via New Haven, Mystic, Newport RI, Plymouth and up 
to Boston.

Mystic Pizza, right? Of course we were lying about looking at a map...we just 
liked the names on this route better. Does that make us shallow? A little 
Respect, please...
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJKd83FCPYl4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJKd83FCPYl4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJKd83FCPYl4&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJKd83FCPYl4&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJKd83FCPYl4>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJKd83FCPYl4&media=>
close 
Updated at 4.23pm BST

4.09pm BST 

Road trip fail: Silk City Diner is closed.

It only does breakfast at weekends. Gutted. This place looks awesome. 
Old-school diner, with that Airstream caravan look, plus a very cute and 
colourful garden, encased in stucco walls and wrought-iron gates. Oh well, will 
have to pick something up on the road now. Onward to Boston...

Updated at 4.10pm BST

3.54pm BST 

Route ruck:

It's already kicking off in the comments. Menardo 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27329246> says

No one goes through Pennsylvania and Upstate New York to get to Boston, unless 
you're looking to add seven or eight hours of driving to your trip.

Oops.

KentuckyFriedColonel 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27329615> takes a gentler, 
more paternal approach, by suggesting the team go "Go North, then East" via 
Albany, Lenox, Amherst, Concord and Lexington.

Get to see a lot of lovely scenery and experience a nice variety of 
picture-postcard / significant New England/NY towns and cities.

Or: "Go East, then North" via New Haven, Mystic and visiting Newport RI ("one 
of my very favourite places") then east to Plymouth and up to Boston.

We like the sound of those. Any other thoughts?

Updated at 4.15pm BST

3.46pm BST 

More driveby tourism... Love Park, with the "Love" sculpture, designed by 
Robert Indiana <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Indiana>, and installed in 
1976 as part of the United States'Bicentennial 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_Bicentennial> celebration.

3.42pm BST 

Driving by City Hall now. Big, gorgeous beast of a building.

3.33pm BST 

Just did some drive-by people watching at Rittenhouse Square, thus (sort of) 
following a below-the-line tip from yesterday.
 Rittenhouse Square, Philadelphia. Photograph: /visitphilly.com  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12176079> rahackettphillyPA  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12176079> 24 September 2013 
8:08pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27304873> 
go to Rittenhouse Square in the late afternoon and watch the world go by. The 
primo people watching site in the city, its practically a sociological study. 
Get a bench near the center. Please comment Thank you Rich

3.19pm BST 

"Oh no! We haven't run up the Rocky steps!" I say, before remembering I 
haven't even seen Rocky.

It's pretty insane how much American films and TV affect how we experience 
places. The Rocky steps are at the front of the Philadelphia Musuem of Art. 
Stallone runs up them in the movie (I've seen that scene at least), and it's 
almost obligatory for tourists to mimic that run. Two journalists from the 
Philadelphia Inquirer even wrote a book about it -Rocky Stories: Tales of Love 
Hope and Happiness at America's Most Famous Steps 
<http://rockystories.blogspot.co.uk/> - after interviewing the countless 
imitators.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNubH5BDOaD8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNubH5BDOaD8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNubH5BDOaD8&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNubH5BDOaD8&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNubH5BDOaD8>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNubH5BDOaD8&media=>
close 
3.14pm BST 

Route manoeuvres

As is the way of these road trips, armchair navigators local experts have been 
stirred into action and have been plotting team's route for us - for which we 
are truly grateful, readily admitting that we're rubbish with maps, and don't 
know our rights from our lefts, our easts from wests etc etc.

Purplearth  <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27313752>
entreated us to avoid New York and take the scenic Delaware River drive to 
Somerville by way of Princeton. But they lost us when they said "get your map 
out now: I-287, and maybe US-6 to I-84. I-95 can be quite crazy and 
unpredictable". Handbrake to that plan - too many numbers and letters. 
Confusing!

Alexguy  <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27186084>
advised: "Route 81 through Pennsylvania and join up with I-88 in New York," 
taking in the Baseball Hall of Fame at Cooperstown. Nice and simple. Cruise 
control.

But MisterMeaner <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27312707>
 has probably won the day with this artful piece of navigation: "Route 611 
through Cheltenham and then continue on up to the Lehigh Valley." Nice and 
simple - if a bit of a detour to theright/east left/west. We're not sure how 
much it will add to the journey, but phrases like "Amish country", "16oz cans 
of Pabst Blue Ribbon at South Bethlehem's New Street Cafe"and "Stop at Larry 
Holmes' Ringside Bar and shake hands with The Champ" pretty much had us at the 
get-go.

What does everyone think? Good plan?

Updated at 3.25pm BST

2.49pm BST 

After breakfast, we're heading off to Boston.

It's going to take some time, so we need your tips for where to stop en route.

Boston, I won't lie, I'm worried for you. Can you top Baltimore and Philly? 
Are you up to it? It will be another flying visit. We'll be there for this 
evening and tomorrow morning. How can we make the most of the city and see it 
at its best? Send us your tips:@VickyBaker <https://twitter.com/vickybaker>, 
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, via GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc> or in the 
comments below.

2.44pm BST 

Looking over the tips coming in on Twitter, it seems to be between Silk City 
Diner <http://www.silkcityphilly.com> versus Honey's Sit 'n' Eat <> for 
breakfast.
Oh, and here comes another vote for Silk City. Looks like we are heading that 
way.
SJ (@LDNPHLGunner) 
@vickybaker <https://twitter.com/vickybaker> Silk City is my vote.
 <https://twitter.com/LDNPHLGunner/statuses/382860362766626817> September 25, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/LDNPHLGunner/statuses/382860362766626817> 
2.38pm BST 

Good morning, Philadelphia!

What a day yesterday was. We arrived in Philly mid-afternoon, after taking the 
scenic route from Baltimore and calling in on Delaware (thanksbrainfrz76 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27303865> for giving us 
the background on this little-known state).

We met Kobe Bryant's barber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/24/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-524215f8e4b082870c28e0a9>
. We checked out a slice ofEinstein's brain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/24/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-52420159e4b082870c28e0a1>
 at the Mutter Museum (I'm still recovering from that place). We got food tips 
fromPhillyCop <http://www.flickr.com/photos/philly_police/> at Reading Terminal 
Market. We learnt how to speak, Philly-style ("Wha'djeet? Pass me that jawn.") 
Then we hit the nightlife aroundFishtown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/24/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-52422b81e4b092830eda27d7>
.
After signing off, we went on to Barbary <https://www.facebook.com/thebarbary‎>
 (another tip). It was pretty dead in there, so we moved on again toKung Fu 
Neck Tie <> (another tip), where we happened upon a goth birthday party 
(bodices, leather cowboy hats, lashings of eyeliner). There was a band playing, 
with a leader singer that looked like a cross between Marilyn Manson and the 
singer from AFI. Not our usual scene, but they were actually pretty good. We 
caught two bands last night, which isn't bad going for such a flying visit.

We're now having some pick-me-up juice from the hotel, before going out to 
look for a breakfast joint. Any tips? We've had a shout forHoney's Sit Neat 
<http://honeyssitneat.com/>, from @Jumpphilly  <https://twitter.com/jumpphilly>
- which could be a winner.

Updated at 3.22pm BST
 