
3.55am BST 

The quest for the Holy Grale

The Holy Grale, it turns out, is a thing. Everyone is here, mostly in the 
garden out back – crammed on to benches under a fairy light ceiling in the 
shadow of the old church roof. It's cheap Kolsch night – a waiter is walking 
around the benches with dozens of $2 mini glasses, dropping them off to 
drinkers, marking their beer mats with each deposit.

The food, according to @eaterlouisville <https://twitter.com/EaterLouisville>, 
is also a thing. When it first opened it was standard pub fare, then they 
upgraded the kitchen, bringing in head chefJosh Lehmann  
<http://louisville.eater.com/places/holy-grale>two years ago, since when "the 
food has gone gangbusters".

My burger – the 3D Valley Farm Burger with cheddar, caremalised onion, arugula 
and a crispy pretzel bun – is magnificent, possibly the best thing we've had on 
the trip so far. On the side, spicy broccoli with kimchi and hazelnuts. 
Absurdly good.

A chain of unintended happenings in Loiusville has left us floored. High 
stakes ping pong, celebrity chefs, and gastronomic churches. A huge thanks to 
everyone who contributed. Tomorrow … onwards to Tennesee.

3.51am BST 

Day three – mapped

3.46am BST 

Top zombie tippage

But decidedly worth the shout out to @josetexter 
<https://twitter.com/josetexter>. Keep the tips coming to @benjilanyado 
<https://twitter.com/benjilanyado> for tomorrow's time in Louisville and the 
road south!

3.29am BST 

Our old Kentucky Bond

And speaking of adventurers with a penchant for shaken cocktails, Benji's 
following in the footsteps of a somewhat famous fictional agent for MI6. 

Goldfinger <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goldfinger_(film)> might be 
remembered as the one with Oddjob, a character named Pussy Galore, and that 
extraordinary tagline – "Everything he touches turns to excitement!" – but it 
also features Kentucky, and in particularFort Knox, just south of Louisville. 

The James Bond Wiki provides <http://jamesbond.wikia.com/wiki/Goldfinger> us 
this fantastic, convoluted summary of 007's sojourn into America's exotic 
heartland of darkness:

[After] flying to Kentucky … Bond sees the plan of Goldfinger to attack Fort 
Knox, tries to drop a note off to the CIA by putting it in the pocket of one of 
the mob members who was going to help Goldfinger, although he ended up being 
shot by Oddjob and crushed when his car was crushed into a cube. … Bond manages 
to convince Pussy Galore to change the nerve gas canisters in the planes about 
to attack Fort Knox with dummies, so that it has no effect on the soldiers 
there.

Then what? Bond is handcuffed, lowered into the vault, and forced to contend 
with lethal projectile hat. (Again, Kentucky and the hats?)

3.19am BST 

Louisville Sluggers

The Slugger is, first and foremost, a baseball bat, and arguably the best 
baseball bat. TheLouisville factory <http://www.sluggermuseum.com/about/> has 
been making these bats forover 100 years <http://www.sluggermuseum.com/about/>, 
and according to their site,over 60% of pros 
<http://www.sluggermuseum.com/todayspros/> use them when they step to the 
plate. In short, it's about as pure a symbol of Americana as you'll come across.

But the Louisville Slugger also happens to be 1oz bourbon, 2tsp blackberry 
brandy, 1oz dry vermouth, and lemons 
<http://www.drinksmixer.com/drink1wx4359.html>, shaken with ice. In other 
words, the Slugger's also quickly becoming symbol of Benji's night so far.

3.12am BST 

Literary Louisville

Lori has driven us to The Highlands, an artsy three and a half mile stretch 5 
minutes from Louisville Downtown. It's famed for its contrasts: tattoo parlours 
side by side with white tablecloth restaurants.

Another case in point: Hunter S Thomson grew up here, but its most famous 
current resident is Mitch MConnell, the most powerful Republican in the 
country. 
 In the back of @lori_mattingly's car. Photograph: /Benji 
The neighbourhood spread grew up around the vast Victorioan mansions on 
Cherokee Road – inthe Great Gatsby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/150967/great-gatsby>, Cherokee Road was 
where Daisy was born and raised.

2.52am BST 

Changing plans

Things have changed, I'm in the back of @lori_mattingly 
<https://twitter.com/lori_mattingly>'s car, Gary up front in driver solidarity. 
@eaterlouisville <https://twitter.com/EaterLouisville> has hijacked our food 
choice, and we're aimed forthe Holy Grale, a converted Unitarian church in the 
Highlands – and which happened to beone of our expert picks  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/17/louisville-kentucky-food-drink-music>
before the trip got underway.

Updated at 3.09am BST

2.30am BST 

Celebrity twitrip

It's getting dark. We're still at the Garage. Manny, bless him, insisted on 
buying me and Gary some bourbon, despite the fact that he whooped my ass on the 
ping pong table. Southern hospitality at its finest.

Zach from @eaterlouisville <https://twitter.com/EaterLouisville> has summoned 
some local royalty:Damaris Philips (@ChefDPhillips 
<https://twitter.com/ChefDPhillips?original_referer=https%3A%2F%2Fflexible.gutools.co.uk%2Fadmin%2Fpreview%2F521dddffe4b088aaf5f49bac&tw_i=372869412082028544&tw_p=tweetembed>
), who recently won the nationalFood Network Star competition 
<http://www.foodnetwork.com/damaris-phillips/index.html>.

A local star. We've been in this city for three hours, and already I have a 
very good feeling about it. We've forgotten to eat. We need to do something 
about that … 

Updated at 2.49am BST

2.14am BST 

Back near French Lick, Indiana

Below the line, we've been told of an oddity on the route between Bloomington 
and Louisville; we unfortunately couldn't make it, but it's still worth a shout 
to bothadamsjo2 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10628765> and 
LiterateIndy <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12240627> for 
suggesting this bizarre "Eighth Wonder of the World", which happens to be part 
of the French Lick Resort.Really <http://www.frenchlick.com/hotels/westbaden>.

The West Baden Springs Hotel 
<http://www.historichotels.org/hotels-resorts/west-baden-springs-hotel> is 
worth a click here 
<http://www.historichotels.org/hotels-resorts/west-baden-springs-hotel> to 
check out it's strange and stunning architecture. The hotel as a 
whole encompasses stables, golf courses, a spa, and a 'natatorium' (read: 
extravagant indoor swimming pool). Wiki only provides a partial glimpse of its 
atrium:
 West Baden Springs Hotel atrium. Photograph: /Wikipedia 
The original spa was first built near local mineral springs over a hundred 
years ago, Jesuit priests once bought it for a dollar, and finally someone got 
round to declaring it a national historic landmark. 

2.00am BST 

Twitrip: the sitcom

[Editor's note: from all the arched eyebrows turned toward Benji, he must've 
just told them about the wind, his contacts, that bad grip on the paddle...]

1.49am BST 

Benji makes friends

Some of Hollis' friends have joined us here, along with Zach of 
@EaterLouisville <https://twitter.com/EaterLouisville>, the local branch of the 
hugely popular national food blogEater <http://louisville.eater.com/>, which 
opened here last November – a sign of the times.

Very small, unimportant, not at all worth mentioning ever again side note: 
@MannyMassages <https://twitter.com/MannyMassages> beat me at table tennis, but 
it was really windy.

Updated at 2.29am BST

1.44am BST 

A note on Garage Bar

This place is excellent. An old garage with a fully gravelled front, dotted 
with benches, and the crucial table tennis tables, nets held together with wing 
mirrors.

Inside, there's a world of bourbon behind the bar on wooden shelves. Opposite, 
a tiled Neopolitan oven churning out pizzas. We're in 'NuLu' a rapidly rising 
strip full of bars and restaurants in the northeast of the city.

Updated at 1.48am BST

1.32am BST 

GARY WON.

Indiana now belongs to London!

1.22am BST 

That other Louisville sporting event

Though all eyes are rightly drawn to the epic matchup of Kentucky v London 
ping pong at Garage Bar, Louisville, is, in fact somewhat known for a certain 
annual equestrian competition.

Nothing is quite so ingrained into Louisville's DNA as the first race of the 
Triple Crown <http://www.kentuckyderby.com/>, the Kentucky Derby. Every year, 
the Downs 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=churchill+downs&sugexp=chrome,mod=9&ie=UTF-8> 
are overrun by … everyone. At this point, the Derby is as famous for its horses 
(and gambling) as for its song 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triple_Crown_of_Thoroughbred_Racing#United_States_Triple_Crowns>
, its mint juleps <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mint_julep> and its hats – its 
really strange hats <http://www.kentuckyderby.com/news/photos/derby-hats>.
 Churchill Downs, Louisville KY. Photograph: /wIKI 
A horse hasn't won all three races of the Crown since 1978 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Triple_Crown_of_Thoroughbred_Racing#United_States_Triple_Crowns>
, but in 2009, Mine That Bird came close, winning two of three spectacular 
fashion.

Updated at 2.25am BST

12.56am BST 

Wiff waff: Louisville

We've reached the Garage Bar. @MannyMassages 
<https://twitter.com/MannyMassages> is here and waiting. Serious game face. I 
send Gary in to battle. Manny calls me out. I smile like a Bond Villain. 

12.52am BST 

#TeamLondon

Boris is evidently on Benji's side.

12.33am BST 

Smack talk

Followed by delays, and then some more really intimidating smack talk.

Updated at 12.36am BST

12.22am BST 

Pre-match Louisville

God bless AirBnB. @ochaney <https://twitter.com/ochaney> tweeted that 
Louisville had some excellent listings, so we booked one from the car a few 
hours ago.

We meet Melvin, the flat owner, outside a grand downtown building and he takes 
us to the top floor, down a few corridors, to his beautiful loft (pic 
attached). It's superb … and had a SPIRAL STAIRCASE. It cost us £52 ($80.75).
 AirBnB Louisville , hat tip to @ochaney. Photograph: /Benji 
He and a few others also left a few tips 
<https://twitter.com/MannyMassages/status/372840340480618496>, one of which is 
for Garage Bar <http://www.garageonmarket.com/>, our pre-ordained next 
destination. 
 To do. Photograph: /Benji 
There, we have business to attend to: @MannyMassages 
<https://twitter.com/MannyMassages> has challenged us to a ping pong match. The 
winner buys a round of bourbon. 

Manny, I've got a surprise for you. I've got a guy. Gary, our driver, grew up 
with a ping pong table in his back garden. He's been mentally preparing since 
we crossed state lines into Kentucky. Hell, he's has been mentally preparing 
for this since childhood.

He's currently primed for battle, zen-like, repeating old Chinese mantras in a 
trance.

We'll see you in 10, Manny. 

Updated at 12.26am BST

12.11am BST 

They buy guns

11.59pm BST 

Looming Louisville

11.51pm BST 

Kentucky, we are in you!

11.45pm BST 

Crossing the Ohio River

11.30pm BST 

The tension mounts

He tweeted, brandishing an ear of corn … @MannyMassages 
<https://twitter.com/MannyMassages>, this is you're up against.

Updated at 11.43pm BST

11.25pm BST 

Americana

11.17pm BST 

A challenger awaits!

After serving up dinner plans to the crew, @MannyMassages 
<https://twitter.com/MannyMassages> challenges Benji to serve back.

11.06pm BST 

The long and perfectly straight road

10.57pm BST 

Border bait and grills

Updated at 12.37am BST

10.45pm BST 

Bourbon 102: how serious?

Pretty serious: 95% of the world's supply 
<http://www.visitlex.com/idea/bourbon.php> comes from Kentucky. The sipping 
tips have already begun in earnest and the guys haven't even crossed state 
lines.

In fact, the major whiskey makers and a number of craft distilleries have 
banded together to organize the Kentucky Bourbon Trail 
<http://kybourbontrail.com/map/>, which ranges from Louisville and Lexington. 

The gang includes Jim Beam, Evan Williams, Wild Turkey and, of course, the 
recommended stop at Maker's Mark <http://www.makersmark.com/>.

And you're feeling a bit bourbon-ed out after a full day, @GoWanderLou 
<https://twitter.com/GoWanderLou> tells us of the Urban Bourban trail 
<http://www.bourboncountry.com/things-to-do/urban-bourbon-trail/index.aspx>, 
and the Guardian's Erin Keane found the top 10 bars in Louisville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/aug/17/top-10-bars-louisville-kentucky>
. Some highlights:

Jack's Lounge: Bar manager Joy "Bad Girl of Bourbon" Perrine literally wrote 
the book on bourbon cocktails (The Kentucky Bourbon Cocktail Book 
<http://www.amazon.com/The-Kentucky-Bourbon-Cocktail-Book/dp/0813192463>), and 
her influence is evident in the bar's unfussy yet intelligent approach to 
Kentucky's native spirit.

The Holy Grale Inside: In this renovated church in the thick of the hopping 
Highlands, the city's beer geeks gather for evening services.

Don't let the Jazz Age opulence of this upscale downtown newcomer fool you – 
St Charles Exchange doesn't take itself too seriously. The inventive craft 
cocktail list includes locally sourced and house-made ingredients and changes 
frequently

Finally, a bit of literary tippage regarding a man who loved his mint juleps 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mint_julep>.

10.25pm BST 

Mystery solved

10.20pm BST 

Benji's taken to the forum to plan tonight's victuals. Answers have come 
tumbling in, and so have more questions: what can be found atHillbilly Tea
? What areKentucky Hot Browns? Will Holy Grale force Benji to pass a series of 
tests <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xFntFdEGgws> just to get a drink?

Updated at 10.21pm BST

10.12pm BST 

Southbound

Updated at 11.19pm BST

10.02pm BST 

Hoosiers

Nobody much knows what 'Hoosier' means, beyond "a resident of the state of 
Indiana <http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/hoosier>". Etymology-wise 
<http://www.etymonline.com/index.php?allowed_in_frame=0&search=hoosier&searchmode=none>
, the only clue is that it might have been "used of anything unusually large".

So how about we just let Gene Hackman inspire everybody 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoosiers> and go with his definition: winners.

Updated at 10.27pm BST

9.54pm BST 

Sleeveless

Someone just alerted campus police … to complain about sartorial malfeasances.

Updated at 11.19pm BST

9.48pm BST 

Not exactly Hoosiers

Updated at 11.27pm BST

9.29pm BST 

Indiana: 1979, 2013

Benji's just learned of a film called Breaking Away 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0078902/>, which stars Bloomington and won an 
Oscar in 1979.The trailer  <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gmYs0S-6ry4>shows us 
the story of a midwesterner with big dreams, trouble with quarry culture, and 
some pretty corny dialogue – "Smart move, shorty". A quick YouTube scan, 
however, reveals a slightly more thrilling clip inspired by a scene from the 
movie:

Updated at 9.30pm BST

9.07pm BST 

Bonne bourbon

Benji's off to Kentucky, whose famous spirit was named for its history in 
Bourbon County, which in turn was named after the French House of Bourbon 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/House_of_Bourbon>, a title that these days would 
make most Americans think of some mythical stash of barrels in a very large 
house.

Bourbon 101: Distilled from fermented corn, mostly, rather than the malted 
barley of scotch and the (more loosely defined) cereal grain of American 
whiskey.Wiki <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bourbon_whiskey> tells us that 
nobody knows who first distilled bourbon, but that a minister namedElijah Craig 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elijah_Craig> – who also gets credited with many 
Kentucky firsts, eg, fulling mill, paper mill, ropewalk, etc" – often gets the 
hat tip.

Where should Benji and the guys head to on the way to Louisville? And what 
should that lucky, non-designated driver have to drink?

Updated at 9.39pm BST

8.49pm BST 

Goodbye, IU

We're Kentucky bound.

Updated at 9.16pm BST

8.34pm BST 

Hoosier country

Matt walks us around the beautiful Indiana University campus, lined with 
imposing faculty buildings built with the trademark local limestone – cut from 
nearby quarries, the same stone was used to build the Empire State Building.

One of the faculties has a huge elm tree jutting through the middle of it – 
the family who sold the land to the university insisted that the tree could 
never be moved. Another was built with the proceeds of a Colgate patent 
purchase – it was a IU professor who invented fluoride.

Matt tells me about the university social scene. It's split between frat house 
preppy types, and a lefty hippie crowd. He sees himself as somewhere in the 
middle, leaning towards the latter.

He takes me into his statistics class, where I find a seat at the back. 
Appropriately, they're covering Central Tendency.

Updated at 9.44pm BST

8.23pm BST 

Schooled

Updated at 8.31pm BST

7.55pm BST 

7.49pm BST 

Where next?

After Bloomington, where do Benji and the team head next, dear readers? May be,
 looking for bourbon now that they've lined their stomachs. Any recommends on 
the way to Louisville?

7.37pm BST 

And Matt (@ces_matte <https://twitter.com/ces_matte>) has come to join us for 
lunch!

He's a college senior and has skipped a statistics class to show us around 
campus. Don't tell his mum.

7.02pm BST 

Bloomington we are in you

We've made it to Bloomington, the Indiana University town, and drive through 
campus to the tree-lined, lazy centre, where students are walking down broad 
alleys between wood slat houses. It feels like a seaside town in the middle of 
Indiana, with little shops selling luminous vests and tiny shorts emblazoned 
with the Hoosiers insignia - the college football team. We're set up on the 
front porch of theRuncible Spoon <http://runciblespoonrestaurant.com> 
(recommended by@ces_matte <https://twitter.com/ces_matte>), where every 
waitress is mild-mannered and tattooed.

Updated at 7.46pm BST

6.41pm BST 

In Bloomington, Indiana University student @ces_matte 
<https://twitter.com/ces_matte/status/372764102877536256> has been plying Benji 
with tips on Twitter. By way of thanks, we award him an honorary Guardian 
degree cum laude and give him the afternoon off classes.
Matthew Cesnik (@ces_matte) 
@benjilanyado <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado> food wise, there's a lot of 
options: runcible spoon, farm, village deli. Also, stop by for a beer at nicks 
or the bluebird.
 <https://twitter.com/ces_matte/statuses/372764102877536256> August 28, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/ces_matte/statuses/372764102877536256> Matthew Cesnik 
(@ces_matte) 
@benjilanyado <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado> hope you have a good time 
here, I've lived here my whole life.. Perhaps I'll see y'all when I'm walking 
to class.
 <https://twitter.com/ces_matte/statuses/372764534647160832> August 28, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/ces_matte/statuses/372764534647160832> 
Updated at 7.47pm BST

6.33pm BST 

Steele country

A visit to TC Steele's converted farm up on a forest ridge in the Brown County 
State Park. In 1907 Steele turned seven abandoned farmhouses and fields of 
struggling sorghum and tobacco into his beautiful artistic refuge, spending day 
after day perched on the hills painting what he saw below him.

His wife designed four of the five trails that lace the 211-acre site, and we 
head down the "Trail of Silences" in between the oaks and hickory accompanied 
by a chorus of crickets.

Neatly, Steele ended his career as the artist-in-residence at Indiana 
University in Bloomington, our next stop.

5.57pm BST 

TC Steele 101

Benji and the team are at the impressionist painter TC Steele's 
<http://www.tcsteele.org> house near Belmont in Brown County. Here's what we've 
discovered about the most important of Indiana'sHoosier Group 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoosier_Group> painters, famed for his Indiana 
landscapes:

As Steele explored new places to paint, he discovered an isolated area of 
Brown County, Indiana, where he built a hilltop studio-home... In August 1907 
Steele married Selma Nuebacher, his daughter’s sister-in-law...

Whoa, back up, there - "he married his daughter's sister-in-law". Artists, eh?

...and brought her to their new summer home in Brown County. Inspired by the 
breezes blowing through the cottage’s screened porches, they named it the House 
of the Singing Winds. The land, while not suitable for agricultural purpose, 
provided Steele with "beautiful picturesque woods and hills and valleys."

According to the Indiana historical Society: 
<http://www.indianahistory.org/teachers-students/hoosier-facts-fun/famous-hoosiers/t.c.-steele>
 "At first, his farmer neighbors thought Steele and his wife were strange. The 
Steeles were refined 'city folk' who did not seem to understand that the land 
was to be worked for profit, not captured in art."

Not to mention - he married his daughter's sister-in-law!

"Over time, the neighbors came to respect the artist."

Updated at 6.08pm BST

5.32pm BST 

Love this drive ...

Our straight-line route has warped into the forest, wild woods either side of 
us, the occasional beautiful log cabin.

We peel off following a crooked sign towards "Crooked Creek", over a rusty 
bridge with felled trees in the water either side.

Updated at 5.32pm BST

5.24pm BST 
GuardianUS (@GuardianUS) 
We gave the #Twitrips <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Twitrips&src=hash> crew 
the reins to our Instagram:http://t.co/64dxMeVLfp <http://t.co/64dxMeVLfp> 
#selfies <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23selfies&src=hash> cc @guardiantravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel>
 <https://twitter.com/GuardianUS/statuses/372753372153008128> August 28, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianUS/statuses/372753372153008128> 
5.17pm BST 

Impressionist landscape

Through tree tunnels and into the forests of the Brown County State Park, 
aiming for the house of impressionist painter TC Steele, deep in the woods - as 
recommended by@LiterateIndy <https://twitter.com/LiterateIndy>.

4.50pm BST 

Discovering Columbus

We pass the huge Cummins Engine  <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cummins>plant 
on the south side of town, and turn back through the residential outskirts, 
lined with two-storey Victorian white clapboard houses with yellowy-green dry 
lawns, flaking white air conditioning units propping up windows, topless 
grandpas sitting on porches.Crossroads America 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26399953>.

Back through the centre of town, past the Art Deco Central Fire Station, out 
onto the 46 West and the road to college town Bloomington.

Updated at 5.18pm BST

4.18pm BST 

Man versus boy

We're on the outskirts of Columbus, an architectural outpost dubbed the Athens 
of the Prairie <http://reason.com/reasontv/2012/11/19/athens-of-the-prarie> 
which was funded by industrialist and philanthropist J Irwin Miller in the 50s 
(the town was recommended by@stephani  
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26396659>and @LiterateIndy 
<https://twitter.com/LiterateIndy>).

Columbus, Indiana is worth a stop on your way from Indianapolis to Louisville. 
The city has a surprising collection of noteworthy buildings designed by noted 
architects like Eero Saarinen, I.M. Pei, among others. I enjoyed my afternoon 
there.

A quick coffee pitstop, and cultural comparison. Me - a middle class north 
Londoner - I go for a small caramel frappé. Hollis, our photographer from 
Nashville, who last night revealed he used to be a salmon boat captain in 
Alaska - he goes for an eight-shot monster, with chocolate sauce and a floater 
of milk on top. The coffee machine was churning out his drink for over two 
minutes.

Updated at 4.30pm BST

4.11pm BST 

On Twitter, @LiterateIndy <https://twitter.com/LiterateIndy> (another regular 
tipster) has suggested a pit-stop at the home of late 19th/early 20th-century 
impressionist painterTC Steele <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T._C._Steele> 
between Columbus and Bloomington.
LiterateIndy (@LiterateIndy) 
.@benjilanyado <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado> In Brown County, artist T.C. 
Steele homesite is absolutely lovely. House, studio, garden ->
http://t.co/B4N0pq48eI <http://t.co/B4N0pq48eI> #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TwiTrips&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/LiterateIndy/statuses/372733572408291328> August 28, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/LiterateIndy/statuses/372733572408291328> 
4.05pm BST 

Reader challenge

@woyce  <https://twitter.com/woyce>- who has been doing us proud with tips all 
week - has set a challenge: how many different ways are there to pronounce 
Louisville?
Joyce (@woyce) 
@benjilanyado <https://twitter.com/benjilanyado> Another goal for the day: ask 
every single person how they pronounce "Louisville." Only guarantee-it won't be 
Louis-ville.
 <https://twitter.com/woyce/statuses/372734527631654913> August 28, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/woyce/statuses/372734527631654913> 
4.00pm BST 

Deviation

We've decided to take a deviation. Again. @ces_matte 
<https://twitter.com/ces_matte> told us yesterday that there's a considerably 
more scenic route from Indy to Louisville, via Columbus, the university town of 
Bloomington, and Brown County state park. We're headed that way. Tips welcome.

@MAOneby <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26407055>'s 
suggesting theEmpire Quarry 
<http://www.atlasobscura.com/places/empire-state-quarry> - just north of 
Bedford, where the stone for the Empire State Building comes from - for a swim. 
Hmmm.

Corn update: this end of the state, it's good and ready, dry and yellowing, 
scorched by a long hot summer - the less green the leaves, the closer they are 
to harvest.

Updated at 4.01pm BST

3.47pm BST 

Bonnie tuneage

Mellencamp - pah!

The Louisville Eccentric Observer <http://Leoweekly.com> can trump that. 
Here's their playlist for Kentucky. Hardcore, alt-country, jazz - and Bonnie 
"Prince" Billy. Pah-dum!

Send us your requests, and we'll play 'em: @benjilanyado 
<https://twitter.com/benjilanyado>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitrips&src=hash>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, or in the comments below

Updated at 3.59pm BST

3.32pm BST 

Roarin' out with the Cougar

We're firmly anchored with corned beef hash, salami and eggs on rye, lox and 
bagels, and a third of a matzo ball each, and we're back on the I65 just beyond 
the Indianapolis city limits.

We've worked out a way of listening to the playlist you've been putting 
together for us via my Spotify account, Hollis's phone and a $10 service 
station aux cable. Currently: Jack & Diane by John Mellencamp. YEAHHHH LIFE 
GOES OOOOAAAAN.

Updated at 3.59pm BST

3.07pm BST 

Lox for brekkie

Today - Indiana out. We've left our hotel - a great little number with Phil 
Collins playing in the lobby and carpets that look like this:

We've made a beeline for Shapiro's <http://www.shapiros.com>, a Jewish deli 
that many on Twitter and below the line (@ 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26263777>adamsjo2 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/26263777> and @woce 
<https://twitter.com/woyce/status/371705966737104896>) have raved about.

We're pretty much the only ones in here. This be a lunch place, but the corned 
beef hash is ready, and the matzo ball broth is wafting from the kitchen - 
Ronda the teller gives us a sneak pre-lunch taste.

The daily menus are stuck to the wall above the heated pans with sticky tape. 
Ronda says the corned beef hash is the way to go.
 