
People of the Guardian, and others … For five days starting on 26 August, I'm 
yours. That morning, I'll be waking up inChicago, and will be at your service, 
primed for a working week as a wandering pawn. My journey will be the fifth 
instalment of the Guardian's reader-powered TwiTrips through the US. I'm aiming 
to end inMemphis via Indianapolis, somewhere in Kentucky (you decide, hint: I 
like whisky, or whiskey, or bourbon, I won't take you to task over which – 
until I've sampled it), and alsoNashville.

I need you. Apart from a vague notion of the route, I'll have nothing planned, 
taking my lead in real time from the tips you send in on Twitter and
GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/521c75f6e4b055bf6bac88c2>. Feel 
free to ignore this, but I have a request. I want weird. Wonderfully weird.

I'm a hopeless Americaphile, and am never more in love with that country than 
when I discover a slice of its never-ending beautiful oddness. My 
favourite-ever memory of the US? Sitting at a $1 roulette table in theEl Cortez 
casino <http://www.elcortezhotelcasino.com/> in downtown Vegas, having a 
lengthy conversation with a cross-dressing Vietnam vet who still had shrapnel 
in his leg, while being served free, horrible, strawberry daiquiris by a 
60-year-old in hotpants.

That kind of thing, please.

An American friend has already sent me a few suggestions regarding the places 
I might visit, includingwhiskey distilleries, Lower Broadway in Nashville 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lower_Broadway>, Graceland, the John Dillinger 
museum, the home of the Louisville Slugger baseball bat 
<http://www.sluggermuseum.com/>, demolition derbies, some other things. 
DEMOLITION DERBIES?! What are they? Forget everything I just said and send me 
to a demolition derby. Please!

View Guardian Twitter trip: Chicago-Memphis 
<https://maps.google.co.uk/maps/ms?msa=0&msid=216623050904272080934.0004e2e4373d5d425aa29&ie=UTF8&t=m&ll=39.504041,-87.93457&spn=11.860688,18.676758&z=5&source=embed>
 in a larger map 
Also, my friend mentioned that Indianapolis isn't up to much. Did you hear 
that Indianapolis? My mate dissed you. Let's prove him wrong, and send him 
endlessselfies <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Selfie> of brilliantness happening 
right there in Indianapolis.

Also, a personal plea. I went on the Guardian's first-ever TwiTrip back in 
2009, and have been on dozens since. TwiTrips were my baby. They were my thing. 
Over the last few months I watched in horror as Adam Gabbatt, Jacob Steinberg, 
Katie Rogers and then Marcel Theroux took the reins of the horse – my horse – 
and were bloody brilliant. I hated it. I sat in my bedroom for weeks, shouting 
at the moon and throwing darts at cardboard cutouts of their faces.

This is my glorious return. I must beat them. This TwiTrip must be the best 
yet. I want your tips to be so awesome that it makes them all cry. "My trip was 
good," they'll think, "but holy mother of heaven, I didn't even know it was 
possible to have THAT much fun. I must retire immediately."

Got it? Good. I'll see you on the 26th. Bring it on …

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 