
4.24am BST 

Good night, Portland!

We're about to sign off for the night. It's been another good day and it feels 
like we've covered a lot of ground, in every sense. Thanks to all who have 
chipped in along the way. We'll see you tomorrow when we're heading onward to 
our final destination:Bar Harbor. Tips welcome, of course. Good night!
 The journey so far. 
4.20am BST 

Oh, and all washed down with some local beer: Bunker pils. 

Updated at 4.21am BST

4.19am BST 

The lobster roll is great, but the real treat here is all the raw seafood: 
oysters, mackerel, tuna, fluke. We've had seafood in every which way so far – 
fried, steamed, in soups, in pasta – now we're having it straight up.
 Yellowfin  Lobster roll  Fluke tartar  Tempura … something 
4.11am BST 

Eventide

Eventide is centred around a big slab of Maine granite, which is filled with 
ice and oysters. They typically have 15-20 oysters on the board, of which half 
are from Maine. There's a good indie soundtrack in the background – plenty of 
the Smiths and Interpol. We're trying to think if there are any famous 
musicians from Portland. (Jump in if you know one.)

"There's something timeless about the American oyster bar," says Arlin, the 
owner of Eventide as he talks us through the menu. He and his partners already 
had a restaurant in Portland,Hugo's <http://hugos.net/>, next door, and they 
were looking for a new venture. They felt the city was lacking a locally 
sourced oyster bar, so here it is. 

Updated at 4.12am BST

3.58am BST 

Damn, just realised in all our mad dashes across Boston, we forgot – or rather 
ran out of time for – theMuseum of Bad Art <http://www.museumofbadart.org/>. 
Shame. I have always wanted to go there. 

[Alan here – we're all too sad to have missed this museum. Even the usually 
fussyNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/09/03/arts/design/03badart.html> had a blast, 
quoted below, and you can check out more ofthe looney exhibits here 
<http://www.aqnb.com/2011/10/16/museum-of-bad-art/>.]

No venture into the world of bad art is complete without a trip to the Museum 
of Bad Art <http://www.museumofbadart.org/> (called MoBA for short), currently 
with three sites in the Boston area. … The museum’s volunteer curator, Michael 
Frank, said most of the art on display was donated by patrons, genre 
enthusiasts and sometimes artists themselves. 

“They were things that I’m convinced were created in all seriousness, but 
clearly something has gone wrong, either in the execution or in the concept,” 
said Mr. Frank, who pays the bills by working as a musician and balloon artist 
named Mike the Hatman. “Sometimes we’ll have poor technique that results in a 
compelling image. But a painting that shows poor technique isn’t necessarily 
bad art.”

Comments in the museum’s guest book summed up the genre’s dark appeal. “This 
collection is disturbing, yet I can’t seem to look away,” wrote Voyeur From 
Canada. “Just like a hideous car accident.”

Another wrote: “Her nipples follow you around the room. Creepy!”
 "Charlie and Sheba". What is 'Sheba'? Photograph: /Wiki 
3.48am BST 

Maine: criminals and horror (on film, anyway)

Maine may seem like all beautiful coastlines, lobster rolls, forests and 
blueberries, but any quick glance at its role on film reveals a scenic state of 
crime, supernatural occurrences, and intrepid heroes.

A lot of this is due to Portland's own Stephen King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/rereading-stephen-king>, the author 
of too many classics to summarize here. King's influence has shown no signs of 
letting up, either: he's just releaseda sequel to The Shining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/25/doctor-sleep-stephen-king-review>
, and is responsible for the show Under the Dome. Carrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/21/stephen-king-shining-sequel-interview>
 – that classic about the hazards of bullying telepathic high schoolers – is 
beingremade this fall <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5vw5G8EaKdE>, and was set 
in Maine, as wasThe Shawshank Redemption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/57129/shawshank.redemption>.

(Spoilers in this clip! If you're among the handful of people who've never 
seen Shawshank, that is …)

Bonus: King recently sat down with the Guardian's Emma Brockes to talk about 
his works, his family, and his long struggle with alcoholism. The long 
profile/interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/sep/21/stephen-king-shining-sequel-interview>
 is as fun, interesting and inspiring as you'd expect, and worth a read.

And then there's Murder She Wrote 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Murder,_She_Wrote>, the long-running mystery show 
starring another living legend, Angela Lansbury. The small (fictional) town of 
Cabot Cove, Maine, was apparently populated almost entirely by criminals, but 
the good news is that Jessica Fletcher was around to take names and turn them 
into weekly books. Possibly even better news is that the show broke barriers 
for its time, as Lansbury would be first to note.

Updated at 3.49am BST

3.30am BST 

We're following a tip by @woolybucke <https://twitter.com/woolybucket>t to try 
Eventide <http://www.eventideoysterco.com/%20%20>. We're here right now and 
they have lobster roll. We're in business.

3.19am BST 

And, of course, honoring your musical request 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27380792>s below the line 
(even though they're still in Portland), it's No Regrets and Rockport Sunday, 
by the witty "New England folkie legend [of] about fohty (no typo: dialect) 
years".

3.10am BST 

Land of the lobster

Maine's identity has become as tightly bound up by big blue lobsters 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lobster> as the crustaceans' claws are by big 
rubber bands. We've receivedtip 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc/559201> 
aftertip 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc/555764> 
aftertip <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/kentuckyfriedcolonel/public> about 
where to eat lobsters. Until Vicky actually tries a Maine lobster though, we'll 
have to be content with an excerpt from David Foster Wallace's classic Gourmet 
review <http://www.gourmet.com/magazine/2000s/2004/08/consider_the_lobster>of 
theMaine Lobster Festival <http://www.mainelobsterfestival.com/>.

Lobsters are basically giant sea-insects. Like most arthropods, they date from 
the Jurassic period, biologically so much older than mammalia that they might 
as well be from another planet. And they are – particularly in their natural 
brown-green state, brandishing their claws like weapons and with thick antennae 
awhip—not nice to look at. 

But they are themselves good eating. Or so we think now. Up until sometime in 
the 1800s, though, lobster was literally low-class food, eaten only by the poor 
and institutionalized. Even in the harsh penal environment of early America, 
some colonies had laws against feeding lobsters to inmates more than once a 
week because it was thought to be cruel and unusual, like making people eat 
rats. One reason for their low status was how plentiful lobsters were in old 
New England. “Unbelievable abundance” is how one source describes the 
situation, including accounts of Plymouth pilgrims wading out and capturing all 
they wanted by hand, and of early Boston’s seashore being littered with 
lobsters after hard storms – these latter were treated as a smelly nuisance and 
ground up for fertilizer. 

Now, of course, lobster is posh, a delicacy, only a step or two down from 
caviar. The meat is richer and more substantial than most fish, its taste 
subtle compared to the marine-gaminess of mussels and clams. In the US pop-food 
imagination, lobster is now the seafood analog to steak, with which it’s so 
often twinned as Surf ’n’ Turf on the really expensive part of the chain steak 
house menu. 

In a good year, the US industry produces around 80 million pounds of lobster, 
and Maine accounts for more than half that total.

Updated at 3.10am BST

3.00am BST 

Built in 1897, The Inn at St John is the city’s oldest continuously operating 
historic Victorian Inn, apparently. It's very chintzy. I like it. With the 
trends to make things all sleek and boutique, you don't get many places like 
this anymore. 

2.44am BST 

Culinary Portland

Under threat of Greta's veto power, Vicky and Kylie are deciding where to head 
for a late dinner in Portland – in other words – think you can surprise the 
team's Maine native?

 There's decidedly a theme to the top tippage thus far …

safburrows <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10489001>: "Highly 
recommendJ's Oyster Bar <http://www.jsoyster.com/> on the waterfront in 
downtown Portland, Maine. Get there early as it's s small place but SO worth 
it, especially if you dress warmly right now and sit outside!"

NationalDisgrace <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2762160>: "
Fisherman's Grill <http://www.fishermensgrill.com/> for the kindest service and 
freshest seafood."

NotaSeed <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2531738>: "Fore Street
 <http://www.forestreet.biz/en/Home> in Portland – get the mussels – pretty 
much the best ever."

Richard Owens <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Richard+Owens>: "Becky's 
Diner <http://www.yelp.com/biz/beckys-diner-portland> on Commercial Street as 
well as Gilbert's Chowder House <http://www.gilbertschowderhouse.com/>, which 
is also on Commercial Street *and* on the waterfront."

Any non-seafood options in New England? Yes, apparently. Pie.

aeausa <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10130272>: "BTW, one of 
the true signs of a native New Englanders is that we can eat apple pie for 
breakfast without any qualms. If you find a good apple pie, have it in the 
morning. You'll see."

We'll see, indeed.

Updated at 5.27pm BST

2.31am BST 

No one warned us about the werewolves

This tip just in …

I'm glad we didn't go for Greta's other suggestion now: a cabin in the woods 
on the outskirts of town.

Don't forget: Greta lives in Portland, so she gets final call tonight on where 
we eat. She's really interested to see what other people flag up. Maybe 
somewhere she's never tried.

2.26am BST 

Portland!

We made it. Phew. That was quite a journey. Now where shall we go for dinner? 
Have had some great tips over the last few days. Just going to go back through 
them and pull out a winner.

2.05am BST 

Booked for Portland

There must be a lot of leaf peepers in town, because getting a hotel isn't 
easy. Many are booked up until the end of October. Also, no one understands my 
accent. "Miss Crater? And what's that email address? D Guardian? V Guardian?"

Poor phone reception isn't helping either. But finally we've found one – the 
Inn at St John <http://innatstjohn.com/> – and we're all set for a night in 
Portland. 

Updated at 2.10am BST

1.45am BST 

Too late for sunset and too dark for much of a view, wanderingbutnotlost 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/wanderingbutnotlost>'s tip for Portland 
Head Light, in Cape Elizabeth and just south of Portland, won't be possible 
tonight.Wiki <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portland_Head_Light> tells us that 
the historic lighthouse was built over 200 years ago, under the orders of 
George Washington. It still functions – so at the very least Vicky might catch 
a glimpse of the light at the top casting out to sea.
 Portland Headlight Photograph: /wanderingbutnotlost 
1.31am BST 

Cheers, Cheers

The team has bid Massachusetts a fond farewell, though they were sad to leave 
with so much of Boston and its seafood untried. They're heartened, though, by 
memories ofa place that never forgets <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheers> – 
if only because of syndication. Yes, that home ofMayday Malone 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sam_Malone>, the Boston Brahmin 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frasier_Crane>, Carla, Cliff, Woody and Norm. So 
what if Vicky, Greta and Kylie didn't make it tothe actual bar 
<http://www.cheersboston.com/main_home.html>?

So every time you clink drinks, says thanks in British English 
<http://english2english.tumblr.com/>, or hear Frasier 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frasier> on the airwaves, it's a little homage to 
the bay's most beloved bar.

1.18am BST 

To celebrate the crossing into Maine, it's part three of Zach Nugent 
<http://nhpr.org/people/zach-nugent>'s epic New England playlist. Tell us what 
songs to play below the line and we'll put them on the next list … and tell 
Vicky, Greta and Kylie where to go in Maine @VickyBaker 
<https://twitter.com/vickybaker>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, or in the comments!

1.15am BST 

Maine!

We made it. Just crossed the state line. Getting ever closer to Portland.

Updated at 1.15am BST

1.05am BST 

Clams are deep fried and served in a packed paper bag, with tartar sauce on 
the side. Our pack costs $22 – pricey for fried fare. There's a $4 surcharge at 
this time year because rain forced the local clam flats to close and means they 
have to get their supplies elsewhere. It happens every year, they say. 
 Before …  … and after. 
Updated at 1.07am BST

12.50am BST 

Ipswich clams

We've stopped off at the Clam Box in Ipswich. It's a cute little wooden place, 
painted red and white, and dating back to the 1930s. Inside are red-cushioned 
booths, while the walls are decorated with maritime paraphernalia (fishing 
nets, plastic lobsters, a ship's wheel). 

12.40am BST 

As much as 12-year-old me wants to go door-knocking to find that mystery 
member of NKOTB, we're off to get some clams. 

12.35am BST 

Witness Gloucester

Also in Gloucester are the recommendations of Richard Owens 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Richard+Owens> on Witness – too far 
afield for the team to make, but worthy nonetheless, especially considering all 
the tips for Cape Ann.

If you're going to Gloucester and want to explore more than the waterfront, a 
trip toOur Lady of Good Voyage <http://www.nps.gov/nr/travel/maritime/lad.htm> 
is most definitely worthwhile. It's a Catholic church that has catered to the 
families of working class fishermen of Portuguese, Italian, Scandinavian and 
Irish descent since 1893 (the stained glass is extraordinary and lining the 
entire chapel are literally dozens of gorgeous handmade miniature fishing 
boats; stunning images of vessels at sea and related biblical narratives are 
built into the stained glass).

And the Cape Ann Museum <http://www.capeannmuseum.org/> in Gloucester is a 
must! An astounding collection of twentieth century art.

scooter94705 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/scooter94705> also sings a 
shanty of praise for the town and Cape Ann:

It's a little out of the way but worth the trip. It's a fishing town in 
transition but retains a lot of its original character. You can get there via 
the various towns along Rt 127, a great ocean-side drive.

Go to the Lone Gull Coffee <http://www.lonegullcoffeehouse.com/> shop in 
downtown to get your day started and get some immersion in the local color.
Rocky Neck, off to the east, is an old artist-intensive area that can be fun to 
explore.

Afterward, head up the coast to Rockport; the ring road around Cape Ann is an 
amazing drive. Rockport can be crowded on weekends but is very manageable 
during the week. Finally, when you are heading up towards New Hampshire 
(hopefully not on I-95 but rather on the coast roads), stop in downtown 
Portsmouth for lunch. It's got lots of colorful locals and some good food and 
coffee Then you'll be ready to take on the great state of Maine.

12.27am BST 

Not far from Essex is the town of Gloucester, reachable by Highway 128 – a 
road most known for being the subject of Jonathan Richman's song, Roadrunner. 
The Guardian's Laura Bartonfeels rather strongly about it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/jul/20/popandrock5>:

“Roadrunner is one of the most magical songs in existence. It is a song about 
what it means to be young, and behind the wheel of an automobile, with the 
radio on and the night and the highway stretched out before you. It is a paean 
to the modern world, to the urban landscape, to the Plymouth Roadrunner car, to 
roadside restaurants, neon lights, suburbia, the highway, the darkness, pine 
trees and supermarkets.”

Updated at 12.27am BST

12.11am BST 

They're telling us about the unusual make-up of its small 3,200 population. 
Plenty of clammers and shipbuilders, but also execs who commute into Boston, 
sports stars and one of New Kids On the Block. We're not sure which one.

Updated at 12.21am BST

11.58pm BST 

They're back – and in Essex!

No sign of fake tan and vajazzles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mind-your-language/2013/aug/02/mind-your-language-nouveau-cockney>
 here. Essex, Massachusetts is a picturesque harbour town, full of typical New 
England wooden houses. We're down at the water's edge talking to the 
shipbuilders.

11.47pm BST 

Capes and cods, walruses and whales

Too far a detour and of contention among commenters, Cape Cod was scratched 
off Vicky's schedule long ago. The famous beaches – andgreat white shark 
destination <http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=213902183> – 
were supported by Gummibarchen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1451750>, Rich Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10624605> and Don Schaefer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12342288>, among others. With 
presidential vacation spot Martha's Vineyard nearby, the views must be 
stunning; we only have Wiki to help confirm this.
 Cape Cod. Photograph: /Wiki 
Rhyacian <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12188087> tells us to 
forget about it, though and head to Cape Ann, north of Boston. 

Noted whale spotter Herman Melville <http://www.classicreader.com/book/309/14/>
, meanwhile, tells us to ship off to another little island nearby: Nantucket.

Nantucket! Take out your map and look at it … a mere hillock, and elbow of 
sand; all beach, without a background. There is more sand there than you would 
use in twenty years as a substitute for blotting paper. Some gamesome wights 
will tell you that … they import Canada thistles … that pieces of wood in 
Nantucket are carried about like bits of the true cross in Rome; that people 
there plant toadstools before their houses, to get under the shade in summer 
time; that one blade of grass makes an oasis, … that to the very chairs and 
tables small clams will sometimes be found adhering as to the backs of sea 
turtles. But these extravaganzas only show that Nantucket is no Illinois.

With the landless gull, that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to sleep 
between billows; so at nightfall, the Nantucketer, out of sight of land, furls 
his sails, and lays him to his rest, while under his very pillow rush herds of 
walruses and whales.

If only Yelp had such reviews.

Updated at 11.50pm BST

11.26pm BST 

Salem – we'll miss you

Literally. There's too little time and too many mixed reviews to trek off to 
the famous witching town. 

Here's the reader roundup and the Wiki lowdown.

On Witness, we had mixed messages:

"If you must go to Salem 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc/555770>
, have lunch at Gulu-Gulu! great food, great selection of beers"

oh_cailin <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/oh_cailin>: "Visit spooky Salem
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc/553126> … 
the place of the infamous witchcraft trials, and go to Nathaniel Hawthorne's 
birthplace." 

Below the line, however, Sarah Heineman Belfort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12341848>, boleyngroupie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10155120>, and aeausa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10130272> "echo dodging the 
Hallowe'en kitsch at Salem." Only whith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1763927> measures the 
criticism: 

"Spot on about Salem. It is such a nice little town once you clear away the 
witchy nonsense and Halloween gimcrack. Full of lovely buildings in between car 
parks and tat. PEM is one of my favorite museums anywhere, more beautiful 
objects than paintings by its very nature with an honest to god Chinese house 
attached."

Hawthorne, the author of The Scarlet Letter and House of the Seven Gables, was 
none too proud of his Salem ancestor, aka the judge who never repented 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Hathorne> for, you know, damning innocent 
people as witches. William supposedly added the 'w' to his name to get away 
from the legacy. And what's the kitschy fuss?

Welp, in 1692, two little girls had what seem to have been epileptic seizures, 
andaccusations promptly started flying of witchery and collusion with the devil 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salem_witch_trials>. There may have been some 
small town, family feud politics afoot, but whatever the case, the town's 
extremely Puritan leaders got into the fray, and by the end of it had condemned 
28 people, most of whom died. The story of mass hysteria and madness became 
famous as word got out of the killings, and eventually Arthur Miller turned it 
into a play, and Daniel Day Lewis and Winona Ryder turned it into a movie. 

Salem, apparently, turned it into a cash cow.

Updated at 12.25am BST

11.00pm BST 

The only way is Essex

We're heading there now. We love the sound of those coastal clam shacks. The 
traffic is actually not so bad. We're about 25 minutes away.

To Woodman's <http://www.woodmans.com/>, per boleyngroupie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10155120>? 

Or Farnham's <http://www.yelp.com/biz/jt-farnhams-essex-2>, per aeausa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10130272>?

Updated at 11.01pm BST

10.46pm BST 

I'm joking because it is bang on 5.45 as we get into the car to leave. Timing 
is not our strong point. Hope we're not hit to badly. Our day in Boston went 
too quick. We're off to Portland, Maine tonight. Where should we stay? 

Drop us your picks below the line, or tweet me @vickybaker 
<https://twitter.com/vickybaker> or @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel>!

Updated at 10.47pm BST

10.39pm BST 

Faneuil and Quincy

Last stop: Faneuil Hall and Quincy Market 
<http://www.faneuilhallmarketplace.com/>. The latter has got a not exactly 
complimentary review fromwhith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1763927> below the line. 
It's certainly tourist central, and there's a Starbucks at the entrance. We 
don't have much time to spare anyway. We've got to hit the road before the 
notoriously bad rush hour we've been warned about. 

Updated at 11.02pm BST

10.31pm BST 

Seemingly out of nowhere, the thoughtful, unique and extremely pretty Boston 
Holocaust memorial.

10.24pm BST 

Beer-swilling, tea-chucking revolutionaries stick it to King George

One of the oldest cities in America, Boston has lots and lots of history to 
keep its historical re-enactors very busy. The US may have been invented in 
Philadelphia, but Boston took the heat. Here's a very, very condensed timeline 
of the big events.

Boston Massacre <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boston_Massacre> – 1770 – 
Protesting taxes, five men were killed by British soldiers, and the event went 
down in contemporary propaganda as a symbol of royal oppression.

The Destruction of the Tea in Boston 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boston_Tea_Party#Destruction_of_the_tea> – 1773 – 
Future president John Adams didn't go in for "the Tea Party" moniker, but was 
all in favor of dumping tea into the bay to protest tariffs. He wrote: "This 
Destruction of the Tea is so bold, so daring, so firm, intrepid and inflexible, 
and it must have so important Consequences, and so lasting, that I cant but 
consider it as an Epocha in History". Little did he know that some 21st century 
Americans think as much, too.

"The shot heard round the world" – 1775 – A stray skirmish in Lexington 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battles_of_Lexington_and_Concord>, just outside 
Boston, turns into the first fight of the Revolutionary War, which Ralph Waldo 
Emerson immortalized in his poem "Concord Hymn 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Concord_Hymn>".

Midnight Ride – 1775 – Paul Revere  <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Revere>
rides out to save his beer-loving, philosopher buddy Sam Adams – yes,that Sam 
Adams <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samuel_Adams>– and "Sign me up first" John 
Hancock <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Hancock> from capture by the British.

Bunker Hill <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Bunker_Hill> – 1775 – A 
"pyrrhic victory" for the British, it was during this fight that the order 
"Don't fire until you see the whites of their eyes" became famous, though who 
said it is anybody's guess.

Of course, as the years went on Hancock, the Adams men and a whole crew of 
others got together to write a pair of constitutions and various other 
declarations and bills. There areplenty <http://www.historictours.com/boston/> 
ofhistorical tours <http://www.thefreedomtrail.org/>, if you're interested; 
though you may learn more about Boston by simply heading to Fenway and thinking 
of Sam Adams as the lager of choice.

Updated at 10.50pm BST

10.17pm BST 

For Pigtown <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/993898> and aeausa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10130272> down below the line, 
who point us to the Kingston Trio and explain that the reason Boston's metro 
system card is called the Charlie Card … it's all about Boston rebelling 
against taxes. Of course.

Updated at 10.25pm BST

9.56pm BST 

Vicky's just passed by the site of an especially tempting tip, from 
boleyngroupie <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10155120>: 
"there's one restaurant that may be worth it for clam chowder:Union Oyster House
 <http://www.unionoysterhouse.com/>, the oldest restaurant in the US."

Newsbellglobal <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11393833> and 
Gummibarchen <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1451750>, 
meanwhile, recommend Neptune Oysters <http://www.neptuneoyster.com/>, noting 
"It's a little bit pricey for a lobster roll, but *so worth it*. The dressing 
is unusual for the Boston area (I've heard it's more common in Connecticut); 
lobster rolls are usually served cold with a mayonnaise-based sauce in these 
parts."

Updated at 10.04pm BST

9.30pm BST 

Gary/William should be at work right now, but he's called his boss for 
permission to give a one-off alternative tour (sitting down in the Rose 
Kennedy park for a condensed-but-gripping account of the Boston Massacre).

 "Three women feeding me cannoli. This is the greatest day of my life," he 
says, chomping through the icing sugar. That's the affect of cannoli on 
Bostonians. 

"Excuse me," says a girl passing by the park. "I'm from California and I'm 
seeing these white boxes everywhere. What are they?" Now she's part of the 
taste test too. The verdict? It's a tough one. Gary/William is the expert, of 
course. He votes for Mike's, as, it seems, domany of our commenters 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27366052>.

9.14pm BST 

Gary/William is giving us a crash course in Boston's history. He's technically 
off duty, so switching between tenses as he tells it. We're trying to keep up. 

9.08pm BST 

Re-re-enacting history

Look who has come to join us for our taste test. It's Gary, or William – 
the boss of one of the North End gangs – as is his character name. He's a 
Freedom Trail guide <http://thefreedomtrail.org/> for a non-profit company. We 
just saw him walk by and we had to ask him to join us.

8.53pm BST 

An Anglophile's Boston

Henry James, <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henry_James> the American novelist 
who preferred Victorian Britain to his native New York, wrote an odd 
politico-picaresque-romance of a novel called The Bostonians in 1886. These 
winding little lanes are unlike any other American city street scene, which is 
to say those with usual "eternal equidistances, with their quadrilateral scheme 
of life",in James' words <http://www2.newpaltz.edu/~hathaway/americanscene.html>
. Boston reminded James of Europe, and he saw it as a "bigger, louder, braver" 
place than the rest of New England, with "a scant but adequate cluster of 
'nooks'", and full of "small happy accidents".

The original heart of the town is a tangled web of cobbled streets rising up 
from the Common. This is the Beacon Hill district - a grand pile of 
19th-century red-brick houses that comprises some of the most expensive real 
estate in the US. But it was in these narrow hills with their gaslamps and 
grill works, their stained-glass windows and their fanlights that James' 
contemporaries fought for feminism and, a century before, inside more colonial 
trappings, in which Bostonians voiced angry opinions about tariffs and tea.

Updated at 9.46pm BST

8.44pm BST 
 Looking down, looking up at Panza.  Marzipan candies 
8.36pm BST 

North Shore shots.
 North Shore pubbery  A small shrine to St Rocco in Modern Pastry 
8.27pm BST 

Oh, and Maria's opinion of cannoli back in Italy? "Lousy." 

This is the place for it, she says. We've got three boxes of the stuff from 
across the neighbourhood; we're about to put it to the test. 

8.20pm BST 

We're in Maria's, meeting Maria herself. She's worked on this spot for 43 
years and has been the owner for the last 32 of those, after renaming it. 
Originally from Naples, she came over to the States when she was 14 and retains 
the strong accent. 

She recently picked up a prize from Boston Magazine for the best cannoli in 
town 2013. So what's the secret? Maria's a fully hands-on owner. She works 
seven days a week. "A lot of places have employees, following things from a 
book. It's not like that here." Everything here has to have her touch.

"Everyone cooks differently. My mother had three daughters and we all cook in 
our own way. I have daughters too and you come to my house and you always know 
who made the gravy. You can't teach cooking. You either feel it or you don't."

Updated at 8.30pm BST

8.06pm BST 

Mmm...

But with so many good cannoli tips coming in, which one do we choose? We 
don't. We're hitting us the three biggest names:Mike's 
<http://www.mikespastry.com> (universally tipped), Modern  
<http://www.modernpastry.com>and Maria's <http://mariaspastry.com/>. It's the 
Boston cannoli challenge.

Updated at 3.45pm BST

8.02pm BST 

Cannoli are at the heart of Italian-American culture. Remember the line in the 
Godfather: "Take the gun, leave the cannoli."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyHzh0PvMWTI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyHzh0PvMWTI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyHzh0PvMWTI&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyHzh0PvMWTI&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyHzh0PvMWTI>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DyHzh0PvMWTI&media=>
close 
Cannoli

Sicilian pastry desserts. The singular is cannolo  (in Sicilian cannolu), 
meaning "little tube". Basically, fried pastry dough tubes with a sweet, creamy 
filling usually of ricotta cheese. The independent movie Teacakes or Cannoli, 
directed by Francine Pellegrino in 2000, is about a 16-year-old boy growing up 
in Boston's north side, focusing on Boston-Italian heritage in the 
neighbourhood.

Updated at 8.30pm BST

7.47pm BST 

Overheard on the streets of North End

"Are you in heaven with the smell of all this garlic?"

It's Italian restaurant after Italian restaurant round here.

On that note, we're of to try some of the famous Boston cannoli.

7.39pm BST 

@grtnotion <https://twitter.com/grtnotion/status/383267689055006721> is 
playing catch-up. Offering great breakfast tips, but a little too late. We love 
the sound ofCharlie's Sandwich Shoppe <>* in the South End, an all-American 
diner dating back to the 1920s with a dozen types of omelette on the menu. 
That's where we'd go tomorrow if we didn't have to move on.

* When the South End of Boston was jazz central 
<http://www.southendhistory.org/2012/05/boston-jazz-history.html> in the 1950s, 
Charlie's was known for serving African-American jazz musicians during the era 
of segregation. The walls of the diner are adorned with pictures of the greats. 
As a child, Sammy Davis, Jr used to tap dance in front of the restaurant for 
change.

Updated at 10.20pm BST

7.24pm BST 

Panza is open-fronted so we can look right out on to the street. It's a busy 
neighbourhood with a constant stream of people passing by. No lobster here, but 
we'll get enough of that in Maine, all being well. They do, however, have 
linguine with littleneck clams. That'll do the job. We're ticking the box for 
Italian Boston.

Updated at 8.32pm BST

6.58pm BST 

A waiter preparing the tables sees our disappointment.

"Hey, just go opposite. Panza <http://www.panzarestaurant.com>. It's the same 
owner."

#Saved!

Updated at 6.59pm BST

6.53pm BST 

Giacomo's - here it is. Varnished wood frontage and a gold clam shell above 
the door. All the tables are laid with starched napkins and sparkling wine 
glasses. But it's empty. Is this the right place?

"We don't open until 4," says the chef from behind the open kitchen.

Foiled again.

6.52pm BST 

We're in the North End, Boston's Italian quarter, following Sara Derfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/26/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor?commentpage=1#block-524462d3e4b04fc121705fea>
' tip toGiacomos <http://www.giacomos.co.uk/> and the promise of lobster 
linguine. We've been warned we might have to queue.

The Italian connection: The first wave of Italians arrived in the North End in 
the 1860s, escaping hardship in the old country. Enclaves of residents lived 
together on streets segregated by the region of Italy they came from - Sicily, 
Milan, Naples, and Genoa - and preserving each's language and customs. By 1900, 
Italians had firmly established themselves in the North End, and by 1930, the 
North End was almost 100% Italian. In recent years, the Italian population in 
the North End has dwindled due to rocketing property prices, forcing many of 
the less affluent residents to move elsewhere. Although Italians now make up 
less than half of the population of the North End, its old world Italian 
flavour is preserved in the cafes and restaurants. (The North End blog 
<http://www.north-end-boston.com/History>)

6.37pm BST 

Greta ordered an Uber car <https://www.uber.com> ( an unmarked car service 
ordered via an app). It turns up promptly. Blacked out windows, so we feel like 
celebrities. And even more so when Scotty becomes our impromptu tour guide. 
He's from Roxbury, about a mile from Southie. Over to Scotty...

This is one of Boston's signature neighbourhoods. It was the city's Irish 
catholic heart and the big Irish parade still takes place here. It was poor, 
working class and there was a stigma attached to that for years. There were 
riots here in the 70s and lots of crime. But it's been gentrified now.

We pass the projects and hit a stretch of triple-decker row houses, perfectly 
painted in pastel colours.

We also get to practice out Boston accents with Scotty. "Pahk the cahr in 
Hahvahd Yahd."

Updated at 6.40pm BST

6.30pm BST 

So, the people of Boston (Alwick 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27368400>, 999Jasper 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27368828>) are telling us 
to skip Southie and head north. We will for lunch, but things down south are 
just getting interesting. We're on the trail ofWhitey Bulger 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whitey_Bulger>'s* bar: Triple Os. Where he used 
to collect his debts. It's not there anymore but we see the spot.

* Whitey Bulger ran a protection racket in Boston 
<http://www.economist.com/news/united-states/21581994-gruesome-mob-trial-highlights-how-much-boston-has-changed-blast-past>
. He was an informant for the FBI but went on the run for 16 years until he was 
arrested in Santa Monica in 2011. On August 12 this year, he was found guilty 
on 31 counts, including racketeering charges, and was found to have been 
involved in 11 murders

Updated at 6.32pm BST

5.43pm BST 

Over on the Guardian's Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/theguardian> page, 
some tips coming in.Sara Derfus seconds Alwick's <> earlier shout in the 
comments for Harpoon in the Seaport District and adds a couple for Southie and 
the North End:

Lived in Boston for 2 years and it has to be the Harpoon brewery at the 
seaport district. Also Giacamo's in the North End, not the South end one. Get 
the lobster linguine, amazing and less than $30, the line can be something but 
it is worth it. Also in the South End Geoffrey's Cafe does the best bloody 
Mary, just $5, really great small place, it was one of my Boston salvations.

Updated at 5.56pm BST

5.34pm BST 

While Vicky, Greta and Kylie hit the T, we'll hit the tracks. This playlist is 
by our friends at Boston music blogAllstonPudding.com 
<http://allstonpudding.com/>.

We're taking requests, so send us your tunes to: @VickyBaker 
<https://twitter.com/vickybaker>, @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, via GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc> or in the 
comments below.

Updated at 5.35pm BST

5.22pm BST 

"The next orange line train is now approaching." At Massachusetts Avenue, 
about to board the T.

Updated at 8.45pm BST

5.08pm BST 

Useful T tip from Alwick 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27368400> below the line: 
"When riding the T you will need to purchase a Charlie Card at any station, 
like an Oyster Card."

Not a fan of Southie:

Southie is really just an average working class neighborhood with a very 
checkered past, made unduly famous by movies and crime. There is nothing 
particularly interesting about it at all. I don't hate it, I just have no need 
to ever go.

But more positive about:

The waterfront (aka "The Seaport") is nice, and walkable. Take the Silver Line 
from South Station to the World Trade Center stop, get off and walk around. If 
you want some really good, inexpensive and no-frills, fresh seafood, go to The 
Yankee Lobster Company on Northern Ave. They also serve Harpoon beer, from the 
brewery right next door.

Updated at 5.20pm BST

5.04pm BST 

Frank was great, but sport is clearly the way to his heart.

We asked him about the neighbourhood first and drew a bit of a blank.

"Well, y'know, I've worked these streets for a couple of years, but I don't 
tend to bounce around here. So, erm..."

He lives in Foxborough, the team's base. As soon as the conversation switches 
to football, he springs to life. Tough game coming up against Atlanta, 
apparently.

That's typical New England, says Greta, as we walk away. Sport is everything 
here.

4.55pm BST 

On our way, we've met Frank, a South End postman.

He's a massive New England Patriots <http://www.patriots.com> fan, and he 
gives us a top tip. Tickets are really hard to come by, but the best time to 
buy them online is on a Wednesday between 10.10am and 10.45am, because that's 
when players post the ones they have been allocated but can't use themselves.

"It's worked for me," he says.

4.36pm BST 

Boston public transport comes highly recommended in the tips (thanks @Menardo 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27357564>, @aeausa 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27358660>) so we're 
heading for the T, the city's metro system. We're going to check out Southie as 
perSarah Heineman Belfort 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27366052>'s tip in the 
comments:

If you do want to see Southie, head over to Castle Island (not a real island). 
You willdrive through the residential neighborhood on your way over, then walk 
around the park (surrounding an old fort), and look out across Boston Harbor.

We're on foot, heading to the station, passing gorgeous South End brownstone 
houses, skyscrapers peaking up over the top of some of them.

Updated at 4.44pm BST

4.12pm BST 

Another reason Flour was a good tip: it's their birthday today and that means 
free cupcakes, apparently. Thirteen years today.*

I've picked the twice-baked brioche, dipped in almonds.

"It's out-of-control-good," says the server.

"Just look at it. Isn't beautiful?"

It sure is. But, hold on, Greta has just taken it outside to photograph it. 
Hey, come back with that!

* (Actually, I'm not sure Flour is 13 years old, despite what the waitress 
just told me - just the "bread starter". Not sure what that means actually.)

Updated at 4.32pm BST

3.57pm BST 

Shout out of thanks to @loganpass 
<https://twitter.com/loganpass/status/383215269021118464> for some great food 
tips. She recommended Flour Bakery, where we are right now (just walked in the 
door) and plenty of other places for Boston and our continuing journey to Maine.
She also said road trips are all about food - and we couldn't agree more.
l (@loganpass) 
@gretarybus <https://twitter.com/gretarybus> @vickybaker 
<https://twitter.com/vickybaker> @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> BTW, I realize these are all food 
suggestions, but isn't that what road trips are all about?
 <https://twitter.com/loganpass/statuses/383219340750778368> September 26, 2013
 <https://twitter.com/loganpass/statuses/383219340750778368> 
Updated at 5.19pm BST

3.53pm BST 

Our taxi driver has a thick accent.

"Italian?" we ask.

No, Portuguese. Manuel is originally from Cape Verde, although he has been in 
Boston for 36 years.

"Living in this city is a privilege," he says. "But expensive." He exhales 
emphatically at the thought of it.

We pass a building site, the old Boston Herald HQ being turned into condos.

"No one wanted to live downtown here 10 or 15 years ago, now everyone does."

And does he like living her?

"It's a privilege!" he says again, gesticulating wildly over the steering 
wheel, as if I should know that by now. He's a fan of the mayor,Thomas Menino <>
, who is about step down after five consecutive terms. Elections will be held 
in November.

Updated at 4.02pm BST

3.42pm BST 

South End

The neighbourhood is built on a former tidal marsh, a part of a larger project 
of the filling of Boston's Back Bay in the mid-19th century to relieve the 
crowded downtown and Beacon Hill. It went from being poor to middle-class and 
back to poor again. Then in the 50s came aperiod of slum clearances and 
redevelopment, until today's reincarnation as one of Boston's main restaurant 
districts with "a growing retail presence, much of it aimed primarily at 
upper-middle class shoppers".

Updated at 8.43pm BST

3.20pm BST 

Not Southie - der!

The cab's here - after a long wait. Crossing the Charles River. Correction 
from our taxi driver: Flour Bakery is in SOUTH END, not Southie. We're trying 
to get our head around Boston neighbourhoods. 

[* Ed's note: Consider the post below on Southie an opportunity to get 
acquainted, if you don't already know it, with Mystic River, the 
critically-acclaimed movie that won Sean Penn an Oscar based on theDennis Lehane
 <http://www.dennislehane.com/dennislehanebooks> novel]

Updated at 3.25pm BST

3.01pm BST 

Southie.

One of the oldest and most historic neighbourhoods in the US, known for its 
row houses and working-class Irish-Americans roots. According to Wiki:

While the Southie lifestyle depicted in recent films like Mystic River and The 
Departed persists, the neighborhood is quite different from how it used to be. 
Gentrification has come to several areas, particularly the waterfront, which is 
now home to the new Boston convention center, several nearby hotels and upscale 
restaurants, and the Institute for Contemporary Art.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmiA24jwlbM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmiA24jwlbM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmiA24jwlbM&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmiA24jwlbM&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmiA24jwlbM>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnmiA24jwlbM&media=>
close 
However, the gentrification trend may be somewhat overstated, according to a 
Boston Magazine 
<http://www.bostonmagazine.com/news/blog/2013/06/12/new-york-times-calls-south-boston-sobo/>
 article this summer that mocked the New York Times for referring to South 
Boston as SoBo:

yes, technically some people who are invested in the rising price of real 
estate in South Boston have, in the past, referred to it as SoBo. You are not 
wrong there, New York Times. But there’s a fairly good sign that while there 
may be pockets of yuppies trying to make it happen, it hasn’t quite caught on 
in Boston

Updated at 3.09pm BST

2.51pm BST 

Lots of good breakfast options coming in but we're making an executive 
decision and opting forFlour Bakery <http://flourbakery.com/>. We're keen to 
get over to South Boston, or Southie as they call it, to see what's going on 
there. Any other tips for while we are there?
Metin (@staccatostrokes) 
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> make sure you swing by 
clear flour, by far the best bakery in the greater boston area.#TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TwiTrips&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/staccatostrokes/statuses/383007579607420928> September 
25, 2013 <https://twitter.com/staccatostrokes/statuses/383007579607420928>  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3441707> anthea1234  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3441707> 26 September 2013 
4:26am <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27346606> 
If you head over to Harvard Square tomorrow try Tory Row for breakfast 
(although if you managed also to stop at Meadhall after the CBC and feel like 
staying local the breakfast at the Kendall hotel is pretty good). Then go see 
the Glass Flowers at the Harvard Natural History Museum.
Kevin Hunt (@Djugurba) 
@vickybaker <https://twitter.com/vickybaker> @GuardianTravel 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianTravel> Sound Bites on Broadway in Somerville. 
Challah French Toast.
 <https://twitter.com/Djugurba/statuses/383215285115047936> September 26, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/Djugurba/statuses/383215285115047936> 
Updated at 5.28pm BST

2.29pm BST 

Good morning, Boston!

We arrived in town fairly late last night, after a long day on the road from 
Philly, stopping off at "the oldest burger bar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/25/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-52434693e4b090a5419bf922>
" in the US, theBeinecke Rare Book & Manuscript Library  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/25/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-524355e1e4b092830eda284e>
at Yale, and, on a less intellectual note, thePez Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/25/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-524339bde4b025976cb65c4e>
 in Orange. We checked into theKendall Hotel <http://flourbakery.com/> in 
Cambridge, the university area, home to Havard and MIT.We called in at MIT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/25/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-52438d73e4b092830eda285c>
 and then went to eat atCuchi Cuchi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/sep/25/twitter-road-trips-usa-baltimore-bar-harbor#block-52439465e4b090a5419bf92b>
 (don't call it tapas).

Still feeling a bit peckish/greedy, we went to local ice-cream parlour 
Toscanini <http://www.tosci.com/>, where there is a sign on the window 
trumpeting the fact that the The New York Times called it “the world’s best ice 
cream”. We had the B3 (brownie, brown sugar, brown butter) and we're inclined 
to agree. We stopped at theCambridge Brew Company <http://www.cambrew.com> 
after that, following recommendations, but it has to be said it was dead. A 
Wednesday evening in term time may not be the best day for it.
 So, Boston, what have you got in store for us today? We're here for breakfast 
and lunch, before hitting the road to Maine, probably ending up in Portland for 
the night. Suggestions to@VickyBaker <https://twitter.com/vickybaker>, 
@GuardianTravel <https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, #TwiTrips 
<https://twitter.com/guardiantravel>, via GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/523adb73e4b0b2ce000658bc> or in the 
comments below.
 Dinner - not tapas - at Cuchi Cuchi 
Updated at 5.30pm BST
 