
A haulage boss and a mechanic have been convicted of manslaughter after a 
32-tonne truck with faulty brakes killed four people, including a four-year-old 
girl.

The driver, Phillip Potter, 20, was cleared of all charges after a jury heard 
his brakes failed while the 11-year-old vehicle, which was heavily loaded, was 
on a hill.

Matthew Gordon, 30, and Peter Wood, 55, were each convicted of four counts of 
manslaughter following a trial at Bristol crown court. They have been remanded 
in custody ahead of sentencing next month.


Four-year-old Mitzi Steady was crossing Lansdown Lane in Upper Weston, Bath, 
with her grandmother Margaret Rogers on 9 February last year when she was hit 
by the eight-wheeled Scania HGV, which was loaded with aggregate and driven by 
Potter, an inexperienced driver. Rogers and a second woman, Karla Brennan, 
suffered life-changing injuries.

The lorry also hit three parked cars, including a Volvo holding Robert Parker, 
59, Philip Allen, 52, and Stephen Vaughan, 34, all of whom died. Parker and 
Allen were from Cwmbran, south Wales, and Vaughan was from Swansea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ftwo-men-guilty-of-manslaughter-over-bath-tipper-truck-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd977bd5e0d394ef73c92a6a97c40b964eb24fd9%2F0_63_2035_1220%2F2035.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two%20men%20guilty%20of%20manslaughter%20over%20Bath%20tipper%20truck%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ftwo-men-guilty-of-manslaughter-over-bath-tipper-truck-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two%20men%20guilty%20of%20manslaughter%20over%20Bath%20tipper%20truck%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ftwo-men-guilty-of-manslaughter-over-bath-tipper-truck-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdd977bd5e0d394ef73c92a6a97c40b964eb24fd9%2F0_63_2035_1220%2F2035.jpg>
 Mitzi Steady, four, who was killed when the 32-tonne truck’s brakes failed. 
Photograph: Avon and Somerset police/PA 
The jury cleared Potter, from Wiltshire, of causing death by dangerous 
driving, causing death by careless driving and causing serious injuries to 
Brennan and Rogers by dangerous driving. His lawyer, Ian Bridge, told the 
court: “On his instructions, he invites me to say to the families how sorry he 
was that he has been involved in anything to do with their loss.”

During the trial, the court heard Potter was new to the job, the haulage 
company was a “shambles”, and the company had failed to carry out the correct 
safety checks.

Potter was driving behind Gordon, owner of the Wiltshire-based Grittenham 
Haulage, down the steep lane when the brakes on his 11-year-old truck failed 
and he hit Mitzi and Rogers, as well as the parked cars. Witnesses saw smoke 
coming from Potter’s lorry and smelled the brakes burning as he drove down the 
hill. The ABS warning light – indicating problems with the braking system – was 
also on.

Potter told the court he would never have driven the lorry had he known the 
brakes were faulty. Describing the brakes failing, Potter told the jury: “I 
tried the handbrake. I put it on and nothing. I tried putting the lorry into 
third gear to try and get the engine to slow it down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ftwo-men-guilty-of-manslaughter-over-bath-tipper-truck-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73e12952fd507590c168fb96bead2c3553842450%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Two%20men%20guilty%20of%20manslaughter%20over%20Bath%20tipper%20truck%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ftwo-men-guilty-of-manslaughter-over-bath-tipper-truck-crash%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Two%20men%20guilty%20of%20manslaughter%20over%20Bath%20tipper%20truck%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ftwo-men-guilty-of-manslaughter-over-bath-tipper-truck-crash%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73e12952fd507590c168fb96bead2c3553842450%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The scene after the 32-tonne tipper truck careered out of control down a hill 
in Bath, killing four people. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA 
“I was really scared because I never had anything like this happen to me 
before. I blasted the horn. It was the only thing I could think of to warn 
people that I couldn’t stop. Somewhere in the back of my head I believed I was 
going to stop somehow. I am dead. I thought this was the end. I didn’t know 
what was going to happen. My hands are on the steering wheel. I locked my arms 
and pushed myself back into the chair.”

Adam Vaitilingam QC, for the prosecution, told the jury that Gordon was 
granted an operator’s licence in December 2013, the first time he had run such 
a business. “The evidence will show that he was not interested in doing it 
properly,” he said. “His operation was a shambles from start to finish.”

Grittenham Haulage was supposed to have a transport manager – responsible for 
ensuring the lorries were safe – but did not do so in the months leading up to 
the fatal incident.


Wood was employed by Grittenham Haulage to inspect and help maintain the 
lorries, carrying out inspections every six weeks. In police interview, he said 
the lorries should have been inspected every three weeks, telling officers: 
“Tipper lorries go through hell.”

Virtually no defects were recorded in paperwork for the truck involved in the 
collision and its brakes were not properly tested, Vaitilingam said.


The truck had 710,000km (almost 450,000 miles) on the clock at the time of the 
incident. Grittenham Haulage did not carry out the recommended brake-efficiency 
tests on the vehicle. “It is further evidence of a poorly run company that just 
didn’t have a grip of what it needed to do to keep its fleet of lorries safe,” 
Vaitilingam told the jury.

The final safety check on the vehicle by Wood was in January last year, weeks 
before the tragedy. “If Mr Wood did carry out a safety inspection that day it 
was wholly inadequate,” Vaitilingam said. “He says that when he looked at the 
lorry it was in a perfectly safe condition. This sort of catastrophic brake 
failure doesn’t just happen through bad luck.

“This was entirely predictable, the result of poor management and a disregard 
for the rules and a failure to comply with routine guidelines. It was, put 
simply, an accident waiting to happen.”

Potter did not comment as he left court. 

Remanding Gordon and Wood in custody, the judge said: “The offences they have 
been convicted of would attract substantial prison terms, so it seems to me 
that it would be wrong not to start serving those terms now.”


Pre-sentence reports will be prepared for both defendants. 


Alyson Harris, of the Crown Prosecution Service in the south-west, said: “This 
terrible tragedy could have been avoided had the defendants performed their 
jobs competently. The company did not comply with the traffic commissioner’s 
conditions. The vehicle was not properly maintained and it was driven on a road 
it should not have been on and at a time when it was not roadworthy.”

She added: “We hope that these verdicts bring some sense of justice to the 
victims’ families and that all road users take note of the importance of safety 
and of complying with the rules of the road and of the terrible results that 
can follow if that is not done.”
 