
More than two out of five children in England did not visit an NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> dentist in the past year, figures 
show, despite official health advice urging regular checks.

Experts described the figures as “woeful” and called on parents and carers to 
limit children’s consumption of sugary treat foods and for part of therevenue 
from the planned sugar tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/george-osbornes-sugar-tax-economic-fears-budget>
 to be put into improving dental health.

In the year to the end of June, more than 6.7 million children visited an NHS 
dentist, which is just 57.9% of the child population. This was down from 6.9 
million (60%) in the preceding year.

“There is nothing to smile about in these woeful statistics. With the average 
five-year-old now eating their own body weight in sugar each year, it is 
alarming that 42.1% of children failed to visit an NHS dentist in the last 
year,” said Prof Nigel Hunt, dean of the faculty of dental surgery at the Royal 
College of Surgeons.

Young children copy parents' sugary drinks habits, study suggests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/01/young-children-copy-parents-sugary-drinks-study-suggests-fizzy>
“We urge ministers to act. The soft drinks levy, which will be introduced in 
2018, provides an opportunity to invest in tackling tooth decay. Some of the 
revenue raised through it should be spent on oral health improvement 
programmes.”

The east London borough of Hackney had the lowest proportion in England of 
children who had visited an NHS dentist – just 31.1% in 2015-16. The areas with 
the next worst records were all in the capital: Kensington and Chelsea (35.9%), 
Tower Hamlets (37.6%), Waltham Forest (42%) and Merton (42.8%), the latest 
dental data from NHS Digital showed.

In contrast, children in South Tyneside were more likely to have visited the 
dentist last year than those in any other place (81.6%), closely followed by 
the City of London (79.6%), Bath and North-East Somerset (78.7%) and Cheshire 
West and Chester (73.3%).

“Tooth decay is a largely preventable disease that can lead to dental problems 
throughout life,” said Dr Sandra White, director of dental public health at 
PublicHealth <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England. “For 
children, tooth decay can cause pain, problems with sleep, days off school and 
problems eating and socialising. Treatment can involve having teeth removed 
under general anaesthetic.”

She urged parents and carers to help fight tooth decay by ensuring children 
ate fewer sugary foods and drinks and drank water or milk, and by supervising 
their tooth-brushing with fluoride toothpaste.

Izzi Seccombe, chair of the Local Government Association’s community wellbeing 
board, said the large number of children not going to the dentist was “deeply 
worrying”.

Almost half of all adults are also ignoring guidance that they should visit a 
dentist at least once every two years, according to data released by the NHS.

In all 22.1 million adults, or 51.7% of the population, saw an NHS dentist in 
the two years ending on 30 June. However, while that was a small increase from 
the 22 million adults who attended in the two years to June 2015, the 
percentage who did so in 2014-16 was slightly down on the 52% who attended in 
2013-15.

Hospitals in England spent £35m extracting teeth from under-18s in 2014-15, 
61% more than was spent five years earlier.


 