 As 50 news ombudsmen descended on London from around the world last week to 
discuss the current state of accountability in the media, a classic example of 
the sort of case we often face was rapidly piling up in my email and letters 
tray: just how accurate can one account of an event really claim to be?
I joined delegates at the conference, hosted by our sister paper, the 
Guardian, to take part in discussions on topics as diverse as plagiarism, 
blogging, trauma in disaster reporting and changing the defensive culture of 
the media, while back at the office my phone was ringing off its cradle with 
complaints about our report of an Oxford debate headlined 'Hundreds shouted at 
me: roll over and die'.

The piece interviewed Parkinson's sufferer Mike Robins, who claimed to have 
met huge hostility from anti-vivisectionists when he described to the meeting 
dramatic improvements he had experienced in his health after receiving 
treatment developed in animals.

Crucially, the paper was not present at the debate but interviewed Mr Robins 
afterwards. He told The Observer about the reaction of the audience when he 
attempted to demonstrate a device which turns off the uncontrollable tremors 
associated with his disease.

He told the paper: 'I was bayed at. Several hundred people were shouting. Some 
called out "Nazi!", "bastard!" and "Why don't you roll over and die!" I tried 
to speak, but was shouted down. It was utterly terrifying.'

Straightaway, we can see that the headline was inaccurate. In his own words, 
hundreds did not shout 'roll over and die'. I contacted Mr Robins, who told me 
that while there may not have been hundreds in the room (there were 150) his 
perception was that hundreds were shouting at him.

The difficulty here is the difference between his perception - held, and 
reported, in good faith - and the reality, as displayed in a video recording of 
the meeting, made by Europeans for Medical Progress (EMP), organisers of the 
debate.

We said his demonstration had been blocked because the meeting had been packed 
by anti-vivisectionists, and yet the recording plainly shows him turning off 
his tremors with the device, and being heard in silence.

It is only later that voices are raised, when he asks who could object to 
animal experiments in the light of the remarkable change to his condition. The 
recorded sound is indistinct, and so it is not possible to distinguish 
individual words, but there is clearly a brief outcry.

Letters and emails from those at the debate poured in. Fewer subjects are more 
contentious than animal rights so we would expect a stark difference of 
opinion, but these were startling. Prof John Stein wrote that he had had 
witnessed Mr Robins's demonstration. 'I saw how instead of marvelling at this 
miracle, the activists shouted that he ought to have been prepared to die 
rather than put monkeys at risk and, with stunning lack of logic, accused him 
of being a Nazi.' A reader calling himself simply 'Mitchell' wrote that he was 
amazed at the attitude we reported. 'How ridiculous can these animal lovers be? 
They value the life of a monkey over that of a human being.'

However, Diana Marshall, of Woodbridge, wrote: 'Yes, the proceedings livened 
up a little, but sitting towards the back of a relatively small audience I 
heard nothing untoward.' Sue Bamgardt, of Hove, Sussex, said: 'There was some 
heckling, but not on the scale you reported.' Shelly Willetts of the Green 
Party wrote: 'There is always a little shouting at debates but I cannot 
understand why you would want to distort the truth to such a ridiculous degree.'

Hella Gamper, of Crowborough, Sussex, added: 'To state that people in the 
audience shouted at Mike Robins "roll over and die" is fiction, and as so often 
happens with media reports, the pivotal point of the debate on animal 
experiments was not given a proper airing.'

I asked Mr Robins to watch the recording with me. He acknowledged that he was 
not prevented from demonstrating his device and that he was heard in silence, 
but told me that he had never stood in front of such a hostile audience. 'I saw 
hatred on the faces of those people,' he said, and he repeated that he was 
frightened by their, albeit momentary, angry reaction. 'I felt I was under 
attack,' he said. He also told me that during the course of the debate he was 
hissed at continually by those sitting behind.

Even allowing for this disparity in the versions of events, our story was 
unbalanced, in that it failed to include any comment from the anti-vivisection 
side of the debate. EMP admits that some random unpleasant comments were made 
at the meeting, but claims they were not orchestrated or on the scale we 
reported.

So, for the record - and in the spirit of balanced reporting as promoted by 
the London gathering of the Organisation of News Ombudsmen - here is EMP's side 
of the argument. 'Dozens of drugs to treat strokes have been found safe and 
effective in animal studies but all of them have gone on to injure or kill 
patients in clinical trials,' says EMP's director, Kathy Archibald. 'Hormone 
replacement therapy, prescribed to many millions of women because it lowered 
monkeys' risk of heart disease and stroke, increases women's risks 
significantly.'

EMP is now calling for an independent and transparent scientific evaluation of 
the use of animals as surrogate humans in drug safety testing and medical 
research.

Â· Write to Stephen Pritchard, Readers' Editor, The Observer, 3-7 Herbal Hill, 
London EC1R 3EJ, tel 020 7713 4656 or emailreader@observer.co.uk 
<mailto:reader@observer.co.uk>
 