
Britain was one of six major donors that met or exceeded the UN’s target for 
international aid spending in the most recent year for which final data is 
available, according to official figures published on Wednesday.

Against the backdrop of a major onslaught from aid critics 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/may-defends-foreign-aid-cash-handouts-after-call-for-review-8f9gs3ctr>
, datacompiled by the Organisation for Economic Coooperation and Development 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-development/development-finance-data/final-2015-oda.htm>
 (OECD) showed that UK aid spending in 2015, which totalled 0.7% of gross 
national income, was exceeded by only five countries: Denmark (0.85%), the 
Netherlands (0.75%), Norway (1.05%), Luxembourg (0.95%) and Sweden (1.4%).

While criticism of British overseas development assistance has been ratcheted 
up by opponents of Britain’s commitment to overseas aid, including Conservative 
MPs and sections of the media, aid organisations issued a qualified welcome to 
the figures.

UK watchdog calls for clearer picture of how aid investments benefit the poor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/28/uk-aid-watchdog-calls-for-clearer-picture-of-how-investments-benefit-poor>
Oxfam said it was heartening that the UK remained one of the largest donors of 
overseas aid. The charity said Britain should be proud of its commitment, which 
it described as a testament to the country’s generosity and support for some of 
the world’s poorest people.

Oxfam’s head of UK policy and government relations, Richard Pyle, said: “Those 
who are critical of UK aid spending should remember the incredible impact it 
has around the world, such as supporting 11 million children through school 
over the past five years. Britain is helping to lead the way in global aid 
spending, by hitting the UN’s development spending target.”

Tom Viita, senior UK political adviser at Christian Aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid>, said: “Aid is making a 
vital difference to millions of people around the world who are caught up in an 
unprecedented number of humanitarian crises.

“The British public is showing enormous generosity in its donations to appeals 
and the UK stands among the leading countries making a safer world for 
everyone. It’s encouraging that the global aid budget has slightly increased 
this year but it still falls far short of the human need in our world.”

Save the Children also defended the British aid contribution, saying that it 
helped save lives and “expand opportunity”.

“We should be proud that Britain stands up for the world’s poorest people, and 
our aid budget helps save lives and expand opportunity,” said Kevin Watkins, 
the charity’s CEO.


“We can be proud of the edge that gives us in international discussions – 
Britain is now thought of as an ‘aid superpower’, a country that still has 
great influence around the world because other countries know we will keep our 
promises.”


In 2013 
<http://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/SN03714/SN03714.pdf> 
(pdf), the UK became the first G7 country to meet the UN target for aid 
spending. The government subsequentlypassed a bill that enshrined in law its 
annual commitment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/uk-passes-bill-law-aid-target-percentage-income>
 to meet the 0.7% aid target.


The UN set out the 0.7% commitment to development spending in 1970 
<http://www.unmillenniumproject.org/press/07.htm>. By 2013, just five other 
countries had achieved or exceeded the target: Luxembourg, Denmark, Sweden, 
Norway and the United Arab Emirates.

A UK government spokesperson said that the development budget was an important 
part of securing Britain’s place in the world.

“We are leading the way in combatting poverty, preventing the spread of 
disease and reducing the pressures of mass migration, and people in Britain can 
be proud of what UK aid is achieving.”


Paddy Carter, a development finance researcher at the Overseas Development 
Institute (ODI), a UK thinktank, said it was impossible to hit an exact target 
share of gross national income when aid spending had to be planned on the basis 
of forecasts that will inevitably fluctuate.


“Getting to within five-thousandths of a percentage point of GNI is impressive 
budgetary marksmanship,” he added.

UK accused of lack of transparency over rise in aid funding to private sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/nov/22/uk-accused-of-lack-of-transparency-over-rise-in-aid-funding-to-private-sector>
The OECD <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> figures showed that the 
largest development assistance donors by volume were the US, the UK, Germany, 
Japan and France. Aid flows from the 30 major international donors who make up 
the OECD’s Development Assistance Committee totalled $131.4bn (£107bn) in 2015.

Most of the increase was due to higher spending on refugees following the rise 
in numbers of people coming to Europe. Refugee costs within the borders of 
donor countries themselves totalled $12.1bn, or 9.2% of total overseas 
development assistance (ODA). When refugee costs were excluded, net ODA still 
grew by 1.3% in real terms.

The largest recipient of ODA in 2015 was Syria, with $4.9bn, followed by 
Afghanistan with $4.3bn, Pakistan ($3.8bn ), and then Ethiopia and India, who 
received $3.2bn each. The total net ODA to the least developed countries was 
$43bn, which the OECD said represented a rise of nearly 8% in real terms from 
2014.

Among several countries who are not members of the OECD’s 30-member 
Development Assistance Committee (DAC), the United Arab Emirates posted the 
highest ODA/GNI ratio of aid spending in 2015 at 1.09%.

Recent criticism of UK aid spending has focused on cash transfers to Pakistan 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4082734/Queue-UK-s-1bn-foreign-aid-cashpoint-Just-thought-couldn-t-worse-cash-doled-envelopes-ATM-cards-loaded-money.html>
, which a senior Tory MP and member of the Commons international development 
committee likened to “exporting the dole”.

The Department for International Development said the programme was helping 
the poorest families in Pakistan and was an efficient and effective way to make 
sure they had the support they need.


But Nigel Evans, a Conservative MP, warned that cash transfers were “clearly 
open to fraud”.
 