
Britain risks a “catastrophic” Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> because the government is 
so dismissive of the concerns of trade experts,according to one of the figures 
behind the EU-Canada trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/08/trade-negotiator-shocked-at-brexiters-ignorance>
 which took a decade to negotiate.

As a trade negotiator, I’m shocked at Brexiters’ ignorance | Jason Langrish
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/08/trade-negotiator-shocked-at-brexiters-ignorance>
Writing in the Observer, Jason Langrish – one of Canada’s authorities in the 
field – says the UK’s former ambassador to the EU, Sir Ivan Rogers, who 
resigned last week and quit the civil service, was absolutely right to say that 
a British deal could also take a decade to strike.

Langrish, who was closely involved in the prolonged Canadian talks, argues 
that Rogers’ analysis of the time-scale “seems realistic”, and says discussions 
he has had with UK government officials about Brexit suggest that there is 
little chance of minimising serious potential damage from the UK’s exit from the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

Although he has no formal role in advising the UK, Langrish has been sounded 
out behind the scenes by those involved with handling Brexit in Whitehall. The 
impression he has been left with is that unless the British government shows 
more flexibility it will probably have to revert toWorld Trade Organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/wto> rules and common tariffs, which could 
lop 4% off UK GDP.

Referring to his talks with UK officials, he writes: “While they have always 
been pleasant (and notably friendly towards Canada), my view is that they 
remain in campaign mode.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fuk-faces-very-hard-brexit-warns-norwegian-pm-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20faces%20'very%20hard%20Brexit'%2C%20warns%20Norwegian%20PM%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fuk-faces-very-hard-brexit-warns-norwegian-pm-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20faces%20%27very%20hard%20Brexit%27%2C%20warns%20Norwegian%20PM%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fuk-faces-very-hard-brexit-warns-norwegian-pm-video&media=>
UK faces ‘very hard Brexit’, warns Norwegian PM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/05/uk-faces-very-hard-brexit-warns-norwegian-pm-video>
“Were they willing to realistically discuss options for Brexit, as opposed to 
telling you what they intend to do in a general sense while dismissing the 
obvious concerns, they may have a chance to minimise the damage from the 
potentially catastrophic decision to leave. This seems increasingly unlikely. 
Let’s hope that the courts, parliament and, ultimately, the electorate do it 
for them.”

The Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/eu-canada-sign-ceta-free-trade-deal-trudeau-juncker>
 has been cited by UK politicians and senior figures in other member states as 
a potential model for the UK to follow. In March, before the Brexit referendum, 
Boris Johnson, now the foreign secretary, said: “I think we can strike a deal 
as the Canadians have done, based on trade and getting rid of tariffs. It’s a 
very, very bright future I see.”

Sir Ivan Rogers quits civil service four days after leaving EU envoy role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/07/sir-ivan-rogers-quits-civil-service-four-days-after-leaving-eu-envoy-role>
Rogers was subject to a barrage of criticism from hardline Brexiters when it 
emerged thathe had warned ministers that the view in Brussels  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/eu-politicians-believe-trade-deal-could-take-decade-no-10-is-warned>
was that a trade deal with the EU could be a decade at least in the making, and 
that even then there was no guarantee of success.

Rogers quit his post last week  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
and in a memo to staff talked of “muddled thinking” about strategy at the top 
of government.

A spokesman for the Foreign Office said that Rogers had also resigned from the 
civil service and would be paid three months’ salary in lieu of his notice 
period. He will not receive a payoff and did not ask for one.

“We are grateful for Sir Ivan’s work in Brussels and across a number of other 
senior positions in the civil service,” the spokesman said.
 