
Business confidence has been dragged to a four-year low amid rising concerns 
over economic uncertainty and a slowdown in demand following the EU referendum 
result.

Expectations that sales, orders and profits will grow over the next six months 
slipped to 12%, down from 38% in January, according to Lloyds Bank’s Business 
in Britain report.

More than a quarter of companies cited economic uncertainty as the main threat 
to growth over the next six months, while 18% said the biggest danger came from 
a drop in demand.

Fixing a Hole: how to solve the chronic UK current account deficit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/sep/18/fixing-a-hole-why-uk-current-account-deficit-needs-urgent-attention>
The outlook for demand, employment and investment has weakened across all 
sectors, the report said. However,one of the biggest slides in confidence was 
in services, falling by an average of 30 points in retail and wholesale, 
hospitality and leisure, and business and other services.

Tim Hinton, a managing director at Lloyds, said the blow to confidence since 
January’s report should be viewed in the context of recent economic and 
political shocks.

“The EU referendum vote has introduced a level of uncertainty for companies as 
the UK decides on the best model for its future relationship with the EU, and 
this is likely to continue for the foreseeable future.

“Whilst sentiment has fallen to a four-year low, it remains well above the 
lows reached during the global financial crisis of 2008-9.”

Labour market unaffected by Brexit vote ... for now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/14/labour-market-unaffected-by-brexit-vote-for-now>
The report, which gathers the views of around 1,500 businesses, said 
expectations for an exports boost have also waned, with hopes of a total rise 
in global export sales dropping 15 points to 20%.

The plunge in the value of the pound to 31-year lows following Britain’s vote 
to leave the EU has made UK goods more competitive on the global market, 
helping exports to grow.

Employment also remained under pressure, with the number of firms expecting to 
recruit more staff over the next six months dropping for the fourth consecutive 
survey.

The study said the net balance of companies looking increase headcount over 
the period fell by 14 points to minus 1%, while those looking to up their 
capital expenditure was down 14% to zero.
 