
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has given banks an 
extra two years to comply with new rules that are intended to avoid a repeat of 
the taxpayer bailouts needed during the financial crash.

Setting out regulations about the shares and bonds 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2016/082.aspx> banks 
must hold to absorb losses, Threadneedle Street said they would have until 
2022, rather than 2020, to build up their buffers.

Since 2008, regulators around the world have been trying to find ways to make 
banks safe during a crisis without recourse to the taxpayer and the latest 
rules from the Bank are part of a package of measures intended to avoid 
bailouts.

Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney>, the governor 
of the Bank of England, said: “This policy is a significant milestone on the 
journey to end ‘too big to fail’ in the UK.”


The aim, he said, was to “ensure that banks that provide essential economic 
functions hold sufficient resources to be resolved in an orderly way, without 
recourse to public funds, and whilst allowing households and businesses to 
continue to access the services they need.”

Bank of England to force bigger UK lenders to hold more capital as 'risk 
buffer'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/29/bank-of-england-uk-lenders-hold-capital-risk-buffer>
The rules will apply to banks that have more than 80,000 accounts – double the 
number first suggested by the Bank of England – which means some of the 
smallest lenders will not need to comply.

The Bank of England said institutions were already holding several times more 
capital than they did before the crisis and were subjected to annual stress 
tests. The next results will be published at the end of the month.

The latest rules “represent one of the last pillars of post-crisis reforms 
designed to make banks safer and more resilient, and to avoid taxpayer bailouts 
in future”.

The Bank added: “These requirements will make it possible to resolve failing 
banks by ensuring that they hold sufficient equity and debt to absorb losses. 
It will enable the recapitalisation of businesses that need to keep operating 
during the process because they provide important financial services to 
households and businesses. This process is called ‘bail-in’.”

The rules relate to what is known as minimum requirement for own funds and 
eligible liabilities (MREL) – part of an EU directive.
 