
Self-catering in the UK is the "easy" holiday option, right? No flights, 
transfers, jabs, hotel rules, plenty of space, the chance to save money by 
eating in and so on, all make for a more relaxing experience. That's the 
theory, anyhow. In practice, booking a cottage can be a minefield. There are 
dozens of companies selling tens of thousands of properties across the country. 
The UK's largest self-catering operator,Cottages4You 
<http://www.cottages4you.co.uk/>, has 10,000 places on its books alone.

So, where do you start? Who should you book through? When should you book? Are 
some regions of the country cheaper than others? Are there any firms who don't 
put their prices up at peak times?

This guide is designed to help you answer these questions. While we can't pick 
the perfect cottage for you, we've done the groundwork, finding out who offers 
what and where, which areas are the most popular and which properties get 
snapped up early.

First things first, when to book? The London Olympics and the diamond jubilee, 
combined with the economic downturn, mean that more of us are looking to 
holiday at home this year.Holiday Lettings <http://www.holidaylettings.co.uk/>, 
which features more than 6,000 UK properties, reported a 50% year-on-year rise 
in inquiries in the first two days of 2012, whileOwners Direct 
<http://www.ownersdirect.co.uk/> (nearly 3,000 places) says inquiries are up 
30%.

An additional pressure will be the expected increase in foreign tourists 
hoping to combine a trip to the Olympics with a trip into the countryside.
Hideaways <http://www.hideaways.co.uk/>, which specialises in accommodation in 
the West Country, says it has taken a number of bookings from families from 
abroad.

All of which suggests you should book early, especially if you have your heart 
set on a coastal cottage in one of the more popular regions. According to 
Cottages4You, the best-selling areas, based on 2012 bookings to date are (in 
order): Cornwall, Scotland, Devon, Wales, Norfolk, the Lake District and 
Dorset. Within those regions there are particular hot spots: in Cornwall, for 
example, Padstow is a magnet for families in summer.

The good news is, while flagship cottages in these honeypot areas are getting 
snapped up now, there are many alternatives in gorgeous but less well-trodden 
parts of the country, and as part of this series we will highlight some of the 
hidden gems in these quieter corners of the British countryside.

Over the coming week we'll be publishing lists of firms specialising in 
Cornwall, Scotland, Devon, Wales, Norfolk, the Lake District and Dorset – but 
first, here is a list of 10 that operate UK-wide.

If you have come across any useful websites or have any tips on self-catering 
for fellow readers, post a comment below.

Cottages4You <http://www.cottages4you.co.uk/>
 The Manor House, Essex 
Cottages4You has an overwhelming 10,000 properties available online. Most of 
the cottages on its books look fairly standard – in terms of decor they are not 
going to win any style awards – but the group has just introduced a boutique 
collection showcasing some of its snazziest properties that come with luxury 
interiors, extras such as swimming pools and games rooms, and lay on treats 
such as dressing gowns and welcome packs of local produce. Examples includeThe 
Manor House 
<http://www.cottageselection.co.uk/sites/cottageselection/Partners/BQQ/Pages/PropertyDetails_C.aspx?QS=a6274ebf-0a4b-4dae-b593-b962e5ef7cf9~C~BVD~~216~GBP~~0~~A~N~~63d25d4e-6c52-42f4-aa38-afee03d56237~34186~0~0~~~Y~N~>
 on Osea Island in Essex (sleeps 20, from £5,147 to £6,677 for seven nights) a 
slick, spacious property overlooking the beach and estuary of the river 
Blackwater with a billiards table and outdoor saltwater swimming pool.

Another new feature is its Baby and Toddler-friendly portfolio 
<http://www.cottages4you.co.uk/sites/cottages4you/pages/Search_C_babytoddler.aspx?QS=3E0F3DCD-882D-4738-9E61-B90EA3C005F2%7EC%7E216%7E>
 of nearly 200 properties, each of which has a tick-list of facilities such as 
cots, high chairs, steriliser and enclosed garden, as well as useful 
information on nearby child-friendly restaurants, buggy-friendly walks and soft 
play centres.

Holiday Lettings <http://www.holidaylettings.co.uk/>
 Slade Farm Cottage in the Cotswolds 
This huge TripAdvisor-owned portal, which puts holiday-makers in direct 
contact with owners, has a colossal 51,000 homes worldwide, 6,020 of which are 
in the UK. Cornwall, the Cotswolds, the New Forest, Isle of Wight and north 
Wales are the bestsellers. Two ever-popular properties are:Slade Farm Cottage 
<http://www.holidaylettings.co.uk/rentals/moreton-in-marsh/140760> (sleeps six, 
from £575 per week) located off a quiet country lane in Moreton-in-Marsh in the 
Cotswolds andLantic <http://www.holidaylettings.co.uk/rentals/fowey/79167> 
(sleeps six, from £445 per week) in Fowey, Cornwall, a recently refurbished 
cottage overlooking the harbour.

Rural Retreats <https://www.ruralretreats.co.uk/>
 Sally Port Cottage, Cornwall 
Rural Retreats has more than 350 cottages sleeping from two to 24 across the 
UK. More than 60% of its coastal properties have already been snapped up for 
the school summer holidays.Sally Port 
<https://www.ruralretreats.co.uk/index.html#property,propref=CW045>, a 
lighthouse cottage on the Roseland peninsula in Cornwall (sleeps four) is a 
popular choice that's already heavily booked until the end of August, but not 
exclusively. For example, three nights from 11 June is £670. With great walks 
across the surrounding National Trust land, and a couple of decent restaurants 
(including the Michelin-starredDriftwood Hotel 
<http://www.driftwoodhotel.co.uk/> in Portscatho) and pubs (such as the Rising 
Sun <http://www.risingsunstmawes.co.uk/> in St Mawes) it would make a dramatic 
setting for a New Year's getaway (five nights from 29 December for £1,177). 
However,Peppard Cottage 
<https://www.ruralretreats.co.uk/index.html#property,propref=DO018> (sleeps 
six) a Grade II listed thatched cottage overlooking the village green in 
Sydling St Nicholas, Dorset, is close to the Jurassic Coast and still has 
plenty of availability this summer. Five nights beginning 22 July cost £1,186.

Alastair Sawday's <http://www.sawdays.co.uk/self-catering> 
 The Old Shippon, Beara Farmhouse, Devon 
Sawday's new self-catering website features more than 600 rentals in the UK, 
with links to individual properties so you can contact the owners directly. 
Cornwall, London and Devon are the biggest draws, the latter proving the best 
value, averaging £100 per person per week. Sawday's prides itself on being as 
much about the people as the properties, picking owners who are also passionate 
about their area and able to offer great insider tips on what to see and do.

In Devon, The Old Shippon, Beara Farmhouse 
<http://www.sawdays.co.uk/self-catering/britain/england/devon/the-old-shippon-beara-farmhouse?utm_source=sawdays_self-catering&utm_medium=search_results>
 (sleeps four, from £300-£550 per week) is a converted barn on a smallholding 
next to the owners' farmhouse and would make a great base for a family with 
young children. Or if you're looking for a quirky – and cheap – retreat,
Jackson's Cabin 
<http://www.sawdays.co.uk/self-catering/britain/england/devon/jackson-s-cabin?utm_source=sawdays_self-catering&utm_medium=search_results>
 in Totnes (sleeps two, plus two small kids) was built by the owner, a 
furniture maker, and costs between £250 and £390 per week.

The National Trust Holiday Cottages 
<http://www.nationaltrustcottages.co.uk/home?campid=HC2010KWBR>
 Lighthouse Keepers Cottage, Devon 
A collection of 400 properties, including lighthouses, listed lodges, 
farmhouses, fisherman's cottages, mansions and manor houses. Some of them are 
in particularly spectacular locations, such asBird How 
<http://www.nationaltrustcottages.co.uk/north_of_england/lake_district/bird_how/214>
 (sleeps four, from £319 per week), a remote fellside cottage above the River 
Esk in Cumbria, and watersideQuay Cottage 
<http://www.nationaltrustcottages.co.uk/south_west/dorset/quay_cottage/106>, 
the only holiday cottage on the National Trust-owned Brownsea Island in Poole 
harbour and already booked up for most of the year.

For wow factor, take a look at Egryn 
<http://www.nationaltrustcottages.co.uk/featured_holiday_cottage/egryn/415/ref61>
, a Grade II listed medieval hall house dating from 1510 (sleeps nine) on the 
coast between Barmouth and Harlech overlooking Cardigan Bay in Wales, from £810 
for seven nights (low season) to £2,253 (high). Simpler in style but in a fab 
location is theLighthouse Keepers' Cottage 
<http://www.nationaltrustcottages.co.uk/south_west/north_devon/the_lighthouse_keepers_cottage/16>
 (sleeps 10, seven nights from £646-£1,651), perched on the edge of cliffs on 
the remote Foreland Point in Devon, where you're more likely to see dolphins, 
porpoise and gannets fishing at high tide than people.

The Landmark Trust <http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/>
 Culloden Tower, North Yorkshire 
A particular favourite of ours and a great choice if you're looking for 
somewhere special. Every one of its 183 historic and unusual buildings, 
including an Elizabethan gatehouse, a former chapel and a gothic temple, has 
been meticulously restored and boasts outstanding original features. Plus the 
website's easy to use with useful sections onwhat's available next week 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/lateAvailability> and special offers 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/specialoffers>. Its smaller properties are 
especially popular (take note any couples looking for a Valentine's escape) but 
places for larger parties also get snapped up for long weekend breaks. Its most 
popular building isClavell Tower, 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/BuildingDetails/Overview/159/Clavell_Tower> a 
tower for two on a wild stretch of Dorset coast, so popular it's almost fully 
booked this year – book now for 2013! As an alternative, tryCulloden Tower 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/BuildingDetails/Overview/169/Culloden_Tower> 
(sleeps four), a 1746 building in Richmond, North Yorkshire, which the trust 
says boasts the grandest bedroom ceiling of all its properties. A three-day 
weekend in April costs £875.

Stately Escapes <http://www.statelyescapes.co.uk/>
 Inglethrope Hall, Norfolk 
If you're planning a big get-together, Stately Escapes could have what you're 
looking for. Although it has cottages for two among its 150 properties across 
England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland, as the name suggests it specialises in 
the kind of impressive pad you might want to hire for a special occasion. 
Search is made easier by listing properties by facility: for example with a 
pool, within walking distance of a decent pub, dog-friendly places to stay and 
so on. A seven-night stay atThe Gardeners Cottage 
<http://statelyescapes.co.uk/holiday-details/view/87-gardeners-cottage/in-region/22-norfolk/#overview>
 (sleeps six) in the grounds of Inglethorpe Hall, a Grade II listed country 
house in 30 private acres in north Norfolk, is available for £360.50 per week 
until 28 March, and up to £710 in high season (three nights from £252-£498).
Inglethrope Hall 
<http://www.statelyescapes.co.uk/holiday-details/view/93-inglethorpe-hall> 
itself sleeps up to 15, three nights from £1,556-£3,326 or seven nights from 
£2,033-£4,346.

One Off Places <http://www.oneoffplaces.co.uk/>
 Lantau Cottage, Cornwall 
One Off Places says its USP is picking properties for their character or 
uniqueness, so its 120 UK holiday rentals (out of a total of 850 worldwide 
listings) include yurts, gypsy caravans and even a barge. In keeping with other 
cottage companies, its most popular areas are Cornwall, Norfolk, the Scottish 
Highlands, Devon and west Wales.Lantau Cottage 
<http://www.oneoffplaces.co.uk/Europe/England/Cornwall/Lantau-Cottage.aspx> in 
Cornwall (sleeps nine, from £695-£1,495 per week) is a 17th-century cottage 
with wonky floors, a winding staircase that incorporates an original full size 
ship's mast, and an Elizabethan panelled bedroom. In Cirencester, 
Gloucestershire,Log House Holidays 
<http://www.oneoffplaces.co.uk/Europe/England/Gloucestershire/Log-House-Holidays.aspx>
 is a group of four log cabins on the edge of a private lake, each with its own 
boat (sleeps four, from £650-£1,185 per week).

Farmstay UK <http://www.farmstay.co.uk/>
 Wheatacre Hall Barns, Norfolk 
As the name might suggest, this is a farmer-owned consortium featuring 1,200 
self-catering, B&Bs or alternative places to stay (yurts, shepherds huts, etc) 
on or near farms. The advanced search has a pretty extensive list of facilities 
so you can narrow down your selection by opting for a tennis court, pool, 
internet access and real fires, to find a property to suit you. Examples include
Airhouses 
<http://www.farmstay.co.uk/self-catering/scottish-borders-lauder-airhouses-1015/>
 (sleeping two-10, from £350-£1,550 per week) on 600 acres of farmland in the 
Scottish Borders, with outside hot tubs, and pettable pet pigs and Shetland 
ponies. In Norfolk,Wheatacre Hall Barns 
<http://www.farmstay.co.uk/self-catering/suffolk-beccles-wheatacre-hall-barns-1464/>
 is a group of six converted barns (each sleeps six, £390-£1,306 per week) with 
on-site games room and acres of land for running about.

Owners Direct <http://www.ownersdirect.co.uk/>

A cottage and villa specialist with nearly 3,000 places to stay. Among its 
most popular properties are theOld Vicarage 
<http://www.ownersdirect.co.uk/england/E1286.htm> (sleeps 10, £550-£650 per 
week in the low-shoulder seasons), a 700-year-old Grade II listed property in 
the quaint back streets of Looe, Cornwnall, less than a minute's walk to the 
harbour and sandy beach. TheOld Coastguard Cottage 
<http://www.ownersdirect.co.uk/england/E2708.htm> next to the lifeboat slip on 
the eastern tip of Swanage Bay in Dorset (sleeps six) is another popular 
choice. Like the Old Vicarage, it is fully booked all summer, but is available 
from £350 per week out of season.

You can also book cottages and villas through guardiancottages.co.uk 
<http://www.guardiancottages.co.uk/sites/cottageselection/partners/gdn/pages/landing.aspx">
 