
Four British companies are alleged to have played a key part in a multimillion 
pound bribery scandal involving a leading Italian politician.

Luca Volontè, a former member of the Union of the Centre party in Italy, has 
been accused of helping quash a human rights report criticisingAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan>, one of the world’s most 
authoritarian countries. TheObserver has also established that one of the UK 
companies was allegedly linked to a scandal involving Russian organised crime.

Volontè, who is also president of the European People’s party in the Council of
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, is being investigated 
by the Milan public prosecutor’s office for allegedly accepting €2.39m in 
bribes.

It is claimed that Volontè received the money in exchange for persuading the 
People’s party to vote against a 2013 report by the council, Europe’s leading 
human rights organisation, that highlighted the plight of political prisoners 
in Azerbaijan. He denies any wrongdoing.

Several months after the report criticising Azerbaijan was rejected by EU 
member state politicians, the European commission announced the construction of 
the controversial Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP) bringing gas from Azerbaijan to 
Europe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbribery-claims-azerbaijan-pipeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf0c1b73929748bcd6ba9d1e63f5939e9d834e12%2F1021_0_2371_2963%2F2371.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20companies%20%E2%80%98linked%20to%20Azerbaijan%20pipeline%20bribery%20scandal%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbribery-claims-azerbaijan-pipeline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20companies%20%E2%80%98linked%20to%20Azerbaijan%20pipeline%20bribery%20scandal%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fbribery-claims-azerbaijan-pipeline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf0c1b73929748bcd6ba9d1e63f5939e9d834e12%2F1021_0_2371_2963%2F2371.jpg>
 Luca Volontè, an Italian politician, has been accused of accepting bribes to 
quash a report into the plight of political prisoners in Azerbaijan. 
Photograph: Vano Shlamov/AFP/Getty Images 
Campaign groups claim that the publication of the council’s report, drafted by 
a German Social Democrat MP, Christoph Strasser, would have invited public 
scrutiny of alleged abuses in the country, and raised questions about Europe’s 
backing for the pipeline.

Strasser told the Italian broadcaster RAI: “By rejecting my report, Azerbaijan 
saved its reputation and nobody had nothing to say when they started doing 
business [in Europe].”

TAP is part of the giant Euro-Caspian Mega Pipeline which will run across 
Georgia, Turkey, Greece, Albania andItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>. Once completed it will bring gas to 
Europe from the BP-operated Shah Deniz fields in the Caspian Sea off 
Azerbaijan’s coast.

Payments made to Volontè via the four UK companies were revealed in an Italian 
documentary. Volontè confirmed to the programme’s makers that he was paid for 
advice which he “personally provided to Elkhan Suleymanov”, a good friend of 
Azerbaijan’s president, Ilham Aliyev. He has said he was only paid for giving 
agricultural advice.

The four UK companies appear to have been shell companies with no operations 
in the UK and are now dissolved. The European Stability Initiative thinktank 
has named them asLCM Alliance LLP, based in Potters Bar, Hilux Services and 
Polux Management, both 
<http://www.esiweb.org/index.php?lang=en&id=156&document_ID=181> of Glasgow, 
and Metastar Invest, whose HQ is registered at a service address in Birmingham. 
All four were ultimately controlled by companies in tax havens.

Records show that one of the UK-registered companies allegedly used to funnel 
the payments – Metastar, a limited liability partnership (LLP) now dissolved – 
was run by two “members”: Advance Developments Ltd and Corporate Solutions Ltd. 
Both firms, also now dissolved, were based inBelize and controlled a vast 
network of UK-registered LLPs, including 
<https://www.companieslist.co.uk/OC316669-armut-services-llp> one called Armut 
Services.

Azerbaijan dissidents warn the west not to fall for Baku's flashy facade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/azerbaijan-dissidents-warn-west-baku-friendly-facade>
Documents filed with the Latvian courts 
<http://www.lawlesslatvia.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/Latvian-Complaint-signed-FULL-2.pdf>
 allege that Armut helped siphon off $230m of funds paid by the hedge fund 
Hermitage Capital Management to the Russian treasury.

The scandal involved an organised Russian criminal syndicate, the Klyuev 
Group, which, it is claimed, has stolen at least $800m from the Russian people 
with the aid of the Russian government.

Sergei Magnitsky, a lawyer working for Hermitage, blew the whistle on the 
scandal only to be imprisoned in Russia. It isalleged that Magnitsky was  
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2015/02/sergei-magnitsky-murder-114878>
tortured to force him to withdraw his testimony. While in prison he developed 
gallstones, pancreatitis and a blocked gall bladder. A human rights council set 
up by the Kremlin found that he was physically assaulted shortly before his 
death, which was the direct result of being denied urgent medical care needed 
to treat his conditions.

Emma Hughes of Platform, a group that campaigns against the fossil fuel 
industry, said the involvement of UK tax havens in the alleged bribery scandal 
should act as a wake-up call for the British government. “This alleged 
corruption scandal is yet another example of how the opacity created by tax 
havens is used to fuel corruption and bribery around the world,” she said.

“Until the UK changes the law to tackle this it is facilitating criminality. 
It should begin by approving an amendment to the criminal finances bill which 
would enable the UK to freeze the assets of people who are involved in, or 
profit from, human rights abuses.”The Trans Adriatic Pipeline has been a 
longstanding source of controversy. William Hague, when foreign secretary, gave 
his blessing to the project claiming that it would reduce the UK’s dependency 
on Russian gas.

However, others disagree. “In actuality the Euro-Caspian Mega Pipeline is 
likely to be used to feed Russian gas to Europe as the pipeline has been 
designed to interconnect with the Russian pipeline grid,” said Hughes. “TAP 
will lock Europe into polluting fossil fuels for the next 50 years, undermining 
our climate targets and make us dependent on the Azeri government. These 
revelations mean the EU must halt its support for this dangerous pipeline.”
 