
The fall in sterling following the Brexit vote helped British business shake 
off a period of uncertainty to end 2016 on a high note as companies reported 
increases in export sales and orders. But the quarterly health check by the 
British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) found that business activity in the last 
three months of the year failed to rebound to historic levels, leaving 
companies worse off than a year ago.

Why the UK economy could fare better in 2017 than forecasters predict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/01/uk-economy-will-fare-better-in-2017-than-forecasters-predict>
And the survey, among the largest of its kind with more than 7,200 
respondents, detectedconcerns among business leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/08/after-sterlings-terrifying-plunge-bosses-plead-for-clarity-on-the-future-of-brexit>
 that rising import prices would slow growth this year.

The BCC said businesses turned a corner in the fourth quarter after a fall in 
confidence in the previous three months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/12/uk-economy-near-standstill-brexit-vote-hits-investment-bcc>
. Echoing official figures that showed GDP growth was among the highest in the 
developed world, the BCC found that the economy remained robust in the last few 
months of the year in part due to the boost from the lower pound, which made 
British exports cheaper.

It said most firms in the manufacturing and services sectors were confident 
their turnover would improve, that job opportunities would grow and investment 
in plant and machinery would improve in the next year.

Manufacturers were the biggest beneficiaries from the fall in sterling 
according to the survey, which found that a similar balance of firms reported a 
rise in exports, +16%, as in the third quarter. The balance for export orders 
was +13%, similar to +12% in the previous quarter. Both balances were up from 
+1% in the same quarter last year.

The services sector improved after a dramatic fall in the previous quarter 
with domestic sales leading the way, up from +9% to +15% while orders rose from 
+8% to +13, but still well down on the second quarter when they had been +24% 
and +20% respectively.

UK manufacturing growth at a 30-month high, says PMI survey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/uk-manufacturing-growth-at-a-30-month-high-says-pmi-survey>
Adam Marshall, the BCC’s director general, said businesses were coping with 
uncertainty “and looking to seize opportunities as they arise”. But he warned 
that a sharp increase in import prices was beginning to weigh on their costs 
and would lead to higher prices in the near future.

“Inflation has emerged in our survey as a rising concern for many businesses. 
Both manufacturing and services firms say they are under pressure, particularly 
from the rising cost of inputs, which is squeezing margins and may weaken 
future investment,” he said.

Suren Thiru, the lobby group’s head of economics, said: “While growth is 
likely to have remained on trend in the quarter, the UK’s growth prospects in 
the near term are expected to be more subdued, weighed down by rising inflation 
andthe uncertainty surrounding Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/28/majority-of-managers-think-brexit-uncertainty-will-affect-uk-economy>
.”

Construction companies also face rising import costs, according to a report 
from Markit/CIPS that found the weaker pound has driven up firms’ material 
costs to their highest in five and a half years.

The broadly upbeat survey of the construction sector found that growth was 
higher but remained vulnerable to uncertainty surrounding Britain’s ongoing 
relations with the European Union.

Housebuilding was the main driver behind construction growth again and grew at 
the fastest rate since January. Work on civil engineering projects also picked 
up at a robust pace while commercial construction increased only slightly.

UK construction industry enjoys fast growth in new orders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-construction-industry-growth-new-orders>
Tim Moore, senior economist at IHS Markit and author of the survey, said: “All 
three main areas of construction activity have started to recover from last 
summer’s soft patch, but in each case growth remains much weaker than the 
cyclical peaks seen in 2014.”

Paul Trigg, construction specialist and assistant head of risk underwriting at 
the trade credit insurer Euler Hermes, was also cautious. “Business confidence 
across construction remains high. But the industry is yet to feel the full 
brunt of Brexit and there are concerns the current work pipeline will only 
carry contractors in the short term.

“Plummeting levels of foreign direct investment are expected to curb office 
development, which will hurt contractors as competition ramps up and squeezes 
low industry margins even further.”
 