
Britain’s economy shrugged off the uncertainty surrounding June’s referendum 
vote to leave the European Union and maintain the best performance among the 
world’s leading economies with growth of 0.5% in the three months since the 
poll.

The powerful showing, which defied City forecasts that gross domestic product 
(GDP) growth would more than halve to 0.3%, came after the dominant services 
sector expanded at a faster rate in the quarter to the end of September than 
during the three months running up to the referendum vote.

But the figures were marred by a contraction in agriculture, construction and 
manufacturing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/manufacturers-feel-falling-pound-is-bad-despite-increasing-their-exports>
 that promptedbusiness groups to urge the chancellor, Philip Hammond, to use 
the autumn statement next month to support measures that boost investment and 
productivity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/27/uk-maternity-leave-extended-cbi-autumn-statement-philip-hammond>
. Overall, GDP growth slowed from0.7% in the previous quarter. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/uk-economy-grows-by-07-in-second-quarter>

Consumer confidence surveys also indicated an increasingly gloomy mood among 
consumers as the feelgood factor from low interest rates and inflation was 
replaced by concerns that the pound’s sharp decline would increase shop prices 
and hit UK living standards hard next year.

GfK’s consumer confidence index, which assesses respondents’ outlook for the 
next 12 months, decreased by two points to -3, ending a revival since June’s 
Brexit vote that pushed the index riseup to -1 after falling to -12.


The GDP data from the Office for National Statistics is the first official 
verdict on how the economy has performed since Britain voted to leave the 
European Union.


The figures rule out the prospect of a technical recession – defined by two 
consecutive quarters of contraction – in the second half of the year which was 
predicted by many economists before the referendum vote.

Hammond said the figures demonstrated the resilience of the UK economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/philip-hammond-rules-out-splurge-in-public-spending-in-autumn-statement>
, which was “well-placed” to deal with the challenges and opportunities created 
by the EU referendum.

The chancellor said: “We are moving into a period of negotiations with the EU 
and we are determined to get the very best deal for households and businesses. 
The economy will need to adjust to a new relationship with the EU, but we are 
well-placed to take advantage of opportunities ahead.”

However, several City analysts warned that the post-referendum bounce would 
prove to be temporary. Kallum Pickering, senior UK economist at Berenberg bank, 
said the resilient post-referendum performance “does not say anything about the 
UK’s ability to perform outside of the EU”.

He said: “The good quarter of growth merely reflects the momentum heading into 
the vote and the healthy underlying fundamentals after some three years of good 
growth. The data does not alter our long-term view that Brexit will lower UK 
trend growth, to around 1.8% from 2.2% per year, via less trade, migration and 
investment with its major market, the EU.”

Business groups warned the chancellor that industry remained vulnerable to 
uncertainty after the Brexit vote and he should open his cheque book to prevent 
a longer-term slump in output.

Mike Spicer, director of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said: 
“Although many manufacturers saw a bounce this summer, in part from the lower 
exchange rate, this was not enough to prevent a contraction in industrial 
output overall. Many have found themselves on the wrong side of currency 
movements – facing increased costs for imported components.”

For this reason “boosting business confidence must be a key task for 
government in the months ahead”, he said.

The 0.5% rise beat the latest forecasts from Bank of England policymakers, who 
were predicting at the time of theAugust inflation report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 that third quarter growth would come in at 0.1%.

Threadneedle Street is likely to use the data as a reason to delay any further 
stimulus to the economy until next year, placing further pressure on the 
Treasury to support industry.

The main boost to growth came from the transport, storage and communication 
sectors which grew at its fastest pace since the fourth quarter of 2009, rising 
2.2% over the period in contrast to 0.6% in the second quarter.

The ONS said higher output in the film, music and TV industries was the main 
driver, indicating that Britain’s creative industries sailed through the 
uncertainty surrounding the referendum unscathed.

The expansion of the services sector helped to offset the steepest fall in 
construction since the third quarter of 2012, with a slide in new housebuilding 
dragging the entire building industry down 1.4% between July and September.

Manufacturing dropped by 1% in the third quarter, while production fell 0.4% 
and agriculture slipped by 0.7%, prompting the TUC general secretary, Frances 
O’Grady, to say the government needed to do more to help.

“We can’t yet say what impact Brexit will have on our economy, but these 
figures show there’s no room for complacency. British manufacturing is still 
struggling, and now faces real uncertainty following the vote to leave the EU.

“The government must use next month’s autumn statement to boost Britain’s jobs 
and wages. This means investing in infrastructure like roads, rail and homes, 
and raising the national minimum wage.”

Britain’s economy has been growing for 15 consecutive quarters. The relative 
resilience of the UK economy since the Brexit vote on 23 June has largely been 
attributed to awillingness among consumers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/uk-household-spending-rose-in-september-figures-show>
 to keep spending, as well asstrength in the services sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/services-sector-growth-brexit-vote-uk>
.

The International Monetary Fund has predicted that Britain will be the fastest 
growing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/britain-fastest-growing-g7-economy-imf-international-monetary-fund-brexit-vote>
 of the G7 leading industrial countries in 2016, with growth of 1.8%. The 
Washington-based fund accepted that its warning of apost-Brexit-vote financial 
crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/18/imf-says-brexit-would-trigger-uk-recession-eu-referendum>
 had proved too pessimistic.
 