
Britain’s manufacturers are bracing for more swings in the exchange rate and 
rising costs, as the start of Brexit negotiations in 2017 threatens to keep the 
pound under pressure.


Factories have had to cope with sharp rises in energy and raw material costs 
in recent months as the weak pound makes imports to the UK more expensive. For 
manufacturers that export there has been a small silver lining as the fall in 
the pound since the Brexit vote has made their goods cheaper to overseas 
buyers, but that boost has only partially offset the pressure from higher costs.

The British Chambers of Commerce (BCC) says that six months on from the EU 
referendum, its members in the manufacturing industry have become more worried 
about moves in the pound and about inflation. Its poll of 1,775 manufacturers 
showed 56% felt that the exchange rate was more of a concern to their business 
than three months ago, up from 48% in September.

There was also an increase in the proportion worried about rising prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
, reflecting official figures for November that showed manufacturers faced the 
sharpest rise in their costs for five years. The BCC survey found 26% of 
manufacturers now saw inflation as more of a concern, up from 21% three months 
ago.

Suren Thiru, the BCC’s head of economics, highlighted the pressures on 
manufacturers from the pound’s drop since the referendum which has seen it lose 
its value 17% against the dollar and 10% against the euro.

“While the post-referendum slump in the value of sterling is benefiting some 
exporters, a weak currency is something of a double-edged sword, as many UK 
exporters also import goods and raw materials, so will be facing higher input 
costs,” he said.

The business group wants more help for firms to offset the pressures from the 
Brexit process, which has already shown signs of slowing business investment 
and knocking consumer confidence. Thiru highlightedbusiness rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/business-rates-hike-of-2bn-may-put-pressure-on-retailers-to-raise-prices>
, a tax that firms pay on their commercial property, as one cost that could be 
lowered by the government.

“Uncertainty over future currency movements is also a growing concern for 
businesses. With further expected rises in the US interest rate in the coming 
months likely to place further downward pressure on sterling, it is vital that 
more is done to address the high input costs faced by businesses, particularly 
business rates.”

The economic news since the vote to leave the EU in June has generally defied 
gloomy predictions of a sharp slowdown from forecasters like the Bank of 
England and International Monetary Fund. Butthe most recent indicators suggest 
the Brexit vote is starting to be felt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/brexit-economy-referendum-inflation-uk-2017>
 and that the effects will become more pronounced in 2017 when negotiations 
over the leaving the EU being in earnest.

The latest official figures on inflation suggest the weak pound is now feeding 
through to prices paid by consumers,particularly for fuel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/petrol-prices>. Inflation hit a two-year 
high of 1.2% last month and forecasters expect it to continue rising and 
approach 3% in 2017.

The jobs market has also shown signs of strain. The pace of hiring has eased 
off and there has been ajump in the number of people considered “economically 
inactive” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/uk-unemployment-rate-pay-growth-jobless-ons>
 – out of work and not looking for work. Consumer confidence polls have pointed 
to growing worries about the economic outlook and about inflation in 
particular. Thinktanks have warnedhigher prices and a slowdown in wage growth 
will squeeze household incomes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/ifs-warnsf-biggest-squeeze-on-pay-for-70-years-autumn-statement>
.


There have also been indications that business investment is slowing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/uk-investment-ons-consumer-spending-retail-manufacturing>
 but a separate poll from the Institute of Directors (IoD) suggestedfirms were 
still willing to spend and expand in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/business-giants-expand-workforces-2017-despite-brexit-worries-jobs-cbi-unemployment>
.

Its survey of 844 business leaders suggested they were cautiously upbeat about 
the year ahead. More than 60% were optimistic or very optimistic about their 
prospects in 2017, and the net optimism against pessimism figure, at 50%, was 
the highest since the vote to leave the EU in June.

But business bosses also warned of a number of concerns that could see their 
expectations prove over-optimistic. Half felt current UK economic conditions 
were having a negative effect on their business’ growth, and 45% felt an 
uncertain trading status with the EU was holding them back. There were also 
worries about skills shortages amid the prospect of an immigration clampdown 
after Brexit.



 