
The government has stumped up £3m to fund English local authorities’ work to 
monitor and improve air quality.

The air quality grant for 2016/17 was announced on 6 October and is six times 
greater than the amount allocated for the current financial year. It is the 
first funding round to be managed by DEFRA and the Department for Transport’s 
Joint Air Quality Unit <http://www.endsreport.com/52385>.


Some £2.36m was allocated when the fund was launched in 2010/11, rising to 
£3.1m the following two years. But it fell to £1m in 2013/14 and 2014/15.

This was then cut further to only £0.5m. The number of councils given cash to 
improve air quality dropped accordingly, falling from 36 to eight over the past 
three years. More councils in Northern Ireland <http://www.endsreport.com/52007>
 than England received such funding this year.

ENDS highlighted the steady reduction to the fund in January 
<http://www.endsreport.com/51358>.

Tories halve councils' cash to fight air pollution in England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/29/tories-halve-councils-cash-to-fight-air-pollution-in-england>
So too did the Commons’ Environment Food and Rural Affairs Committee 
<http://www.endsreport.com/52374> (EFRA), which in April called on DEFRA to 
preserve funding and ensure that councils are “recompensed for any costs of 
implementing new clean air zones <http://www.endsreport.com/54113> which they 
are not able to recoup from reasonable charges on drivers”.

Restoring the grant’s budget may be interpreted as a response to such 
criticism.

The grant may be sought for any location that DEFRA projects will exceed EU 
air quality limits, as reported to the European Commission, or had an air 
quality management area declared by the end of March 2016. Applications are due 
before midday on November 23.

EFRA chair Neil Parish said: “The government needs to act now to give all 
councils the power – and crucially, the funding – to implement a Clean Air Zone 
and limit the most polluting vehicles in hotspot areas. The £3m government 
funding pot is a start, but not nearly enough. We also need a big push to 
incentivise electric and low-emissions vehicles to replace the oldest, most 
polluting vehicles.”

In a response to a written parliamentary question by the MP, on 19 October the 
government revealed that more than a third (169) of the UK’s 418 local 
authorities breached air quality limits on nitrogen dioxide in 2015. Breaches 
were reported in all four UK nations.
 