
Tiny pieces of plastic in personal beauty products, that end up in the oceans 
and are swallowed by marine life, will be banned from sale in the UK by the end 
of 2017, the government is to announce on Saturday.

The move comes just days after MPs called for a ban on so-called microbeads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/24/microplastics-ban-in-cosmetics-save-oceans-mps-say-microbeads>
, and sees the UK following in the footsteps of the US,which has banned them 
beginning in mid-2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/08/us-to-ban-soaps-other-products-containing-microbeads>
. More than 357,000 people signeda petition 
<https://secure.greenpeace.org.uk/page/s/ban-microbeads> calling for a UK ban, 
and environment groups welcomed the news of the ban.

Microbeads are very small pieces of plastic in products such as facial scrubs 
and makeup. Some are visible to the naked eye, but others are as tiny as one 
micrometre. Conservationists have warned that they can affect fish growth and 
persist in the guts of mussels and fish that mistake them for food.

The industry had argued that it was already phasing them out voluntarily, but 
critics have claimed some companieswere exploiting loopholes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/20/microbeads-report-reveals-loopholes-pledges-by-biggest-firms>
 or dragging their feet on a phase-out.

Greenpeace said the new ban was welcome but should be extended to other 
products too.

“It’s a credit to Theresa May’s government that they’ve listened to concerns 
from the public, scientists, and MPs and taken a first step towards banning 
microbeads,” said the group’s oceans campaigner Louise Edge. “But marine life 
doesn’t distinguish between plastic from a face wash and plastic from a washing 
detergent, so it makes no sense for this ban to be limited to some products and 
not others, as is currently proposed.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fhow-microbead-ban-could-help-solve-massive-problem-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20microbead%20ban%20could%20help%20solve%20a%20massive%20problem%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fhow-microbead-ban-could-help-solve-massive-problem-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20microbead%20ban%20could%20help%20solve%20a%20massive%20problem%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fhow-microbead-ban-could-help-solve-massive-problem-video&media=>
How the microbead ban could help solve a massive problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/sep/02/how-microbead-ban-could-help-solve-massive-problem-video>
The Cosmetic, Toiletry & Perfumery Association, which represents the industry, 
said it was not surprised by the ban, but did not understand why it had been 
singled out, given other plastic rubbish dumped in the oceans.

Dr Chris Flower, its spokesman and director general, said: “It was inevitable. 
But it will ban something we are not using. The survey we’ve carried out [on 
members] shows a 70% reduction [in products with microbeads] since 2015, and 
almost zero by the end of 2018.”

He said it would not increase costs to consumers, but did mean some health and 
beauty products would disappear from shelves, as manufacturers work to overcome 
“supply, quality and reliability and microbiological purity issues”.

The environment minister, George Eustice, said in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/14/nment-backs-microbeads-ban-george-eustice>
 that the government “fully backed” a ban and that costs to industry would “not 
be that high”.

The government is to publish a consultation next week on how wide-ranging the 
ban should be, and which products will be covered. Keith Taylor, the Green 
party MEP, welcomed the ban butsaid 
<https://twitter.com/GreenKeithMEP/status/771755682542546945> it should extend 
much further than just beauty cosmetics.

Mary Creagh, the Labour MP and chair of the Environmental Audit Committee, 
agreed, saying: “I’m pleased to see the Government has finally agreed with my 
Committee’s call for a ban on microbeads. Fish don’t care where the plastic 
they are eating comes from, so it’s vital the ban covers all microplastics in 
all down the drain products.”

The US ban, approved by Barack Obama, covers cosmetic products with plastic 
microbeads, including toothpaste, soap and body washes.

One cleansing product can contain hundreds of thousands of the microbeads, 
which end up in the oceans after being washed down sinks. Yet natural 
alternatives that biodegrade and pose no harm to marine life exist, including 
jojoba beads, apricot kernels, ground nutshells and salt.

How your clothes are poisoning our oceans and food supply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/20/microfibers-plastic-pollution-oceans-patagonia-synthetic-clothes-microbeads>
Supermarket beauty products such as those by Asda, Waitrose and Sainsbury’s 
have already had the plastic dropped, and major companies such as Unilever – 
which owns Dove and other brands – have also phased them out. But other big 
names such as Tesco will not have phased them out entirely until the end of 
2017. Procter and Gamble, which owns Crest toothpaste, Gillette, Olay, will 
have ended them by 2017.

Consumers looking to avoid microbeads in the meantime should avoid products 
containing polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET), polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) and 
nylon, campaigners say.

So far, no conclusive scientific evidence has proved the microplastics pose 
any threat to human health when passed up the food chain by fish. “No studies 
were identified that address the potential human health effects of 
microplastics ingested by humans through the food chain,”a review of their 
safety by the European Food and Safety Agency found 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.2903/j.efsa.2016.4501/full>.
 