
Household spending bounced back last month, with people splashing out on 
theatre trips, restaurants and holidays, according to new figures.

UK consumer spending was up 2.4% year-on-year in September, having been 
broadly flat in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/12/uk-economy-near-standstill-brexit-vote-hits-investment-bcc>
, said payments company Visa. That was the fastest growth since April.

The trend continued in September for people to prioritise spending on 
experiences over buying things. The fastest spending growth was in the 
recreation and culture industry followed by hotels, restaurants and bars. 
Contrasting with that, spending on clothes and shoes was down on a year ago.

Taking the latest three months together, Visa said momentum remained subdued 
as households continued to digest the result of June’s referendum on EU 
membership.


“It is too early to say whether the growth seen in September will continue, 
and positive signs return more permanently following the soft patch that began 
in May,” said Kevin Jenkins, UK & Ireland managing director at Visa.

The figures, compiled for Visa by data company IHS Markit, showed e-commerce 
spending increased at the quickest rate since April, up 6% on the year, while 
face-to-face spending was broadly unchanged from one year earlier, edging up 
0.1%.

September’s robust spending figures chime with signs consumer confidence also 
recovered last month, helped bylow unemployment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/sep/14/uk-unemployment-data-brexit-stock-markets-business-live?page=with:block-57d90a83e4b067ad300878d7#block-57d90a83e4b067ad300878d7>
,record low interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 andrelatively low inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/uk-inflation-remains-unchanged-at-06>
. A key gauge of sentiment compiled by market researchers GfK wasback as its 
pre-referendum level in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/uk-consumer-confidence-recovers-to-pre-eu-referendum-level>
.

But economists warn rising prices could soon sour shoppers’ moods. The pound’s 
sharp fall against other currencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/theories-emerge-for-pounds-flash-crash-against-dollar>
 since the Brexit vote hasraised the cost of imports to the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/08/black-country-brexit-two-manufacturers-midlands-navigating-new-world>
 such as foods and manufacturers’ raw materials. Firms say they will have to 
pass at least some of those higher costs to customers.

There are signs of inflationary pressures in a report from Lloyds Bank on 
Monday. Its survey of businesses in England and Wales found there was another 
steep rise in firms’ input costs in September, which translated into higher 
prices charged for goods and services.

“The weaker pound remains a focal point in the survey data. Improved 
competitiveness has no doubt given added impetus to the post-EU referendum 
rebound, but increasingly businesses are feeling the impact of higher import 
costs,” said Tim Hinton, a specialist in banking for small and medium-sized 
companies at Lloyds.
 