
By chance, the Bank of England’s latest decision on interest rates  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/bank-of-england-leaves-interest-rates-unchanged>
fell on the eighth anniversary of the collapse of the US investment bankLehman 
Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/15/lehmanbrothers.creditcrunch>, 
one of the seismic economic events of the past 100 years.

On that day, official borrowing costs in the UK stood at 5%. In the months 
that followed the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee cut them 
aggressively until in early 2009 they hit 0.5%.

Nobody – not even the ultra-pessimists – imagined back then that in September 
2016 the Bank would be considering cutting interest rates, from 0.25% to 0.1%. 
But the assumption that ultra-low interest rates were a passing phase proved to 
be entirely false.

Bank of England leaves interest rates unchanged
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/bank-of-england-leaves-interest-rates-unchanged>
The world economy has never truly recovered from the shock administered by the 
near-death of the banking system in late 2008, symbolised by the Lehman 
Brother’s bankruptcy. Growth has remained weak, real incomes have been 
squeezed, popular anger at ruling elites has grown. Donald Trump’s run at the 
US presidency and theBrexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> can both be traced back to 
those tumultuous days eight years ago.

The possible implications of a British exit from the European Union explain 
why the Bank could well cut interest rates again before Christmas. As expected, 
the MPC kept rates unchanged at 0.25% at its latest meeting but sent out a 
strong signal to the markets that it was in the mood for further easing.

That’s despite the fact that the economy has performed rather better since the 
referendum than the Bank envisaged when it announced itsbig package of stimulus 
measures in early August. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 Back then, the MPC envisaged that the economy would grind to a virtual 
standstill in the third quarter. Now Threadneedle Street’s in-house economists 
think the initial stab at estimating activity from the Office for National 
Statistics will show growth of 0.2%, rising to 0.3% when more data comes in.

So why is another rate cut in the offing? Firstly, the Bank thinks some of the 
deleterious effects of Brexit – on investment in particular – will take time to 
show up. Secondly, it wants to keep downward pressure on the pound to boost 
exports. And finally, the prospect of still cheaper money has boosted financial 
markets and it fears a backlash if it fails to deliver.

That doesn’t mean rates at 0.1% are a dead cert. But it will take even better 
economic news over the coming weeks to prevent them from happening.
 