
Employment and unemployment down marginally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/uk-unemployment-rate-pay-growth-jobless-ons>
. Wage growth and inactivity up a bit. Cut through the mass of data and the 
conclusion is clear: the improvement in the UK labour market has stalled.


The latest news from the Office for National Statistics 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/bulletins/uklabourmarket/dec2016>
 is consistent with the recent reports from theBank of England’s regional agents
 <http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/default.aspx>
, the officials who act as the eyes and ears of Threadneedle Street’s monetary 
policy committee.

These regular updates suggest that companies have become a lot more cautious 
about hiring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/01/hays-drop-hiring-brexit-vote-eu-referendum-banks-recruitment>
 since the UK voted to leave the EU in June. The fall in employment of 6,000 
during the three months to October followed an increase of 173,000 in the 
quarter ending in July. That is a marked deceleration and has been particularly 
pronounced in the private sector.

UK unemployment rate stays at 4.8% as pay growth picks up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/uk-unemployment-rate-pay-growth-jobless-ons>
For the moment, the figures chime with business surveys and suggest that 
employers are adopting a wait-and-see approach, rather than resorting to major 
layoff programmes. The more timely but less comprehensive claimant count 
measure of unemployment showed a small rise of 2,400 in November, but this was 
lower than the market consensus of 6,500. There were as many job vacancies in 
the three months to November as in the three months leading up to the Brexit 
vote.

The most encouraging piece of news was the pickup in regular annual pay growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/14/uk-unemployment-wages-pound-federal-reserve-interest-rates-business-live?page=with:block-58511334e4b0e02f2b16c031#block-58511334e4b0e02f2b16c031>
 from 2.4% to 2.6%, because this will help blunt theimpact of rising inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
 caused by thehigher oil price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/12/uk-petrol-prices-opec-oil-deal>
 and thedeclining value of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/why-is-uk-inflation-rising-quickly-blame-brexit-oil-price>
.

It is probable, however, that prices will rise more quickly than wages in the 
months to come. This was a distinctly soft labour market report. The days of 
rapid jobs growth are over for now and that means it will become harder for 
workers to get more for their labour.
 