
On 16 January, professional climbers David Bacci and Matteo Della Bordella set 
off to climb Mount Fitz Roy in Patagonia. They chose the mountain’s heavily 
exposed East Pillar, the hardest route of the lot. The pair endured brutal 
weather but eventually finished the climb.
Map of Mount Fitz Roy 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/may/2016-05-23T14:33:13.html>  Map 
of Mount Fitz Roy 
Bacci, who volunteers for Greenpeace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace>, didn’t just want to use 
the climb to prove his alpinist credentials; he wanted to show that it’s 
possible to tackle the toughest mountain conditions in “PFC-free” clothing.

PFCs, or perfluorinated compounds, are a staple in many fabrics used for 
outdoor clothing. They are popular with the industry’s big brands because they 
create a porous outer layer that allows impermeable, waterproof materials to 
breathe, while making surfaces repel water and oil.

Yet PFCs are also linked to a number of worrying health conditions. Laboratory 
studies have found links toreproductive problems in animals 
<http://www.hindawi.com/journals/isrn/2013/657849/#B1>. PFCs can also last 
indefinitely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/26/greenpeace-finds-brands-like-north-face-using-toxic-chemicals-in-outdoor-products>
 in the environment and find their way into the animal food chain.

Páramo <http://www.paramo-clothing.com/> is one of the few PFC-free outdoor 
brands currently on the market. In a demonstration of industry leadership, the 
apparel company came out publicly earlier this year to support Greenpeace’s 
call for an end to the use of this toxic chemical in outdoor gear.

“Greenpeace wanted to point out the irony that those [companies] that 
supposedly loved the outdoors were still polluting it,” says Catherine 
Whitehead, marketing executive at Páramo. “We’ve been talking to Greenpeace for 
the past couple of years and that came to fruition with us agreeing to sign up 
to its Detox campaign.”

Toxic chemicals found in most outdoor gear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/25/toxic-chemicals-found-in-most-outdoor-gear>
Páramo uses an alternative fabric technology, invented by its founder. In that 
sense, it has a head-start on its industry competitors. The company has also 
taken steps recently to ensure all its garments are fully recyclable.

Páramo shows that it is “absolutely possible” for outdoor brands to produce 
high-performance gear without using hazardous chemicals, says Cecilia Preite 
Martinez, a spokesperson for Greenpeace’s Detox campaign. “Páramo is setting 
the highest standard in the whole outdoor sector and this example should 
encourage bigger brands to take the lead for a toxic-free future,” she adds.

Eyes will certainly be on Páramo to ensure that it meets its new commitments. 
By the same token, public interest is now squarely focused on the likes ofNorth 
Face <http://www.thenorthface.co.uk/blog/eu/en/chemical-responsibility>, Mammut 
<https://www.mammut.ch/INT/en/cr/planet/pfc>, Jack Wolfskin 
<http://www.jack-wolfskin.co.uk/pfc/> and Patagonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/25/toxic-chemicals-found-in-most-outdoor-gear>
 to up their game and follow suit.

Páramo is the 2016 winner in the bold move category of the Guardian 
Sustainable Business Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/nov/11/guardian-sustainable-business-awards-2016-the-categories-and-awards-criteria>
.
 