
Growing worries about the economic outlook have dented the confidence of UK 
households and manufacturers, according to the latest reports to suggest the 
Brexit vote result will slow the economy.

A poll by market researchers GfK recorded the biggest slide in consumer 
confidence for more than 26 years in July. The group said people were on 
average gloomier about their own finances, the broader economy and whether now 
was a good time to make big purchases such as furniture and household 
appliances.

A separate survey of manufacturing companies, also published on Friday, paints 
a similar picture. Manufacturers’ organisation EEF said that the sector’s 
recovery was under threat as its poll revealed business confidence had fallen 
in every region of England and Wales.

The GfK report on household reactions to the Brexit vote adds to evidence that 
consumers could rein in spending amid higher uncertainty about jobs, pay and 
the UK’s economic health.

The headline confidence index fell to -12 in July from -1 in the June survey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/30/mark-carney-expected-to-calm-fears-for-financial-markets-bank-of-england>
 carried out before the referendum. That was the sharpest month-to-month drop 
since March 1990, shortly beforethe UK fell into recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/gallery/2009/jan/22/recession-margaretthatcher>
.

The latest result was also weaker than a reading in a one-off post-referendum 
GfK poll of -9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/08/brexit-vote-batters-consumer-confidence-slide-gfk-yougov-regions>
 conducted from 30 June to 5 July.

The researchers, who surveyed 2,000 people for the full report between 1 and 
15 July, said the outlook for consumer confidence would depend on how quickly 
the UK’s trading position is clarified.


“Consumers in post-Brexit Britain are reporting higher levels of concern this 
month,” said Joe Staton, head of market dynamics at GfK. “We’ve seen a very 
significant drop in confidence, as is clear from the fall in each of our key 
measures, with the biggest decrease occurring in the outlook for the general 
economic situation in the next 12 months.

“However, the index continues to remain at a relatively elevated level by 
historic[al] standards. Its future trajectory depends on whether we enter a new 
period of damaging economic uncertainty or restore confidence by embracing a 
positive stance on negotiating a new deal for the UK.”


The poll showed people were gloomier about their current and future personal 
finances and about the current and future state of the UK economy. Some of the 
results will have been collected before Theresa May became prime minister on 13 
July and appointed a new cabinet, so ministers will be hoping a return to some 
political stability could improve confidence readings in coming months.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fuk-sees-biggest-fall-in-consumer-confidence-for-26-years-after-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdedf5ad9d330c12c9d9fbaa878cdc9dbc4e8b3e6%2F0_0_5358_3216%2F5358.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20sees%20biggest%20fall%20in%20consumer%20confidence%20for%2026%20years%20after%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fuk-sees-biggest-fall-in-consumer-confidence-for-26-years-after-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20sees%20biggest%20fall%20in%20consumer%20confidence%20for%2026%20years%20after%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fuk-sees-biggest-fall-in-consumer-confidence-for-26-years-after-brexit-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdedf5ad9d330c12c9d9fbaa878cdc9dbc4e8b3e6%2F0_0_5358_3216%2F5358.jpg>
 Manufacturers’ confidence score fell to 5.24 out of 10 after the vote, from 
6.37 beforehand. Photograph: WPA Pool/Getty Images 
The report follows a clutch of business surveys this week suggesting the vote 
to leave the EU could derail Britain’s economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/health-check-of-key-sectors-post-brexit-vote-counter-growth-figure>
 following relatively strong economic growth in the run-up to the referendum. 
GDP wasrevealed to be up 0.6% in the second quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/27/uk-economy-grew-before-brexit-vote-second-quarter-gdp-philip-hammond>
, greater than the 0.4% growth seen in the previous three months, but more 
timely indicators pointed to falling confidence among car factories, high 
street stores and in the construction industry.

Manufacturing group EEF has added its voice to that gloom on Friday. Its 
overview of business confidence among factory bosses found optimism dropped 
most sharply in the south-east England and London region and in Wales. The 
smallest decline in confidence was among firms in the north-east England, 
according to the survey carried out with accountants BDO.

The poll of 410 firms found that UK manufacturers’ average confidence score 
just before the referendum was 6.37 out of a possible 10 points, and had 
declined to 5.24 following the vote.

“The Brexit vote has put the manufacturing sector’s recovery in jeopardy,” 
said Lee Hopley, chief economist at EEF.

She noted that despite suffering the largest fall, the south east England and 
London region still ranked top in the UK for business confidence while the 
north-west England and the east Midlands had the lowest scores.

“The growth path is now uncertain in all regions and, while firms in the 
south-east and London and Wales look better placed to ride the storm, companies 
in the eastern counties, north-east and the south-west appear more downbeat 
about their ability to cope,” Hopley said.

Exchange rate volatility, political uncertainty and the prospect of increased 
costs on the back of a weaker pound were all causing concern for manufacturers, 
the lobby group said.

“With a solid business environment, supportive policies and the right outcome 
from Brexit negotiations allowing for trade and ongoing access to skilled 
workers, manufacturers should be able to overcome the risks, reap future growth 
rewards and get their business confidence back on track,” it added.

Tom Lawton, manufacturing head at the report’s co-author, BDO, said there had 
been encouraging signs from the new government of support for the sector.

“The lack of a clear strategy for the manufacturing sector over recent years 
has been of huge concern and it is encouraging to see Theresa May’s promise of 
a proper industrial strategy,” said Lawton.

“We would like to see the government match manufacturers’ long-term outlook by 
developing a 15 to 20 year industrial policy that avoids the disruptions of the 
political cycle.”
 