
British retailers are hoping for a boost from tourists on post-referendum 
shopping sprees as China’s “golden week” holiday begins, bringing with it the 
prospect of more bargain hunters heading to the UK.

Tourist spending in UK surges after pound's Brexit slump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/tourist-spending-uk-surges-following-pounds-brexit-slump>
Department stores and luxury shops have enjoyed bumper takings from overseas 
visitors snapping up watches and jewellery since the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/tourist-spending-uk-surges-following-pounds-brexit-slump>
. The tourists were attracted to UK high streets by a sharp fall in the pound 
following the Brexit vote. The sharp move means tourists can now get more 
pounds for their own currency.

With the pound still well below its pre-referendum level, the twice-yearly 
golden week holiday inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, which 
began on Saturday, is expected to bring in more tourists.

The tax-free shopping company Global Blue  <http://www.globalblue.com/>said 
any boost from golden week would build on a strong August for tourist spending 
in the UK. It reported a 37% year-on-year surge in UK international tax-free 
shopping in August.

“The weakened pound has continued to work in retailers’ favour as 
international visitors have made plans to travel to enjoy the UK’s warmer 
weather and take home with them British luxury items due to the improved 
exchange rate,” said the company’s UK and Ireland managing director, Gordon 
Clark.

“The UK is outperforming the rest of Europe and very much remains a key 
destination on Chinese travellers’ itineraries and we anticipate September and 
October tourist spend to follow August’s surge.”

Clark pointed to reports that the online travel agency Ctrip had enjoyed 
strong demand in the Chinese market 
<http://www.chinapost.com.tw/china/china-business/2016/09/30/479720/British-retailers.htm>
 for trips to Britain during golden week.

“According to Ctrip, a trip to the UK is now about 20% cheaper than it was 
this time last year, and more than half of Ctrip’s routes to the UK were booked 
up one month ahead of golden week,” said Clark.

Westfield, which owns two London shopping centres, is expecting busy tourist 
trade with Chinese shoppers visiting during the 1-7 October holiday. That 
optimism follows a successful summer period when record Ramadan sales helped 
drive a 70% increase in international spending at Westfield compared with a 
year earlier.

Westfield said its retailers were reporting that Chinese tourists were 
bulk-buying designer items to make the most of the weak pound. Louis Vuitton, 
Gucci and Burberry were seeing strong custom from China, with handbags and 
accessories the most popular items.


At Westfield’s west London centre, spending by Chinese visitors was up 53% on 
the previous year in August. The average spend per Chinese shopper was up 35% 
on the year.

Official figures have also shown spending by visitors to the UK rose after the 
referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/spending-by-visitors-to-uk-tourism-rose-2-per-cent-in-july>
. Tourists’ spending picked up in July, while British holidaymakers’ cut their 
outgoings overseas as the weak pound made foreign holidays more expensive.

Currency experts expect the pound to remain relatively weak for some time amid 
uncertainty over the UK’s future trading relationships, and asthe Bank of 
England hints at another interest rate cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/bank-of-england-leaves-interest-rates-unchanged>
 on top ofAugust’s move to a record low in official borrowing costs of 0.25% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
. The Prime Minister Theresa’s May’s announcement on sunday that she will 
trigger article 50 by the end of March 2017 may also further weaken sterling.

This weekend marked 100 days since the vote to leave the EU. While the pound 
has stabilised following an initial tumble, it is still down more than 10% 
against the US dollar, China’s yuan and the euro.


Jake Trask, currency analyst at currency exchange company UKForex, believes 
there is little prospect of a recovery for the pound for now. “In the next 
hundred days, the pound is unlikely to reach anything like its pre-Brexit 
value, despite more positive economic data emerging from the UK in recent 
weeks. In fact, a move downwards looks much more likely,” he said.
 