
Britain went on a bit of a borrowing binge as Christmas approached. Unable to 
resist all the bargains on offer onBlack Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday/2016/nov/25/all>, shoppers 
pulled out the plastic. The rise in unsecured consumer debt in November was the 
biggest for more than a decade.

News of the increase in consumer debt is not exactly a surprise. When the Bank 
of England cut interest rates in August last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
, the aim was to making borrowing cheaper and therefore more attractive. The 
message came through loud and clear: UK households need little encouragement to 
buy on the never-never. Unsecured credit is growing at an annual rate just shy 
of 11%

Rising consumer debt is not necessarily a problem. When unemployment is low 
and real incomes are rising, it can make perfectly good sense to borrow for a 
big-ticket item, especially when, as onBlack Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday>, it is on offer at a 
knockdown price and when interest rates are so low.

UK credit binge approaching levels not seen since 2008 crash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-credit-cards-borrowing-debt-economic-crash-fears>
But anybody who believes consumers can continue to amass credit at 11% a year 
is living in cloud cuckoo land. The UK has been through these credit cycles 
many times in the past, and things have never ended well.

Annual growth in unsecured borrowing is edging back up towards the 16% peak 
reached in the early 2000s, as is unsecured debt as a proportion of disposable 
income.

The danger comes when unemployment rises, real incomes are squeezed or 
interest rates start to go up. At that point, borrowing becomes less a matter 
of personal choice and more a sign of financial distress.

Britain is not at that point â€“ yet. Consumers are not optimistic about the 
outlook for the economy but they are relatively happy about the state of their 
own finances. That could change asinflation starts to climb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/petrol-food-prices-uk-rising-2017>
.
 