
Britain’s services sector grew at the fastest pace for 17 months in December, 
according to a survey that has raised hopes for a strong end to 2016 for the 
economy.

There was also a pick-up in new business and job creation, according to the 
poll of firms from the UK’s biggest sector, which includes banks, hotels and 
transport. But news that companies increased their prices at the fastest pace 
for more than five years will intensifyworries over the weak pound stoking 
inflation in the months ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/petrol-food-prices-uk-rising-2017>
 and raises the prospect of interest rates going up this year.

The main reading on the closely watched Markit/CIPS UK Services PMI 
<https://www.markiteconomics.com/Survey/PressRelease.mvc/4290982327144083a5e931c3253650ee>
 (pdf) confounded economists’ expectations of a slowdown. It increased for the 
third month running to 56.2 from 55.2 in November and signalled the fastest 
growth for the dominant services sector since July 2015. Economists had 
forecast 54.7 in a Reuters poll.

It was the fifth month running that the index was above the 50 mark, which 
separates growth from contraction, havingbriefly plunged below it in the wake 
of June’s referendum on EU membership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/uk-services-sector-contraction-adds-to-recession-fears-pmi>
.

Chris Williamson (@WilliamsonChris) 
The UK all-sector #PMI <https://twitter.com/hashtag/PMI?src=hash> hit a 
17-month high in Dec, signalling +0.5% GDP in Q4. Faster growth seen in 
services, manufacturing & constructionpic.twitter.com/iFyKgiAxLs 
<https://t.co/iFyKgiAxLs>
 <https://twitter.com/WilliamsonChris/status/816940955857289216> January 5, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/WilliamsonChris/status/816940955857289216> 
The report follows stronger-than-expected surveys from the smaller 
manufacturing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/uk-manufacturing-growth-at-a-30-month-high-says-pmi-survey>
 andconstruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-construction-industry-growth-new-orders>
 sectors this week. The polls’ compilers said that taken together they point to 
the economy growing 0.5% in the final quarter of 2016, only a slight slowdown 
from0.6% in the third quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/23/uk-gdp-growth-brexit-industrial-services-construction-wages>
 and confounding forecasters who had predicted growth would grind to a halt 
before the end of the year because of Brexit worries.

“A buoyant service sector adds to signs that the UK economy continues to defy 
widely held expectations of a Brexit-driven slowdown,” said Chris Williamson, 
chief business economist at IHS Markit.

He said that, with the all-sector PMI now at a 17-month high and signs of 
costs pressures, talk of an interest rate hike was likely to grow.

The Bank of England cut official interest rates to a record low of 0.25% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 after the Brexit vote as part of a package of measures to shore up confidence 
and keep businesses and consumers spending. Since then policymakers have 
highlighted theyface a trade-off between keeping inflation in check and 
supporting the jobs market and wider economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/bank-of-england-uk-interest-rates-slowdown-growth>
.

Williamson added: “At face value, this improvement suggests that the next move 
by the Bank of England is more likely to be a rate hike than a cut, but 
policymakers are clearly concerned about the extent to which Brexit- related 
uncertainty could slow growth this year.

“They will therefore consider the current resilience of the economy alongside 
the elevated levels of uncertainty highlighted by the historical weakness of 
business optimism about the year ahead. Any change in policy therefore looks 
unlikely in the short-term, and the next move in policy could as much be a rate 
cut as a hike.”

The report signalled that new business increased at the fastest rate since 
July 2015, with companies linking the improvement to a range of factors, 
including new product launches, government contracts and export business.

Employment growth continued for the fifth month running in December, with the 
rate of job creation unchanged from November’s seven-month high. Markit said 
the jobs reading was stronger than the long-run survey average but that 
employment growth over 2016 as a whole was weaker than the trends shown in 
2013, 2014 and 2015.


Cost pressures remained “elevated”, the report said. Companies’ costs, or 
input prices, rose at the second-fastest rate since April 2011, linked to the 
weak pound, which has made imports to the UK more expensive.

“Higher food and fuel prices were widely mentioned, while labour, IT and 
oil-based items such as packaging were also cited as being up in price,” the 
PMI report said.

As a result, services companies raised their own charges at the fastest rate 
since April 2011. The survey covers a large part of the services sector, but 
not retailers.

Those rising prices could soon squeeze consumer spending, economists warned.

Scott Bowman at the consultancy Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> said: “A moderation in growth 
in 2017 seems likely as rising inflation eats into households’ real income 
growth.

“Nonetheless, the support provided to activity from a lower pound and 
rock-bottom interest rates should prevent growth from slowing too sharply. 
Overall, our forecast is for GDP growth to ease from around 2.0% in 2016 to 
about 1.5% in 2017.”


The PMI reports chime with a modestly upbeat tone in the latest survey from 
the British Chambers of Commerce. That suggestedfirms had enjoyed increases in 
export sales and orders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/uk-economy-ends-2016-on-high-but-rising-import-prices-bite>
 but showed they were worried that rising import prices would slow growth this 
year.

Alan Clarke at the Scotiabank in London said the less timely official data 
would now be key to confirming the message from the surveys.


“Brexit clearly hasn’t hurt business sentiment. The acid test is whether this 
feeds into the hard data,” he said.
 