
UK stock markets soared on Tuesday, helped by a slump in the pound as it fell 
to a new 31-year low against the dollar amid growing fears that Britain could 
leave the single market after Brexit.

The FTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 index of Britain’s 
leading companies – which is dominated by companies that earn revenues in 
dollars – surged to 7,074.34, closing at its highest level since the record 
finish of 7,104 in April 2015. It came tantalisingly close to beating that 
landmark before a last-minute spate of profit taking.

However, the FTSE 250 mid-cap index closed at a new peak, as investors 
shrugged off the gloom that surrounded markets at the start of the year and in 
the aftermath of the UK’s EU referendum in June.

The share gains came as the pound dropped to its worst level since June 1985, 
falling to $1.2721, down 0.9%. Against the euro, sterling hit a three-year low 
of €1.1365, down 0.8%.

The latest falls in the currency followed Theresa May’s announcement on Sunday 
that the government would trigger the process of leaving the European Union by 
the end of March 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
, as well as subsequent comments suggesting it would place a priority on 
restricting immigration into the UK,even at the expense of leaving the single 
market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
.
FTSE100 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-04T16:51:12/embed.html>
The pound has also been hit by the Bank of England cutting interest rates in 
August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
and suggesting further reductions could come later in the year.

May told the BBC that the UK’s economy was strong and currencies “of course go 
up and down”.

Many analysts believe the pound has further to fall. Connor Campbell, 
financial analyst at betting firm Spreadex, said: “It seems that it is going to 
be hard to provide a tourniquet for sterling’s recent wounds given the solidity 
of the newly announced Brexit timeline ... and the firmness with which May 
stated her intention to chase border control even if it means relinquishing 
Britain’s position in the single market.”

Kathleen Brooks, research director at City Index, said: “A move down to $1.25, 
and even $1.20 is now a possibility ... The all-time low for the pound/dollar 
from March 1985 is $1.05. We don’t expect to return to these lows; back in 1985 
the pound only briefly dipped to $1.05 before recovering sharply.”

But the weakness in the pound helped lift the international companies and 
exporters which dominate the FTSE 100, making their goods cheaper for foreign 
buyers and boosting their profits.

Trevor Green, head of UK Equities at fund manager Aviva Investors, said the 
market was being driven by different factors to a year ago, when optimism over 
the health of the eurozone helped push shares upwards. He said: “The dynamics 
driving the index towards a record high are different from [2015], when we last 
witnessed the index go over 7,000. Then it was about falling oil prices and 
optimism on the eurozone recovery. This time, it materially revolves around 
currency ... Overseas earners benefit from the translation of these earnings 
back to sterling, leading to a succession of companies upgrading their earnings 
forecasts for currency alone.”

The index of Britain’s 100 largest listed companies closed up 90.82 points or 
1.3% to reach 7074.34 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/ftse-100-near-record-high-pound-31-year-low>
, a revival of 28% since it hit a 2016 low of 5537 in February. At that point, 
investors were unnerved by signs of a global slowdown, a plunge in the oil 
price and worries about the effect of low interest rates on bank balance sheets.
FTSE 250 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-04T16:52:04/embed.html>
The FTSE is also 18% higher than the 5982 level it fell to in June following 
the Brexit vote.

The more domestically focussed FTSE 250 jumped 0.87% to 18,342.07. Again the 
pound’s weakness helped make company valuations more attractive to both 
overseas investors and possible predators seeking takeovers.

The index was also lifted by signs that dire warnings of recession made before 
the Brexit vote looked misplaced, at least for the moment.UK construction 
bounced back in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/construction-sector-housebuilding-post-referendum-slump-brexit-vote>
, according to the latest Markit/Cips survey, with its purchasing managers’ 
index rising to a better-than-expected 52.3 from 49.2 in August, the first 
increase since March. That followed news on Monday thatUK manufacturing 
activity expanded at the fastest pace for more than two years in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/03/uk-stocks-rally-as-brexit-fears-fade>
, with stronger export orders on the back of the pound’s continuing weakness.

Investors were also lifted by news that the International Monetary Fund, which 
was one of those warning of a severe downturn if the UK voted to leave the 
European Union, wasnow predicting the UK would be the fastest growing of the G7 
industrialised nations this year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/britain-fastest-growing-g7-economy-imf-international-monetary-fund-brexit-vote>
The IMF is forecasting UK growth of 1.8% in 2016, up 0.1 percentage points from 
its previous prediction in July, albeit falling to 1.1% in 2017.

Markets around the globe have also been supported by a revival in commodity 
prices, notably oil, which has stabilised followinglast week’s outline of a 
deal by producers to tackle the supply glut by curbing output 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/29/oil-prices-rise-6-opec-agrees-limit-crude-output>
.

And with low interest rates and bond yields, investors seeking a decent return 
on their money have been tempted into the stock market. Laith Khalaf, senior 
analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Lower interest rates have also given the 
stock market a leg up, because with cash and bonds yielding next to nothing, 
equities are the natural alternative for anyone looking for a decent level of 
income.

“Nor will there be any shortage of income-seekers at the moment, as millions 
of baby boomers are reaching retirement age, while the recent pension freedoms 
conveniently allow them to park their retirement funds in the stock market 
rather than buying an annuity.”

However, analysts also pointed out that if the weakness of the pound is taken 
into account and is balanced against the FTSE’s performance last year when the 
pound was stronger, the index has actually fallen around 2% so far this year.
Pound v Dollar 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-04T16:52:34/embed.html> 