





UK water companies are urging a national trading standards body to help stamp 
out “misleading” labelling on disposable wet wipes that are marketed as 
flushable but clog up drains and litter oceans at huge environmental cost.


They are calling on manufacturers of moist toilet tissues and other 
non-biodegradable cleaning cloths such as bathroom cleaning wipes – which are 
routinely flushed away by consumers in their toilets – to ensure that such 
products are prominently labelled as not flushable and are to be disposed of in 
a bin.

In a letter  
<http://www.mcsuk.org/downloads/Press_pics/21st%20CPB%20'Flushable'%20Products%20Complaint%20to%20Trading%20Standrads%20letter%20%20Wed%2026th%20Oct%2016%20FINAL.pdf>
to the Chartered Trading Standards Institute (CTSI), Tony Harrington of the 
trade body Water UK urges the institute to launch its own investigation into an 
issue which he says is “adversely” affecting consumers and the environment.

Tampons aren't for toilets: biodegradable bag hopes to fight the flushers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/womens-blog/2016/may/16/tampons-not-for-toilets-flushing-fab-little-bag-periods>
“Wet wipes and other products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/womens-blog/2016/may/16/tampons-not-for-toilets-flushing-fab-little-bag-periods>
 which find their way into our sewers are not dissolvable like standard toilet 
paper, but instead may contain materials which do not disintegrate in the same 
way that a paper-based tissue does,” he wrote in the letter to CTSI head of 
policy, Melissa Dring. “This can lead to materials like plastics being released 
into the environment (similar to microbeads, a product that has received 
considerable media attention, and whichthe government has committed to ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/02/uk-government-to-ban-microbeads-from-cosmetics-by-end-of-2017>
 for cosmetics), substances which we are now aware could have consequences for 
the human food chain.”

Harrington, who is chair of the 21st Century Drainage Programme Board, a Water 
UK-sponsored sector group looking at more resilient urban drainage systems, 
said that misleading labelling and instructions are fuelling the problem.

“It is our belief that whilst manufacturers are still able to advertise their 
products as being ‘flushable’, or sell them with no suitable guidance on the 
label as to disposal, consumers will continue to dispose of them by incorrectly 
flushing them into the sewer system,” the letter reads. “As far as we can see, 
having clear and prominently visible ‘Do Not Flush’ labelling and removing the 
word ‘flushable’ from all packaging is the only acceptable and environmentally 
responsible way forward, while available products fail to meet water industry 
standards for flushability.”

In the UK alone, water companies spend approximately £88m of customers’ money 
clearing an estimated 360,000 blockages annually in the sewerage network. Half 
of these blockages are avoidable and are caused by the incorrect disposal of 
wet wipes and other hygiene products via toilets.

Putting wet wipes down the toilet can cause blockages that lead to massive 
buildups of fat, known as “fatbergs”.In 2013 a lump of congealed fat the size 
of a bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/aug/06/fatberg-london-sewer-grease-blockage>
 was found in sewers beneath London. Last year a spokesperson for Southern 
Water said 
<http://www.kentonline.co.uk/canterbury/news/wet-wipes-to-blame-for-5236/> Kent 
residents were dumping 2,000 tonnes of wet wipes into sewers.New York city has 
spent $18m (£12.3m) on “wipe-related equipment problems” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/15/nyregion/the-wet-wipes-box-says-flush-but-the-new-york-city-sewer-system-says-dont.html>
 in the past five years.


In Australia this summer, the consumer advocacy group Choice warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/15/wet-wipes-marked-as-flushable-still-pose-blockage-threat-research-finds>
 – after extensive testing – that disposable wipes marketed as “flushable” 
still posed an expensive blockage threat to household plumbing.

The submission of the letter to trading standards is an unprecedented action 
by water companies to press for change and follows campaigning by charities 
such as the Marine Conservation Society (MCS). The number of wet wipes washing 
up on beaches in the UK increased by more than 50% in 2014, said the charity, 
which is also drumming up support for its campaign through anonline petition 
<https://www.mcsuk.org/forms/wetwipes.php>.

“When we talk to people about the campaign, they are genuinely shocked that 
something which could clog up their pipes and drains is being labelled as 
flushable,” said Dr Laura Foster, head of pollution at the MCS. “Harm is caused 
as these products contain plastics or other non-biodegradable materials. We 
advise people only to flush the three Ps: pee, poo and paper.”


The MCS will forward the petition to Trading Standards shortly, providing 
further evidence that there is customer confusion on labelling and that 
flushable should mean a product is safe to flush and does not cause harm to the 
marine environment.

• This article was amended on 26 October 2016 to correct the name of the 
Chartered Trading Standards Institute
 