
Members of Italy’s populist Five Star Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/five-star-movement> (M5S) have voted 
overwhelmingly to sever ties with Nigel Farage and his MEPs in the European 
parliament, raising the prospect of a Ukip losing some of its EU funding.


Almost 80% of M5S’s 40,000 members voted to join the Alliance of Liberals and 
Democrats for Europe (ALDE), the liberal bloc led by the former Belgian prime 
minister and Brexit negotiator Guy Verhofstadt. Only 16% voted to stay in the 
Farage-led Eurosceptic group, known as theEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> of Freedom and Direct Democracy 
(EFDD).

Farage scorned Grillo’s attempts to leave, accusing the comedian and M5S 
founder of seeking to join the “Euro-fanatic establishment”. Grillo struck a 
more friendly tone, wishing Farage all the best as a possibleBritish ambassador 
to the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/boris-johnson-faces-mps-over-farage-trump-and-climate-change>
, an idea floated by Donald Trump to the consternation of the British 
government.

Has Beppe Grillo left Farage for a marriage of convenience?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/has-beppe-grillo-dumped-farage-for-marriage-convenience-ukip-five-star-movement>
His good humour, however, did not last long. The Italian MEPs’ plan collapsed 
on Monday evening, when Verhofstadt’s group rejected an alliance with M5S.

According to an EFDD spokesman, M5S’s 17 MEPs remain part of the group and 
have made no formal application to leave, but the large vote in favour of 
abandoning Ukip will put huge pressure on them to quit the EFDD, which prides 
itself on giving people a say.

If M5S MEPs follow the wishes of their members, Farage’s group will be left 
hanging by a thread. The EFDD had 44 MEPs from eight countries before Monday’s 
vote, but most were from Ukip or M5S. France, the Czech Republic, Germany, 
Lithuania, Poland and Sweden provided a handful of members to make up the 
numbers and meet EU requirements for a quarter of member states to be 
represented.

Without the Italians, it would only take the departure of one non-British MEP 
or three Ukip MEPs for Farage’s group to collapse. Their departure would also 
put the EEDD and Ukip’s EU funding at risk. The European parliament has eight 
political groups, which shared €61m (£53m) in funding in 2015. Money is closely 
tied to group size, so losing MEPs means a reduction in grants.

The collapse of the deal with Verhofstadt’s group potentially leaves M5S’s 17 
MEPs without a home in the European parliament, reducing their access to EU 
funds too.

The The prospect of a new alliance for M5S unravelled on Monday afternoon as 
ALDE MEPs from northern European countries lined up to denounce a potential 
merger. A European parliament source said “overwhelming opposition” from ALDE 
MEPs had forced Verhofstadt to take the idea off the table, a damaging setback 
as he runs for president of the European parliament.

Verhofstadt’s previous criticism of Grillo also came back to haunt him. In 
2014 he said it would be impossible for “any responsible pro-European group to 
take the M5S on board”.

Italy's Five Star Movement part of growing club of Putin sympathisers in west
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/five-star-movement-beppe-grillo-putin-supporters-west>
In a statement released on Monday evening Verhofstadt said: “There is 
insufficient common ground to proceed with the request of the Five Star 
Movement to join the ALDE Group. There remain fundamental differences on key 
European issues.”


Urmas Paet, an liberal Estonian MEP, said he had opposed the merger since the 
surprise deal emerged over the weekend. “The main reason is that ALDE has been 
one of the most pro-European groups and Five Star has been one of the most 
anti-European.”

He said he had been surprised by M5S’s desire to join ALDE, given major 
differences in their positions on Brexit, the eurozone andEU foreign policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/five-star-movement-beppe-grillo-putin-supporters-west>
. Some of Grillo’s closest allies have called for the EU to drop sanctions 
against Russia, while Verhofstadt is one of the bloc’s strongest critics of 
Vladimir Putin. “It has not been handled well,” Paet said, adding that he had 
been disappointed in the lack of consultation within the liberal group.

Grillo’s party has also praised the UK’s vote to leave the EU as a lesson in 
democracy, while the liberals are among the staunchest defenders of the single 
market. Verhofstadt has led calls for a eurozone finance minister and treasury, 
while M5S has been a strong critic of the single currency.

Merging with M5S was attractive to Verhofstadt , however, because it weakened 
the Eurosceptics while making ALDE the third-largest group in the European 
parliament.

Doubts among liberal MEPs were likely to have been intensified by a letter 
from Grillo to Farage in which he said together the two leaders could “change 
the world” despite his members’ decision to abandon their grouping.

Farage and Grillo joined forces in 2014 to create the EFDD on a platform 
attacking the creation of “a single centralised European superstate”.

Grillo, however, wrote in his blog at the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/08/five-star-founder-beppe-grillo-calls-for-vote-on-quitting-farage-bloc>
 that he wanted M5S to find a new grouping because it no longer shared common 
goals with Ukip.

The EFDD group said Farage had sent a prophetic text message to Grillo on 
Sunday, which said it would be illogical for M5S to join ALDE. “They loathe 
direct democracy. You may not be there for long,” he said.

On Monday Farage said: “I didn’t expect to be proved right so quickly.”








 