
James O’Mahoney opens the door to the Santa Barbara Surfing Museum 
<http://www.sbsurfingmuseum.com/index.html> wearing a dazzling blue Hawaiian 
shirt. Although the word “museum” might be stretching it somewhat, we are 
standing in a room filled with an eccentric collection of surfboards.

O’Mahoney bought his first board 22 years ago and has never looked back. His 
favourite is a replica of the one used by Colonel Kilgore’s men inApocalypse Now
. The walls are lined with cases displaying memorabilia, including the St 
Christopher’s Medal worn by Elvis Presley inJailhouse Rock and the ukulele 
played by Marilyn Monroe inSome Like It Hot.

We are downtown, in a part of Santa Barbara recently dubbed the “Funk Zone”: a 
12-block area set back from the waterfront and filled with new restaurants, 
galleries, pop-up shops and craft breweries. O’Mahoney compares it to 
“Greenwich Village in the 60s”.

Really?

“Yeah,” he says. “All the artists are coming to this part of town and there’s 
the same kind of atmosphere, where anything goes.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsanta-barbara-west-coast-california-holidays-funk-zone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446052630469%2Ff89d12f6-a6a5-413e-ad3c-b8349032a896-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uncovering%20Cali%20cool%20in%20Santa%20Barbara's%20Funk%20Zone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsanta-barbara-west-coast-california-holidays-funk-zone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uncovering%20Cali%20cool%20in%20Santa%20Barbara%27s%20Funk%20Zone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsanta-barbara-west-coast-california-holidays-funk-zone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446052630469%2Ff89d12f6-a6a5-413e-ad3c-b8349032a896-2060x1236.jpeg>
 String along … Santa Barbara Surfing Museum’s ukulele collection, including 
one played by Marilyn Monroe in ‘Some Like It Hot’. Photograph: Alamy 
Before arriving here, I associated this Californian coastal town with a naff 
1980s soap, all big hair and heightened emotions. Then, when the filmSideways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/may/20/dvdreviews> came out in 2004, the 
surrounding wine county saw an upsurge of visitors wanting to check out the 
shooting locations and taste some of the region’s finest pinot noir.

There aren’t many things I’d change about the Funk Zone. Apart from its name

Locally, it is renowned for being the millionaires’ residential area of choice 
– Oprah Winfrey lives in nearby Montecito and the director Nancy Meyers makes 
many of her movies here (the light-soaked, open-plan bakery run by Meryl Streep 
inIt’s Complicated  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jan/07/its-complicated-review>is 
situated in the town). Over the years, Santa Barbara has gained a reputation as 
a wealthy, nice, civilised, possibly slightly stodgy kind of place where people 
wear floaty linen and drink San Pellegrino. But now, thanks to the Funk Zone, 
Santa Barbara is becoming cool.

Of course, it’s a terrible name. Some say it was the brainchild of a local 
politician. Others insist on a more romantic explanation and say it dates from 
the time, several decades ago, when this part of town was filled with 
warehouses where fish would be gutted and where you’d take your surfboard to be 
waxed. The air smelt “funky”, hence the gradual evolution into the Funk Zone.

Whatever the source, the crowd is distinctly hipster. There are bearded types 
in rolled-up jeans serving artisanal pizza atLucky Penny 
<http://www.luckypennysb.com/about/>, so-called because its facade is entirely 
covered by a shimmering mosaic of copper pennies. Atthe Lark 
<http://www.thelarksb.com/>, a buzzy restaurant housed in a former fish market, 
there are delicious cocktails made with locally sourced jam on the menu (try 
the punchy Star ghost chilli vodka with plum jam).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsanta-barbara-west-coast-california-holidays-funk-zone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446549744215%2F23bf88cb-2c71-409a-9234-53b21ee99e53-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uncovering%20Cali%20cool%20in%20Santa%20Barbara's%20Funk%20Zone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsanta-barbara-west-coast-california-holidays-funk-zone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uncovering%20Cali%20cool%20in%20Santa%20Barbara%27s%20Funk%20Zone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsanta-barbara-west-coast-california-holidays-funk-zone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446549744215%2F23bf88cb-2c71-409a-9234-53b21ee99e53-2060x1236.jpeg>
 California vibe: The Oreana Winery tasting room in The Funk Zone. Photograph: 
Alamy 
There are artists in black T-shirts hanging out in studios in converted 
warehouses, the walls alive with bright swirls of graffiti. Often, these 
studios operate an open-door policy and you can wander in to look around.
Gallerie Silo <http://galleriesilo.com/index.php/blog/>, for instance, is 
located in a former grain silo for the Weber Bread Company and is home to the 
artist Michel Armour, who has opened the ground floor as an exhibition space 
for his work.

It is a democratic ethos that extends to the accommodation. For years, Santa 
Barbara hotels were at the higher end of the price scale. But theWayfarer 
<http://www.pacificahotels.com/thewayfarer>, a chic, contemporary hostel that 
opened in the Funk Zone last year, offers both private and shared 
accommodation, complete with a heated outdoor swimming pool, library and 
on-site laundry. I stayed in the Harbor View Inn, on the beachfront, which has 
a wide range of rooms.

On the horizon, seagulls are circling a white sailboat. Behind me, early 
evening joggers are running along the beach, the sand lined by the lengthening 
shadows of tall palm trees. As the sun sets on another dazzling September day, 
I begin to suspect that Santa Barbara itself is capable of providing all the 
necessary buoyancy for a spot of life rehab.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsanta-barbara-west-coast-california-holidays-funk-zone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446053073135%2Fd57f25d7-dafc-418c-b623-6b9ea704076f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Uncovering%20Cali%20cool%20in%20Santa%20Barbara's%20Funk%20Zone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsanta-barbara-west-coast-california-holidays-funk-zone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Uncovering%20Cali%20cool%20in%20Santa%20Barbara%27s%20Funk%20Zone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fnov%2F01%2Fsanta-barbara-west-coast-california-holidays-funk-zone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F28%2F1446053073135%2Fd57f25d7-dafc-418c-b623-6b9ea704076f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘I begin to suspect Santa Barbara can provide a spot of life rehab.’ Above, 
Stearns Wharf. Photograph: Getty 
The wine helps, too. There are 20 tasting rooms clustered in the Funk Zone so 
that walking between them is easy: theSanta Barbara Urban Wine Trail 
<http://www.urbanwinetrailsb.com/> provides a useful map and suggested 
itinerary.

At the Santa Barbara Wine Collective 
<http://www.santabarbarawinecollective.com/>, I sit at the bar and try the 
fruity shiraz and the smooth, full-bodied pinot noir. There is live music 
provided by a singer and a guitar player on stage and I am surrounded on all 
sides by fellow wine-tasters. It’s a sociable, fun, easy atmosphere. In fact, 
there aren’t many things I’d change about the Funk Zone other than its name.

“Well,” says James O’Mahoney when I ask him about it, “it’s OK. We’ve gotten 
to live with it.”

Essentials

Santa Barbara is a 90-minute drive from Los Angeles (flights from £564 with 
American Airlines), or fly to Santa Barbara via Phoenix from £612, including 
stopover on the return leg (aa.com 
<http://www.aa.com/international/internationalSplashAccess.do?countryCodeForIP=GB>
, 0844 499 7300). Dorm rooms at the Wayfarer start from £32 a night, private 
rooms from £110 (pacificahotels.com/thewayfarer 
<http://www.pacificahotels.com/thewayfarer>). At the Harbor View Inn (
harborviewinnsb.com <http://www.harborviewinnsb.com/>) rooms cost from £175 a 
night
 