
Some years ago, my family and I paid a visit to the Rainbow Bridge national 
monument in Utah. It’s a natural stone arch, roughly the same height as the 
Statue of Liberty, and so remote that it wasn’t located by white people until 
1909. It used to require a desert hike of several days to get to the bridge, 
but ever since the dam turned the Glen Canyon into Lake Powell, it’s only a 
two-mile stroll from a convenient landing dock. When we arrived, no one was 
around, apart from a park ranger stationed on the path, waiting for us, ready 
to answer any questions we might have, and to ask us to refrain from walking 
under the arch, because it is a site of tremendous religious significance for 
several Native American tribes.

This federal employee standing in the middle of the desert – engaging, 
articulate, genial – seemed as much a monument as the bridge itself. I don’t 
think I’ve ever met anyone who enjoyed his job so much. We took turns posing 
for photographs wearing his hat.

The photographers came first, dragging their heavy, wet-plate cameras into the 
wilderness

For more than a century, national parks have been the places where Americans 
come to terms with the immensity of their own landscape, and the juxtaposition 
is immediately jarring: you find yourself viewing indescribable majesty through 
the windscreen of the car you drive to work in.

America’s National Park Service <https://www.nps.gov/index.htm> has its 
origins in a forward-thinking, 19th-century effort to save the nation’s 
spectacular wilderness from exploitation by commercial interests – basically 
from what had already happened to Niagara Falls, a natural wonder turned 
tourist trap. In 1864, Abraham Lincoln approved the Yosemite Grant, ceding the 
Yosemite Valley to the state of California for conservation. In 1872, 
Yellowstone became America’s first national park, and in 1916 the National Park 
Service was created and charged with preserving the lands it managed, while 
also making them accessible to the public.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Funconquerable-majesty-americas-national-parks-100-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F426e827d6d03afd5a2361c232916fd072600dbba%2F0_0_4165_3400%2F4165.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unconquerable%20majesty%3A%20how%20I%20fell%20for%20America's%20national%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Funconquerable-majesty-americas-national-parks-100-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unconquerable%20majesty%3A%20how%20I%20fell%20for%20America%27s%20national%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Funconquerable-majesty-americas-national-parks-100-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F426e827d6d03afd5a2361c232916fd072600dbba%2F0_0_4165_3400%2F4165.jpg>
 Chris, Campground Ranger, Tuolumne Meadows Campground, 2014; from the series 
Yos-E-Mite, by Michael Matthew Woodlee. Photograph: © Michael Matthew Woodlee 
In the early days the national parks, most of them in the far west, were 
pretty inaccessible. It was easier for tourists with money to get to Europe. 
The photographers came first, dragging their heavy, wet-plate cameras into the 
wilderness. The advent of the automobile changed all that; the tourists arrived 
on newly built roads, and they started taking their own pictures. Later still, 
the photographers started taking pictures of the tourists.

There’s an obvious dichotomy in these twin aims of preservation and access: 
tourists spoil things. They blot the landscape. They turn raw nature into 
something consumable. Inevitably, they leave their mark.

I found sharing the trail with strangers in flip-flops excruciating. 'Look 
out!' I wanted to shout. 'It’s a mile deep!'

Our next stop after the Rainbow Bridge was the North Rim of the Grand Canyon, 
with its pine forests and panoramic-windowed lodge. The South Rim is the more 
famous national gawping place – about 90% of canyon visitors congregate there – 
but the North Rim is still pretty crowded. One is forever ducking out of other 
people’s pictures. I suffer from acrophobia-by-proxy – I’m afraid of heights on 
behalf of others – and I found sharing the trail with strangers in flip-flops 
excruciating. “Look out!” I wanted to shout. “It’s a mile deep!”

But what the photographs collected here capture is an overwhelming sense of 
fragility. The landscape is invariably vast; the people are specks.National 
parks <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/national-parks> may be populated 
by tourists, but that does not make them tame places. Arguably this incongruity 
– unconquerable majesty, tourists in T-shirts – is the point of the National 
Park Service; to bring the one to the other. The rituals we have developed 
around our encounters with awesome spectacle may seem inadequate but, frankly, 
what else are you meant to do? You stand, you stare, you take a few pictures. 
If all else fails, you try on the ranger’s hat. He honestly doesn’t mind. It’s 
part of his job.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Funconquerable-majesty-americas-national-parks-100-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cb2ff9d19af5ae65c7aa195d6c97458f8f40d89%2F0_0_3000_2385%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unconquerable%20majesty%3A%20how%20I%20fell%20for%20America's%20national%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Funconquerable-majesty-americas-national-parks-100-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unconquerable%20majesty%3A%20how%20I%20fell%20for%20America%27s%20national%20parks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Funconquerable-majesty-americas-national-parks-100-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3cb2ff9d19af5ae65c7aa195d6c97458f8f40d89%2F0_0_3000_2385%2F3000.jpg>
 Merced River, Yosemite National Park, California, 13 August 1979, by Stephen 
Shore. Photograph: © Stephen Shore/Courtesy of 303 Gallery, New York 
• These images are taken from Picturing America’s National Parks, published 
next month by Aperture and George Eastman Museum at £35. To order a copy for 
£28, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/405383/s/picturing-america-s-national-parks/>
 or call 0330 333 6846. An accompanying exhibition runs at George Eastman 
Museum, New York, from 4 June-2 October; go toeastman.org 
<https://www.eastman.org/photography-national-parks> for details
 