
Unions in Victoria have issued a blanket ban on work at the site of an 
illegally demolishedMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> pub and demanded that 
the developer surrender the land to be used as a community asset.


The historic Corkman Irish pub in Carlton was knocked down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/18/victoria-plans-harsher-penalties-for-cowboy-developers-after-historic-pub-demolished>
 despite the developer not having demolition approval from the City of 
Melbourne and council workers issuing a stop-work order on Saturday afternoon.

They are expected to face penalties of $200,000 under planning laws and could 
face up to $1m in fines if prosecuted under multiple laws.

But the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union said the fines were 
clearly “no disincentive” to rogue developers and called for the land to be 
surrendered to the council, which could develop the site into a community asset.

Victoria plans harsher penalties for 'cowboy developers' after historic pub 
demolished
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/18/victoria-plans-harsher-penalties-for-cowboy-developers-after-historic-pub-demolished>
The union also issued a “green ban” advising all union members against working 
on the site, the first such ban to be issued in a decade.

“It doesn’t matter how big the fine is if, at the end of the day, these cowboy 
developers still profit from the vandalism of Victoria’s heritage,” said Luke 
Hilakari, secretary of the Victorian Trades Hall Council.

The 159-year-old pub was not formally heritage-listed but had been assessed by 
the Victorian government as being of heritage value and was included within a 
heritage overlay that covers most of Carlton. It was one of the oldest 
buildings in the inner-city suburb and,according to the heritage expert Dirk 
den Hartog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/18/victoria-plans-harsher-penalties-for-cowboy-developers-after-historic-pub-demolished>
, was a rare example of Georgian architecture in the city.

“The only way to permanently protect our heritage is for illegal demolition to 
amount to surrender of the site itself,” Hilakari said, adding that the site 
should remain undeveloped “as a warning to any other cowboy developers”.

Victoria’s planning minister, Richard Wynne, said he supported the work ban 
and would investigate raising the cost of fines to developers who flout 
planning regulations, including potentially introducing separate fines for 
illegally destroying a commercial building.

“We’ll work with the Victorian Building Authority and council towards a 
solution for the site,” he said. ‘While it is too early to make a ruling at 
this stage, we want to make it clear that illegal demolition won’t be 
tolerated.”

The CFMEU secretary, John Setka, also raised concerns about the safety of 
workers who carried out the demolition after the Environmental Protection 
Authorityconfirmed that the rubble contained unsecured asbestos 
<http://www.epa.vic.gov.au/about-us/news-centre/news-and-updates/news/2016/october/19/update-epa-making-enquiries-into-corkman-pub-demolition>
.

The EPA issued a notice to the site owner but the authority’s metro manager, 
Daniel Hunt, said attempts at contact had been unsuccessful. Penalties for 
illegally disposing of asbestos can reach $750,000.

The demolition is being investigated by the Victorian Building Authority, the 
City of Melbourne, Worksafe and the Department of Environment, Land, Water and 
Planning, as well as the EPA.
 