
A DODGY DOSSIER?

It should be noted that today’s explosive Fiver is unverified and potentially 
unverifiable. We have decided to publish it anyway so that Fiver readers can 
make up their own minds. Because apparently that’s a thing now.

CONFIDENTIAL/SENSITIVE SOURCE

COMPANY INTELLIGENCE REPORT 2017/043

MILK CUP: LIVERPOOL AND SOUTHAMPTON SEMI-FINAL FIRST LEG TAKING PLACE AT ST 
MARY’S. NO ONE ALL THAT EXCITED BUT NEITHER SIDE WOULD MIND REACHING THE FINAL 
IF POSSIBLE

Summary

 * Sources suggest Southampton desperate to reach final after run of results 
more gruesome and troubling than the mental image of [REDACTED – Fiver Lawyers] 
hotel room and [REDACTED – Fiver Lawyers] on the bed. 
 * Liverpool probably less bothered by result, if they’re honest. 
 * Despite the extensive cultivation of confidential data in secret dossier, 
Fiver’s grip on who is more likely to win football matches apparently remains 
shaky at best. 
Southampton’s Nathan Redmond can silence doubters in Liverpool semi-final | 
Paul Doyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/11/nathan-redmond-southampton-liverpool-efl-semi-final>
 * Southampton source confirms bear defecates in forested area, pope Catholic 
and one-legged duck swims in spherical pattern. 
 * Fiver’s usual attempt at predicting scoreline likely to be wildly 
inaccurate. 
Detail


 * Southampton, having played more games over Christmas than a Trivial Pursuit 
obsessed uncle, could do with a lift. Saints haven’t really been waiting 
particularly long for a trip to Wembley, given they won the Football League 
Trophy there in 2010, but with progression in the league this season (they have 
finished eighth, seventh and sixth in the past three seasons) looking unlikely 
they could do with something to smile about. Indeed since mid October they’ve 
been as miserable and unproductive as a January detox: only four teams – Hull, 
Swansea, Palace and Watford – have picked up fewer points in the league. 
 * “It would be nice if we could go to the final,” is hardly a chest-beating 
battle cry from Jürgen KLOPP and in truth, though sources suggest it would 
indeed be nice, the league remains not just a bigger fish to fry but a blue 
whale blocking the horizons. A trip to Old Trafford awaits at the weekend after 
this first leg, while the second leg is followed at the end of the month by 
Chelsea’s visit to Anfield. 
 * The Fiver was under the impression that Liverpool are definitely favourites 
to reach the final, given the two teams’ recent form, league position and 
players at their disposal. But: “Are we favourites against Southampton? Whoever 
says this has not a real idea about cup competitions,” said KLOPP. “If this was 
the case, then in the last few years the finals all over the world always would 
have been the same teams involved.” Some sources suggest that KLOPP may have 
confused the question “Are you favourites?” with the statement: “You are 
favourites and favourites always win.” 
• Claude PUEL has been at his blindingly-obvious best pre-match. “We have to 
try and make a strong game and get a good result to prepare well for the second 
game and still have a good possibility to qualify,” revealed the Southampton 
manager, prompting several reporters with press cards in their trilbies to dash 
to the nearest payphone. “This first game at home is very important.”

11 January 2017

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE

Join John Ashdown from 7.45pm GMT for hot MBM coverage of Southampton 2-2 
Liverpool. <https://www.theguardian.com/football/live>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“I hope to keep fighting with all my might together with people in my club, my 
teammates and fans who have always given me support” – former Japan striker 
Kazuyoshi “King Kazu” Miura, signing a new one-year deal with second-tier 
Yokohama FA, aged 49.

RECOMMENDED VIEWING

Voting on the compulsory purchase of Millwall’s land around The Den was 
postponed on Tuesday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/vote-compulsory-purchase-order-millwall-postponed-till-february>
, 24 hours before it was set to be confirmed. The decision is now due in 
February. In the meantime,we went down to hear from Lions’ fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/11/millwall-fans-voice-their-fears-around-controversial-den-plans-video>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fmillwall-fans-voice-their-fears-around-controversial-den-plans-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Millwall%20fans%20voice%20their%20fears%20around%20controversial%20Den%20plans%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fmillwall-fans-voice-their-fears-around-controversial-den-plans-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Millwall%20fans%20voice%20their%20fears%20around%20controversial%20Den%20plans%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fmillwall-fans-voice-their-fears-around-controversial-den-plans-video&media=>
Here you go 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/11/millwall-fans-voice-their-fears-around-controversial-den-plans-video>
. 
FIVER LETTERS

“Following on the inane commentary theme (Fiver letters passim), why do two 
players from the same team ‘both go for the same ball’? Where is this other 
ball they’re supposed to go for?” – Allen Farmer.


“I think ‘naturally two-footed’ sticks out as the most banal and superfluous 
of commentators’ phrases, usually deployed as an appreciation heaped on skilful 
wingers. While I’m sure some unfortunate souls who didn’t quite make it to the 
Premier League might be envious of Shaun Wright-Phillips for having a foot 
attached to both his left and right legs, for most of us being naturally 
two-footed is thede facto state of affairs” – Jack Skelly.

“‘Scoring goals for fun’ and crosses that are ‘fizzed’ in. Grrr …” – Mark 
Robinson.

“An ‘agricultural’ tackle. Never from any other sector of the economy. 
Manufacturing, perhaps? Or tourism?” – Mike Wilner.

“What exactly do you want commentators to say? ‘A passed to B’; ‘B passed to 
C’; ‘C passed to A’; ‘pass may have gone backwards’; ‘blah blah’? While I don’t 
think commentators are perfect, I would rather listen to some form of spoken 
equivalent to creative writing than the tedious sprouting of robotic Alan 
Shearer making precise and perfect (and boring) assessments on everything. What 
do you guys read for entertainment, IBM technical reference manuals?” – Graham 
Haslam.

“May I point out that ‘empty net’, ‘wicked deflection’, ‘electing to punch’ 
and crosses containing ‘whip’ as mentioned yesterday are all contained along 
with many others in 2004’s all-encompassing Football Lexicon by Leigh & 
Woodhouse, which can be ordered from all good bookshopsor here 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Football-Lexicon-David-Woodhouse/dp/0571230520>, if 
you must. I say this not only to hopefully stem the flow of further cliches in 
the letters section, but also because Woodhouse happens to be a friend of mine 
and plays in goal for my six-a-side team” – Martin Eales.

“With reference to Andy Marriott (yesterday’s letters), I once played for a 
team in Melbourne called Taxation United, formed in the offices of the 
Australian Taxation Office, for which I did not work. Taxation United gave away 
a lot of penalties” – Jason Steger.

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
prizeless letter o’the day is … Jack Skelly.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/uk?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

BITS AND BOBS

José Mourinho reckons he’s “sad and happy” about Manchester United trousering 
Everton’s £24m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/everton-morgan-schneiderlin-manchester-united-bid>
 for Morgan Schneiderlin. “I’m sad because I like him,” he mused. “Happy 
because he wants this.” The 2-0 Carling Cup semi-final first leg win over Hull 
has also prompted him to get his prawn sandwiches out. “I am sorry to say I 
think the fans have also to improve,”he blootered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/jose-mourinho-manchester-united-hull-city>
. “My invitation to the fans is don’t come to the theatre, come to play, play 
with us.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-southampton-liverpool-coca-cola-cup-dossier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7c668a777c6c36b75c82a3ee4b895973ebfbb98%2F276_220_2001_1200%2F2001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Unverified%20and%20potentially%20unverifiable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-southampton-liverpool-coca-cola-cup-dossier%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Fiver%20%7C%20Unverified%20and%20potentially%20unverifiable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fthe-fiver-southampton-liverpool-coca-cola-cup-dossier%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7c668a777c6c36b75c82a3ee4b895973ebfbb98%2F276_220_2001_1200%2F2001.jpg>
 Get a room. Photograph: Tom Purslow/Man Utd via Getty Images 
England women’s record goalscorer Kelly Smith has announced her retirement 
from football 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/england-womens-record-goalscorer-kelly-smith-retires>
, and will start coaching at Arsenal Ladies instead.

Jonathan Calleri is ready to do one from West Ham in the direction of 
Florence, Genoa or the Canaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/west-ham-jonathan-calleri-fiorentina-las-palmas>
.

Arsenal had a €40m bid for Roma defender Kostas Manolas snubbed in the summer, 
according to Mr 15% Ioannis Evangelopoulos. “Roma’s demands were higher than 
the English club were willing to go,” he sighed.

Birmingham are closing on West Brom’s Craig Gardner and Granada’s £2m Rene 
Krhin; £10m QPR ace Sandro has joined Antalyaspor on a free; and Bournemouth 
want Chelsea’s PO’JT on loan.

Wales defender Neil Taylor has sustained cheekbone-crack in training, and will 
undergo surgery.

Bayer Leverkusen’s Javier Hernández denies having used a hypnotist to try and 
end his goal drought. “I’ve never seen a hypnotist,” he clucked like a chicken. 
“I don’t need any hypnotist to be what I am.”

And the original Ronaldo has shrugged off Michael Owen’s bantz about his 
girth. “’I am shocked by how much importance my weight is given in the world we 
live in,” he sighed. “I don’t know why it is so important, to be honest.”


STILL WANT MORE?

Transfer window watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
! Get all the latest news and moves from the Premier League, La Liga, Serie A, 
Bundesliga and Ligue 1. And you can alsosign up to get updates via FaceSpace 
MessageApp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/insideguardian/2017/jan/06/transfer-window-watch-keep-up-with-the-latest-moves-with-our-chatbot>
, or whatever.

Which footballer has scored the most goals for a single club? The Knowledge 
dusts off its record books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/which-footballer-has-scored-the-most-goals-for-a-single-club-the-knowledge>
.

Marina Hyde on Gianni’s World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/11/gianni-infantino-world-cup-oscars-fifa>
.

Paul Doyle on Nathan Redmond and Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/11/nathan-redmond-southampton-liverpool-efl-semi-final>
.

Nick Ames on Guinea-Bissau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/11/guinnea-bissau-africa-cup-of-nations>
, intrepid outsiders about to make Afcon history.

Kristan Heneage on David Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/11/david-beckham-la-galaxy-mls>
, a decade after his move to MLS.

Glenn Billingham on a big-boned Luis Suárez’s first season in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/these-football-times/2017/jan/11/luis-suarez-groningen-ajax-barcelona-liverpool>
.

Old, but gold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2015/mar/27/memory-lane-awkward-footballer-photos>
.

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. And Instachat, too 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>!


THE FIVER CAN HAPPILY OFFER A SIXTH MOVEMENT
 