
DELE’S SWANS DIVE

Perhaps because it led to only one of the five goals Tottenham Hotspur scored 
past the training cones of Swansea City on Saturday, the preposterous dive with 
which Dele Alli gulled referee Jon Moss at White Hart Lane on Saturday was 
greeted more with amusement than the kind of sanctimonious, spittle-flecked 
outrage and indignation more usually reserved for such antics. Previously the 
sole domain of dirty, cheating foreigners, Alli’s perfectly executed forward 
two-and-one-half somersault with pike is the kind of duplicitous behaviour that 
has only in recent years been adopted by formerly upstanding (in every sense of 
the word) Englishmen. Indeed, former Manchester City legend Franny Lee is 
widely credited with leading the vanguard for homegrown players as recently as 
the 1960s, about 30 years before the German Jürgen Klinsmann, another Tottenham 
Hotspur player, was widely derided for officially introducing this scurrilous 
practice to the English game.

Of course Alli’s manager, Mauricio Pochettino, has long had first-hand 
experience of gravitationally challenged Englishmen, having been the hapless 
Argentinian defender over whose wafting, outstretched leg Michael Owen famously 
swan-dived to earn the penalty that consigned the South American side to defeat 
in the group stages of the 2002 World Cup. “Don’t believe that English football 
is fair play always because Owen jumped like he was in a swimming pool,” he 
said. “Come on. I didn’t touch him. I promise you. It’s true. I think today 
football is more global. England is more like European football. Now we have 
the influence of the Latin people that try to cheat always. Maybe you were more 
pure 20, 25, 30 years ago. Now you are like us.” It’s a charitable view that 
doesn’t stand up to much scrutiny as the study of ye olde English footie 
footage confirms, but it’s nice of you to say so Mauricio.

While Swansea boss Bob Bradley described the decision to award Spurs a penalty 
“a game-changer”, presumably in so far as it delayed the inevitable opening of 
the floodgates by a mere six minutes, former referee Howard Webb has said Alli 
is in danger of earning himself a bad reputation as a serial diver, like Lee, 
Owen, $tevie Mbe, Ashley Young and various other foreigners before him. “It was 
a dive and Dele Alli needs to be careful he doesn’t get a reputation,” Webb 
said. “Although referees will go into the game trying to be neutral, you can’t 
unsee what you have previously seen a player do, so these things subconsciously 
affect the way referees view him.” Webb is correct in so far as that what has 
been seen cannot be unseen … a sentiment with which angry Swans fans who’ve 
been watching their side’s defending in recent matches will wholeheartedly 
agree.

LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE TONIGHT

Follow the FA Cup third-round draw with Jacob Steinberg from 7pm before he 
jumps into his MBM hot-seat to bring you live coverage of Middlesbrough 1-1 
Hull at 8pm. <https://www.theguardian.com/football>

QUOTE OF THE DAY

“We are fighting for justice. We have all been through it and we just want 
justice” – former Crewe player Andy Woodward speaks at the launch of The 
Offside Trust, an independent organisation that will support victims of sexual 
abuse in sport. Woodward called on the English Football League, Football 
Association, Premier League, Professional Footballers’ Association and 
commercial organisations that profit from the game to donate money to the cause.

FIVER LETTERS

“I read the Fiver daily and gotta’ say I really enjoy it. The letters, though, 
are a mystery to me; I read them and while I often understand the jokes, I 
cannot muster the ability to write any humor like that. As a semi-retired 
American living in Spain, it’s not simply ‘dumb ‘murican doesn’t chuff our 
jolly old humor’ or whatever you Brits would say. (‘Chuff’ is a word, isn’t it? 
Maybe it’s Scottish, I dunno.) Anyway, I’ve got a wide assortment of penis size 
jokes (some don’t even involve Donald Trump) or mom jokes that I’d like to 
submit, but I also don’t want to be blacklisted for being too crass. Is that 
possible? Being too crass, I mean? Oh, by the way, your coverage of the Seattle 
Sounders is terrible. We’re in a Cup final next weekend, for Pete’s sake, get 
on our level, Fiver” – Paul Cox.

“I was going to read Ben Graham’s letter (Friday’s Fiver) all the way to the 
end, but couldn’t be bothered” – Colum Farrelly.

“OK Ben Graham, I’ll take the bait, along with my 1,056 fellow readers. The 
thing that fills me with ennui is the gratuitous attempt to provoke a pedant 
frenzy with an archly knowing controversial use of the word ‘disinterested’. 
Yes, yes, I know it has been used to mean ‘uninterested’ since Adam failed to 
be entertained by Eve’s fruit shopping anecdotes, but you know that we’re all 
going to find it offensive and not be slow to point it out. Satisfied?” – Dale 
Sellers (and 1,057 others).

• Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com 
<mailto:the.boss@theguardian.com>. And if you’ve nothing better to do you can 
alsotweet The Fiver <https://twitter.com/thefiver>. Today’s winner of our 
prizeless letter o’the day is … Paul Cox.

SUPPORT THE GUARDIAN

Producing the Guardian’s thoughtful, in-depth journalism – the stuff not 
normally found in this email, obviously – is expensive, but supporting us 
isn’t. If you value our journalism, please support us by making aone-off 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/?INTCMP=co_uk_Fiver_Fiver_copy> or 
recurring contribution 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=mem_editorial_Fiver_copy>
.

RECOMMENDED LISTENING
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fupstanding-englishmen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad77d6db83aa8a42952901ed6f650f2099e86e7d%2F0_300_5254_3153%2F5254.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Upstanding%20Englishmen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fupstanding-englishmen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Upstanding%20Englishmen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fupstanding-englishmen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad77d6db83aa8a42952901ed6f650f2099e86e7d%2F0_300_5254_3153%2F5254.jpg>
 AC Jimbo and co. Photograph: James Drew Turner for the Guardian 
AC Jimbo is still suffering from sore throat-knack but it didn’t stop him from 
hostingthe latest thrilling instalment of Football Weekly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/series/footballweekly>.

BITS AND BOBS

Zlatan Ibrahimovic has denied deliberately trying to boot Séamus Coleman in 
the noggin claiming, much like an annoying seven-year-old braggart,that he 
could have made the Everton defender “fall asleep” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/manchester-united-zlatan-ibrahimovic-denies-kick-seamus-coleman>
 if it had been on purpose.

Manchester City’s Sergio Agüero has been slapped with a four-match ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/fa-bans-manchester-city-sergio-aguero-fernandinho-chelsea>
 after turning himself into a human torpedo and firing himself into Chelsea’s 
David Luiz at the weekend. Meanwhile, Fernandinho has been banned for three 
games for introducing a hand to Cesc Fàbregas’s mush.


Some incredibly enlightened Russian MPs have asked the state communications 
oversight agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/russian-mps-accuse-fifa-17-video-game-of-gay-propaganda>
 to take action against the FIFA 17 video game for violating the country’s law 
against gay propaganda by supporting the Premier League’s rainbow laces 
campaign.


Po’ Uncle Sepp has lost his appeal against his six-year ban from football. “I 
look back with gratitude to all the years in which I was able torealise my 
ideals for football <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2022>and 
serve Fifa,”he sniffed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/05/sepp-blatter-loses-appeal-six-year-ban-fifa-football>
.

Preston will refund fans who travelled to Hillsborough to watch grown men 
Jermaine Beckford and Eoin Doyle get sent off for fighting each other during 
their 2-1 loss. The money will come direct from the fines the players have been 
ordered to pay.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fupstanding-englishmen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb557a3d973e9f5297b7e20bdee9b64211d20df2a%2F0_232_2349_1409%2F2349.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Upstanding%20Englishmen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fupstanding-englishmen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Upstanding%20Englishmen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fupstanding-englishmen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb557a3d973e9f5297b7e20bdee9b64211d20df2a%2F0_232_2349_1409%2F2349.jpg>
 Grown men, earlier. Photograph: Alex Dodd - CameraSport/CameraSport via Getty 
Images 
And former Newcastle player Emre has appeared out of nowhere to launch some 
invective the way of Sam Allardyce and a soft, cohesive substance. “He was a 
terrible coach – his relationships, innuendo, the way he would chew his gum. I 
had nothing to hide, but he always had secretive walls around him and huge gum 
that he was chewing constantly,” he roared.

STILL WANT MORE?

It’s Monday. It’s ten talking points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/05/premier-league-10-talking-points-liverpool-joel-matip-sunderland-burnley>
 from the weekend’s Premier League action.

It’s Monday. It’s Sid Lowe’s La Liga roundup, with the focus on plucky little 
Barcelona and Real Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/05/sergio-ramos-barcelona-real-madrid-clasico-la-liga-title>
.

It’s Monday. It’s Paolo Bandini’s Serie A wrap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/05/lazio-roma-derby-serie-a>
 on how the Rome derby descended into disrepute.

It’s Monday. It’s Sean Ingle’s column on how brainy folk in white coats might 
be able to measure football IQ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/dec/04/barcelona-andres-iniesta-scope-embrace-brain-game-real-madrid>
.

It’s Monday. Um. 

It’s Monday. Ah.

It’s Monday. It’s Raphael Honigstein’s Bundesliga blog – appearing here soon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/raphaelhonigstein>. 

Oh, and if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace
 <https://www.facebook.com/guardianfootball>. AND INSTACHAT, TOO! 
<https://www.instagram.com/guardian_sport/>


LEE TRUNDLE: STILL GOT IT 
<https://twitter.com/JordanWebber96/status/805471467328696320>

 