
Tens of thousands of banking jobs could be lost to continental Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> from next year if ministers do 
not agree a transitional deal on single market access with the EU, a Lords 
report on financial services after Brexit is expected to warn.

UK naive to expect easy ride in Brexit trade talks, says Lords report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/uk-naive-to-expect-easy-ride-in-trade-talks-says-lords-report>
Peers on the committee, due to report on Thursday, have been struck by the 
urgent need for financial institutions to make decisions on their location 
because they cannot wait until the end of Brexit negotiations in 2019 to find 
out if they can trade in the single market from London.
Graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-14T14:32:57/embed.html>
The committee has been given a range of estimates of the likely job losses 
across the financial services sector including a claim from Ernst and Young, 
commissioned by the London Stock Exchange, that 200,000 UK jobs are at stake.

The Brexit committee, one of several that has begun looking at the impact of 
the UK’s planned departure from the EU, has been warned that big banks will 
start making decisions next year, partly because the relevant financial 
arrangements take a year to unwind.

Banks believe they need clarity on the UK’s trading relationship with the 
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> long before the end of 
article 50 negotiations are due to be completed by the spring of 2019. They 
fear it could be necessary to relocate from London as soon as possible without 
transitional arrangements to ensure access to the single market post-Brexit.

It is already becoming clear that a dividing line is developing between those 
ministers who think the complexity of the negotiations mean it is not possible 
to negotiate a new trading relationship with the EU by autumn 2018, requiring a 
transitional agreement, and those who think it is feasible simply to leave the 
EU and then trade with the EU on World Trade Organization terms.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fhammond-favours-transitional-deal-with-eu-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hammond%20favours%20transitional%20deal%20with%20EU%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fhammond-favours-transitional-deal-with-eu-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hammond%20favours%20transitional%20deal%20with%20EU%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fhammond-favours-transitional-deal-with-eu-video&media=>
Hammond favours transitional deal with EU – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/12/hammond-favours-transitional-deal-with-eu-video>
Philip Hammond, the chancellor, became the clearest cabinet exponent of a 
transitional agreement on Monday, saying that “thoughtful politicians” 
increasingly agreed on its importance. However, other ministers, such as the 
Brexit secretary, David Davis, have said they are more relaxed about the issue.

“Passporting” rules currently allow UK-registered financial services firms to 
sell their products and services throughout the EU without needing to set up a 
local subsidiary, as well as allowing European banks and fund managers to work 
freely in London.

Much of the evidence from financial firms heard by the Lords committee called 
for the certainty of transitional trading arrangements between the UK and EU to 
allow complex negotiations be carried out.

The Association of British Insurers told peers that an early agreement on a 
transitional phase was needed since this would “provide the option for the 
firms most affected byBrexit not to <http://operations.is/> take swift 
decisions in 2017 on scaling back”.

Philip Hammond says post-Brexit transitional deal will be needed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
This would require either the UK or the financial services sector to continue 
paying contributions to the EU in return for access to the single market. 
Senior Tories, including the former Cabinet Office minister Oliver Letwin, have 
acknowledged that the insurance retail industry is a special case and fees will 
have to be paid into the EU if firms are to be allowed to provide services.

Committee members have also been struck by warnings from the London Stock 
Exchange Group chief executive, Xavier Rolet, that the article 50 negotiating 
process would make it hard to secure the smooth transition that he wanted.
Graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-14T15:07:08/embed.html>
Rolet told the inquiry: “Article 50 was designed with exactly the opposite set 
of objectives in mind; that is, to impose and enforce such a reduced timeline 
to raise the cost of exiting the EU and make it punitive, or to create a level 
of uncertainty. This is our number one concern.

“If our customers are faced with an uncertain outcome within, say, the next 
two-and-a-half years, for the protection of their own customers and 
shareholders they are likely to have to start today to think, plan and execute 
alternative arrangements.

“The real difficulty is that for most financial securities and licences, the 
delays in securing a licence easily exceed a year; 18 to 24 months is the norm, 
particularly since in most cases the regulatory environment in Europe is less 
global, sophisticated and deep than it is in the UK. So the ability to process 
multiple applications takes time.

“It is about ensuring that our customers will not be in a situation in the 
next two years where all of a sudden they have large amounts of risk or 
activities that are non-compliant.”

The Lords report on financial services is the fourth and probably the most 
important in a series of agenda-shaping reports from peers that will inform the 
first phase of the detailed debate on Brexit.

Pressure is mounting among business leaders for more clarity from the 
government on how much time they may have to adjust to a new trade regime, with 
many warning that a transition phase is only useful if the long-term policy 
direction is clear.

Views are mixed in the City on the likely impact of a hard Brexit. One senior 
commercial banker described the loss of passporting rights as an “embuggerance” 
– British military slang for an obstacle in the way of progress – rather than a 
catastrophe and was more worried about future access to skilled European 
employees. Some in fund management and insurance are more concerned, while 
others predict some loss of clearing jobs to rival European centres is 
inevitable.

At a meeting between car manufacturers and Davis on Monday, attendees were 
said to be heartened that the government increasingly understood the need for 
them to retain access to European markets but were worried there was little 
plan for achieving this.

Instead, many are now approaching the point where they are having to 
contemplate the worst-case scenario where departure from the customs union 
devastates their complex cross-border supply chains.

“New products can take years to develop, so we need to know soon how we are 
going to get them to market,” said one industrialist present at the automotive 
summit in London, who was sceptical of the “vague assurances” already provided 
to manufacturers such as Nissan.

They also warned Davis that their factories often “just have a few hours of 
parts” stored in inventory due to just-in-time supply chains, so new paperwork 
hurdles and tariffs would be devastating.

Similarly, in the City, bankers report that almost every firm they know is 
making contingency plans, with varying degrees of irreversibility. There is 
growing scepticism that “passporting” rights for financial services products 
can be protected.

“It looks increasingly like a hard Brexit is inevitable,” one leading UK 
commercial banker told journalists at a private lunch on Monday. “Unless they 
can find a way to avoid this, a transition phase might only delay the pain.”
 