
The United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> security 
council has adopted a landmark resolution demanding a halt to all Israeli 
settlement in the occupied territories after Barack Obama’s administration 
refused to veto the resolution.

A White House official said Obama had taken the decision to abstain in the 
absence of any meaningful peace process.

The resolution passed by a 14-0 vote on Friday night. Loud applause was heard 
in the packed chamber when the US ambassador, Samantha Power, abstained.

All remaining members of the security council, including the UK, voted in 
support. Egypt, which had drafted the resolution and had been briefly persuaded 
byIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> to postpone the vote, also 
backed the move.

Friday’s vote was scheduled at the request of four countries – New Zealand, 
Malaysia, Senegal and Venezuela – who stepped in to push for action a day after 
Egypt put the draft resolution on hold.

Israel recalled its ambassadors to New Zealand and Senegal in protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/24/israeli-ambassador-to-new-zealand-recalled-in-protest-at-un-vote-role>
 on Saturday.

Israeli official accuses Barack Obama of 'shameful move at UN'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/israeli-official-accuses-barack-obama-shameful-move-un>
Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas’s office said the vote was “a big blow” to 
Israeli policy and a show of “strong support for the two-state solution”.

The resolution says Israel’s settlements on Palestinian territory occupied 
since 1967, including East Jerusalem, have “no legal validity” and demands a 
halt to “all Israeli settlement activities,” saying this “is essential for 
salvaging the two-state solution”.


The resolution reiterated that Israeli settlement was a “flagrant violation” 
of international law.

The United States vetoed a similar resolution in 2011, which was the sole veto 
cast by the Obama administration at the security council.

The abstention decision underlined the tension between Obama and the Israeli 
prime minister,Benjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu>, who had made furious 
efforts to prevent such a move.

White House rails against Israel's settlement project in West Bank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/white-house-criticizes-israel-settlement-west-bank>
A resolution requires nine votes in favour and no vetoes by the United States, 
France, Russia, Britain or China in order to be adopted. Among those who 
welcomed the resolution was UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon.

“The secretary general takes this opportunity to encourage Israeli and 
Palestinian leaders to work with the international community to create a 
conducive environment for a return to meaningful negotiations,” said his 
spokesman, Stephane Dujarric.

Explaining the US abstention, Power said the Israeli settlement “seriously 
undermines Israel’s security”, adding : “The United States has been sending a 
message that the settlements must stop privately and publicly for nearly five 
decades.”


Power said the US did not veto the resolution because the Obama administration 
believed it reflected the state of affairs regarding settlement and remained 
consistent with US policy.

“One cannot simultaneously champion expanding Israeli settlements and champion 
a viable two-state solution that would end the conflict. One had to make a 
choice between settlements and separation,” Power said.


The US decision to abstain was immediately condemned by Netanyahu’s office as 
“shameful” which pointedly referred to Israel’s expectation of working more 
closely with Donald Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fus-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c60781b2f9df0fa4aaf71380e39705635ba8995%2F0_412_6181_3709%2F6181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20abstention%20allows%20UN%20to%20demand%20end%20to%20Israeli%20settlements&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fus-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20abstention%20allows%20UN%20to%20demand%20end%20to%20Israeli%20settlements&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fus-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c60781b2f9df0fa4aaf71380e39705635ba8995%2F0_412_6181_3709%2F6181.jpg>
 The Israeli ambassador to the UN, Danny Danon, addresses the security council. 
Photograph: A Jones/Pacific/Barcroft Images 
“Israel rejects this shameful anti-Israel resolution at the UN and will not 
abide by its terms,” a statement from Netanyahu’s office said. “The Obama 
administration not only failed to protect Israel against this gang-up at the 
UN, it colluded with it behind the scenes,.

“Israel looks forward to working with president-elect Trump and with all our 
friends in Congress, Republicans and Democrats alike, to negate the harmful 
effects of this absurd resolution.”

The Israeli ambassador to the UN, Danny Danon, bluntly told the council that 
the resolution would not have the hoped-for impact of spurring peace efforts.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fisrael-ambassador-to-un-rejects-shameful-resolution-to-halt-israeli-settlements-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Israel's%20ambassador%20to%20UN%20rejects%20'shameful'%20resolution%20to%20halt%20Israeli%20settlements%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fisrael-ambassador-to-un-rejects-shameful-resolution-to-halt-israeli-settlements-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Israel%27s%20ambassador%20to%20UN%20rejects%20%27shameful%27%20resolution%20to%20halt%20Israeli%20settlements%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fisrael-ambassador-to-un-rejects-shameful-resolution-to-halt-israeli-settlements-video&media=>
Israel’s ambassador to UN rejects ‘shameful’ resolution to halt Israeli 
settlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/24/israel-ambassador-to-un-rejects-shameful-resolution-to-halt-israeli-settlements-video>
“By voting yes in favour of this resolution, you have in fact voted no. You 
voted no to negotiation, you voted no to progress and a chance for better lives 
for Israelis and Palestinians, and you voted no to the possibility of peace,” 
Danon told the council.

The vote will, however, be seen as a major defeat for Netanyahu, who has long 
had a difficult relationship with the Obama administration.


Netanyahu had tried to prevent the vote by appealing to Trump, who will not be 
sworn in until late January, and to the Egyptian president, Abdel Fatal al-Sisi.

While the resolution is largely symbolic, it will be seen as empowering an 
increasingly tough UN over Israel and will give pause to international 
companies who have interests in the occupied territories.

Originally drafted by Egypt, the original version of the resolution had been 
supposed to go to a vote on Thursday night, butwas withdrawn by Sisi under 
pressure orchestrated by Israel. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/donald-trump-binyamin-netanyahu-un-resolution-settlements-occupied-territories-palestine>

Following the vote Trump, tweeted: “As to the UN, things will be different 
after Jan 20.”

Commenting on Trump’s attempted intervention, a White House official insisted 
that until Trump’s inauguration on 20 January there was one US president - 
Obama.
UKUN_NewYork (@UKUN_NewYork) 
This resolution is a clear reinforcement of the intl community's conviction 
that a two-state solution is viable.@MatthewRycroft1 
<https://twitter.com/MatthewRycroft1> pic.twitter.com/p7CnSIMe5W 
<https://t.co/p7CnSIMe5W>
 <https://twitter.com/UKUN_NewYork/status/812387515143438338> December 23, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/UKUN_NewYork/status/812387515143438338> 
Pro-Israel senators and lobby groups also weighed in following the vote. The 
American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC), one of the most influential 
lobby groups, said it was “deeply disturbed by the failure of the Obama 
administration to exercise its veto to prevent a destructive, one-sided, 
anti-Israel resolution from being enacted by the United Nations security 
council”.

It also pointedly thanked Trump for his attempts to intervene: “AIPAC 
expresses its appreciation to president-elect Trump and the many Democratic and 
Republican members of Congress who urged a veto of this resolution.”

The United Nations maintains that settlements are illegal, but UN officials 
have reported a surge in construction over the past months.

About 430,000 Israeli settlers live in the West Bank and a further 200,000 
Israelis live in east Jerusalem, which Palestinians see as the capital of their 
future state.

The resolution demands that “Israel immediately and completely cease all 
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East 
Jerusalem”.

It states that Israeli settlements have “no legal validity” and are 
“dangerously imperiling the viability of the two-state solution”.
 