
The prospect of three more hikes in US interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/interest-rates-us> next year has sent the 
dollar to a 14-year high and caused a selloff on most Asian markets.


The US Federal Reserve increased rates as expected on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/us-federal-reserve-raises-interest-rates-second-time-since-2008>
 by a quarter of a point, only the second time it has done so since 2008.

But investors were caught out by surprisingly bullish comments from Fed chair 
Janet Yellen <https://www.theguardian.com/business/janet-yellen> in the wake of 
the announcement and by projections showing that 11 of her 17 policy-making 
colleagues see borrowing costs rising another three times in 2017.

This is a true age of uncertainty for the world economy | Barry Eichengreen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/2016-world-economy-donald-trump-eu-jk-galbraith>
The news sent the dollar index with other currencies soaring to 102.62, its 
highest point since 2003. The euro was down 0.2% at $1.0512 after sliding to 
$1.0468, a trough not seen in 21 months. The pound dipped nearly US2c to $1.255.

In Asian trading the Australian, Canadian and New Zealand dollars all suffered 
losses, as well as the Mexican peso.
Holger Zschaepitz (@Schuldensuehner) 
Dollar Index jumps to 14y high, 10mth peak vs the Yen. https://t.co/qIdAXNEwpC 
<https://t.co/qIdAXNEwpC> pic.twitter.com/bZWg5XjNB6 <https://t.co/bZWg5XjNB6>
 <https://twitter.com/Schuldensuehner/status/809273592152260608> December 15, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/Schuldensuehner/status/809273592152260608> 
China’s yuan fell to its weakest level against the dollar in more than eight 
years as it crept higher towards the seven yuan to one dollar mark. Traders 
told Reuters that China’s big state-owned banks were intervening heavily in the 
market to prevent the yuan falling too far from the central bank’s daily fix of 
6.9289 yuan per dollar.

The Fed stance came as US president-elect Donald Trump has promised to boost 
growth through tax cuts, spending and deregulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/14/bonds-trump-prompts-inflation-tax-cuts-interest-rates>
.

“This is flat out hawkish, and the US dollar is reacting accordingly,” Stephen 
Innes, senior trader at Oanda in Singapore, said in a note. “I thought we would 
be calling the Yellen bluff this morning, as the market had expected at most a 
subtle shift in Fed language.


“However, the Fed’s forward guidance is in reaction to Trumpflation as Dr 
Yellen did little to quell the markets’ pent up the view that both growth and 
inflation will accelerate in 2017.”

“The rate hike projections for 2017 being increased to three shows that Fed’s 
board is having to factor in the impact of Trump’s policies,” said Junichi 
Ishikawa, senior FX strategist at IG Securities in Tokyo.


The greenback pushed towards 118 yen in Asia, helping to push the Nikkei 
average of leading shares higher, in contrast to other bourses in the region as 
traders worried about a flood of cash out of their own economies to higher 
yields in the US.

Our problem isn’t robots, it’s​ ​the​ ​low-wage car-wash economy | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/mark-carney-britains-car-wash-economy-low-wage-jobs>
Hong Kong shares sank 1.2% and Shanghai lost 0.9% while Sydney was off 0.8%, 
Seoul shed 0.4%.

Shares in London and Frankfurt were expected to be down slightly when trading 
opened later on Thursday, according to trading group IG.

In her post-announcement conference, Yellen said: “It’s important for 
households and businesses to understand that my colleagues and I have judged 
the course of theUS economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> to 
be strong.

“We have a strong labor market and we have a resilient economy.”

Greg McKenna, chief market strategist at CFD and FX provider AxiTrader, said: 
“This is a big event... the Fed has straight-batted it but is hiking and 
signalling more than the market expected just on current economic settings.”
 