
If you know where to look, the north-eastern US is dense with great food, in 
both raw materials and restaurants. On the coast of Maine, much of the 
gastronomic wealth comes, of course, from the sea, including produce that 
old-fashioned Yankees would never think of eating, such as sea urchin roe, 
seaweed and sea cucumber.

The coast of Maine may be my favourite place in the world, for its rocky 
beauty, the character of its people, its sense of history, and its food. One of 
my happiest memories is of the six months I lived and worked in a house by a 
small harbour. The coast is big. It takes four-and-a-half hours to drive it by 
the fastest route, which cheats by running partly inland. Stretched out, the 
coastline would run for more than 3,000 miles, and that's not counting islands 
(seemainecoastguide.com <http://mainecoastguide.com/cruising/where.html>).

The town that gives the strongest sense of coastal Maine life is Stonington, 
at the foot of Deer Isle, connected to the mainland by a tall, narrow bridge. 
Stonington has by far Maine's largest concentration of lobster boats. It's very 
picturesque, with limited evidence of either the good or ill effects of 
tourism, and it lies on thePenobscot Bay 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Penobscot_Bay>, which is a candidate for most 
beautiful bay in the world.
 Fishermen unload their haul at Stonington, Maine's lobster capital. 
Photograph: Alamy 
To see the bay properly, take the "mail boat" from Stonington to Isle au Haut, 
a few miles south at the edge of the bay. Then, if you're back in town early 
enough, you can watch the lobstermen unload their catch. From there, head to 36 
Main Street and eat a lobster with the locals at theHarbor Cafe (+1 207 367 
5099).

Back on the mainland, hang a left at Brooksville for the Cape Rosier 
peninsula. Near Harborside, lovers of organic veg will enjoy a stop at the 
famousFour Seasons Farm <http://www.fourseasonfarm.com/farmstand/index.html> 
(609 Weir Cove Road, fourseasonfarm.com), run by eminent gardener Eliot 
Coleman, to buy produce, books and artworks from the local artist collective.

To the south-west, the other side of Rockland, lies what is probably the 
north-east's best spot for oyster-farming, the Damariscotta river. It's really 
a long tidal inlet, in whose lower portion the cold water and balance of salt 
produces slow-growing, full-flavoured, fine-textured oysters. If you want to 
open them yourself, buy them at the little shop atGlidden Point Oyster Co 
<http://www.oysterfarm.com/>. If you'd rather have someone else do the work, 
sample them atKing Eider's Pub <http://www.kingeiderspub.com> right in 
Damariscotta town.
 Vermont lamb at Bondir in Cambridge. Photograph: Boston Globe via Getty Images
When I first began to eat in Boston some years ago it was a gastronomic 
backwater, and appeared to suffer from a strong, lingering Puritan influence. 
Of course, it had been known for certain foods — baked beans (which can be 
excellent), cod (ditto), and the incredibly old-fashioned-soundingIndian pudding
 <http://www.simplyrecipes.com/recipes/indian_pudding/>, which is cornmeal mush 
with molasses. Now Boston restaurants are totally up to date. Some of the best 
get their humanely raised, organically fed poultry, rabbit, pork, and other 
things fromPete & Jen's Backyard Birds 
<http://peteandjensbackyardbirds.com/farm-photos.htm> up the road in Concord, 
Massachusetts. Taste these excellent meats atBondir 
<http://bondircambridge.com/> a contemporary restaurant in Cambridge, just over 
the Charles river.

Cranberries, an ultra-American, originally wild fruit, are harvested at the 
end of September and early October. It's fascinating to see the harvested red 
berries floating in a flooded bog, but those berries are only for processing. 
For keeping, they must be harvested dry, which is done nowadays by machine. 
Kristine and Robert Keese ofCranberry Hill Farm <http://organiccranberries.com> 
(+1 508 888 9179, organiccranberries.com) in Plymouth, Massachusetts, became 
the first certified-organic cranberry growers in the US almost 20 years ago. In 
season, you might catch their two-day harvest, and buy straight from the 
growers (call first).

The food of Philadelphia, in the shadow of New York, is underappreciated by 
those who haven't been. I've come to know the city and its ever-increasing 
number of good restaurants only as an adult. At weekends, the famousReading 
Terminal Market <http://www.readingterminalmarket.org/> is full of energy and 
jammed with people coming to buy from the countless purveyors, including Amish. 
Buy a soft Philadelphia pretzel ($2) in the market atMiller's Twist  
<http://www.millerstwist.com>.

Philadelphia is known for scrapple, a loaf made of cornmeal with pork scraps, 
including liver, plus spices – a polarising food. It's served sliced and fried 
crisp on the outside. I once immersed myself in the topic, doing a blind 
scrapple tasting, looking for the best. It's diner food, widely available, 
including at the market, and no one who loves it seems to complain about the 
quality anywhere.
 Diners eating Chesapeake Bay crabs. Photograph: Alamy 
Heading south-east from Philly, the former manufacturing city of Baltimore is 
still an important seaport. It sits on the wide Patapsco river where it joins 
Chesapeake Bay. Baltimore has grit and character. Chefs draw on the enormous 
and wonderful bay, which is one of the world's most biologically rich bodies of 
water.

Blue crabs are not only delicious, they are also the most important food that 
comes from the bay, in terms of quantity. They're at the soft-shell stage from 
May to September. It's fascinating to watch the crabs moult, which takes place 
in "floats" – special crab pens on the water or at the water's edge. They're 
easy to spot in places on the eastern shore of the Chesapeake, such as around 
Crisfield. But Baltimore is where the chefs cook them best.

I grew up in Maryland and love its hilly farmland, settled more than three 
centuries ago. Much of it has been swallowed up by housing, but a new 
generation of small farms provides great local ingredients. A key Chesapeake 
item, nearly lost in the 20th century and now being revived, is the pretty, and 
tasty, hot fish pepper, an African-American chilli once associated with 
Baltimore's oyster- and crabhouses, which explains the name. As the fish pepper 
ripens, it becomes green-and-white striped, before turning brilliant red. A 
great proponent of Chesapeake food is Spike Gjerde, the chef at Baltimore's
Woodberry Kitchen <http://www.woodberrykitchen.com/>. There you can buy dried 
fish pepper and fish pepper hot sauce, as well as eat the pepper and other 
prime ingredients in various dishes.

So there you have it, a foodie trip down the whole of the north-east. From 
Maine to Maryland, the landscape and ingredients are so diverse that you might 
feel like you're in two different countries.

Edward Behr is the author of The Art Of Eating Cookbook 
<http://www.artofeating.com/shop/cookbook.htm> and editor of quarterly food 
magazineThe Art of Eating <http://www.artofeating.com/>

• For more information on holidays in the USA, visit DiscoverAmerica.com 
<http://www.discoveramerica.com/>
 