
The US justice department is reported to have found evidence of Volkswagen 
acting criminally in connection with the emissions cheating scandal that 
plunged the German company into crisis.


Federal prosecutors are weighing up whether to criminally charge VW and its 
employees or accept a multibillion-dollar settlement, according tothe Wall 
Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/u-s-said-to-uncover-evidence-of-criminal-acts-in-vw-probe-1471290998>
. The justice department and VW declined to comment on the discussions, which 
are said to have a soft deadline of Christmas 2016.

Volkswagen emissions scandal: $15bn settlement gets preliminary approval
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/volkswagen-emissions-scandal> 
VW has admitted to deliberately cheating on US diesel emissions tests for 
several years and this summeragreed to pay $15.3bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/volkswagen-emissions-scandal> 
(£11.8bn) to its customers and regulators.


However, the settlement did not preclude criminal charges, and at the time, 
deputy attorney general Sally Yates sought to reassure consumers that “our 
criminal investigation remains active 
<https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/deputy-attorney-general-sally-q-yates-delivers-remarks-press-conference-announcing-147>
 and ongoing”.

“We will follow the facts wherever they go and we will determine whether to 
bring criminal charges against any companies or individual wrongdoers.”


It is unusual for US authorities to seek a criminal prosecution of companies 
or executives, with prosecutors tending to accept an admittance of guilt, an 
apology from the chief executive and multimillion-dollar fines.


 In 2014, Toyota paid $1.2bn to settle a criminal investigation into its 
attempt to mislead the public about a defect that caused unintended 
acceleration. Last year,General Motors paid $900m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/16/gm-close-settling-us-criminal-case-ignition-switches>
 to end an investigation into an ignition switch defect, which cut engines and 
disabled systems such as power steering and airbags, linked to 124 deaths.

Both companies agreed to the appointment of an independent monitor to oversee 
their safety practices for three years. A similar agreement is likely if 
prosecutors agree a settlement with VW.

Three US states have launched lawsuits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/19/volkswagen-sued-new-york-massachusetts-diesel-emissions>
 alleging that VW executives knew the company’s cars had been engineered to 
cheat US pollution tests and had concluded that “breaking the law and risking 
the imposition of fines was an acceptable cost of doing business”.


New York, Massachusetts <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/massachusetts> 
and Maryland filed lawsuits last month alleging that former VW chief executive 
Martin Winterkorn and other top executives were involved in a campaign of 
“systematic cheating and deception” to mislead US regulators over the emissions 
of its diesel cars.

An 84-page lawsuit filed by New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> attorney general Eric 
Schneiderman alleged that VW had been adapting technology to make its cars’ 
emissions appear loweras far back as 1999. The company went on to develop 
bespoke software, termed a “defeat device”, that allowed its cars to produce up 
to 40 times as much pollution on the roads than under strict US emissions test 
conditions.

The June settlement required VW to offer to buy back the 475,000 2.0-litre 
diesel cars it installed with illegal “defeat device” software designed to 
trick regulators into believing that its cars were greener than they really 
were. The buyback is expected to cost VW $10bn. The cost could increase 
significantly if VW is also ordered to buy back 85,000 3.0-litre Audis, 
Porsches and SUVs sold since 2009.

It was also ordered to spend $2bn on the construction of infrastructure to 
charge electric vehicles and develop zero-emission ride-sharing across the 
country. A further $2.7bn will be spent on helping the state replace old buses.
 