
The Wimbledon champion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/andy-murray-wins-wimbledon-2016-milos-raonic>
 Andy Murray will be the second seed at the US Open, starting on Monday, as he 
looks to win his second grand slam title of the year.

Rio 2016: Guardian writers pick their favourite Olympic moments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/22/rio-2016-guardian-writers-favourite-olympic-moments-helps-biles-fiji-lochte>
Novak Djokovic is the top seed for an event he won last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/13/novak-djokovic-wins-us-open-2015-final-over-roger-federer-after-epic-battle>
, Stan Wawrinka is ranked third and thetwo-times champion Rafael Nadal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/10/rafael-nadal-us-open-champion> 
is seeded fourth, with Roger Federer having already withdrawn because of a knee 
injury.

Murray’s first grand slam title came in New York in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/sep/11/andy-murray-us-open-novak-djokovic1>
 – although he has failed to progress past the last eight since – and he will 
return to the city in excellent formhaving just defended his Olympic title in 
Rio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/andy-murray-beats-juan-martin-del-potro-rio-2016>
, one month after clinching his second grass-court title at Wimbledon.

Should he reach the final in the US, Murray would join Rod Laver, Federer and 
Djokovic in becoming the only men to advance to the final of every major in a 
season.

In contrast to Murray’s purple patch Djokovic’s form has dipped after a 
terrific start to the season, with a surprising last-32defeat bySam Querrey at 
Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/02/novak-djokovic-knocked-out-wimbledon-sam-querrey>
 being followed up bydefeat at the Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/novak-djokovic-rio-2016-juan-martin-del-potro>
 by the eventual finalist, Juan Martín del Potro, who is an unseeded wild card 
at the US Open.

Johanna Konta is seeded 13th in the women’s half of the draw, having reached 
the fourth round last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/07/us-open-2015-johanna-konta-rues-double-faults-as-she-falls-to-petra-kvitova>
, while the home hope Serena Williams is unsurprisingly the top seed as she 
looks to win a 23rd grand slam singles title. Last year, chasing the ‘Serena 
Slam’ and a fourth successive US Open title, Williams was surprisinglybeaten in 
the semi-finals by the unseeded Roberta Vinci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/11/serena-williams-grand-slam-ended-roberta-vinci>
.

Her sister, Venus Williams, is seeded sixth while the Australian Open 
champion, Angelique Kerber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/30/serena-williams-angelque-kerber-australian-open-final-tennis>
, theFrench Open champion, Garbiñe Muguruza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/garbine-muguruza-beats-serena-williams-french-open-final-match-report>
, Agnieszka Radwanska and Simona Halep are all in the top five.

Meanwhile James Ward’s hopes of reaching the US Open main draw for the second 
year running were ended by Máximo González in the first round of qualifying. 
The 29-year-old Briton featured in the first round proper for the first time 
last year but the Argentinian González ensured there would be no repeat as he 
kept his own dream alive with a 6-3, 6-4 victory.

Ward, beaten in straight sets by Djokovic at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/27/novak-djokovic-james-ward-wimbledon>
, failed to find a way back after losing his serve and falling 3-0 behind in 
the first set. González served out the set with the minimum of fuss and then 
broke Ward in the opening game of the second, only to lose his own serve 
immediately.

Another break apiece followed before Ward crucially lost his serve again in 
the seventh game. González held his nerve in the next game and, after Ward made 
it 5-4, took his third match point to advance to the next round.
 