
Highway 101 in the western United States is one of the most iconic routes in 
the world, running from Washington state, throughOregon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/oregon> and down through California, where 
it connects with the classic, coast-hugging Route 1.

But with such a huge area, it's not easy to know where to start, or finish, or 
indeed, what to do in between. Which famous attractions are worth a detour? And 
which tourist traps should be avoided? Where's the best place to stay, eat and 
drink on a budget?

If you are planning a road trip, along all or part of the coast, our panel of 
experts can help answer your queries, whether they're about visiting the 
north-west cities of Seattle and Portland; hiking Redwood forests; exploring 
San Francisco or hanging out on the beaches of LA or San Diego.

Post your questions in the comments below and our expert panel will be live 
online between 4-5pm (BST) on Thursday 23 May.

If you live on the west coast, or know any of the major cities well, we'd love 
you to join in the chat and share your tips. Plus, from Monday 27 May, join 
Jacob Steinberg on our Twitrip from Seattle to San Francisco.

The experts 

Scott Leonard, from Portland, Oregon, is the author of hiking guides Moon 
<http://www.moon.com/> Washington Hiking and Moon Take a Hike Seattle, and 
co-author of Pacific Northwest Hiking. He enjoys spending his time exploring 
the great outdoors of the Pacific Northwest.

Ben Vickery and Aaron Rayburn live in Portland, close to where they both grew 
up. They are passionate about the Columbia River Gorge, and blog about 
Portland's exuberant arts and culture scene onfortport.com 
<http://www.fortport.com/>.

Jennifer Maerz is a producer at the Bold Italic  <http://www.thebolditalic.com>
, an online magazine, blog, events hub and shop that celebrates all things San 
Francisco. Jennifer is a pop culture writer who has worked for various 
publications along the west coast. Her speciality is advice on northern 
California road trips.

Evan Karp is a writer, with columns in the San Francisco Chronicle, SF Weekly, 
and SF Arts. He founded and runs the nonprofitQuiet Lightning 
<http://quietlightning.org/>, and founded and edits Litseen 
<http://litseen.com/>, a daily calendar of the Bay Area's literary events. 
Originally from Savannah, Georgia, he has lived on the west coast for nearly 
four years and enjoys biking through northern California's various 
microclimates.

James Bartlett is a British freelance journalist based in Los Angeles. He 
writes for the Los Angeles Times, LA Weekly,BBCAmerica.com 
<http://www.bbcamerica.com/> about the weird and wonderful side of life in LA. 
He is also the author ofGourmet Ghosts â€“ Los Angeles 
<http://www.gourmetghosts.com>, a guide to haunted bars and restaurants across 
the city.

Candice Woo is a freelance food writer and restaurant critic based in San 
Diego. She covers restaurants, chefs, craft beer, bars and nightlife for a 
number of publications, and is currently the editor ofEater in San Diego 
<http://sandiego.eater.com/>.

Pam Mandel is a freelance writer who lives in Seattle, Washington and blogs at 
Nerd's Eye View <http://www.nerdseyeview.com/>. Her work has been published in 
Conde Nast Traveler online, Afar, the San Francisco Chronicle, Gadling, World 
Hum. She thinks the world's best beach is in Olympic national park on the 
Washington coast.

Alissa Walker is a Los Angeles-based writer and radio producer, who covers 
design, architecture, cities, transportation and walking. She has written for 
Wired, LA Weekly and the Los Angeles Times, among others. She relishes life in 
LA without a car and blogs at AWalkerinLA.com <http://www.aWalkerinLA.com>. 
Follow her on Twitter:@gelatobaby <https://twitter.com/gelatobaby>
 