
The US Fish and Wildlife Service has released its plan for the recovery of 
threatenedpolar bears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/20/churchill-canada-hudson-bay-no-snow-sea-ice-polar-bear>
, acknowledging it will take no direct action to address the primary threat of 
greenhouse gases on the decline of sea ice habitat.

This is the polar bear capital of the world, but the snow has gone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/20/churchill-canada-hudson-bay-no-snow-sea-ice-polar-bear>
Polar bears, the first species to be declared threatened or endangered because 
of climate change, rely onsea ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/08/arctic-multi-year-sea-ice-break-up-graveyard>
 for hunting seals and raising their young. Climate models project that rising 
temperatures will continue to diminish sea ice throughout this century.

The plan announced on Monday calls for reduced greenhouse gas emissions but 
focuses on action to be taken by the agency on other conservation strategies, 
such as preventing contamination from spills, protecting dens, or reducing 
conflicts with humans.

Shaye Wolf, climate science director for the Centre for Biological Diversity, 
which filed the petition to list polar bears in 2005, called the recovery plan 
toothless.

The plan, she said, acknowledges polar bears will not survive without cuts in 
large-scale greenhouse gas pollution. The science in the plan shows the need to 
keep global temperature rise well below2C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/21/study-reveals-greater-climate-impacts-of-2c-temperature-rise-heatwaves>
 for polar bears to have any reasonable chance of survival, she said.

Study reveals greater climate impacts of 2C temperature rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/21/study-reveals-greater-climate-impacts-of-2c-temperature-rise-heatwaves>
The agency’s job, she said, is to outline the steps needed to be taken for 
polar bears to survive. “It acknowledges the problem but fails to put the 
solution in the core strategy for the bear,” she said.

The agency said addressing increased atmospheric levels of greenhouse gases 
that result in Arctic warming will require global action. Until that happens, 
the focus of recovery will be on US wildlife management actions that will 
contribute to polar bear survival in the interim “so that they are in a 
position to recover onceArctic <https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> 
warming has been abated”, the plan said.

Dirk Kempthorne, who was secretary of the interior under George Bush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jan/16/greenpolitics-georgebush>, 
announced in 2008 that polar bears would be listed as threatened under the 
Endangered Species Act. But he added immediately that endangered species law 
would not be used to set climate policy or limit greenhouse gas emissions.
 