
The US is set to ban personal care products that contain microbeads after the 
House of Representatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/house-of-representatives> approved a bill 
that would phase out the environmentally-harmful items.

The bill, which had been backed by a bipartisan committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/18/congress-vote-ban-microbeads-beauty-soap-toiletries-plastic>
, will now go to the Senate for approval.

The Microbead Free Waters Act would start the phase-out of the tiny pieces of 
plastic found in soap, toothpaste and body washes beginning 1 July 2017. 
Microbeads can flow into rivers, lakes and streams where, they can be mistaken 
for food by fish. This can lead to the spread of pollutants throughout the food 
chain, including to humans.

Microbeads are typically smaller than a pinhead but are causing significant 
problems in the Great Lakes. Research conducted in 2013 by the State University 
of New Yorkfound 
<http://www.npr.org/2014/05/21/313157701/why-those-tiny-microbeads-in-soap-may-pose-problem-for-great-lakes>
 that the lakes were riddled with microbeads, with Lake Ontario containing an 
estimated 1.1m plastic particles per square kilometer.

Full scale of plastic in the world's oceans revealed for first time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/10/full-scale-plastic-worlds-oceans-revealed-first-time-pollution>
Ohio, which has most of the Lake Erie shoreline, is considering microbead 
legislation, as is Michigan. Illinois became the first state to ban the sale of 
such products in 2014, withCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> recently finalising a bill to 
phase out microbeads by 2020.

Research by Oregon State University found that a stunning 8tn microbeads a day 
were being emitted into bodies of water in the US. This plastic adds to thevast 
quantity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/10/full-scale-plastic-worlds-oceans-revealed-first-time-pollution>
 floating throughout the world’s oceans, with arecent study finding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/01/up-to-90-of-seabirds-have-plastic-in-their-guts-study-finds>
 that up to 90% of the planet’s seabirds have pieces of plastic in their guts.

“These microbeads are tiny plastic, but make for big-time pollution,” said 
Republican Fred Upton, a co-sponsor of the bill.

“The Great Lakes have survived many a foe – severe pollution, oil spills, 
discharge from refineries, zebra mussels, and attempts to steal our water, just 
to name a few,” Upton said. “We will fight any activity that puts our beloved 
Great Lakes in jeopardy.”
 