
When political scientists write about populism, they often begin by trying to 
define it, as if it were a scientific term, like entropy or photosynthesis. To 
do so is a mistake. There is no set of features that exclusively defines 
movements, parties, and people that are called “populist”: the different people 
and parties that are placed in this category enjoy family resemblances of one 
to the other, but there is not a universal set of traits that is common to all 
of them.

There is, however, a particular kind of populist politics that originated in 
the United States in the 19th century, which has recurred there in the 20th and 
21st centuries – and which began to appear in western Europe in the 1970s. In 
the past few decades, these campaigns and parties have converged in their 
concerns, and in the wake of the Great Recession, they have surged.

The kind of populism that runs through American history, and has been 
transplanted to Europe, cannot be defined exclusively in terms of right, left 
or centre: it includes bothDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and Bernie Sanders, the Front 
National in France and Podemos in Spain. There are rightwing, leftwing and 
centrist populist parties. It is not an ideology, but a political logic – a way 
of thinking about politics. In his book on American populism, The Populist 
Persuasion, the historian Michael Kazin describes populism as “a language whose 
speakers conceive of ordinary people as a noble assemblage not bounded narrowly 
by class; view their elite opponents as self-serving and undemocratic; and seek 
to mobilise the former against the latter.”

That’s a good start. It doesn’t describe people like Ronald Reagan or Vladimir 
Putin, both of whom have sometimes been called “populist”, but it does describe 
the logic of the parties, movements, and candidates, from the US’s People’s 
Party of 1892 toMarine Le Pen’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/nation-state-marine-le-pen-global-mood-france-brexit-trump-front-national>
 Front National of 2016. I would, however, take Kazin’s characterisation one 
step further and distinguish between leftwing populists such as Bernie Sanders 
and Podemos’sPablo Iglesias 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/15/podemos-pablo-iglesias-jeremy-corbyn-spain-election-radicalism-labour>
, and rightwing populists such as Trump and Le Pen.

Leftwing populists champion the people against an elite or an establishment. 
Theirs is a vertical politics of the bottom and middle, arrayed against the 
top. Rightwing populists champion the people against an elite that they accuse 
of favouring a third group, which can consist, for instance, of immigrants, 
Islamists, or African American militants. Rightwing populism is triadic: it 
looks upward, but also down upon an out group.

Leftwing populism is historically different to socialist or social democratic 
movements. It is not a politics of class conflict, and it does not necessarily 
seek the abolition of capitalism. It is also different to a progressive or 
liberal politics that seeks to reconcile the interests of opposing classes and 
groups. It assumes a basic antagonism between the people and an elite at the 
heart of its politics.

Rightwing populism, meanwhile, is different to a conservatism that primarily 
identifies with the business classes against their critics and antagonists 
below. In its American and western European versions, it is also different to 
an authoritarian conservatism that aims to subvert democracy. It operates 
within a democratic context.

The Podemos revolution: how a small group of radical academics changed 
European politics | Giles Tremlett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/31/podemos-revolution-radical-academics-changed-european-politics>
Just as there is no common ideology that defines populism, there is no one 
constituency that comprises “the people”. They can be blue-collar workers, 
shopkeepers, or students burdened by debt; they can be the poor or the middle 
class. Equally, there is no common identification of “the establishment”. The 
exact referents of “the people” and “the elite” do not define populism, what 
defines it is the conflict between the two (or, in the case of rightwing 
populism, the three).

Populist movements have flourished in opposition, and have suffered identity 
crises when they have entered government

The conflict itself turns on a set of demands that the populists make of the 
elite – demands that the populists believe the establishment will be unwilling 
to grant them. Sanders wanted “Medicare for all” and a $15 minimum wage. If he 
had wanted the Affordable Care Act to cover hearing aids, or to raise the 
minimum wage from $7.25 to $7.75, that would not have defined a clash between 
the people and the establishment. If Trump were to demand an increase in guards 
along the Mexican border, or if Denmark’s rightwing People’s Party campaigned 
on a mere reduction in asylum-seekers, these demands would not open up a gulf 
between the people and the elite. But promising a wall that the Mexican 
government will pay for or the total cessation of immigration – that does 
establish a frontier.

These kinds of demands define the clash between the people and the 
establishment. If they are granted in whole or even in part, or if populists 
abandon them as too ambitious – as Syriza did with its demands for 
renegotiation of Greece’s debt – then the populist movement is likely to 
dissipate or to morph into a normal political party or candidacy. In this 
sense, American and western European populist movements have flourished when 
they are in opposition, and have suffered identity crises when they have 
entered government.

Populist campaigns and parties often function as warning signs of a political 
crisis. In both Europe and the US, populist movements have been most successful 
at times when people see the prevailing political norms – which are preserved 
and defended by the existing establishment – as being at odds with their own 
hopes, fears, and concerns. The populists express these neglected concerns and 
frame them in a politics that pits the people against an intransigent elite. By 
doing so, they become catalysts for political change.

Populist campaigns and parties, by nature, point to problems through demands 
that are unlikely to be realised in the present political circumstances. In the 
case of some rightwing populists, these demands are laced with bigotry or 
challenge democratic norms. In other cases, they are clouded with 
misinformation. But they still point to tears in the fabric of accepted 
political wisdom.

In recent decades, as the great postwar boom has stalled, the major parties on 
both sides of the Atlantic, have embraced a neoliberal agenda of free movement 
of capital and labour to achieve prosperity. Leaders have favoured increased 
immigration, only to find that American voters were up in arms about illegal 
immigration, and European voters were up in arms about immigrant communities 
they regarded as seedbeds of crime and, later, terrorism. In continental 
Europe, the major parties embraced the idea of the single currency only to find 
that it fell into disfavour during the Great Recession. In the United States, 
both parties embraced “free trade” deals only to discover that much of the 
public did not support these treaties.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbirth-of-populism-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfb88dce18c617ddff47a38827b74b4c172e8b61%2F0_0_2742_1645%2F2742.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Us%20v%20Them%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20populism%20%7C%20John%20B%20Judis%20%7C%20The%20Long%20Read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbirth-of-populism-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Us%20v%20Them%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20populism%20%7C%20John%20B%20Judis%20%7C%20The%20Long%20Read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbirth-of-populism-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfb88dce18c617ddff47a38827b74b4c172e8b61%2F0_0_2742_1645%2F2742.jpg>
 Marine Le Pen, the leader of the Front National, addresses a rally in Frejus, 
France, in September. Photograph: Jean-Paul Pelissier/Reuters 
In the last decades of the 19th century, as the People’s Party was erupting on 
the American scene, Europe was seeing the emergence of social democratic 
parties inspired by Karl Marx’s theory of socialism. Over the next 70 years, 
Europe would become home to an array of parties on the left, centre and right, 
but it would not witness anything resembling American populism until the 1970s.

Like the original People’s Party in the US, the European parties operated 
within the electoral arena and championed the “people” against an 
“establishment” or “elite”. The French Front National says that it represents 
the “little people” and the “forgotten members” against the “caste”. In 
Finland, the Finns Party says that it wants “a democracy that rests on the 
consent of the people and does not emanate from elites or bureaucrats”. In 
Spain,Podemos <https://www.theguardian.com/world/podemos> champions the “gente” 
against the “casta”. In Italy, Beppe Grillo of the Five Star Movement rails 
against what he calls the “three destroyers” – journalists, industrialists, and 
politicians. In the Netherlands, Geert Wilders’ Party for Freedom represents 
“Henk and Ingrid” against “the political elite”.

The first European populist parties were rightwing. They accused the elites of 
coddling communists, welfare recipients, or immigrants. As a result, the term 
“populist” in Europe became used pejoratively by leftwing and centrist 
politicians and academics. In the last decade, however, leftwing populist 
parties have arisen in Spain and Greece that direct their ire against the 
establishment in their country or against the EU headquarters in Brussels.

The main difference between US and European populists is that while American 
parties and campaigns come and go quickly, some European populist parties have 
been around for decades. That is primarily because many European nations have 
multi-party systems, and many of the countries have proportional representation 
that allows smaller parties to maintain a foothold even when they are polling 
in single digits.

Populist movements themselves do not often achieve their own objectives. Their 
demands may be co-opted by the major parties, or they may be thoroughly 
rejected. But they do roil the waters. They signal that the prevailing 
political ideology is not working and the standard worldview is breaking down. 

No one, not even the man himself, expected Donald Trump to get the Republican 
presidential nomination in 2016. Similarly, no one, including Bernie Sanders, 
expected that through the California primary in June, the Vermont senator would 
still be challenging Hillary Clinton for the Democratic nomination.

Trump’s success was initially attributed to his showmanship and celebrity. But 
as he won primary after primary, political experts observed him playing on 
racist opposition to Barack Obama’s presidency or exploiting a latent sympathy 
for fascism among working-class white Americans. Sanders’s success invited less 
speculation, but commentators tended to dismiss him as a utopian and point to 
the airy idealism of millennial voters. If that were not sufficient explanation 
for his success, they also emphasised Hillary Clinton’s weakness as a 
frontrunner.

It makes more sense, however, to understand Trump and Sanders’s success as the 
latest chapter in the history of American populism. While strands of populism 
go back to the American revolution, it really begins with the People’s Party of 
the 1890s, which set the precedent for movements that have popped up 
periodically ever since. In the US, in contrast to Europe, these campaigns have 
burst forth suddenly and unexpectedly. Despite usually being short-lived, they 
have, nevertheless, had an outsized impact. And while they may seem unusual at 
the time, they are very much part of the political fabric of the nation.

While the history of American politics is riven with conflicts – over slavery, 
prohibition, abortion, intervention abroad – it is also dominated for long 
stretches by an underlying consensus about government’s role in the economy and 
abroad.

American politics is structured to sustain such prevailing worldviews. Its 
characteristics of winner-takes-all, first-past-the-post, single-member 
districts have encouraged a two‑party system. Third-party candidates are often 
dismissed as “spoilers”. Moreover, in deciding on whom to nominate in party 
primaries, voters and party bigwigs have generally taken electability into 
account, and in the general election, candidates have generally tried to 
capture the centre and to stay away from being branded “extremist”. As a result 
of this two-party tilt towards the centre, sharp political differences over 
underlying socioeconomic issues have tended to become blunted or even to be 
ignored, particularly in presidential elections.

But there are times, when, in the face of dramatic changes in society and the 
economy, or in America’s place in the world, voters have suddenly become 
responsive to politicians or movements that raise issues that major parties 
have either downplayed or overlooked completely.

The rise of the People’s Party was the first major salvo against the worldview 
of laissez-faire capitalism; the Louisiana governor Huey Long’s “Share Our 
Wealth” movement, which emerged in the wake of Franklin Roosevelt’s election in 
1932, helped pressure Roosevelt to address economic inequality. Together, these 
movements established the framework that Bernie Sanders, who described himself 
both as a democratic socialist and as a progressive, would adopt during his 
2016 campaign. Equally, the populist campaigns of George Wallace in the 1960s 
and Pat Buchanan in the 1990s foreshadowed the candidacy of Donald Trump.

During their heyday in the late 19th century, the populists of the People’s 
Party had a profound effect on American and – as it turned out – Latin American 
and European politics. It developed the logic of populism: the concept of a 
“people” arrayed against an elite that refused to grant necessary reforms. In 
American politics, the organisation was an early sign of the inadequacy of the 
two major parties’ views of government and the economy.

The populists were the first to call for government to regulate and even 
nationalise industries that were integral to the economy, like the railroads; 
they wanted government to reduce the economic inequality that capitalism, when 
left to its own devices, was creating, and they wanted to reduce the power of 
business in determining the outcome of elections. Populism had an immediate 
impact on the politics of some progressive Democrats, and even on Republicans 
such as Theodore Roosevelt. Eventually, much of the populist agenda was 
incorporated into Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s New Deal and into the outlook of 
New Deal liberalism.

In May 1891, the legend goes, some members of the Kansas Farmers Alliance, 
riding back home from a national convention in Cincinnati, came up with the 
term “populist” to describe the political views that they and other alliance 
groups in the west and south were developing. The next year, the alliance 
groups joined hands with the Knights of Labor, then the main workers’ 
organisation in the United States, to form the People’s Party, which, over the 
next two years, challenged the most basic assumptions that guided Republicans 
and Democrats in Washington. The party would be short-lived, but its example 
would establish the basis for populism in the United States and Europe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbirth-of-populism-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e502bd3b584e36254f9af62119b7f0896c1a051%2F200_254_6914_4150%2F6914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Us%20v%20Them%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20populism%20%7C%20John%20B%20Judis%20%7C%20The%20Long%20Read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbirth-of-populism-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Us%20v%20Them%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20populism%20%7C%20John%20B%20Judis%20%7C%20The%20Long%20Read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbirth-of-populism-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e502bd3b584e36254f9af62119b7f0896c1a051%2F200_254_6914_4150%2F6914.jpg>
 A political cartoon from 1900. Photograph: Rights Managed/Mary Evans / Library 
of Congress 
At the time, the leading Republicans and Democrats in the United States were 
revelling in the progress of American industry and finance. They believed in 
the self-regulating market as an instrument of prosperity and individual 
opportunity, and thought that the role of government should be minimal. Grover 
Cleveland, who was president from 1884 to 1888 and then from 1892 to 1896, 
railed against government “paternalism”. Public sector intervention, he 
declared in his second inaugural address, “stifles the spirit of true 
Americanism”; its “functions,” he stated, “do not include the support of the 
people”. Government’s principal role was to maintain a “sound and stable 
currency” through upholding the gold standard.

But during these years, farmers in the south and the plains suffered from a 
sharp drop in agricultural prices. Farm prices fell two-thirds in the midwest 
and south from 1870 to 1890. The plains, which prospered in the early 1880s, 
were hit by a ruinous drought in the late 1880s. But unsympathetic railroads, 
which enjoyed monopoly status, raised the cost of transporting farm produce. 
Many farmers in the south and the plains states could barely break even. The 
small family farm gave way to the large “bonanza” farm, often owned by 
companies based in the east. Salaries were threatened by low-wage immigrants 
from China, Japan, Portugal and Italy. Farmers who retained their land were 
burdened by debt. In Kansas, 45% of the land had become owned by banks.

The first populists saw themselves representing the “people”, including 
farmers and blue-collar workers, against the “money power” or “plutocracy”. 
That was reflected in their early programmes, which included a demand for the 
incorporation and recognition of labour unions alongside demands for railroad 
regulation, an end to land speculation, and easy money (through the replacement 
or supplementing of the gold standard) to ease the burden of debt that the 
farmers suffered from. Except for a few scattered leaders, the populists were 
not socialists. They wanted to reform rather than abolish capitalism, and their 
agent of reform was not the socialist working class, but the loosely conceived 
idea of “the people”.

When their demands – which also included a graduated income tax and political 
reforms to establish the secret ballot and the direct election of senators – 
proved too radical and far-reaching for the major parties, the People’s Party 
was created in 1892, and nominated a candidate for president. “We seek to 
restore the government of the Republic to the hands of ‘the plain people’, with 
whose class it originated,” the party’s first platform declared. “We believe 
that the powers of government – in other words, of the people – should be 
expanded … as rapidly and as far as the good sense of an intelligent people and 
the teachings of experience shall justify, to the end that oppression, 
injustice, and poverty shall eventually cease in the land.”

But in the 1880s and early 1890s, populist politics was primarily directed 
upward at the plutocrats

There was always a more conservative strain within the populist movement. In 
the south, some groups cooperated with the parallel national alliance of black 
farmers, but others did not. Populists also favoured the expulsion of Chinese 
immigrants, whom businesses had imported to provide cheap labour on western 
farms and railroads, and their support for that policy was often accompanied by 
racist rhetoric. But in the 1880s and early 1890s, populist politics was 
primarily directed upward at the plutocrats.

In the 1892 election, the People’s Party did remarkably well. Its woefully 
underfunded presidential candidate received 8% of the vote and carried five 
states. In the 1894 election, the People’s Party’s candidates for the House of 
Representatives won 10% of the vote. The party elected four congressmen, four 
senators, 21 state executives and 465 state legislators. With its base in the 
south and the west, and with Grover Cleveland wildly unpopular, the People’s 
Party looked to be on its way to challenging the Democrats as the second party. 
However, the election of 1894 turned out to be the party’s swansong.

In the end, the populists were done in by the dynamics of the two-party 
system. In the plains states, anger against Cleveland turned voters back to the 
more electable Republicans. In the south, Democrats subdued the People’s Party 
by a combination of co-option and, in response to the willingness of some 
populists to court the black vote, vicious race-baiting.

As liberal critics would later point out, the People’s Party had within it 
strains of antisemitism, racism, and nativism, particularly towards Chinese 
people, but these were at best secondary elements. Until the movement began to 
disintegrate, the original People’s Party was primarily a movement of the left. 
The first major instances of rightwing populism would come in the 1930s – from 
the Catholic priest and radio host Father Charles Coughlin – and then, in the 
1960s, with George Wallace’s presidential campaigns.

Wallace, the Democratic governor of Alabama, helped to doom the New Deal 
majority and lay the foundations for the Reagan realignment of 1980. He created 
a new rightwing variety of populism – what the sociologist Donald Warren called 
“middle American radicalism” – which would migrate into the Republican party 
and become the basis of Donald Trump’s challenge to Republican orthodoxy in 
2016.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbirth-of-populism-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9f9fe228b411a3f9b75c94215a7aaa10509c370%2F0_0_3000_1996%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Us%20v%20Them%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20populism%20%7C%20John%20B%20Judis%20%7C%20The%20Long%20Read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbirth-of-populism-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Us%20v%20Them%3A%20the%20birth%20of%20populism%20%7C%20John%20B%20Judis%20%7C%20The%20Long%20Read&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbirth-of-populism-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9f9fe228b411a3f9b75c94215a7aaa10509c370%2F0_0_3000_1996%2F3000.jpg>
 To populist politician George Wallace, campaigning in Boston in 1968. 
Photograph: AP 
The New Deal had rested on a tacit alliance between liberals and conservative 
southern Democrats, the latter of which resisted any legislation that might 
challenge white supremacy. As the party of Abraham Lincoln, the Republicans had 
traditionally been receptive to black civil rights, and the Republican 
leadership in Congress supported the Democratic president Lyndon Johnson’s 
Civil Rights and Voting Rights Acts of 1964 and 1965. The Arizona Republican 
senator Barry Goldwater was an early dissenter, but in the 1964 presidential 
election, Johnson easily defeated him. Johnson’s victory did not, however, 
signal widespread support for his civil rights initiatives, and after he passed 
the Voting Rights Act and introduced legislation known as the “War on Poverty”, 
a popular backlash grew. Wallace turned the backlash into a populist crusade.

Wallace would eventually make his name as an arch-segregationist, but he was 
initially a populist Democrat for whom race was strictly a secondary 
consideration. He initially ran for governor in 1958 as a New Deal Democrat and 
lost against a candidate backed by the Ku Klux Klan. After that, he pledged: “I 
will never be outniggered again.”

In 1962, Wallace ran again and this time he won as a proponent of “segregation 
now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever”. In 1963, he gained notoriety 
when he attempted to block two black students from registering at the 
University of Alabama. In 1964, he ran in the Democratic primaries in 
Wisconsin, Indiana and Maryland, winning about a third of the vote – as high as 
43% in Maryland, where he carried 15 of 23 counties. In 1968, he ran as an 
independent against the Republican Richard Nixon and the Democrat Hubert 
Humphrey. In early October, Wallace was ahead of Humphrey in the polls – in the 
end, he got 13.5% of the vote and carried five states in the south. In 1972, he 
ran as a Democrat, and stood a chance of taking the nomination when, in May, an 
assassin shot and crippled him while he was campaigning for the Maryland 
primary.

Wallace emphasised his opposition to racial integration, but he framed it as a 
defence of the average (white) American against the tyranny of Washington 
bureaucrats. Big government was imposing its will on the average person. 
Appearing on Meet the Press in 1967, Wallace summed up his candidacy:

There’s a backlash against big government in this country. This is a movement 
of the people … And I think that if the politicians get in the way, a lot of 
them are going to get run over by this average man in the street – this man in 
the textile mill, this man in the steel mill, this barber, this beautician, the 
policeman on the beat … the little businessman.

Wallace opposed busing – the practice of assigning children to particular 
state schools in order to redress racial segregation – because it was breaking 
up working-class neighbourhoods, and he attacked the white liberals who 
promoted it as hypocrites who refused to subject their children to what they 
insisted that the children of less affluent families must endure. “They are 
building a bridge over the Potomac for all the white liberals fleeing to 
Virginia,” he declared.

The dark history of Donald Trump's rightwing revolt | Timothy Shenk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/16/secret-history-trumpism-donald-trump>
Wallace was not, however, a political conservative. On domestic issues that 
did not directly touch on race, he ran as a New Deal Democrat. In his 1968 
campaign brochure, he boasted that in Alabama, he had increased spending on 
education, welfare, roads and agriculture.

In 1976, the Donald Warren published a study of “middle American radicals” 
(MARs). On the basis of extensive surveys conducted between 1971 and 72 and in 
1975, Warren defined a distinct political group that was neither left nor 
right, liberal nor conservative. MARs “feel the middle class has been seriously 
neglected,” Warren wrote. They see “government as favouring both the rich and 
poor simultaneously”.

Warren’s MARs held conservative positions on poverty and racial issues. They 
rejected busing and welfare agencies as examples of “the rich [giving] in to 
the demands of the poor, and the middle-income people have to pay the bill”. 
They disliked the national government, but they also thought corporations “have 
too much power” and were “too big”. They favoured many liberal programmes. They 
wanted government to guarantee jobs to everyone. They supported price (but not 
wage) control, Medicare, some kind of national health insurance, federal aid to 
education and social security.

Warren found that MARs represented about a quarter of the electorate. They 
were on average more male than female; they had a high-school but not a college 
education; their income fell in the middle, or slightly below it; they had 
skilled or semi-skilled blue-collar occupations, or clerical or sales jobs – 
and they were the most likely demographic group to vote for George Wallace.

In other words, Wallace’s base was among voters who saw themselves as middle 
class – the American equivalent of “the people” – and who believed themselves 
to be locked in conflict with those below and above.

Forty years later, Trump portrays himself as an enemy of free trade treaties, 
runaway shops, and illegal immigration and as the champion of the “silent 
majority” – a term borrowed from Nixon – against the “special interests” and 
the “establishment” of both parties. “The silent majority is back, and it’s not 
silent. It’s aggressive,” Trump declared last year. At rallies, his campaign 
has given out signs that read: “The silent majority stands with Trump.”

In January, just before the Iowa caucuses, Trump’s campaign ran a television 
advertisement titled The Establishment. Seated behind a desk, Trump looked into 
the camera and said: “The establishment, the media, the special interest, the 
lobbyists, the donors, they’re all against me. I’m self-funding my campaign. I 
don’t owe anybody anything. I only owe it to the American people to do a great 
job. They are really trying to stop me.”

This essay is adapted from The Populist Explosion 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/populist-explosion.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by John B Judis, published by Columbia Global Reports. To order a copy, go to
bookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/> or call 0330 333 
6846.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/gdnlongread?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, or sign up to the long read weekly emailhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 