
The US economy added more than 2m jobs in 2016 and finished the year with a 
pick-up in wages, suggesting Donald Trump will inherit a solid labour market 
from outgoing presidentBarack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>.

The news of the strongest wage growth since 2009 also raised expectations that 
the president-elect’s first year in office will be accompanied by a series of 
interest rate rises from the US central bank.

In the final set of jobs figures 
<https://www.bls.gov/news.release/empsit.nr0.htm> for the Obama administration, 
December’s job creation missed economists forecasts, with 156,000 new jobs 
added rather than the expected 178,000. But earlier months’ figures were 
revised to show 19,000 more jobs were created than previously thought and pay 
growth was stronger than expected.


Obama's labour market report card: not bad, could have done better
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/06/obamas-labour-market-report-card-not-bad-could-have-done-better>
BLS-Labor Statistics (@BLS_gov) 
Payroll employment rises by 156,000 in December; unemployment rate changes 
little (4.7%)https://t.co/1Y9cSWJUIB <https://t.co/1Y9cSWJUIB> #JobsReport 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/JobsReport?src=hash> #BLSdata 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/BLSdata?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/BLS_gov/status/817362611826257921> January 6, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/BLS_gov/status/817362611826257921> 
Paul Ashworth, chief US economist at the consultancy Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> commented: “The more modest 
156,000 increase in non-farm payrolls in December suggests that labour market 
conditions weakened just a fraction in the closing stages of last year. 
Nevertheless, that is still a solid gain, particularly as it followed an even 
bigger 204,000 increase in November.”

The figures from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics showed a total of 2.2m jobs 
were added to the world’s biggest economy in 2016 after the creation of 2.7m in 
2015.

But the year ended with a small rise in the headline unemployment rate. 
Despite the growth in jobs, unemployment edged up to 4.7%, as expected, as more 
people registered as looking for work. The unemployment rate was 7.8% when 
Obama was sworn in at the start of 2009.

Much of the focus in financial markets was on average hourly earnings as they 
rose by 0.4% in December after dipping by 0.1% in November. That lifted the 
annual growth rate to a seven-year high of 2.9%. The earnings growth along with 
other signs the US is approaching full employment would keep theFederal Reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve> on course to raise 
interest rates further this year, economists said.

In December, the Fed increased borrowing costs for the first time in a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/us-federal-reserve-raises-interest-rates-second-time-since-2008>
, and only the second time since the 2008 financial crisis and it predicted 
three further rates increases in 2017.

Rob Carnell, chief international economist at the bank ING, said the earnings 
news was key to when the Fed will raise rates again in a bid to keep inflation 
in check. Some market commentators had suggested the Fed was wrong to signal 
three more rate rises this year, but Carnell suggested the central bank’s 
policymakers would feel vindicated by the labour market report.
US unemployment rate graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-06T16:18:29/embed.html>
“The key figure here is average hourly earnings – now rising at 2.9% 
[year-on-year], its highest rate of growth since June 2009,” he said.

“We still think there may only be two hikes in 2017, but believe there is a 
very strong case for a March hike now, and are forecasting just that ... this 
report underlines that the US labour market is tight, and getting tighter. The 
Fed will not want to hang about before tightening again.”


Aside from potential inflationary pressures from the labour market, 
expectations of interest rate rises have been bolstered by the prospect of 
higher government spending and looser regulations on business under Trump, who 
takes over the presidency in two weeks.

Those changes are expected to boost economic growth in the short term and push 
up inflation.
 