
Costa Rica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/costarica> swept to the top 
of the Concacaf World Cup qualifying group with a 4-0 rout of the USA on 
Tuesday night. The hosts took the lead just before half-time before pulling 
away from a demoralized US late in the second half. By the time substitute Joel 
Campbell killed off the game with a late brace, Jürgen Klinsmann’s team already 
looked totally out of ideas. Now they have to contemplate a long winter rooted 
to the bottom of the group with no points and little faith in the coach.

Costa Rica 4-0 USA: World Cup qualifying – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/nov/15/costa-rica-v-usa-world-cup-qualifying-live>
After the ill-fated experiment with 3-5-2 – or what Klinsmann insisted had 
actually been a 3-4-3 with Christian Pulisic in a roving role – against Mexico, 
theUSA <https://www.theguardian.com/football/usfootballteam> were back to a 
more familiar 4-4-2 against Costa Rica. Though other than Brad Guzan replacing 
Tim Howard after his season-ending injury in Columbus, it was the same line up 
that had spent the first half hour of the previous game chasing Mexican ghosts.

As for Costa Rica, the absence of a dedicated striker gave their starting line 
up something of the look of a 5-5-0, though when the game kicked off Johan 
Venegas was operating as something of a false nine, and something of a pest – 
fouling John Brooks early on and clearly relishing the ease with which he could 
get under Brooks’ skin as he set the tone for one of the key battles for the 
evening.

Brooks was on a yellow card coming into the game, and was always likely to be 
a significant figure on the night. Venegas clearly fancied the match-up of his 
nimbleness against a solid but not overly athletic defender, and he created the 
first chance of the game by slipping the ball between Brooks’ legs in the box, 
only to be put off his shot by an advancing Guzan and a late lunging tackle by 
Timothy Chandler. It wasn’t the last Brooks had seen of Venegas.

Costa Rica, as always, relied on patience and guile more than relentless 
pressure – probing for a lapse in concentration from a US defender, or a kind 
bounce off a heavy, unpredictable surface. In the early moments of an open game 
they had their chances – an improvised overhead kick from a seated Bryan Ruiz 
stood out – but were kept out by a solid if not exactly inspiring USA team.

That said, at first the visitors’ concentration seemed generally improved 
since Friday night, and the culprit on Mexico’s set-piece winner, Jozy 
Altidore, made early amends by being first to react to a couple of tricky Costa 
Rica set pieces with crucial interceptions, even if he wasn’t quite playing 
himself into the game at the other end.

As for the looks the USA were getting, Christian Pulisic was demonstrating the 
poise he’s being celebrated for as the latest great US soccer hope – putting 
his foot on the ball in tight spots or taking an extra touch to find the right 
angle for a dangerous ball across the box. But for the first half at least, 
these touches were pretty rather than truly threatening, as the US struggled to 
transition into any dangerous positions to give him options to pick out.

Still, given their 0-8-2 all-time record in Costa Rica, and the fact that they 
were 2-0 down within minutes in the corresponding game in 2014World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> qualifying, the US 
would have been happy to go in to the half at 0-0. And when Bobby Wood dropped 
his shoulder and drove the ball between Navas and the near post in the 41st 
minute, some greater boldness from Altidore or Pulisic would have seen them 
tapping in to the net from inches out.

As it was, it was Costa Rica who made the breakthrough.Randall Azofeifa seized 
on a Jermaine Jones error and switched the point of attack with a raking ball 
from the center line to wide left. As Christian Bolanos gave chase, Omar 
Gonzalez ambled across from his central position to follow the ball out, only 
for the ball to hold up on the surface, and for Bolanos to scoop it back into 
the space Gonzalez had vacated. There was Venegas, easily evading a desperate 
Brooks for a free glancing header across Guzan and into the net.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fusa-slump-defeat-costa-rica-jurgen-klinsmann%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a9894feaf4f4ec8d6d93d977bc7b7ede93f9d09%2F0_0_2499_1675%2F2499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=USA%20slump%20to%204-0%20defeat%20in%20Costa%20Rica%20as%20pressure%20builds%20on%20J%C3%BCrgen%20Klinsmann&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fusa-slump-defeat-costa-rica-jurgen-klinsmann%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=USA%20slump%20to%204-0%20defeat%20in%20Costa%20Rica%20as%20pressure%20builds%20on%20J%C3%BCrgen%20Klinsmann&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fusa-slump-defeat-costa-rica-jurgen-klinsmann%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a9894feaf4f4ec8d6d93d977bc7b7ede93f9d09%2F0_0_2499_1675%2F2499.jpg>
 Timmy Chandler argues with the ref in San Jose. Photograph: Carlos 
Gonzalez/AFP/Getty Images 
There was no immediate sign of the US chasing the game in the second half. 
Jones and Bradley were anchoring the center of midfield but hardly providing a 
ready conduit to connect to their attackers, while the occasional set piece 
chances they earned for Michael Bradley were ending disappointingly. You had to 
wonder what Sacha Kljestan thought of the general dearth of attacking 
imagination as he watched from the bench.

By the time we ticked past the hour the game was drifting out of the USA’s 
reach without sign of an intervention from Klinsmann. In fact the first change 
came from Costa Rica in the 66th minute, when Joel Campbell replaced the 
injured Venegas.

If the US hoped that marked the end of Costa Rica’s offensive threat they were 
about to be rudely surprised. Two minutes later, Bryan Ruiz popped up on the 
right hand side to curl a beautiful outswinging cross with the outside of his 
left boot. Bolanos ran to meet it ahead of a lagging Chandler, and his header 
was too much for Guzan to keep out.

Belatedly, Klinsmann made his move, with the hard-running Lynden Gooch 
replacing Pulisic. But in the 74th minute, with most observers still scratching 
their heads trying to work out the net gain in that move, the US fell further 
behind. A shocking first touch by Brooks, whose night was rapidly falling 
apart, allowed Campbell the simplest of clear run-ins on goal to finish low 
into the corner.

Forget changing the losing record, now the aim was damage control for the USA, 
but they remained their own worst enemies – four minutes after Brooks’ error it 
was Chandler’s turn again, as his telegraphed pass was intercepted by Ronald 
Matarrita and scooped over the top of a static US backline. There was a 
grateful Campbell again – pulling the ball down and putting the ball neatly 
into the same corner Guzan had just retrieved it from.

A rout, then, and the worst qualifying loss since 1957 for the US. The Hex 
tends to be forgiving of even the worst starts and the US will still feel they 
should qualify having played two of the three toughest games in their schedule 
of 10, but after opening their campaign with two losses they face several 
months stewing on this result until the campaign resumes in March, while Costa 
Rica, fresh off a surprise win in Trinidad on Friday, will be delighted to find 
themselves six points and ten goals clear of one of the traditional powerhouses 
of this round of qualifying.

Nothing powerful about this US team on current evidence, and despite the 
unquestioning mandate Klinsmann enjoys from US Soccer head Sunil Gulati, the 
increasingly dissatisfied fanbase will have seen nothing to suggest that the 
team is on target for the 2018 World Cup. By the time the US plays 
competitively again that tournament will be vividly clear on the horizon, but 
there’s nothing clear about where Klinsmann’s going to find inspiration from.

Costa Rica: Navas; Matarrita, Umaña, Acosta, Waston, Salvatierra; Bolaños, 
Azofeifa (Tejeda 70), Borges, Ruiz, Venegas (Campbell 67)

USA: Guzan; Besler, Brooks, González, Chandler; Pulisic (Gooch 70), Bradley, 
Jones (Kljestan 71), Johnson (Zusi 77); Altidore, Wood

Goals: Venegas 44, Bolaños 68, Campbell 74, 78
 