
Why are we prejudiced against vegetables? Is it a superficial insecurity or 
something lodged more deeply in nutritional psyche?


Is it #eatclean or just green sludge? How to sort the good from the fad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/09/is-it-eatclean-or-just-green-sludge-how-to-sort-the-good-from-the-fad>
James Truman, former editorial director of Condé Nast, has made the answer to 
this question part of his latest quest – a chic vegetarian restaurant south of 
New York’s Union Square, that aims to challenge assumptions about fine dining – 
namely that something’s missing if an animal hasn’t been caught or slaughtered 
somewhere in the chain preceding its preparation.

Two weeks since the opening night of Nix 
<https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/149/304/case.html> (named after 
the supreme court ruling that established the tomato should be classed as a 
vegetable not a fruit, which it is botanically), some answers are beginning to 
present themselves.

“We wanted to broaden the game of what a vegetarian could be, and the exciting 
thing is that people leave here not feeling they’ve been denied something,” 
says Truman, who spent his 20s following a vegan diet in the virtuous spirit of 
the vegetarian philosopher George Bernard Shaw. “They just feel like they’ve 
had something different but rather good.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnix-restaurant-vegetarian-food-new-york-james-truman-john-fraser-chipotle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4564b501bb2a9a84e9fe09b76cd016bde49f8fc%2F0_310_3600_2155%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vegetarian%20and%20proud%3A%20without%20meat%2C%20Nix%20packs%20a%20bite&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnix-restaurant-vegetarian-food-new-york-james-truman-john-fraser-chipotle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vegetarian%20and%20proud%3A%20without%20meat%2C%20Nix%20packs%20a%20bite&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnix-restaurant-vegetarian-food-new-york-james-truman-john-fraser-chipotle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4564b501bb2a9a84e9fe09b76cd016bde49f8fc%2F0_310_3600_2155%2F3600.jpg>
 Cauliflower tempura with steamed buns. ‘We wanted to broaden the game of what 
a vegetarian could be,’ says Truman. Photograph: James Edward 
fIt’s a quest that many chefs are now joining, not least in response to a 
nagging awareness that the environmental costs of producing animal proteins for 
human consumption are unaffordable.

Coupled with other unpalatable news – that meat can cause cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/26/bacon-ham-sausages-processed-meats-cancer-risk-smoking-says-who>
, revulsion at factory farm conditions – it could trigger a fairly rapid 
adoption of an alternative that can still be urbane and sexy, rather than 
overly invested in natural fibers and Birkenstocks-vibe.

“The most exciting compliment we have received from our first guests is that 
they haven’t even noticed there was no meat or fish, but found the experience 
no less satisfying.”

A traditional vegetarian restaurant, with undercurrents of piousness, 
“indigestible brown rice and tasteless steamed vegetables – a punishment of 
sorts”, is far removed from what Truman and well-knownNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> chef John Fraser, who proved the 
concept by staging meat-free Mondays at his uptown restaurant Dovetail, sought 
to create. Rather they sought a spacious, light place where Fraser could 
develop a cuisine that would challenge the conventions of vegetable-driven fare.

“The idea is to create cuisine one could develop deep cravings for,” says 
Fraser, who became vegetarian five years ago (except for when he had to taste 
meat dishes at his other establishments, Dovetail and Narcissa). “So what we’re 
going to show people is that vegetables, freshly-made, taste just as good as 
meat.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnix-restaurant-vegetarian-food-new-york-james-truman-john-fraser-chipotle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65863b7fd15eb78f320a456914181793a075fa0d%2F0_244_2620_1569%2F2620.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vegetarian%20and%20proud%3A%20without%20meat%2C%20Nix%20packs%20a%20bite&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnix-restaurant-vegetarian-food-new-york-james-truman-john-fraser-chipotle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vegetarian%20and%20proud%3A%20without%20meat%2C%20Nix%20packs%20a%20bite&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fnix-restaurant-vegetarian-food-new-york-james-truman-john-fraser-chipotle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F65863b7fd15eb78f320a456914181793a075fa0d%2F0_244_2620_1569%2F2620.jpg>
 Vegan chocolate mousse cake. ‘The idea is to create cuisine one could develop 
deep cravings for,’ says Fraser. Photograph: James Truman 
Truman and Fraser are not alone in the undertaking; their silent partner in 
the project is Steve Ells, the founder of Chipotle Mexican Grill. If all goes 
well, there’s an idea to expand Nix into a series of restaurants. “It seems to 
us the opportunities are greater than just doing one place,” says Truman. “A 
single restaurant doesn’t have much impact so we’re doing this as a model for 
many.”

The idea of vegetarian high-cuisine is beginning to take shape elsewhere, too. 
In the UK, TV chefHugh Fearnley-Whittingstall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/hughfearnleywhittingstall> has also gone 
meat free 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/aug/26/hugh-fearnley-whittingstall-vegetables>
, arguing that enough animals have been slaughtered on his behalf for one 
lifetime and that there’s an element of laziness, if not a lapse in morals and 
ethics, in sticking to the routine.Dan Barber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/24/dan-barber-blue-hill-final-meal-last-bites>
, chef of Blue Hill and author of Third Plate, advocates a diet containing a 
small amount of protein coupled with grains and vegetables, and argues 
America’s cuisine requires radical transformation.

The point, says Truman, “is people don’t want to eat meat everyday. But we 
don’t care if they’ve been to Peter Luger’s steakhouse the night before. We 
take no position. We’re not trying to convert people to a regimen of living 
that’s hard to follow unless you are fully dedicated to it”.

That fact is, the food at Nix is delectable, and it’s liberating to be free 
from the routine choices of meat or fish and, indeed, from the structure of 
starter-main-dessert. With a tandoor oven left over from the Indian restaurant 
that preceded Nix on the site, the menu mimics an Indian thali with many 
smaller plates gradually building in intensity and weight.

The best dishes – charred broccoli rabe, Nix cottage cheese and Calabrian 
peppers, bluefoot mushrooms with heirloom polenta – tend to the lighter side of 
the menu. The cocktails, too, are outstanding, in particular the blackberry and 
juniper. A reviewer at Gothamist raved last week: “It’s early, to be sure, but 
Nix seems poised to be one of the best openings of 2016 so far.” Similarly 
flattering entries on Yelp are accumulating.

The essential point of Nix, that vegetarian food should be about 
sophistication, not denial, hits the spot.
 