
Lining up from dawn with backpacks and plastic bags full of cash, Venezuelans 
flocked to banks across the country on Tuesday to ditch 100-bolivar bills after
President Nicolás Maduro’s surprise move to pull them from circulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/venezuela-pulls-most-common-banknote-from-circulation-to-beat-mafia>
.

 Soldiers watched as people jostled in lines clutching Venezuela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/venezuela>’s largest denomination bill – now 
worth just three US cents on the streets – which they have to deposit before it 
becomes officially worthless.

 Maduro announced the measure on Sunday, to the consternation of Venezuelans 
who have become accustomed to stashing large volumes of cash at home as the 
bolivar’s value has plunged in the crisis-hit Opec nation.

 Many businesses stopped receiving them immediately.

 Accused by critics of taking a nonsensical and rushed measure, Maduro, 54, 
justified it as an attempt to outwit international mafias, especially on the 
Colombian border, hoarding bolivars for contraband.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fvenezuela-100-bolivar-bills-sudden-ban-colombia-nicolas-maduro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0de6d2b8b70b164b77a4ff3964f8212c38a7707%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Venezuelans%20rush%20to%20ditch%20100-bolivar%20bills%20after%20president's%20sudden%20ban&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fvenezuela-100-bolivar-bills-sudden-ban-colombia-nicolas-maduro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Venezuelans%20rush%20to%20ditch%20100-bolivar%20bills%20after%20president%27s%20sudden%20ban&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fvenezuela-100-bolivar-bills-sudden-ban-colombia-nicolas-maduro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0de6d2b8b70b164b77a4ff3964f8212c38a7707%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 A 100-bolivar note is seen next to a sign that reads ‘100-bolivar notes are 
received until today,’ at a store in Caracas, Venezuela, on Monday. Photograph: 
Marco Bello/Reuters 
“To the people of Venezuela <https://www.theguardian.com/world/venezuela>, 
especially pensioners, drivers, business people, housewives and workers … I 
tell you that you don’t need to worry,” said Maduro in a communique on Tuesday. 
“The measures are in your interests.”

 Displaying images of huge piles of confiscated bills, officials say criminals 
have tried to sabotage Venezuela’s economy – at the behest of the US Treasury – 
by siphoning out bolivars to warehouses in Switzerland, Poland, Ukraine, Spain, 
Germany and the Czech Republic.

 Venezuela closed its border with Colombia on Monday, where the government 
said 117 people had been arrested and 104m bolivars – $27,000 at the black 
market rate – confiscated.

 The country is undergoing a major crisis: inflation is forecast by local 
economists for this year at more than 500% and the currency has fallen more 
than 75% in a year against the dollar – leaving millions skipping meals.

What's it like living in Venezuela? Share your experiences
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/whats-it-like-living-in-venezuela-share-your-experiences>
Tuesday’s bank lines were reminiscent of the now-ubiquitous scenes outside 
shops where food and medicines have grown scarce during Maduro’s more than 
three-year presidency.

 The bills will officially be pulled on Thursday, after which Venezuelans have 
10 days to take any left to the central bank.

 Many are questioning how the country can collect more than six billion bills 
in such a short period.

 “This country is chaotic and every day it gets worse. What’s the point?” said 
Walter Castagnoli, 43, an unemployed driver with a 13-year-old son lining up to 
deposit a satchel full of bills at a bank in Caracas.

 New higher-denomination bills are due to start being released on Thursday. 

 