
The Andrews government re-gazetted an area of Barwon maximum security adult 
jail as a youth detention unit just over 24 hours after theVictorian court of 
appeal found a previous attempt to use the jail was unlawful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/barwon-court-upholds-ruling-that-juveniles-are-being-held-at-adult-prison-unlawfully>
.

The government was ordered on Wednesday to move the 12 children remaining at 
Barwon to an “appropriate” youth justice facility by 4.30pm on Friday.

The order was made on the basis that the government had failed to take into 
consideration everything that ought to have been considered before declaring an 
area of the prison a youth justice facility, and left open the possibility that 
the government could simply repeat the process, correcting those administrative 
mistakes.

On Thursday, the minister for children, families and youth affairs, Jenny 
Mikakos, said the government had addressed the matters raised by the court and 
re-gazetted the area dubbed Grevillea unit as a youth justice facility and 
remand centre. She maintained the decision was in the best interests of the 
children.

“Barwon prison’s Grevillea unit is safe, secure and is functioning 
appropriately as a youth justice and remand centre,” she said in a statement. 
“The government has always said that offenders were sent to the Grevillea unit 
because the damage caused by the riot made parts of the Parkville facility 
unfit for purpose. As a result, it is in the best interests of the offenders to 
be placed in this safe and secure facility.”

Supreme court upholds ruling that children are being held at adult prison 
unlawfully
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/barwon-court-upholds-ruling-that-juveniles-are-being-held-at-adult-prison-unlawfully>
The Human Rights Law Centre, which secured the court decision, criticised the 
move as an act of “utter bad faith”.

The centre’s executive director, Hugh de Kretser, who represented the 
remaining children in Barwon alongside the Fitzroy Legal Service, said the 
government had spent an extraordinary amount of resources to keep the children 
in an adult jail, when there were beds available at existing youth justice 
facilities.

“The government can try again to change the name but it cannot change the 
facts,” he said. “Barwon adult prison remains unfit for children.

“It is an extraordinary act of bad faith for the minister to turn around and 
re-gazette Barwon adult jail, one day after the highest court in this state 
said that she acted unlawfully in transferring and detaining children there.”

The court of appeal decision, published online 
<http://www.supremecourt.vic.gov.au/home/contact+us/publications/minister+for+families+and+children+and+ors+v+certain+children+reasons+for+decision>
, upheld a previous decision by judge Greg Garde that the minister failed to 
consider, among other things, the role of the secretary of the Department of 
Health and Human Services in running the centre and the entitlements of 
detainees, which included the provision of welfare services.

Garde, in his judgment handed down last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/21/keeping-juveniles-in-adult-jail-is-unlawful-victorian-judge-rules>
, said: “Essentially the department and the minister were flying blind as to 
the real situation and suitability of the Grevillea unit when the orders in 
council were made. According to the evidence, the Grevillea unit was taken over 
effectively sight unseen.”

Garde also found the use of Barwon as a youth detention centre breached the 
Victorian charter of human rights and responsibilities but the court of appeal 
adjourned debate on that point until at least February in order to deal with 
the appeal quickly.

Mikakos said the government had done a significant amount of work to establish 
education and health services and a separate visitors’ centre at the new 
Grevilia unit, so that it complied with legislative requirements.

She said on Wednesday that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/barwon-court-upholds-ruling-that-juveniles-are-being-held-at-adult-prison-unlawfully>
 damage to the Parkville youth detention centre, caused by riots in November, 
had destroyed up to 60 beds and significantly reduced its operational capacity, 
and that if the children in Barwon were put into existing facilities at 
Parkville or Malmsbury youth detention centres they would be in crowded 
conditions.

She accused lawyers of having an “ideological fixation” with fighting the 
government on this issue.

The government is doing emergency fortification work on the Parkville cells, 
where detainees were able to escape by climbing through the roof, but they are 
also planning a significant redesign and reconstruction which could put units 
out of commission for months.

“Our hard working staff deserve to feel safe when they go to work in our youth 
justice facilities and we will do what’s needed to ensure that happens,” 
Mikakos said.

De Kretser said the HRLC would discuss possible legal responses to the 
government’s decision with its clients.
 