
Travellers who are short of cash (and don’t mind a spot of dishwashing) could 
bag themselves a free holiday in Italy this winter thanks to an initiative that 
facilitates bartering between bed and breakfast hosts and their guests.

Running from 14-20 November, La Settimana del Baratto 
<http://www.settimanadelbaratto.it/en/> – or Barter Week – encourages 
travellers to exchange goods and services for a free stay in thousands of 
Italian B&Bs.

To take part, prospective guests can list what they have to offer on the 
Barter Week site. Alternatively, guests can browse the wishlist of B&Bs and 
contact them to negotiate their stay.

The wishlist currently includes a huge range of requests. Some hosts, for 
example, will let you stay in exchange for quality local produce from your home 
region or country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvisitors-to-italy-can-stay-for-free-by-sharing-skills-and-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2889e9096e7d3277c9590d020496821561a8d831%2F0_274_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Visitors%20to%20Italy%20can%20stay%20for%20free%20by%20sharing%20skills%20and%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvisitors-to-italy-can-stay-for-free-by-sharing-skills-and-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Visitors%20to%20Italy%20can%20stay%20for%20free%20by%20sharing%20skills%20and%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvisitors-to-italy-can-stay-for-free-by-sharing-skills-and-goods%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2889e9096e7d3277c9590d020496821561a8d831%2F0_274_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 B&BSan Marco Venezia 
<http://www.bed-and-breakfast.it/en/veneto/bb-san-marco-venezia/435?gclid=CN-Nk8bU5M8CFREo0wod3UwKvw>
. Photograph: bbday.it 
Others will give you a room in exchange for a live musical performance, while 
many are bartering for some help with the business – from translating the 
website or conducting a photo shoot to painting the shutters or doing some 
gardening.

Barter Week was launched in 2009 by Italian B&B bookings site 
bed-and-breakfast.it <http://www.bed-and-breakfast.it/> after the team 
discovered that one of the B&Bs listed on the site used to practise barter 
instead of normal payments for its business.

In the first year, around 1,000 B&Bs signed up to offer a barter service for 
one week during low season. Now the number taking part has doubled.

Last year’s Barter Week saw over 10,000 requests and proposals listed on the 
site. According to data it has collected, the most commonly requested barter 
from B&B hosts was travel itself – with 25% of owners offering their home in 
exchange for a stay elsewhere.

After that, B&B owners most commonly asked for home improvement help (19%) or 
assistance with communication and marketing (15%).


On the traveller side, the most commonly offered barter (37%) was help with 
communication projects – photo and video, translations or social media. After 
that, 14% offered to help with housework or repairs and 12% offered lessons in 
specialist skills, from knitting to belly dancing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvisitors-to-italy-can-stay-for-free-by-sharing-skills-and-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe81d6d0b73ff83595d34432c2d3d83501f2f5343%2F0_98_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Visitors%20to%20Italy%20can%20stay%20for%20free%20by%20sharing%20skills%20and%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvisitors-to-italy-can-stay-for-free-by-sharing-skills-and-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Visitors%20to%20Italy%20can%20stay%20for%20free%20by%20sharing%20skills%20and%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fvisitors-to-italy-can-stay-for-free-by-sharing-skills-and-goods%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe81d6d0b73ff83595d34432c2d3d83501f2f5343%2F0_98_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
 B&B Nonna Rana, Cannara. Photograph: bbday.it 
This year has already seen some unusual barters take place. Rome B&B A Casa di 
Lia 
<http://www.bed-and-breakfast.it/en/latium/bb-a-casa-di-lia-home-in-rome-roma/11029>
 bartered two nights for a mosaic representing the helmet of Achilles made by 
an artist from Naples. On its wishlist it also asked also for a trained hawk, 
whereupon a falconer got in contact with information on falconry lessons.

In Naples, B&B DormidaMè 
<http://www.bed-and-breakfast.it/en/veneto/dormidame-bb-napoli/21102>, 
exchanged hospitality for natural soaps made from waste oil, while theMasseria 
San Martino 
<http://www.bed-and-breakfast.it/it/puglia/masseria-san-martino-pezze-di-greco/4112>
 inPuglia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/04/puglia-guide-italy-hotels-bari-brindisi-foggia-salento>
 is hosting a Russian woman who is helping harvest olives.

Although Barter Week <http://www.barattobb.it/> fosters a large number of 
exchanges, some B&Bs accept barters all year round. These can be found on the
barattobb.it <http://barattobb.it/> site, which lists about 1,000 places to 
stay.
 