
Volkswagen engineer James Liang pleaded guilty on Friday to one count of 
conspiracy in the company’s emissions cheating scandal and has agreed to 
cooperate in the widening criminal investigation. This is the first criminal 
charge in the justice department’s year-long investigation into the company’s 
rigging of federal air pollution tests.

US finds evidence Volkswagen acted criminally in emissions scandal – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/16/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-criminal-evidence>
VW previously admitted to cheating on US diesel emissions tests for several 
years after researchers found about 500,000 of its cars contained a software 
that would reduce emissions while the car was undergoing a 
government-administered emissions test. When the car was on the road and the 
cheat device was turned off, the cars emitted up to 40 times the legal limit 
for nitrogen oxide, according to the Environmental Protection Agency. Such 
levels can cause respiratory problems.

VW agreed to pay $15.3bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/volkswagen-emissions-scandal> 
to its customers and regulators in July. The settlement did not preclude 
criminal charges.


“We will follow the facts wherever they go and we will determine whether to 
bring criminal charges against any companies or individual wrongdoers,” Sally 
Yates, US deputy attorney general, said at the time.

Liang pleaded guilty to charges of conspiracy to commit wire fraud against US 
regulators and customers and to violating the Clean Air Act. He faces a maximum 
penalty of five years in prison. By cooperating with the government, he could 
potentially reduce his prison sentence.

Liang worked at Volkswagen since 1983, beginning in Germany and then moving to 
the US in 2008 – two years after the government says the conspiracy began. He 
was part of the team of engineers working on the diesel engine at the center of 
the emissions tests cheating scandal. The 62-year-old appeared inDetroit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/detroit> federal court with a translator. 
His sentence is not expected to be announced until January.

Liang’s plea comes just a day after Vermont’s attorney general, William 
Sorrell, said the settlement reached over the summer was inadequate and 
announced that Vermont was bringing its own lawsuit against VW’s affiliates.

“This was not a mistake. This was not a ‘whoops’ situation,” Sorrell said on 
Thursday 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/6da6dac5293d496a938a97ab067df2e3/vermont-sues-volkswagen-over-emissions-rigging-scandal>
. “This was intentional fraud on a massive scale.”

The lawsuit seeks penalties for violations of Vermont’s environmental and 
consumer laws. The company addressed the suit: “To date, Volkswagen has agreed 
to buy back or modify affected 2.0L TDI vehicles, establish a $2.7 bn 
environmental remediation trust, for which Vermont is eligible to receive 
$17.8m, and invest $2bn for infrastructure and awareness to increase the use of 
zero emission vehicles across the United States.”

By the end of August, about 210,000 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/cfaac2524d2a49ac852e926d9c2b3c89/over-40-pct-vw-owners-seek-emissions-cheating-settlement>
 of the 475,000 owners of affected VW cars have registered to settle with the 
company as part of the $15bn settlement. According to the attorneys working on 
the class-action suit, only 235 people have opted out of the settlement to 
pursue legal action on their own.

“Volkswagen is continuing to cooperate with the US Department of Justice. We 
cannot comment on this indictment,” the company said in a statement.

A final decision on the settlement is expected on 18 October. Recent sales 
figures show VWsales dropped 9% 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/2dff37167e26406db636aa0074693c25/us-auto-sales-expected-drop-august>
 compared with last August.

The Associated Press contributed to this report. 
 