
A nearly $15bn settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/28/volkswagen-settlement-buy-back-cars-emissions-rigging>
 over Volkswagen’s emissions cheating scandal cleared a key hurdle on Tuesday, 
with a federal judge giving preliminary approval to the deal that includes an 
option for owners to have the carmaker buy back their vehicles.

US district judge Charles Breyer called the settlement an “enormous effort” by 
attorneys from both sides and urged Volkswagen owners who may want to opt out 
and pursue their own lawsuits to consider the deal’s environmental achievements.

Volkswagen to pay $14.7bn settlement and buy back cars from consumers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/28/volkswagen-settlement-buy-back-cars-emissions-rigging>
“Because that’s significant, and that’s part of what you’re attempting to 
achieve in this settlement,” said Breyer, who is overseeing consumer lawsuits 
and government allegations that Volkswagen’s diesel engines cheated on US 
emissions tests.

The German carmaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/22/volkswagen-handling-emissions-scandal-shambles-investors-agm-german-carmaker>
 has agreed to spend up to $10bn buying back or repairing about 475,000 
Volkswagens and Audi vehicles with 2-liter diesel engines and paying their 
owners an additional $5,100 to $10,000 each. Details about the vehicle repairs 
have not been finalized.

The settlement also includes $2.7bn for unspecified environmental mitigation 
and an additional $2bn to promote zero-emissions vehicles.

The judge’s decision allows attorneys to notify vehicle owners of the terms 
and consumers to use a settlement website to determine how much compensation 
they would get. They could object and opt out, allowing them to pursue legal 
action against Volkswagen on their own.

The deal does not cover about 85,000 more-powerful Volkswagens and Audis with 
3-liter engines also caught up in the emissions scandal.

Volkswagen has acknowledged that the cars were programmed to turn on emissions 
controls during government lab tests and turn them off while on the road. 
Investigators found that the cars emitted more than 40 times the legal limit of 
nitrogen oxide, which can cause respiratory problems.

The company still faces billions more dollars in fines and penalties and 
possible criminal charges.

Breyer’s preliminary approval of the settlement was expected. The judge, who 
is set to make a final decision in October, has kept close tabs on the 
negotiations and praised the efforts of attorneys and a court-appointed 
settlement master who helped broker the deal.

Still, attorneys for vehicle owners spent considerable time in court on 
Tuesday presenting what they called the benefits of the deal and highlighting 
positive feedback, including from the media.

“We have designed a settlement that places the consumers, the owners and 
lessees in a central, decisive role,” said Elizabeth Cabraser, lead attorney 
for Volkswagen owners.

Robert Giuffra, an attorney for the automaker, said it supported the deal.

“This is a very fair and reasonable settlement … and it allows Volkswagen to 
turn the page and begin to make things right in the United States and begin to 
re-earn the trust of our customers,” he said.
 