
German prosecutors have deepened the crisis at Volkswagen by widening an 
investigation into suspected market manipulation to include the chair of the 
carmaker’s supervisory board, Hans Dieter Pötsch.

The investigation relates to accusations that VW’s management withheld 
information about the company’semissions scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/sep/23/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-explained-diesel-cars>
 from shareholders. In September 2015 it had emerged that VW had installed 
software to deactivate pollution controls on more than 11m diesel vehicles sold 
worldwide.

Following a complaint by financial watchdog BaFin, prosecutors are already 
investigating the former VW bossMartin Winterkorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/23/volkswagen-ceo-martin-winterkorn-quits-over-diesel-emissions-scandal>
 and brand chief Herbert Diess. Pötsch was the Wolfsburg-based carmaker’s 
finance chief between 2003 and 2015, during which he played a key role in 
communicating the company’s outlook to investors.

The 65-year-old Austrian moved from the company’s management to its advisory 
board in October 2015, shortly after the emissions scandal erupted. According 
to German weeklyDer Spiegel 
<http://www.spiegel.de/wirtschaft/unternehmen/volkswagen-hans-dieter-poetsch-liess-sich-20-millionen-euro-garantieren-a-1088674.html>
, Pötsch’s move earned him a bonus of almost €20m (£17.8m) – a reward that was 
calculated on the basis of VW’s pre-crisis performance.

If allegations are proven to be true, Pötsch could potentially face a prison 
sentence of up to 10 years.

Several VW investors have taken legal action to claim compensation for the 
losses they have made as a result of the emissions scandal. The regional court 
in Braunschweighas collected 1,400 complaints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/vw-volkswagen-investors-damages-emissions-scandal-germany>
, pointing to a damages total of about €8bn.

A spokesperson for the carmaker, which employs approximately 600,000 people 
worldwide, said the company would fully cooperate in the state prosecutor’s 
investigation.

“Based on a thorough examination by internal and external legal experts, the 
company reaffirms its belief that VW’s management fulfilled its duties to 
inform the capital market,” VW said on Sunday.

VW said the company and Pötsch, who became chairman in October 2015, would 
fully support the prosecutor’s office in its investigation.

Many car brands emit more pollution than Volkswagen, report finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/19/many-car-brands-emit-more-pollution-than-volkswagen-report-finds>
VW is controlled by the Porsche and Piëch families through their holding 
company Porsche SE. Wolfgang Porsche released a statement on Sunday stating 
that the two families stood with unqualified support behind Pötsch and believed 
the management had acted in accordance with the law throughout.

Stephan Weil, the state premier of Lower Saxony who shares a seat on the 
carmaker’s supervisory board with Pötsch, declined to comment “out of respect 
to the ongoing investigation”.

Adding to the company’s woes on Sunday, German media reported that a US 
regulator had found another cheat device aimed at lowering carbon dioxide 
emissions in cars made by VW’s Audi subsidiary.

Bild am Sonntag said the software lowered carbon dioxide emissions by 
detecting whether a car’s steering wheel was turned as it would be if it was 
driving on a road. If the steering wheel was not turned, as if it was being 
tested in a laboratory, the software activated a gear-shifting programme that 
produced less carbon dioxide, allowing the car to meet the emissions criteria.
 