
The Volkswagen group confirmed on Tuesday that it has negotiated a $4.3bn 
(£3.53bn) draft settlement with US regulators to resolve itsdiesel emissions 
troubles, alongside plans to plead guilty to criminal misconduct charges. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/sep/23/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-explained-diesel-cars>

The guilty plea is part of the deal to settle the scandal, as the carmaker 
looks to restore its tarnished global brand.Volkswagen (VW) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/vw-volkswagen> said that, with the 
addition of the fine, its diesel scandal costs will exceed the nearly €18.2bn 
(£15.76bn) it set aside to handle the problem. VW added that it will face 
oversight by an independent monitor over the next three years.

 The company’s supervisory board is to meet on Wednesday to approve the civil 
and criminal settlement with the US Justice Department. VW said the supervisory 
board and the management board would meet on Tuesday or Wednesday to approve 
the deal. The plea will need the approval of a US judge.

Investment group Evercore ISI said in a research note that it believes the 
“settlement is intended to draw a line under all remaining US-related legal 
risk. This is good news.



 “The most important news is that VW managed to come to an agreement that 
allows the company to move on from here. It’s a major relief that this doesn’t 
get dragged into the new US administration,” Evercore ISI said.

VW has raced to get a deal done before President Obama leaves office on 20 
January, amid fears that a change in administration could drag out the 
settlement for months.

 VW admitted in September 2015 to installing secret software in hundreds of 
thousands of US diesel cars to cheat exhaust emissions tests and make them 
appear cleaner than they were on the road.As many as 11m vehicles could have 
similar software installed worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/10/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-timeline-events>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fvolkswagen-confirms-43-billion-us-payment-over-diesel-emissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F703ea242120efbf54904dbeb73ecd6435da2fb91%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Volkswagen%20confirms%20%244.3bn%20payment%20over%20diesel%20emissions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fvolkswagen-confirms-43-billion-us-payment-over-diesel-emissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Volkswagen%20confirms%20%244.3bn%20payment%20over%20diesel%20emissions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fvolkswagen-confirms-43-billion-us-payment-over-diesel-emissions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F703ea242120efbf54904dbeb73ecd6435da2fb91%2F0_0_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Volkswagen executive Oliver Schmidt has been charged by US prosecutors. 
Photograph: EPA 
 On Monday, a VW executive, Oliver Schmidt, the second VW employee charged by 
US prosecutors,was accused of conspiracy to defraud the United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/vw-volkswagen-emissions-cheating-fbi-arrest>
 over the company’s emissions, cheating and the automaker was accused of 
concealing the fraud from regulators.

 The Justice Department’s settlement with VW will not end its investigation 
into individual misconduct and more executives may face charges, sources said.

 VW must still spend the next two years buying back or fixing dirty U.S. 
vehicles as well as facing unresolved lawsuits from US investors and about 20 
US states.

 Volkswagen’s expected guilty plea is in contrast to Justice Department 
deferred prosecution agreements withToyota Motor Corp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/30/toyota-expands-recall-to-337m-cars-over-airbags-and-emissions-control>
 andGeneral Motors Co 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/19/many-car-brands-emit-more-pollution-than-volkswagen-report-finds>
, which were both accused of misleading regulators or consumers and paid fines 
of $1.2bn and $900m respectively but were not required to plead guilty.

 VW warned in a financial disclosure that the impact of the US settlement on 
2016 group results cannot be quantified yet, citing “various further factors”.

 In late October, the manufacturer said it expected the group’s operating 
margin to come in at the upper end of a 5% to 6% target range before one-off 
items, compared with 6% in 2015. The carmaker is due to announce 2016 results 
on 14 March.

 Porsche SE, the main shareholder of VW, issued a profit warning after the VW 
news.

 The settlement on US criminal and civil fines will negatively affect Porsche 
SE’s results for 2016, the company said, adding that it is possible the net 
result may drop below the previously reported range of €1.4bn to €2.4bn.

 On Tuesday, VW Group said it had record sales of 10.3m vehicles last year, 
including a 12% increase in December. That figure should put VW ahead of 
Japanese rival Toyota as the world’s largest car producer by volume for the 
year.

 On Monday, VW shares rose 4.2% to their highest level since September 2015, 
topping the German blue-chip DAX index, thanks to optimism about the expected 
US criminal settlement. The shares are still 10% below pre-scandal levels.


 