
Friday 18 September 

Volkswagen is told to recall 482,000 cars in the US after it is caught 
deploying sophisticated software to cheat emissions tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2015/sep/24/vw-volkswagen-diesel-emissions-carmaker-why-video>
 and allow its cars to produce up to 40 times more pollution than allowed.The 
Environment Protection Agency claims VW installed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/18/epa-california-investigate-volkswagen-clean-air-violations>
 defeat devices, meaning the cars only cut their nitrogen oxide (NOx) pollution 
during certification tests. Its investigation was prompted by research by the 
International Council on Clean Technology (ICCT), which had finally forced VW 
to admit its actions.

The EPA says: “We intend to hold Volkswagen responsible. We expected better 
from VW. Using a defeat device in cars to evade clean-air standards is illegal 
and a threat to public health.” The agency warns that VW will be further 
investigated and could face other action for breaching the Clean Air Act, 
including a maximum fine of up to $37,500 per vehicle, or $18bn (£11.8bn).

Sunday 20 September

VW starts showing some contrition, promising to launch an investigation of its 
own. Chief executiveMartin Winterkorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/23/volkswagen-chief-martin-winterkorn-quits-emissions-scandal>
 says: “I personally am deeply sorry that we have broken the trust of our 
customers and the public. We do not and will not tolerate violations of any 
kind of our internal rules or of the law.”

Monday 21 September

The noxious stench of faked emissions tests spreads to Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – and the Frankfurt stock 
exchange.

Within minutes of the market opening on Monday morning, about €15bn (£11bn) is 
wiped off VW’s share price. The German government warns that the VW scandal is 
jeopardising the reputation of Germany’s entire automotive industry.

The Guardian view on the VW scandal: punish the guilty | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/25/the-guardian-view-on-the-vw-scandal-punish-the-guilty>
Concerns also grow about the extent of possible test-fixing, with campaigners 
claiming that the European testing system is not fit for purpose. The possible 
ramifications for car manufacturers – and public health – start to emerge as 
the ICCT warns that other vehicles are emitting far more NOx than official 
tests suggest.

VW presses ahead with a glitzy product launch in New York that features Lenny 
Kravitz singing – and an accompanying appearance on stage from US chief 
executive Michael Horn, who declares: “We have totally screwed up.”

Tuesday 22 September 

The morning after the party, the headache grows. Volkswagen now admits there 
are 11m cars worldwide fitted with its defeat devices. The numbers could mean 
that VW’s diesels have pumped out as much as 900,000 tonnes of extra NOx 
emissions a year – about 25 times more than the UK’s controversialDrax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/draxgroup> power station – with huge 
implications for public health.

Winterkorn apologises again, releasing a hastily filmed video saying he was 
“endlessly sorry”. However, he insists he will not resign, even though VW 
shares slump again and the group tells investors it is earmarking €6.5bn to 
deal with the fallout.

Governments around Europe call for action: Germany’s chancellor, Angela 
Merkel, demands “complete transparency” and sends a transport ministry team 
into the firm’s Wolfsburg HQ. Britain and France call for an EU commission 
inquiry.

Analysts start talking about a “Libor moment” for the motor industry, and 
speculate on the uncertain future of diesel cars.

Shares in other carmakers slip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/24/bmw-shares-emissions-volkswagen>
: Peugeot is down 7%, with BMW and Daimler, the owner of Mercedes-Benz, having 
5% wiped off their value.

Wednesday 23 September
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fvw-ceo-quits-amid-diesel-scandal-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443025843309%2FKP_481545_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=VW%20CEO%20quits%20amid%20diesel%20scandal%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fvw-ceo-quits-amid-diesel-scandal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=VW%20CEO%20quits%20amid%20diesel%20scandal%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F23%2Fvw-ceo-quits-amid-diesel-scandal-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F23%2F1443025843309%2FKP_481545_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Volkswagen chief executive Martin Winterkorn resigns, taking responsibility 
for the German carmaker’s rigging of US emissions tests. 
Winterkorn finally bows to the inevitable and falls on his sword, protesting 
he was “not aware of any wrongdoing on my part”.He walks away with a €28m 
pension pot. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/24/vw-emissions-scandal-boss-martin-winterkorn-pension-pot>

 Lawyers start to circle: several class-action lawsuits are filed in the US 
and Canada, with UK firms saying they are preparing for similar cases here on 
behalf of VW owners. Criminal investigations are launched by the US Justice 
Department, whileGerman public prosecutors consider the merits of a case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/25/the-guardian-view-on-the-vw-scandal-punish-the-guilty>
. VW establishes a special committee to investigate, warning that heads will 
roll.

 Rival carmakers insist that VW is an isolated case. But criticism deepens 
over how much governments knew, and when, about true NOx emissions from diesel 
engines compared with test results in the motor industry.

It also emerges that Germany was aware of defeat devices and that Britain, 
France andGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> had lobbied to 
dilute proposed real-world emissions tests for diesel engines, now delayed 
until at least 2017.

Thursday 24 September

Germany confirms that VW vehicles with software installed to cheat emissions 
tests were sold across Europe.

Top German economists warn that the VW scandal could jeopardise the country’s 
growth, and could now be a bigger problem for the wider German economy than 
Greece’s debt.

BMW shares take a further hit after transport campaigners claim their diesels 
also far exceed emissions limits in real-world tests.

Under pressure from environmental groups and a prospective parliamentary 
grilling, the UK’s Department for Transport says it will start its own inquiry 
into car emissions, including running new lab tests and comparing the results 
with cars on the road. France and Italy also announce action including random 
checks.

Friday 25 September
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Fvolkswagen-appoints-matthias-muller-as-new-chief-executive-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443202198608%2FKP_483384_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Volkswagen%20appoints%20Matthias%20M%C3%BCller%20as%20new%20chief%20executive%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Fvolkswagen-appoints-matthias-muller-as-new-chief-executive-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Volkswagen%20appoints%20Matthias%20M%C3%BCller%20as%20new%20chief%20executive%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F25%2Fvolkswagen-appoints-matthias-muller-as-new-chief-executive-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F25%2F1443202198608%2FKP_483384_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Volkswagen name Matthias Müller, the head of the group’s Porsche unit, as the 
new chief executive. 
Volkswagen unveils its new boss, Matthias Müller, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2015/sep/25/volkswagen-appoints-matthias-muller-as-new-chief-executive-video>
 formerly head of its Porsche division. The carmaker then blames the emissions 
scandal on a “small group” of people and says a small number of unnamed staff 
have been suspended.

Rival car manufacturers angrily rebut claims they they employed similar 
methods, the EPA promises to “up its game” on the testing of cars, and the UK 
government insists it had not been given enough information to act on 
misleading test results.
 