
A Volkswagen executive was charged on Monday with conspiracy to defraud the 
United States in the latest chapter of the long-running scandal over the 
company’s deliberate cheating on emissions tests.

Oliver Schmidt, who was general manager in charge of VW’s environmental and 
engineering office in Michigan, did not enter a plea at an initial appearance 
in US district court in Miami on Monday and was ordered held pending a hearing 
on Thursday.


Schmidt, who was shackled and wearing a jail uniform, was charged with fraud 
and conspiracy in not disclosing a cheating device used to rig US diesel 
emissions tests from 2006 through 2015.

As VW’s former head of compliance in the US from 2014 until March 2015, 
Schmidt would have been in charge of the company’s adherence to emissions 
regulations during the scandal, though not at its beginning.


He was arrested by FBI agents in Florida on Saturday after attempting to 
return to Germany from a vacation there, the justice department said. News of 
the arrest wasfirst reported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/09/business/volkswagen-diesel-emissions-investigation-settlement.html?ribbon-ad-idx=5&rref=business>
 by the New York Times.

VW agrees further $1bn settlement deal over emissions scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/vw-agrees-further-1bn-settlement-deal-regarding-emissions-scandal>
The arrest and court appearance come as VW nears a $3bn plus – and potentially 
$4bn – settlement with the justice department and Environmental Protection 
Agency to resolve civil and criminal investigations into the diesel scandal. 
Talks are still under way about some details of the settlements and no deal has 
been reached, sources said.

A Volkswagen spokesman, Mario Guerreiro, said the company “continues to 
cooperate with the Department of Justice as we work to resolve remaining 
matters in the United States”.


Individuals affected the world over 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/volkswagen-faces-class-action-suit-in-australia-over-emissions-scandal-1447910466>
 have filedclass-action suits 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-volkswagen-emissions-lawsuit-idUSKCN10D0M3> 
against the company since the scandal was first made public, most recentlyin 
the UK on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/dieselgate-volkswagen-uk-motorists-class-action-suit>
.

In September 2015 the company admitted to installing “defeat devices” on its 
diesel-powered vehicles, which caused them to emit lower levels of the 
greenhouse gas nitrous oxide during testing. The following June, VW settled 
with the US federal trade commission and environmental protection agency in 
addition to agreeing to buy back cars from consumers for a total cost estimated 
at $15.3bn.


Schmidt is the second person to be arrested in conjunction with the emissions 
cheating; in October Volkswagen engineer James Robert Liang pleaded guilty on 
one count of conspiracy to defraud the government.

The emissions cheating was first discovered by a small research center at West 
Virginia University called the Center for Alternative Fuels, Engines and 
Emissions (Cafee <http://www.cafee.wvu.edu/>). In 2013, the center received a 
$70,000 grant to study emissions and set about determining why all auto 
emissions were not as efficient as Volkswagen’s.
 