
Volkswagen has settled a damaging dispute with two of its suppliers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/volkswagen-supplier-clash-stops-manufacturing-at-six-plants>
 that hit car production at more than half of its German factories.

After more than 20 hours of negotiations that lasted through the night, the 
German carmaker said on Tuesday that it had reached an agreement with CarTrim, 
which makes seats, and ES Automobilguss, which manufactures cast iron parts for 
gearboxes. The dispute affected almost 28,000 workers at six of VW’s 10 
factories inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>.

The Wolfsburg-based company halted production of the popular Golf and Passat 
cars at the start of the week, as well as assembly of engines, gearboxes and 
emissions systems.

In a statement, VW said that the suppliers would start delivering parts again 
“in the near future” and that the affected factories would gradually resume 
production.

Reeling from the emissions scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2015/sep/24/vw-volkswagen-diesel-emissions-carmaker-why-video>
, which has resulted in a sales slump and billions of euros of costs, VW had 
indicated that it would be pushing for price cuts from its suppliers. It has 
set aside €18bn to cover litigation and other costs of the scandal, after 
admitting last September that 11million diesel-powered cars around the world 
were fitted with software designed to cheat emissions tests.

Last week VW asked a German court to take action against Prevent, the 
Bosnia-based parent group of CarTrim and ES Automobilguss, for refusing to 
follow an order to resume deliveries. The dispute centred on a cancelled 
contract.

Prevent’s German subsidiaries stopped delivering parts to VW  
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-08-22/vw-restarts-talks-as-supplier-feud-expands-to-golf-production>
when it refused to reimburse the supplier for changes made at its factories 
before the start of a new contract that was then cancelled.

Olaf Lies, the economy minister of the state of Lower Saxony, where VW is 
based, and a member of the company’s supervisory board, has said that the 
dispute had hit VW at the worst possible time. Whether VW’s management should 
face questions for being overly reliant on a single supplier required 
clarification, he said.

Germany’s economy ministry had urged both sides to drop their dispute, 
expressing concern about the impact on jobs. The German Association of Supply 
Chain Management, Procurement and Logistics has warned of knock-on effects on 
500 other companies that supply parts for the Golf.

A VW spokeswoman said it was difficult to predict when production would be 
resumed and that decisions would be made on a site-by-site basis.

At Emden, where the company makes the Passat, production was halted last 
Thursday when the carmaker ran out of seats. On Monday, production ceased at 
Wolfsburg, which normally makes 2,200 Golfs a day and employs 10,000 people; 
Zwickau, which produces Golfs and Passats; and Braunschweig, which makes 
chassis components and plastic parts.

Kassel, which produces transmission and exhaust systems, was due to switch to 
short-time working on Thursday but is now ramping up production again. It was 
unclear whether Salzgitter, which is involved in engine production, would 
suspend production on Wednesday as planned.

Analysts at investment bank UBS have estimated that a one-week production 
stoppage at Wolfsburg could cut VW’s profits by €100m, while analysts at 
Commerzbank have put the damage at €70m a week.

 