
Volkswagen has been thrown into another crisis after a dispute with a supplier 
forced it to halt production at six plants and cut the hours of nearly 28,000 
workers.

VW <https://www.theguardian.com/business/vw-volkswagen> took the drastic 
action because a company that supplies it with gearbox parts and seat covers 
stopped deliveries. The move affects some of its biggest factories, which 
produce the popular Passat and Golf models as well as engines and exhausts.

The German carmaker has halted manufacturing at its Wolfsburg and Emden plants 
for a week and is to reduce hours of staff elsewhere between now and 30 August. 
In total, 27,700 workers are affected, with some sent home and others moved to 
short-time working. VW has 10 factories inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> in total.

The German government has urged VW and the supplier Prevent to resolve the 
dispute. Analysts at UBS have warned that VW could take a €100m (£86.1m) hit to 
its profits if car production is halted for a week at Wolfsburg, where the 
carmaker is based.

The disruption to production comes almost a year after it emerged that VW had 
cheated diesel emissions tests in the US. The company is still trying to deal 
with the repercussions of the scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/22/volkswagen-handling-emissions-scandal-shambles-investors-agm-german-carmaker>
, which has already costs it billions of euros. VW has agreed a settlement with 
US authorities that will see it pay up to $15bn (£11.4bn).

VW has initiated legal action against Prevent in an attempt to force the 
supplier to resume deliveries. However, Prevent is holding out.

The dispute is connected to VW cancelling contracts with Prevent, which the 
supplier claims have cost it millions of euros. A Prevent spokesman told the 
German newspaper Handelsblatt that VW was imposing unacceptable conditions on 
its suppliers.

In a statement, VW said although a district court had issued injunctions which 
obliged “the suppliers to resume deliveries, the suppliers have not as yet met 
their obligations. Volkswagen continues its efforts to reach agreement with the 
suppliers.

“Given that further developments are not foreseeable, Volkswagen is making 
arrangements for various flexibilisation measures extending as far as 
short-time work.”

VW and Prevent had a “serious responsibility” to resolve the dispute, said a 
spokesman for the economy ministry. “We assume and also expect the companies to 
solve the sticking issues as soon as possible. It is about thousands of jobs, 
which could be affected by shorter work hours, and the responsibility to tackle 
these problems constructively is very high.”

Prevent owns two companies that supply VW. CarTrim makes seat covers while ES 
Automobilguss produces cast iron parts for gearboxes.

Shares in VW fell 0.5% on Monday. They are down by a quarter compared with a 
year ago owing to the impact of the diesel emissions scandal.
 