
I’m about to go surfing but I’m several miles from the sea. I’m in a Welsh 
valley, surrounded by green hills and lush forest, in the shadow of an old 
power station. The water is as flat as a lake. That’s because, right now at 
least, it is a lake. I sit on my board and wait – more out of habit than 
necessity because where I am it’s shallow enough to stand.

Then the hydraulics whir and gurgle and, as if by magic, a beautifully shaped 
wave over a metre high suddenly looms behind me.

Hop to it: a craft beer tour of north Wales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jun/19/north-wales-craft-beer-conwy-tony-naylor>
“Paddle!” shouts my instructor. So I do, face-planting shortly after. No 
matter, there’ll be another one along in three minutes. On that one I make a 
far better showing. And on the one after and the one after that…

I’m at Surf Snowdonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/05/from-aluminium-smelter-to-surfers-mecca>
, a brand-new artificial wave facility at Dolgarrog in the Conwy Valley, north 
Wales. Privately funded, it cost £12m to build, on the site of a former 
aluminium factory – though it has been decontaminated since, and approved by 
Welsh environmental regulators.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsurfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438347259616%2Fc04995eb-5e8c-4d6c-876e-b945d7d4b695-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wales%E2%80%99%20perfect%20new%20wave%3A%20Snowdonia%E2%80%99s%20inland%20surfing%20lake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsurfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wales%E2%80%99%20perfect%20new%20wave%3A%20Snowdonia%E2%80%99s%20inland%20surfing%20lake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsurfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438347259616%2Fc04995eb-5e8c-4d6c-876e-b945d7d4b695-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Surf Snowdonia’s dramatic setting. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
The attraction employs more than 100 people, many of whom live locally – some 
even worked in the original plant. In a region where unemployment is high, it’s 
perhaps not surprising that they all seem very happy to be working here.

UK wilderness adventures: sleep in a ‘stone hotel’ in Snowdonia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/21/snowdonia-walking-adventure-cnicht>
Creating the perfect artificial wave has been a goal for the surfing industry 
for some time. Many concepts have been mooted, including one venture by Kelly 
Slater, the American 11-time world surf champion, but this is the first 
top-quality wave of its kind to attract investment and open to the public.

Surf Snowdonia uses WaveGarden technology, pioneered by a group of 
surfer-engineers in San Sebastián, Spain, and will soon be rolled out globally. 
It offers a good-length wave (up to 150 metres if you ride it the whole way) 
for all ability levels. Expert surfers can surf the two-metre peak next to the 
central pier, intermediates can ride a 1.2 metre section in the middle, while 
beginners can develop their skills on the white water at the edge. This 
triple-function makes it great for families and mixed-ability groups.

Waves come at a rate of 18 an hour. Such frequency would be rare in the ocean, 
where such consistency in quality is unheard of. But because I’m not having to 
paddle hard to keep position or find the best peaks, my arms stay remarkably 
fresh. This means I can concentrate on my “pop” – the way you stand up on the 
board – and my form once I’m up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsurfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438346797574%2Fe3405953-3a93-4886-bec6-9541e5211e26-2060x1051.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wales%E2%80%99%20perfect%20new%20wave%3A%20Snowdonia%E2%80%99s%20inland%20surfing%20lake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsurfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wales%E2%80%99%20perfect%20new%20wave%3A%20Snowdonia%E2%80%99s%20inland%20surfing%20lake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsurfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438346797574%2Fe3405953-3a93-4886-bec6-9541e5211e26-2060x1051.jpeg>
 Surf Snowdonia’s wave machine is able to generate a 2m high wave and 
accommodate up to 36 surfers. Photograph: Oli Scarff/AFP/Getty Images 
Progress here could be rapid, especially for intermediates and children. For 
parents, it must also be nice to have your kids within easy sight and not to 
have to worry about the usual ocean hazards, such as rip currents. I liked not 
having to jostle for priority or worry about taking a local’s wave. You ride 
the wave one at a time in the intermediate and advanced sections; in the 
beginner zone there would be six of you.

10 of the best cool new hotels in Wales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/mar/01/10-best-cool-new-hotels-wales> 
On the day I’m here the wind is moderate yet not affecting the wave shape at 
all, which – for someone who has been plagued by on- and cross-shore winds on 
far too many UK surf sessions – is a revelation. It’s also clean: the water 
comes from mountain reservoirs, which in a week that sawraw sewage discharged 
onto many Cornish and Devon surfing beaches 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-cornwall-33681269>, is another draw.

How does it compare with surfing at an actual beach? There’s obviously no roar 
of the ocean, none of that washing machine-like cleansing churn you get in 
salty sea, no sand, no infinite blue horizon, no variety in the type or length 
of wave you surf.

And you can imagine, albeit with a shudder, becoming blasé about riding these 
flawless waves when you know they can be generated for eternity by the flick of 
a switch.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsurfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438347123498%2F9a2d8c12-4e72-4011-b6de-5b3239ce9009-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wales%E2%80%99%20perfect%20new%20wave%3A%20Snowdonia%E2%80%99s%20inland%20surfing%20lake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsurfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wales%E2%80%99%20perfect%20new%20wave%3A%20Snowdonia%E2%80%99s%20inland%20surfing%20lake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Faug%2F01%2Fsurfsnowdonia-surfing-lake-wales-snowdonia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F31%2F1438347123498%2F9a2d8c12-4e72-4011-b6de-5b3239ce9009-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The writer catches a wave. Photograph: Sean Smith for the Guardian 
At the start, watching the action from the glass-fronted restaurant, we gasped 
as each perfect wave peeled past. It’s the kind of view you never get at an 
actual break unless you’re in the water. And watching the expert surfers, such 
as Surf Academy head and Welsh surfing championJo Dennison 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/Jo-Dennison-surfer/213638738704632>, so 
close-up really is mind-blowing. But after a while you stop drooling. It seems 
you can OD on perfection.

Iceland, Europe's last surfing frontier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jun/27/iceland-europes-last-surfing-frontier>
That’s why the ocean will always have its draw. It plays hard to get. The 
crucial point about Surf Snowdonia, though, is that no one here is suggesting 
you swap surfing in the sea for this man-made lagoon; rather the two should 
complement each other. And there’s no doubt that a trip here could make you a 
better sea surfer, and more excited about surfing in general. It worked for me: 
when my time was up I wanted another slot straight away.

And while purists may balk at the idea of booking a surf session as you would 
a tennis court, sometimes those of us with family or work commitments, who 
aren’t fortunate enough to own a campervan, just want to know we can surf when 
we want to surf.

Where Surf Snowdonia really wins over other simulated action sports 
experiences such as snowdomes – which for some reason leave me feeling sad that 
I’m not experiencing the real thing – is that you’re outside, catching waves in 
a truly beautiful setting. And for me that alone was worth the trip.

How to do it

Surf Snowdonia <http://www.surfsnowdonia.co.uk/> provided a lesson and on-site 
accommodation. Kids’ lessons (5-13) start at £29 for one hour; teen (14-17) and 
adult two-hour sessions (one hour theory, one hour practice) are £39.Beginners 
can freesurf from £19 an hour <http://www.surfsnowdonia.co.uk/prices/> and 
bundle deals are available. On-site pods sleeping up to four cost from £100 a 
night. Trains to Llandudno Junction take between three and four hours from 
London Euston and two hours from Manchester. Llandudno Junction is a 20-minute 
(£5) taxi ride from Dolgarrog.
 