
Leaving a sodden British summer for a Greek island known as Micra Anglia – 
Little England – seemed like tempting fate, but worrying about the weather 
wasn’t necessary. Rugged Andros, the northernmost island in the Cyclades, owes 
its sobriquet to the Greek shipping clans who run their maritime empires from 
London, dispatch their offspring to British boarding schools, but have 
established members’ clubs, museums, and even a class system of sorts back 
home. These magnates have also kept tourism at bay: not wanting their homeland 
overrun by holidaymakers. So this large, lush island, only two hours from 
Athens, has stayed under the radar.

Those who do venture to Andros generally stick to the coast, scalloped with 
over 70 beaches, or the stately town of Chora, a cluster of neoclassical 
mansions jutting out to sea. Inland, the landscape is more evocative of the 
Scottish Highlands than the Cyclades: arched stone bridges and burbling brooks, 
valleys punctuated by medieval watchtowers, waterfalls spilling through 
chestnut forests.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8c1cfd3ee65a6362d550af16d3db584d373161a%2F0_53_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walking%20in%20sunshine%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20on%20the%20Greek%20island%20of%20Andros&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walking%20in%20sunshine%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20on%20the%20Greek%20island%20of%20Andros&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8c1cfd3ee65a6362d550af16d3db584d373161a%2F0_53_3008_1804%2F3008.jpg>
 Into the sea … the town of Chora. Photograph: Andros Routes 
“There’s amazing diversity hidden in the folds of the four mountain ranges,” 
says Olga Karayiannis, the driving force behindAndros Routes 
<http://www.androsroutes.gr/>, a community initiative set up to clear and 
waymark the island’s 300km network of footpaths – for self-guided walking 
adventures. For centuries, these often stone-paved trails were the main routes 
of commerce, communication, and transportation between the island’s 84 
villages. So far, Olga and her team of volunteers have opened up 20 
(well-signposted) paths, including the Andros Route – a 100km-long trail from 
north to south, that usually takes walkers 10 days. The European Ramblers’ 
Associationrecently certified the Andros Route 
<http://www.era-ewv-ferp.com/programs/lqt/andros-route/> as one of Europe’s 
Leading Quality Trails.

“These paths were a forgotten resource,” says Olga. “We’ve revived the 
infrastructure, now we want to bring the benefits of sustainable tourism to 
Andros, especially to the remote villages that are being deserted.” These days, 
shipping is a globalised industry, and this has had knock-on effects on the 
local economy: the trade in silk and citrus fruits that once made Andros rich 
has died out. So Olga is encouraging locals to open pitstops along the routes 
where they can welcome ramblers, cooking them lunch, or selling them their 
produce.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe25645498859511adadf1e2ed3c71a6e24405614%2F0_270_6016_3608%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walking%20in%20sunshine%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20on%20the%20Greek%20island%20of%20Andros&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walking%20in%20sunshine%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20on%20the%20Greek%20island%20of%20Andros&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe25645498859511adadf1e2ed3c71a6e24405614%2F0_270_6016_3608%2F6016.jpg>
 Post-it notes …the routes cleared by Olga and her team of volunteers are easy 
to spot. Photograph: Andros Routes 
On our family-friendly break, my partner and I didn’t have to stray far from 
Ktima Lemonies, an enchanting guesthouse among citrus groves, to find a trail 
easy enough for our four-year-old, Lucas. A footpath at our doorstep connected 
the orchards of Kato (Lower) Lamyra with the manor houses of Ano (Upper) 
Lamyra. The scent of orange blossom and honeysuckle hung thick in the still 
air. Every so often, Chora appeared like a mirage on the horizon, framed by 
cypress trees. We drank from a 200-year-old fountain, rolled fallen lemons down 
the lanes and feasted on foraged mulberries that turned our fingers purple.

Each day, we woke to a heavenly breakfast laid out under the lemon trees. 
Everything (apart from teas from Mariage Frères in Paris) was sourced from the 
surrounding estate or local farmers. There was lemon-and-poppyseed cake, 
yoghurt with plum compote, oregano-flecked cheese, and a dozen homemade jams 
from kumquat to quince. Nelly Grypari, our chic host, encouraged us to fill a 
picnic basket as we planned a day at a secret beach she’d directed us to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa93edb1336346413ba160884ff6ca0458acf8ea8%2F0_166_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walking%20in%20sunshine%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20on%20the%20Greek%20island%20of%20Andros&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walking%20in%20sunshine%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20on%20the%20Greek%20island%20of%20Andros&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa93edb1336346413ba160884ff6ca0458acf8ea8%2F0_166_1280_768%2F1280.jpg>
 Taking steps … Lucas and Rachel exploring Episkopio 
First, we had to earn our swim. Driving into the mountains, bright sunshine 
abruptly gave way to such dense fog that we could barely see where the road 
ended and the cliffs began. We swerved past Vourkoti, the highest village in 
the Cyclades, until we reached Arni, the “little Switzerland” of Andros. As the 
bells of the village church rang out, the clouds parted, revealing blue-grey 
hills receding into the mist. We strolled through a canopy of trees until we 
came to a crooked gate with a crude sign: FOUNT. OPEN THE DOOR. CLOSE. We 
marched straight through to a gushing spring decorated with plastic flowers. 
Water never tasted sweeter.

Marvelling at the views, we descended to the Vori wetlands, passing goats 
perched on slabs of rock. “We’re in the jungle!” Lucas squealed, as we tramped 
through waist-high reeds looking out for rareEleonora’s falcons 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eleonora%27s_falcon>. Over a third of Andros is 
a nature reserve, an important habitat for migrating birds. All we saw, though, 
were electric-blue dragonflies flitting around to a discordant orchestra of 
frogs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1f0eab7cf02952c7185a064e3e9efd11c372b5b%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Walking%20in%20sunshine%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20on%20the%20Greek%20island%20of%20Andros&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Walking%20in%20sunshine%3A%20a%20family%20adventure%20on%20the%20Greek%20island%20of%20Andros&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Fwalking-family-adventure-greek-island-holiday-andros-cyclades%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1f0eab7cf02952c7185a064e3e9efd11c372b5b%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Full of zest … breakfast under the lemon trees at Ktima Lemonies guesthouse. 
Photograph: Nikos Daniilidis 
At Froussei, we hunted for treasure of a different kind: clambering down a 
ravine, we discovered 16 stone watermills crumbling into the riverbed. One had 
become a goat cemetery, strewn with skulls. Our Andros Routes guide, Yiannis 
Tridimas, a retired professor and fell runner, leaped over the rocks like a 
mountain goat. As a boy, he would bring wheat here on the family donkey, to be 
ground into flour. “There were 25 kids in my village,” said Yiannis. “We had to 
walk an hour over the hills to school, then an hour back again. That’s when I 
learned to love this landscape.”


The hike to Achla beach was too challenging for Lucas and the bone-rattling 
dirt road was too much for me, so we took a boat from Chora. After swimming in 
the gin-clear sea, we wandered up the valley to a cascading rock pool shaded by 
ancient planes. “I wish we could stay here forever,” Lucas sighed. I couldn’t 
grant him that wish, but the next best thing was missing the boat back to Chora 
and having to spend the night at Onar, a handful of smartly renovated stone 
cottages in the wilderness. We lazed in a hammock on the stone terrace. “I’ve 
never seen so many stars,” Lucas marvelled. Neither have I.

• Accommodation was provided Ktima Lemonies <http://www.ktimalemonies.gr/> 
(doubles from €100). Cottages at Onar (onar-andros.gr 
<http://onar-andros.gr/the-stone-houses/>) from €170 B&B. Flights were provided 
byAegean <https://en.aegeanair.com/> and car hire by Escape in Andros 
<http://www.escapeinandros.gr/>. Andros is two hours by ferry from Rafina, a 
20-minute drive from Athens airport. For more information visitDiscover Greece 
<http://www.discovergreece.com/>
 